THE VNIVERSALIST Examined and Convicted, destitute of plain Sayings of
Scripture, or Evidence of Reason.

In Answer to a Treatise entitled, The Universality of Gods free Grace in
Christ to Mankind.

By Obadiah How, A. M. Oxon. Pastor of Stickney in Lincolne-shire.

For their sakes, I sanctify my self.

John 17.19. He dyed for this Nation, and not for this Nation only, but that he
might gather into one all the Children of God.

John 11.51. Urgent fratres articulum istum totidem Scripturae verbis nunquam
reperiri, sed respondemus, fieri non posse ut articulus Controversus inter eos
qui Scripturam pro verbo Dei agnoscunt, totidem verbis concipiatur.

Remon. Coll. Hagiens. 170. [Christus mortuus est pro omnibus] [est propitiatio
pro peccatis totius mundi] etc, qui sic loquitur, cum Scriptura loquitur, qui
phrasin hane repudiant, andax est and Scripturarum judex non interpres, qui
ista loca convenienter Analogiae fidei explicat, boni interpretis officium
facit, controversia enim est de sensu non de verbis.

Armin. Resp. ad 31. Artic. Art. 13. Printed for John Rothwell, at the Sun and
Fountain in Paul's Churchyard, 1648.

To the Christian Reader, with some Animadversions upon the Authors Epistle.
THe infirmity of crowding to the Press is grown Epidemicall. Infirmity I
call it; because from thence men do (Public insanire) and have this
unhappiness, that, in the Apostles phrase, their madness is known to all
men, 2 Timothy 3 9. And Epidemicall I call it: for who though of the meanest of
the people, but may fill his hand and the Press at pleasure. Such has been
the License of these latter times, that Pamphlets swarm without License, and
now the pretended Mother striveth to divide the child, with the true, error
with truth, and pleads if it has not equal liberty of the Press, that
truth is suppressed. We want some wise Solomon to give wise judgment, to give
truth its own, and let error know what she is. Whether the want of such has
not much dishonored the Press, blemished the truth, impeded Reformation,
dissetled the people, let common experience determine. Such daily births of
Pamphlets to and fro can be no less to the people, then the winds are to the
waves, make them crowde into new storms. As Athens ascribed her troubles to
the Orators, who tossed the flexible multitude into sedition; I wish that this
had not too great an influence into our present distractions; which if they
were such as did recompense us with some hidden truths, they were worth the
buying at so dear a rate; but if we observe them, they are such as are
addicted only to miscall truth, as if they were hired to curse Israel. If they
can but call Antichristian, erroneous, impious, blasphemous, it passes for
current, as if they had proved it so, as if a foul mouth was the Index of a
deep head, and scurrilitie the measure of reason.

Reader, that which thou have here to the test, and examined, is no new
opinion, nor any new light added to an old truth, but the manner of maintaining
it is very singular, none before daring to appear so apsurd in Print.

This with four other annexed points of Arminius, have formerly troubled quiet
states and strong heads, but now I cannot say that they do either: Men of but
indifferent parts (much more of more accurate) have left raking in the ashes of
these perplexed Disputes, being such as have had their heat pretty well allayed
long since; but of late some indigested and shattered brains have revived
them, with no more hope of success, than intention to cure our Commotions.

The Author of this Discourse, with whom I am to engage, would be taken for a
Messenger of new Light, but he appears under no other face than of a misshapen
Arminian: One strong in the Point of Redemption, but looks with another face
in the Point of Election. In the former he is not different, but where he is
more absurd.

I must acknowledge the depth of these Controversies, these negotiating and
critical times, my slender years, and my Pastoral employment, do all comply
to a disadvantage, were they not counterpoised with some encouragement from my
Adversary. My genius was never martiall'd up in these Bible-battels, therefore
it cannot be expected that I should add any new Light to these Points, which
have exercised, yea exhausted the choicest Lamps in Christendom for their
discovery. I must say of this my Answer as the Poet of his Satyr against some
Scriblers in his time: Pers. in Prol
Non ad poesin ingenio natus, sed temporum ratione ductus -- ^ Such are the
distempers of the times, and the negotiations of men, both of weak judgments,
and corrupt minds, that now the exigence both of truth and peace requires,
that they that have but little, cast in their Mite. I may do it at as cheap a
rate as any. Empty Margents, common resolutions, and an answer as worthless as
his Discourse, will not be to my disparagement. I have nothing that can promise
more: for as I have nothing to satisfy if men expect, so I have nothing to
lose if men censure.

Reader, if thou observest, we may see the whole Fabric in his Frontispiece,
the marrow of his whole discourse in his Epistle; and therein we have a taste of
that Scripture, reason, or fair dealing we are likely to expect from the
whole, which if I should thoroughly examine, and give a solicitous answer to, I
should prevent my self, and make my Epistle as voluminous as his Treatise: I
shall therefore take some things that are not else where, and leave the rest to
fall under the successive refutations in the following discourse.

First we find the man in a passion of the heart:

[Heartily grieved that a Church professing the great love of God, in the
authorized Doctrine thereof, should be abused by many.] It seems then there
is a Church of England, and the Doctrine thereof Orthodox, both which is much
questioned now in these times; were he well furnished, he should have my voice
to be the Churches Champion, but that I fear he has an eye more to his own
tenent then the Authority of the Church of England; and so long as She says as
he says, She shall not want the Title of a Church, that it may be known he
has the suffrage of a Church of his side: not much unlike that Papal
Sycophant, Constat summum Pontificem a pio Constantino Deum appellari. But the
Particulars of his sad Complaint are these:

[Many deny and blaspheme this great love of God to mankind in Scripture
affirmed. John 3.16, 17. As if God hated most men from Eternity, so as they are
not beholding to him for any good at all nor have any door of repentance, or
means of life opened and afforded to them.] It is usual with Impostures, to
frame to themselves Adversaries, and work them to their own conceits; and
this is the Author guilty of. For,

1. He cannot produce any that denies the great love of God to the world of
mankind: John 3.16. Which is, that he sent his Son, that those that believe
might not perish, but have everlasting life. 2. For his deduction therefrom,
it is no high blasphemy to deny.

Secondly, As for that Phrase, [Hating most men from Eternity.] He does not
deal very heartily, to set before his Reader the odious term of (Hating most
men from Eternity,) which flesh and blood does not well digest, without
explaining the meaning of his Adversaries herein, as if they taught some
monstrus Doctrine, when indeed it is his own Doctrine. For, that God hated
Esau he cannot deny, and that that hatred consisted in his denying that
peculiar favor to Esau which he gave to Jacob, he grants; Page 93. And so he
defines Gods hatred to be a less loving; Page 92, And this less loving is a
denying of that good which he gives to another. Now, for God to deny that
great good, viz. Grace and Glory, to most men, which he gives to his Elect,
this is in our sense to hate them; and let him if he can produce any that
speaks otherwise of Gods hatred: But this is no such Blasphemy as he
pretends, for he says no less himself: [He decreed to harden and give up
the residue, for contempt of means, to show his justice, when he overcommeth
his Elect, and brings them in to believe, and so to the inheritance. Page 123.]
Now, is not to decree to harden, to deny that great good, Grace and Glory,
which he gives to his Elect in overcoming them to believe? And is not this to
hate? And is not this to most men in his own expresses? Yet he cries out of
blaspheming the love of God, in saying that in that sense God is said to hate
most men. But he may happily reply, that Gods hardening most men is for
contempt of means; but this helps him not, because he overcommeth his Elect
notwithstanding contempt of means; therefore he denies that grace to one which
he gives to another: Aquin. part. 1. q. 23. art. 3.
Therefore to this I say with Aquinas: [In quantum vult. omnibus aliquod bonum,
omnes amat; in quantum aliquibus non dat quodcunque bonum, nec illud bonum quod
est vita aeterna, ideo eos odio habet and reprobat.]

Thirdly, As for that Phrase of [Most men being not beholding to God for any
good at all.] It is his own perverse inference; that because we say he denies
the top of his love to most men, therefore he charge us with this, that they
are not beholding to God for any good. False suggestion! That God shines both
on Just and unjust, shows many mercies to all, no man denies: [Omnibus dat
aliquod bonum, ideo omnes amat.]

Fourthly, As for the last, [And no door of life and repentance set open for
them.] I only demand, what door can be set open? and with what intention it is
set open to them whom God has determined to give up to destruction? But this
he has done to most men, as he says, Page 120. Now that I may in a few words
thus reason: they that are decreed to be given up and hardened are Reprobated,
and they that are Reprobated, whilst they remain so, cannot be saved, nor
receive Faith, or Conversion, is the Confession of Corvinus; Cap. 26.. 5
[Si intelligatur de reprobo qua tali in sensu composito, nego reprobum posse
salvari aut fidem accipere and se convertere.] And that they that are from
Eternity Reprobated, do always remain so, is clear from their Principles:
because Reprobation is past on them that do finally persist in Infidelity and
disobedience, whom God foreseeth to do so, and by virtue of his prescience do
infallibly persist in it, and so remain always Reprobates. Hence is it that
Corvinus himself, Cap. 21.. 6.
though he said that Justified persons might be reprobated, yet he durst not
say that Reprobated persons could be justified; because that was the conclusive
Act, being done after final impenitence, after which no man can believe or
repent. Therefore how a door of life can be opened to such in time I cannot
see, and to deny it is no blasphemy.

The second thing which he sadly lays to heart is: That

[Many contradict plain sayings of Scripture, as that Christ gave himself a
ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. Christ tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. and
affirm contrary, that Christ did not shed his blood, or die for every man.

But herein he discovers either affected Ignorance, or wilful Calumny: For

1. He cannot produce any that deny the truth of those Scriptures. If he will
content himself with what those places affirm he shall have no Antagonist:
but that which we deny is his glosses on, and inferences from those Texts, as
that Christ did by death procure Eternal life for every son of Adam, which no
Scripture affirms. The Remonst. to whom our Author must come behind in these
Controversies, have been so far from charging us with denying Plain sayings
of Scriptures, that they have granted that their Tenent is not, nor can be
thought to be contained in plain sayings of Scripture. Col. Hagien 170.
[Vrgent fratres articulum istum totidem verbis Scripturae nunqua^ reperiri;
sed respo^demus, fierinon posse ut articulus Controversus inter eos qui
Scripturam pro verbo Dei agnoscunt totidem verbis Scripturae concipiatur.] They
had the ingenuity to conceive that no man that had the least spark of grace,
or reason, would question or deny that which the Scripture plainly affirms;
Rep. ad art. 31. art. 12
and Arminius professes that in this very point, the Controversy is not about
the words, but sense and interpretation; as may be seen in that place quoted
in my Frontispiece; but our Adversary delights [fingere sibi adversarium
stolidum] to make to himself a foolish Adversary.

A third thing that he complains of is this:

[That the Doctrine of the Church of England should be called a flat lie, (
viz. that God redeemed me and all mankind) in this assertion, he redeemed none
but the Elect.] Wherein we may see the Church of England has a Son of a very
good nature, but a very bad ingeny, sorry to have her wronged, but knows not
when she is so, therefore pickes quarrels without cause. For,

1. He that takes the Liturgy of the Church of England for the Doctrine
thereof may very well take that for an injury which is not; and what cause many
have had to say, that many expressions were foisted into the Liturgy, and it
not retain its Primitive purity, I leave to him to examine.

2. To redeem totum genus humanum, is no more then Omnia genera hominum: all
mankind, no more then all the kinds of men: and if he would have that Phrase to
mean further, he must prove it: now this is not proved a lie by saying he
redeemed only the Elect, for such he has in all kinds of men

3. If he peruse the Doctrine of England in the 39. Articles, he shall see
contrary to his Doctrine; unless to the words thereof he add his corrupt
Comments.

A fourth thing which he grieveth for, is this:

[That men should run into so many long-ago-condemned practices, evil and
Papisticall, to maintain their Contradictions of the truth.] But his practice
of so prepossessing the minds of his Reader without ground, is far more
Jesuiticall: and was he of any authority [with any but them that labor with
his Ignorance] So that we might say his tongue is a slander, we might upon
better ground be grieved for his Calumny: But those tricks where with he
challenges us I shall examine.

1. [Pretending insufficiency in the Scripture to be the Determiner of matters
of faith] This is but his wonted forgery, and Calumny, he cannot show wherein
we pretend so much, or at least it must be in that wherein he is as guilty as
any. It has been our plea that no Scripture holds forth his Doctrine;
therefore, there is no need why we should fly to the insufficiency of Scripture
to determine matters of faith; indeed his glosses and Comments we cannot suffer
to determine our faith, therefore let that shift be returned to them that need
it.

2. [Pretending darkness in Fundamentalls] But herein I demand, whether any
there be that says in express words, that the Scripture is dark in
Fundamentals, or whether it be a deduction of his own from our expresses upon
some places of Scripture; if the first, then I expect that he produce them; If
the second, I doubt it will appear that the Jesuiticall Sophistry has a
greater influence into his practice then ours: Just such dealing as we have
from them, we have from him, and in both most unjust forgeries. The Papists
because they cannot work us to their mind to say that all Scriptures are hard,
they to make us odious traduce us, as if we held that all Scriptures are easy.
So the Rhemists object against us in these words: Rhem. Test. in pres.. 16.
[They find no difficulty in the Book sealed with Seven Seals, and no
Interpreter with the Eunuch. Gag. for new Gosp. Page 1.
] And in another Treatise this is laid down by them as an Error of the
Protestants; [That they maintain that the Scriptures are easy.] And now the
Author says as a charge against us, that we hold that the Scripture is dark
in Fundamentals; delivering it so lurgely, and so indefinitely, as if we held
that the Scripture was wholly dark in Fundamentals; but if either of these
Calumniators had but considered that some Scriptures are easy, some hard and
difficult, Scripture neither wholly dark, nor wholly easy, there might have
been little cause appearing for such a Calumny on either side. Now to this
Allegation, if he mean that the Scripture every where treating of the
Foundation, is dark, this no man says: If he mean that in some things that
are concerning the Foundation the Scripture is dark and obscure, he cannot
upon good ground deny it; certainly St Peter was of that mind when he said,
many things were so hard to be understood, that the unlearned did wrest them to
their destruction, 1 Pet. 3.16.

But besides, it is no convincing Argument against us because we do as the
Papists, if either the Author or Arminius be right; our Author in the 118.
Page is loath to dislike all that they say, and Arminius being charged with
holding a Papisticall Tenent, In Perkins, 258.
thus replied; Anne quia Pontificia ideo falsa? This may be easily wiped off if
he could produce any that did so say.

4. [Vsing carnal reasons to frame absurdities that follow.] It seems, that
reasoning that presses his Tenent with absurdities, is carnal reasoning: a
safe conclusion for himself, he would feign embrace the error, but not meddle
with the absurdities that follow; true it is that [Ab uno absurdo mill
sequuntur.] Many absurdities will follow from an absurdity, but certainly no
absurdity will follow from the truth. If his Tenent be Truth, he need not fear
to be burdened with the absurdities that follow; but in that he fears the
absurdities, it is a strong suspicion that it is not truth which yet he would
embrace, but leave the other, as the Cat, [Amat piscem sed non vult tangere
Lympham.] But besides, it is neither a Papisticall shift, nor carnal reasoning
to refute error by absurdities that follow, it was the Apostles practice, 1
Cor. 15.3. He proves the Resurrection by those absurdities that follow upon
the denial of it: as then is not Christ risen, then are we of all Creatures
most miserable, else why are ye baptized for the dead, and many other in that
Chapter; and very frequent is this way of Confutation in Scripture; and it is a
very pregnant way of arguing; but he discovers plainly what thoughts he has
of his Tenent, when he is loath to be troubled with the absurdities that
follow, and I blame him not, for they are many and great.

4. [Imposing strange senses of plain sayings of Scripture.] But what these
strange senses are he should have done well to have inserted, that the Reader
might have had a survey of them, but in that he charge us without instance, I
need not answer: But this I dare refer to any intelligent Reader that is but
versed in the least measure, to judge whether they that hold his Tenent, or we,
give the strangest and most exoticke interpretations, and they that do, let
them lie under that black Charge. Let any review those strange senses that the
Remonst. put upon John 6.37.44. Acts 13.48. With all others that give any light
in these Controversies, of which our Author favors in his whole Treatise: as
in Page That Text John 6.37. [Those that my Father gives me shall come unto
me.] By those that are (given to Christ) he interprets, those that are given to
him in the heavenly Calling, so as to come to him; So that this first (giving)
takes in coming to him; and the sense is this, those that come unto me shall
come unto me, those that believe shall believe; this in the eyes of any
reasonable man cannot but seem a strange Interpretation. So that Text, John
6.44. [No man can come except my Father draw him.] By drawing here, the
Remonst. as also the Author, Page Mean the drawing by the call of the Gospel,
outward only by Moral suasion, and such a drawing as is distinct from bringing
them in to believe and give themselves to Christ: But any that considers the
Context, may adjudge this a strange Interpretation. Our Savior being to show a
reason why among those that did equally enjoy the outward call of the Gospel,
and so as that they were convinced, yet some did not believe, he gives this as
a reason, No man can come unto me except my Father draw him. Now this word
(drawing) showing a reason of a disparity in condition, cannot be meant of that
wherein there was a parity amongst them. So for many others; but the ensuing
Discourse will furnish any with ability to judge who is most guilty of strange
Senses, and Interpretations of Scripture.

Having thus ended his sad complaint, he comes to counsel his reader, or if he
please, to be an answerer, wherein lies a mixture of egregious Slanders,
therefore I shall touch them a little: he wishes his Antagonist,

[Not to invent lies and slanders, to make infamous Such as will not be of the
same opinion, in which the Antichristian brood abounds; and so many have done
in this business also, giving it out to others, that such as say that Christ
is the Savior of the world, as Joh. 4.42. gave himself a ransom for all men,
1 Timothy 2.6. that these are,

1. [False witnesses against Christ and his Apostles.] I should expect the same
dealing from him to us, that he expects from us to him; and in teaching us to
beware of lies and slanders, he should not become the father of a lie and
slander himself: It is not my language, but his own retorted. I know none
more guilty of it than himself: For herein he would possess his Reader, that
we say those that say as John 4.42. 1 Timothy 2.6. Such are false witnesses
against Christ and his Apostles. A shameful forgery, that bears its shame in
the face of it, no man being so senseless to charge any man for a false
witness against Christ and his Apostles for saying as they say. Let the Author
remind his own Tract, and tell me is there nothing there but what Christ and
his Apostles speak? To instance, when he speaks of 1 Timothy 2.6. He says that
that place says that Christ gave himself a ransom for all Adams Sons, and
those that have a being from him: Page 55.57. Yea, every individual of all
mankind: Page 61. But I pray does Christ or his Apostles say so? I could never
yet see it; no, it is a sense that he putteh upon that Text; and so doing, if
any say he is a false witness against Christ and his Apostles, he is not to be
condemned of slander: rather the slander is the Authors charge, because when
we deny his interpretation, he says we deny the words; and when any says he
is a false witness against Christ and his Apostles for obtruding such a sense
on them as they will not own, he charge us with slander, as if we said he
was a false witness that says as those places say: He might have remembered
that saying, Qui alterum accusat probri, etc. He that accuses another, had
need look home to himself.

2. [That such are Arminians.] How ready he is to embrace the Tenent, yet shie
of entertaining the name of Arminius? for him or any that holds the
universality of merit of Christ's death, to account it a slander to be called an
Arminian, is a mere foppery, and for me to give a serious answer herein, would
be to be guilty of his folly. The Doctrine it self is one of the five points
of Arminius, the distinction of procuring and applying, which the Author uses,
and the manner of applying it is theirs, the Scriptures produced by our Author
in pursuance of it are produced by them, his interpretations of contrary Texts
are theirs, his Answers to our Arguments are theirs; if I make not all this
good, I shall willingly lie down under that censure. And if the case be thus,
it is not our slander but his folly that appears. For either he has read
Arminius or not; if he has not, then his want of ingenuity appears in
charging us with slander, in saying he is an Arminian, when he knows not what
an Arminian is: If he have, then his dishonesty appears in so shamefully
denying his Master, when he cannot but know, his speech does so bewray him.
Indeed Arminius has had an ill savor amongst us for these late years, and
that he resenteth, therefore I cannot blame him if he be not willing to be
seen under that garb.

3. [That such hold that Christ dyed for all men alike.] If this be such a
slander, I would he would not afford such a fair occasion for our presuming in
this case. Does not his whole Discourse savor strongly of it? Let him show me
where in all his Book he makes the Death of Christ to make any difference.
Let us but take a taste: He treating of the ends of his Death, lays down
three: First, To satisfy Justice. Secondly, To become their Lord. Thirdly, To
ransom from the Curse. Now if in any place of his Book he makes it appear,
that he satisfied the justice of God for one more than another; or became their
Lord over one more than another; or did ransom one more than another, then I
shall think that he holds not that Christ dyed for all men alike; indeed I
think he makes the application to be with a difference, but for the
impetration or purchase, I suppose he makes it to be general, and equal: but
if he do not hold so, the matter will be the same betwixt him and his
Antagonist.

4. [That men by nature have free will to spituall good, that there is no
Election, that there is no Grace but what men may fall from.] This I conceive
some men lay to his charge, and the ground is this: No absolute Election,
universal Atonement, free will, falling away from Grace, are annexed Points,
and hitherto have been inseparable, and those that have maintained the one,
have with equal strength maintained the other; and when he does so well
acquit himself in the one as quite to desert the other, I shall confess my
self deceived in this business. Indeed, he grants absolute Election, not
upon foresight of faith, but then this destroys general Atonement, as I
show in the following Discourse; Therefore he must come to deny absolute
Election, or else relinquish general Atonement. And so for the rest, they are
so natural to his expresses in his Discourse, that it will be a hard thing to
quit himself of them, how ever the following Discourse will put him to his
Purgators, and I fear at last they will appear no slanders. I would he did
not give too fair occasion for to charge him. I shall mind the Reader but of
one thing more, and that is the pretense of the Author, of a tie that lies
upon him to maintain this Doctrine, and that is the Protestation which he took
[to defend the Doctrine of the Church of England against Popery, and Popish
Innovations, which the Tenent of Christ not dying for all, opens a wide door
unto.] Hereby we may see with what sinister respects he was biased, and with
what blind zeal he was acted when he took the Protestation; his concluding
that he was thereby engaged to defend universal redemption, is a bad president
for Popish mental reservations, and the enervation of all Covenants, if they
may be taken according to the conceit of the Takers, for there is nothing to
which we are less engaged than to that: But he here magnifieth his peircing
judgment in descrying that tie that few besides himself could see, but his
ground I shall examine, (because happily it may reflect on them that are of a
contrary judgment, yet are under the same Covenant with him.) His grounds are
twofold.

1. [He professed to maintain the Protestant Religion against Popery, and
Popish Innovations:] To which he thinks the denial of his Doctrine sets a
wide door open. I know not what his conscience is, I am sure his understanding
is weak if he herein speak as he thinks; as for any fear of Popery I
conceive no ground, there is no affinity at all: Let the Author peruse the
Jesuits over, look the Remists in the Controverted places, and then let him
tell me if that Protestation tied him against Popery, obliged him to hold
universal Redemption; the Author (if he took the Protestation in judgment)
does, or may know, that Papists are divided in those Points as well as
Protestants: and that ours has no more affinity with Popery than his Doctrine,
because Papists there are on both sides, as well as Protestants on both sides.

2. [The second ground is, because he protested to defend the Doctrine of the
Church of England.] As if his Doctrine fetched any authority from that: He
produces four several Articles, I shall examine them severally.

1. [ Art. 6. Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation, so
that what is not there read, or proved by it, is not required of any to be
beleeved] True: But why does not he think himself by this obliged rather to
relinquish his opinion than to defend it? Seeing no Scripture speaks so much,
as is afterward shown; and in that no Scripture faith so much, this Article
of the Doctrine of the Church of England binds him not to believe it, much
less to defend it: First let him prove that his Tenent is the language of
Scripture before he be bound by that article to defend it.

2. [ Art. 20. It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is
contrary to the Word of God, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture
that it be so repugnant to another.] And still this is no friend to him or his
Doctrine, or way of maintaining it; it must be first tried who are most guilty
of giving such uncouth interpretations of Scripture as that they cannot be
reconciled to other places, which I fear will fall upon the Author, and this
the ensuing Discourse will make appear. Herein the Reader may take a survey of
the size of the Authors understanding and judgment in his Protestation taking.

3. [ Art. 2. Christ very God, very man, who suffered, was crucified, etc. to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice not only for original guilt,
but also for all actual sins of men.] This is truth, but then the Reader may
see that is no such enemy to the Popish Innovation, against which this Article
was framed; nor is this Article so great a friend to his Tenent as he in both
pretends: Let us take the Popish Innovation as he lays it down, Page 98.
[That Christ only paid the greatest part of the debt to his Father, wholly in
respect of Eternal punishment, and left a Part of the debt in respect of
temporal punishments for his People to pay, etc.] Now, whether do we that say
according to this Article, that Christ by his death was a Sacrifice not for
original only, nor some actual sins only, but original and all actual sins
of them for whom he dyed, So that ^here is no new debt required of them for
which he did not satisfy; or, he that says that there is a new debt which
Christ did not satisfy for, viz. Contempt of means of grace, which God may
require of them for whom Christ dyed, as a debt not satisfied for, let any
rational man judge. But as the grounds of his protesting, So are his
performances, very weak. Secondly, This Article is no friend to his Tenent;
for, if he have not suffered shipwreck of his common understanding, he may see
a wide difference betwixt the sins of all men, and all the sins of men, and
hence arises his mistake, he refers the Particle (All) to men, and it is to
be referred to sins. That Surgeon that says he has wrought a cure on all
the members of man's body, does no way infer that he has wrought a cure of
the Members of all men's bodies. That Article tends hitherto, to affirm that
Christ did take away all the sins of them for whom he dyed, as well Actual as
Original, and our Author would stretch it to aver that he took away the
Actual and Original sins of every man: but this is not to defend, but to
destroy the Doctrine of the Church of England.

4. [ Art. 15.31. That by the Sacrifice of himself he should take away the
sins of the world, and all the sins of the whole world both Original and
Actual, and this against a Popish Innovation] Truth; and so he does take away
the sin of the world, that is of men living in the world: as he is said to be
believed on in the world, that is, by men living in the world. He takes away
sins from the world (quoad partem credentem) in them that believe: as John
3.16. And for all the sins of Believers all over the whole world; thus far we
grant it, but he cannot with any show of reason stretch those Articles any
further, he may see that the scope of them tend to another business, for if
they should speak as much as the Author intends, they should say thus much,
That Christ took away all Original and all Actual sins of every Son of Adam;
which no Scripture speaks, no Arminian affirms, and the Author disclaimeth,
for he says, contempt of means is a new debt: Therefore the Doctrine of the
Church of England being Orthodox, and so he having protested to defend it, it
cannot speak any such thing, or any ways favor his Doctrine. Many more
particulars might be instanced in, but they are of so low a flight that they
cannot but be distastefull to the Palate of them that are any way ingenuous,
therefore with these I content my self, as affording a sufficient taste of his
forged Calumnies, impertinent Allegations, abuse and foul dealing with his
Opposers, infirm and weak grounds both in maintaining his Doctrine, and
matters of greater concernment, his Covenant and Protestations, which should be
done in judgment. Ex pede Herculem, by the foot we may guess at the stature
of the Body, so by this we may guess at the whole; but I prepossesse thee not
with prejudice, as thou find, judge. Now happily thou may demand, why
this comes forth as a birth out of due time, after so many in these
Controversies, as Mr Whitfield and others? To this I answer, First, because
this was finished before Mr Whitfield's came to light. Secondly, because if the
men we have to deal with were of such ingenuity as that when a man does [(...)
refutare] refute the most illustrious, and expressions of greatest force in a
Controversy, they could acquiesce in it, as if he did (...) refutare, refute
all; Then I know Mr Whitfield would give good satisfaction, he having given
such solutions as the Author will never contradict. But any that considers
the nature of our Antagonists, they may adjudge what has been said to be a
little too concise, and thence they take occasion to say that we pick and
choose for our own advantage, therefore. I have applied my self to a general
Answer, not leaving any material expression unexamined: wishing every
intelligent Reader to consider, that the nature of my Antagonist necessitateth
me to this tediousness. Thirdly, I hope, (though much has been said,) with my
poor Tallent to cast some Mite into the Treasure of public decisions;
therefore not with intention to eclipse in any measure what has been before
said, but desiring in a brotherly way to unite forces to refell this spreading
error that eats like a Canker. The Method of his Chapters I have inverted,
his Sixth is my First. To try a man when he is half hanged, and to state a
question in the midst of a Discourse, I think not much different. And to the
Reader of what judgment soever, I say but this; Let neither affection, nor
prejudice either interpret Scripture, or answer Reason, follow the natural and
clear genius of the Text, and I commit this my unworthy Discourse to thy
perusal, and us all to God, to lead us into all Truth necessary for our
Salvation, and remain

Thine to serve thee in our Common Savior Obadiah How.

The Vniversalist Examined and Convicted, destitute of plain Sayings of
Scripture, or Evidence of Reason.
CHAP. I. Of the State of the Question.
THe vigor and life of Controversies arises from the right and due stating of
the Question, which deserves to be transacted in the first place: therefore I
shall show how the Author stateth the Question, and then lay down the usual
and genuine state as it has been laid down in all engagements in these
Points. The Author being a Man of vast reading in the Polemicks of Divinity,
attempts to summon the several statings of the Question to his Test, and says,

1. [Some say, Jesus Christ dyed for his Elect, and only for them that are
Elect to Sonship and Eternal Inheritance, and no other.] Herein the
affirmative of the Question is set down, but no state of the Question: The one
side say, Christ dyed for his Elect only, the other side say, that Christ dyed
for All; but in neither is the Question stated, only the affirmation barely
propounded. I shall expect to hear the Person and Place where this is given as
the state of the Question.

2. [Some say, that Christ dyed for all men alike, wrought Redemption for all
men alike, with like love, like intention, and for like ends, but this has no
ground in Scripture.] Who they are that thus state the Question I should gladly
be informed; if it be found any where, it must be among the most rigid
maintainers of his Doctrine, and none more rigid then the Remonstrants do I
know, yet they disclaim it: They would have the Love of God to be Common to
all, but not equal to all men Corvin. in Mel. cap. 31. Sect. 1. p. 492.
[Non volumus (...) erga hominum salutem esse equalem sed communem:] And also
Arminius himself, Armin. in Perk. page 57^
[ Scio quidem (...) Dei non esse omnimodo equalem, etc.] Yet how they can
avoid this I see not; For they say, that out of his natural goodness he
propendeth to the salvation of all men, and that indifferently to all, and by
his (will) which they call (plenaria voluntas) he wills Salvation to all if
they believe, and to none if they be incredulous. Now, lest any should think
that I wrong them, I instance; that his will and intention is to save every man
if they will believe and accept of him, is clear from their words; [Intentio
and scopus fuit omnes servare, Coll. Hog. 176.
sed aliter evenit propter eorum culpam:] That it was his intention and scope
to save all men, but it falls out otherwise, through their own default] and
also, Corvin. in. Mol c. 27. Sect. 1. Corv. in Mol. Cap. 27. Sect. 4 Acta.
Synod. 285.
[Nullus omnino hominum est cujus falutem non velit.] And that he dyed to
procure life for none, but upon this condition of says, is evident from them,
In that they say, that Christ may have the end of his death entire, though none
either believe or be saved; and this they say, [Quare etsi nemo credidisset
futurum tamen fuisse ut finis mortis Christi constaret, omnino credimus;] and
also, [Cum mandanti Deo resistere possunt omnes and singuli, relinquitur
profecto, fieri posse ut impetratio sarta tecta maneat suisque numeris perfecta
constet etiamsi increduli omnes manentes, nulli essent forie qui fructum ejus
perciperent:] But this is well known to any that have but tasted of those
disputes. Now to say that he wills the Salvation of all (if they believe) and
the damnation of all if they believe not, And so Christ by his death Impetrated
Salvation for all, that they might be saved if they believe, and yet that none
might be saved if they believe not, and so (for all any decree of God) all may
be incredulous and perish; if this be not to say that Christ dyed for all men
alike, for like ends, etc. I know not what is. But yet I say their profess
words say nothing like this, when they come to give the state of the Question:
and so to come to my Antagonist again, if he find it not there, I would know
where he finds it elsewhere. But besides, I know not how the Author can free
himself from this groundless assertion: what his judgment is truly, I cannot
determine, but so far as his Discourse may assure us, we may conclude it, for
in Cap. 2. where he sets down the ends of Christ so far as concerns Men, as
Page 16, 17, 18, 19. he concludes, [That every particular in that general was
for the (world) (all men) (every man.)] Now, to review these particulars, I say
with the Author, Christ satisfied the justice of God for every Son of Adam, and
for all indifferently; for no one more than another; he satisfied it for all,
and he could but satisfy it for any. So for a second, Christ is the Lord of
every man, and not over one more than another, but of all equally: He is
absolute Lord and Sovereign over all, and he can be no more (as Lord) to any.
So for a third, He is the Ransom of All, and not of one more than another:
That which is done for All and every Man, is done for all alike. That which is
done to every man (as men) or as sinners, is done to all, and makes no
discrimination among men; but all the former are his own affirmations: whence
any may conclude that Christ dyed for all men alike, for he mentions no other
end, so far as Respects Ransom, or Propitiation, but what agrees to every
man alike in his own reasoning,

3. [Some say, Christ dyed for every man in case every man believe on him, and
for no man in case they persist in unbeleife, but this is no Scripture sense,
etc. Christ has given himself a Ransom whether men believe it or no.] I
conceive the Author cannot produce any that so state the Question, (the model
of this plea may be drawn out of the Remonstrants, with the greatest
probability,) but they say no such thing; they do not leave the act of man in
believing to determine the act of Christ as done in and by himself; For then,
they cannot prove that he dyed for any, because in their judgment all may be
unbeleevers and perish, and yet Christ have his end; They say as firmly and
perspicuously, that (Christ dyed for all, Acta Synod. 4^.
whether men believe or no,) as the Author himself avoucheth it; [Phrasis illa
(Christus mortuus est) pro omnibus si credant, fupponit, cum non mortuum esse
pro iis quis non credunt, quod falsum est, ideo mortuus est, non si credant:
sed ut credant and salventur.] Therefore I conclude that such a state of the
Question he cannot produce from any Pen.

4. [Some say, Jesus Christ dyed in some sort for all men, and so as all do
receive some benefit thereby: He dyed for all men as a Lord, but he did not dye
for all as a Surety, to pay the price for, and become the Propitiation for the
sins of all.] The result of his thoughts, is like the errand of Ahimaaz, he
sees something but he knows not what, something he means if he could but
speak. For,

1. Some he may produce that say that all Men, yea all Creatures receive some
benefit by Christ's Death; but then he erreth in a twofold respect, they neither
give this as the state of the Question, neither do they say that he dyed for
all that receive benefit by his Death; he dyed for no other but men, whose
nature he undertook, thus Scripture affirms; but many more Creatures besides
Men have some benefit by Christ's Death.

2. Some he may produce that say that he obtained Lordship and Dominion by his
Death, and thus the Remonstrants say, Corv in Mol. cap 12. Sect 25
[Non obtinuit ut salvator sed ut Dominus and Judex esset,] And some contra
Remonst. thus may affirm, but then he erreth in two particulars; for they do
not either give this as the state of the Question, neither do any utter such an
impolished expression as this: [He dyed for all men as Lord,] this is formed
thus in his own confused brain; it was no Act of Lordship to dye, but rather
as a Servant he dyed, Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. But to grant all that he says, it
deserves a little examination how he deals with this state of the Question
if any such could be produced: he says, [The Affirmative is truth, but not the
whole truth; but the Negative denies the remainder of truth, and what was
before affirmed, for if he did not pay their Price and Purchase them, how
according to the Gospel is he their Lord?]

1. Unless he will say that every man receives all good, and the highest good
by Christ's Death, (which he cannot prove) he must confess that it is the whole
truth, that every man receives some good by his Death.

2. He strongly affirms that Christ dyed for every man by way of Surety,
which is not proveable either by Scripture, or good reason; It is against the
nature of a Surety to do any thing for one as a Surety, and for the other to
be liable to the same thing: hence the same debt in a way of justice comes
not by any means to be required of both the Surety and the Principal: For
this would not be (Moripro) but (Mori cum) not to dye for, but to dye with men:
(Whether this or a different consideration, I know not) but some such thing
made the Remonstr. something shye of this expression of a Surety, and in plain
terms do deny that it is so meant. Coll. Hag. p. 175, 176. in Arg. 3.
[In Collatione dixerunt fratres se hanc formulam ita accipere, ut Christus
diceretur mortuum esse pro nobis (vadis instar) ut pro nobis satisfaceret,
atqui non ita exprimitur.] So that it is clear, that they could not affirm
that Christ dyed for every man as a Surety; which the Author affirms, but
does not prove it to satisfaction.

3. He would prove it by this, (because he is their Lord) for he cannot see how
he should become their Lord if he did not dye for them as Surety, but herein he
argues weakly. No eye surely but sees a wide difference betwixt (purchasing
Lordship) and (satisfying for one as a Surety,) These are no way coincident,
the one may be where the other is not; The Israelites purchased Lordship over
their slaves and Servants, Lev. 25.44. But they were not said to be Surety for
them: So on the other side, Judah was Surety for Benjamin, Genesis 44.33. Paul for
Onesimus, Philem. 18. but in neither of these was there any purchasing or
Lordship; these are (valde distantia) therefore to argue, He is their Lord,
therefore he is their Surety, is weak reasoning.

4. He affirms that to deny that Christ dyed for all as a Surety, is contrary
to what is before affirmed, and says, [If he paid not their price and
purchased them, how can he be their Lord?] This is grounded on his gross
perversion; for he leaves out the words, (As a Surety) wherein the vigor
lies; for else his words should run thus, [If he pay not a Price for them as a
Surety, how can he be their Lord?] And then their weakness would have
appeared to any. Lord he might be, and no Surety; pay a Price for them and
purchase them to himself he may, and yet be no Surety; but he thus produces
the words, [If he paid not a Price for them, how is he their Lord?] This
savours not of ingenuity, or of one who has his mouth full of Exclamations
against perverters of words.

5. [Some say that Christ so dyed for all, that his death is sufficient for
all, and applicable to all, but not so as he has ransomed all men, and become
the Propitiation for the Sins.] These, or the like expressions may be patched
up out of several Judgments; but for one man of either side to produce these
words as the state of the Question, I dare say the Author cannot produce any
Example.

1. That some say, [Christus mortuus est pro omnibus sufficienter;] That is,
Coll. Hag. Page 124.
(That Christ paid a Ransom sufficient for the Salvation of all men) I deny
not, but then here the Author erreth, it was rather a dogmaticall assertion, to
show how those words may be received as truth, then a full state of the
Question, and it may appear in that those hot Disputes have not turned upon
this hinge.

2. Those that say, [Christ dyed for all sufficiently,] do not admit of the
after-expressions, [Applicable to all,] This is the result of the adverse
Party. Indeed, the Remonst. scatter such expressions, as [Deus est omnibus
placabilis] [res impetrata est omnibus applicabilis] [omnes sunt salvabiles.
Corv. in Mol. c. 28. Sect. 22 Page 446.
] That is, God is placable to all, the thing impetrated applicable to all, all
men saveable, and so the Author, Page 36. But from any contra Remonst. I think
he never receives any such, and that on good ground I think so, because it is
not suitable to their Principles. For they that say, [Christ dyed for all
sufficiently,] mean it, only sufficiently, and that in opposition to
[effectually] therefore they do in the same words deny that he did dye for all
(effectually,) and that whether considered really or intentionally, that is,
Christ did neither do it, nor intend to redeem all effectually, and they that
so say cannot say and prove too, that the death of Christ, and the good
obtained thereby is applicable to all, and every man.

3. Those that say, [Christ has dyed for all sufficiently,] do not say, [He
has not ransomed all men] for as they say, Christ has dyed for all
sufficiently, so they say also, he has ransomed all sufficiently; Seeing, that
to (dye for) and to (ransom) are in Scripture Equipollent. So that we may in
this see how the Author hallucinates about other men's words: But to let this
pass as a state given by some, let us see how he deals with it, and with
what plea he waveth it as unsound.

1. He says, [The Affirmative of this will stand well,] but then he did not
consider that those that say, [Christ dyed for all sufficiently,] do mean it
only sufficiently, in opposition to [effectually;] but thus it cannot stand
well with the authority of his Discourse, which proves the Death of Christ
effectual for all men. Cap. 21.

2. He says, [The Negative unsaith the Affirmative,] But how he proves it
shall be examined: he urges thus: [What sufficiency is there applicable from
Christ, or by his Servants, for, or to any man of any thing that Christ has no
perfectly wrought, and received in himself, that he might bestow it according
to the Gospel?] This Phrase [applicable to all] is foysted in sophistically,
there is no question made of the applicability of any sufficiency that Christ
did not work out, and will to apply: but yet a sufficiency there is in the
Blood of Christ, worth, and valor to purchase that which it does not, and for
more then he does effectually redeem: Were there more worlds, or many more in
this world then ever were, or are, or shall be, would any doubt but the Blood
of Christ had worth and sufficiency to ransom them? Nay, if God so pleased to
make his Blood a price for Devils, who would doubt of the sufficiency of it to
redeem them? I hope the Author will not deny the Blood of Christ to have so
much sufficiency in it, as to merit that every man should undoubtedly be saved,
but this it does not effectually, as he confesses, Page 34. His working out
Salvation for men was not proportioned out to the valor of his Blood, but to
the grace, and good will of God to men; he did not dye for, or ransom so many
as he was able, but so many as he pleased.

As for that Phrase, [ Psalm. 68.18, 19, 20.] being produced to prove that there
is not an overplus of worth and sufficiency in the Blood of Christ beyond what
effects by it; shows what a dexterity the Author has in being absurd in
his Quotations; that place shows indeed that he received gifts for
rebellions, and what gifts he gives he received, but that he either gives or
received gifts, even to the top of the worth of his Blood, that the Text
shows not.

6. Some say, Christ dyed for all in regard of the kind or general lump of
mankind considered, because he took the nature of mankind on him, and so dyed
for all, but did not dye for all in regard of individuals.] I have not so much
credulity as to believe that the Author has any president for such a state of
the Question: the expressions are too indigested to come from any knowing man;
to dye for the kind and not the individuals, is to dye for the nature, not the
Persons of men. I fear when his account is cast up, this will appear a crude
conclusion from more clear expressions, contracting the gross Metamorphosis,
from his own brain.

7. [Some say Christ dyed for all men, that they might be saved, and for the
Elect that they should undoubtedly be saved.) Is it not possible that any man's
Judgment shall pass his Pen without corruption? I believe some there are that
say, [Christ dyed for the Elect that they should undoubtedly be saved, and for
the rest that they might be saved, viz. [possibly.] So some have sought to cut
to themselves a way between the Calvinists and Remonst. and of this judgment
was one of eminent note in Gods Church. Mr. Cotton.
But such a state so contradictory as our Author popounds it none ever yet
afforded to us; For, let us consider one branch is, [that all men might be
saved:] Now, by this is meant (only possibly,) and opposed to (undoubtedly), or
infalibly. Now tell me if all be brought into a (possibility only) what place
is here left for any to be in an (undoubted infallibility?) It must argue
either that the Elect are not in the number of (all men,) or else that they
that are only in a (possibility,) are also in an [undoubted infallibility] of
Salvation, both which the Author will say are absurd. Which state of the
Question, the Author approves not as speaking the whole truth. Therefore I
shall wave it, and those particulars that he says follow upon it, yet to meet
with them in other places: In all which statings, I wonder he does so much
press upon the credulity of his Readers, in that he produces not the persons,
and places, by whom, and where the Question is so stated, that we might see how
ingenuously he deals with them.

8. [Some say, that Christ by shedding of his Blood, redeemed the world of
mankind, satisfied Gods Justice, and obtained a way of Salvation for every man;
Dr. Davenant on Heard. Page 233.
(and then add) But God never intended that the outward Act should ever put
man into the possession of pardon, or of a state of Justification and
Salvation:] And for this he cites an Author. Therefore I shall examine this
last state, and our Authors expresses thereon; and I shall consider these words
in a threefold relation, viz. to the Author whom he cites, to the former
stating which he rejects, to the Question of which he pretends it is a
state. As they relate to the Author cited by him, I answer these two
particulars.

1. It cannot be either proved or expected, that these words should be the
state of this Question about Redemption: because that was not his Theme, he
treats there of Reprobation, and therefore no rational man will expect to
find in that Discourse a full state of this Question.

2. Our Author has got the words of that learned man, but has left us
doubtful of his meaning; for that Phrase [He obtained a way of Salvation for
every man,] may have a double meaning.

First, That Christ has obtained a way. viz. (faith) in which every man that
walks, shall and may through it come to life; intimating thus much only, that
Salvation is not attainable but by Faith and Repentance.

Secondly, That Christ made that a way with a purpose that every man should
walk in it, and through it have life. Our Author takes the words in this
second sense, else the words of Dr Davenant serve him not; but thus the words
are not taken by him whose words they are, and that for these two Reasons.

Dr. Davenant on Heard. Page 198.
1. He expressly says thus, [The way that he opened for every one of us to
partake the fruit of our Redemption, is by Repentance and Faith,] which says
no more but this, that the way whereby every man partaketh of Salvation, is
Faith and Repentance; or that every man that does believe and repent shall come
to life, and to this tends his after words, [The Decrees of Election and
Reprobation are no obstacles against any that do this,]

2. Because he says, [Election and Reprobation crosses not that.] Now let us
consider the Decrees of Election and Reprobation, he makes Reprobation to be a
denying from Eternity Grace and Glory to the most men. And these two, viz.
[That God decreed from Eternity to deny both Grace and Glory to the most men;]
And that [Christ opens a way for every man, and so for them, as that he
intends to bring them into life by that way, or that they might be so,] are
in my thoughts inconsistent. Thus as these words relate to the Author of them.

Secondly, I shall consider them as they stand compared with the former
statings which he rejects: And then I demand, what difference there is
betwixt this which he receives, and the third which he rejects? The third
state says thus: [He dyed for all, that all might be saved if they believe,
yet they shall not if they believe not:] And is not this one and the same with
his last state? I cannot see any momentous difference; For between these two,
[Christ by his Death impetrated and procured that all men have life if they
believe, yet so as none but them that believe should partake of it;] And this,
[Christ by his Blood redeemed mankind, and obtained a way of Salvation for
every man, (which way is Faith,) and yet this puts not any man presently into
the possession of Salvation unless they believe;] I need a more piercing
Judgment then I have, to find any difference, I shall expect to find one in
the Authors next.

Again, What difference between this which he receives, and the first which
he rejects? For that says that the Death of Christ is (applicable to all:)
Now when this word (applicable) is expressed without Sophistry, it is meant
(only applicable) and so in an indifferency either to be applied or not applied
as the condition is performed: So (applicable) is [applicandum si crederent,
and non applicandum si non crederent;] That which is only applicable is not to
be applied but on condition; and then it is hence Corvinus makes these two
(Deus est placabilis) and (placandus si crederent) to be equipollent terms,
and this is the true meaning of the word applicable. Now betwixt these two,
[Christ by his Death has made his life applicable to all, that is to be
applied if they believe, and not applied if they believe not] And this [Christ
by his bloodshed has obtained a way of Salvation for every man, but God never
intended that the outward Act put any man into possession unless they
believe;] I cannot see any momentous difference, and the rather I am enduced to
think so, because the result of the eighth State which he receives is but
this, [that all men are salvable,] Page 36. which is one and the same with
[applicable] which he rejects.

Again, I would know what this last state of the Question which he receives,
differs from the seventh State which he neglects, as not the whole truth:
Does not the first part of the seventh, viz. [That Christ dyed for all men
that they might be saved] equallize and speak as much as this, viz [Christ by
his Blood obtained a way to Salvation for every man,] And what is there in the
last, that is not in the first? [To obtain a way to salvation for every man,]
(which way is Faith) is no more then to say, [Christ dyed for all men that they
might be saved by Faith.] And does not the second Branch in the seventh viz.
[And for the Elect that they should undoubtedly be saved,] equallize and speak
as much as the second part in the eighth State? viz. [None but them that enter
into that way of Faith and Repentance shall possess it:] And what is there in
this last, that was not couched in that first particular? He pretends a Plea,
which is this: [The distinction betwixt the Redemption wrought by Christ in
himself by bloodshed; and that which he works in men by application of his
Blood, is not expressed:] But this is empty and groundless, because that
distinction is not in express terms in the eighth State, and by as good
consequence in the seventh: herein he appears not so quick sighted as he
pretends.

Diruit, edificat, mutat quadrata rotundis -- Thus I have examined the last
State given and received by him, in comparison with the former, which he
neglects, and I can see no cause why the last should be entertained when
several others are rejected.

Thirdly, Let us see this State which he so eagerly fastneth on, how it
relates to, or looks on the Question of which it is a State: the result of
it is thus, [So that Jesus Christ has so dyed and given himself a Ransom to
God for all men, etc. That in and by himself he has so redeemed and saved all
men, that they are given to his dispose, and he will raise them out of the
death he dyed for them, and make them alive before him. That, they shall
acknowledge him Lord, and come before his judgment Romans 14.9, 12. etc. And he
is so filled with Spirit for them, to make it so known, and with such
tenderness, that they might be saved, so all are made savable.] When this is
embowelled, we shall see little cause why it should be (after the expunging of
so many Statings) entertained with confidence as that which has most
pertinency and light in it; But I shall first examine the members apart, and
then the whole, conjoined. In this large result, there are included these five
particulars.

1. [That they are given to his dipose;] But let the Author seriously consider
(His opinion being laid aside a while) whether this Phrase, [To dye for] as it
is spoken of Christ, has the same meaning with (paying a price for) as any man
does, when he purchases any person or thing into his dispose; And is this
Phrase [Given to his dispose] a fit expression for [Ransome or Redemption?]
Ransom or Redemption when spoken of man, always presuppose [misery] and
[liberty] as the terms, from which, to which, men are ransomed and redeemed,
but [being given into ones dispose,] requires neither. The Israelites had the
Heathen in their dispose, but they cannot in reason be said to ransom them,
nor to bring them from misery, and slavery, to liberty, but rather the
contrary: Besides, has not Christ all the Creatures on Earth, the Angels in
Heaven, the Devils in Hell, in his dispose, for the good of his Church? But it
would be no Scripture Language to say that he ransomed, redeemed, all Creatures
on Earth, Angels in Heaven, Devils in Hell: Therefore this expression, let it
stand by a while (as of no worth to express ransom or redemption by) till we
see what is in the rest.

2. [That he will raise them out of the death he dyed for them, and set them
alive before him:] which expression savours much of the confusion of its
Author: His meaning herein dubious, and when ever discovered, it will appear
senseless: He must have one of these two senses, either meaning of the
Resurrection at the last day, and so affirming, that being raised out of the
dust, and being made alive before him out of the dust, is that ransom or
redemption mentioned in Scripture: Or else, that Christ dyed for us the same
death which by his Death he freeth us from, but both absurd. For the first,
though it be put as a means and way to the possession of that inheritance to
which we are ransomed and redeemed; Yet no Scripture gives the Resurrection
the name of ransom or redemption, as Christ is said to redeem or ransom us,
and the former very unfit to express this latter by, for then those that are
raised by his Judiciary power only, and that to receive their eternal and
final doom in hell, may in that Act be said to be ransomed and saved; but
this who can believe? So for the second, it is not any whit shorter in
absurdity: for the death which we are freed from is no way proportioned by the
death which he dyed, we are to be freed from the death we were adjudged to, not
what death he dyed himself; he came to save us so far as we were lost, but
not to be so far lost himself. Some suitable proportion of sufferings which
he endured, to them which we deserved I grant, but where they wanted indurance
it was made up by the excellency of the person suffering; temporary sufferings
of that Person that was an infinite God, Act. 20.28. did countervaile eternal
sufferings of a finite Creature; we were adjudged to deaths, Temporal,
Spiritual, Eternal, but Christ did not dye all these for us, yet freed us
from the two last: he dyed the first for us and freed us not from it; he dyed
not a Spiritual death, that is (in sin,) for then he had not been an unspotted
Lamb: 1 Pet. 1.20. He dyed for our sins, but we read not that he dyed in our
sins; and Eternally he dyed not, then had he not been justified himself, nor
justified us, yet he freed us from death both Spiritual and Eternal;
therefore this expression of the Author is obscure, confused, and however taken
absurdly laid down, as not reduceable to any right reason.

3. [They shall acknowledge him Lord, and come before his Judgment Seat:] that
all men acknowledge him Lord, and come to be judged by him none yet denied: But
that being brought before his judgment seat, and being made to confess him
Lord, is to be ransomed and redeemed, none (before our Author) have ever been
so weak to affirm; for in and by eternal destruction men may be caused to
acknowledge him Lord: but is it a sober expression to say that in eternal
destruction we are ransomed and redeemed?

4. [That he is so filled with Spirit for them to make it known, and with such
tenderness to them that they might be saved.] But what is it which by his
Spirit he makes known? Scripture tells us that he is filled with Spirit to
preach the Gospel, Glad tidings, Liberty. Isa. 61.1. But this is none of that
god news, Gospel, that Christ is to Preach; For these, viz. [all are in his
dispose] shall be raised out of the dust] shall acknowledge him Lord, and stand
before his Judgment Seat] are no Gospel news, no glad tidings to them that
call to the hills to cover them from the presence of the Lamb, but to such
these particulars equally belong with all others.

Again, He is filled with Spirit to make known that which requires the work
of the Spirit to the actual enjoying of it, and so filled with Spirit to give
Spirit, that men might enjoy that which he makes known. Luke 4.18. As
liberty, opening Prison doors, Remission of sins, eternal life, and to the
enjoyment of these the work of the Spirit is requisite, but to those
particulars which he furnishes us withal, the works of the Spirit in the
hearts of men are no way requisite; for men are, and shall be brought into his
dispose, raised up out of the dust, stand alive before him, acknowledge him
Lord, come before his Judgment Seat, though they never feel the work of the
Spirit upon their hearts; therefore why he should be filled with Spirit to make
any or all of these known, I would be informed.

Again, To make these known that men might be saved, is not consonant to
reason or Scripture, seeing these may be done and made known to such men, and
at such a time when (in the judgment of all men) they are not salvable.
Certainly, herein the Author comes very short, that which he is filled with
Spirit to make known, that men might be saved, goes further than all those
particulars.

5. [So that all are made salvable.] This is the Helena on which the
Universalists are so enamoured; but this is no congruous expression to expound
[Ransome] and [Redemption,] and [Salvation] by: no not in his own principles;
for [Ransome] and [Redemption] is to all and every man, as he urges: But to be
[salvable] is not attributed to all men, but to the residue that are not Elect.
For by [salvable] is meant only [salvable] and not [infallibly to be saved] and
so [salvandi] now he says the Elect are undoubtedly to be saved, and so
[salvandi] and the rest they are (salvabiles) in a possibility of Salvation.
Again, to be but salvable, argues that those are equally damnable; for
[salvable] is, and must be taken to be saved if they believe, and damned if
they believe not. Now to say that Christ came to make men salvable only, argues
that Condemnation had equal share and interest in his coming with Salvation,
but this is not Scripture Language. Joh. 16.17. Again, to be Ransomed,
Redeemed, Saved, as Christ came to Ransom, Redeem, Save, require the work of
the Spirit of God upon the heart: But to [be in a salvable condition] does not.
Longer might I insist on these, but by this it appears that no one of those
particulars mentioned, nor all of them jointly, do equal those terms of
[Ransome] and [Redemption,] and therefore not well produced as their
definition; and has the Author ever observed in all his judicious perusal of
other men's works, that when it has been controverted, Whether Christ has
ransomed and redeemed every man, this has been the result of their
litigations, Whether all are in his dispose, shall be raised at the last day,
acknowledge him Lord, appear before his judgment seat? And does the Author
think that this was the judgment of that Learned man whom he eiteth to
authorize the last State of the Question? Or does he think that when the
Question is propounded, [whether Christ has dyed for every man] that these
should be the result, and the hinge on which Controversies turn? I think he
cannot be so senseless. But he herein discovers that he puts the state of the
Question in that which the word [Ransome,] [Redemption,] and [dye for] cannot
in Scripture Language admit: And as it was never yet by any controverted to
this day, therefore how faithfully and learnedly he has addressed himself to
this task, I leave to any to judge. These might have been passed by as short
of the business, yet being thus discovered, they let us see some things
concerning the Author.

1. His ambitious affectation, in stuffing his Discourse with seeming variety
of stastings of the Questions, thereby to magnify his vast reading, (when
indeed he cannot produce them from any Pen,) and his peircing judgment in
casting out (as by an Index expurgatorius) that which is Heterodoxall, when
every State is abused by himself for his own ends.

2. His gross and dishonest perversion of men's words, producing them in such
Forms as may render them ridiculous, and subject to his rejection and
correction.

3. His great indiscretion, in troubling the world with an Elaborate Discourse,
wherein he comes not at all to the true state of the Question, nor fully
discovers to his Readers what he would have, as if he intended nothing else,
but to let the world know how much he can write to no purpose.

But to come to some more perspicuous state of the Question as has been
always given, that so we may see the pertinency and validity of his whole
Discourse. I could produce many expressions from many Authors about this
business, who grant an Universality, but not in favor to his Tenet, but I
will not multiply words, lest I run upon the same Rock on which the Author
has split himself; neither shall I insert what I find delivered in a
dogmaticall way, ^ta. Synod. ^. ^. iv. Mol. (...) Sect. 1. ^4. (...) Hag p. 9.
nor what is every particular man's judgment, for the full state is seldom
deduced from such: But I shall rather address my self to Controversall
Discourses, and that to Conferences and Conventions, of many, and those of both
sides, where we may presume the Question is stated to the greatest advantage on
both sides; and so I give it in these particulars.

^^s Coron. ^oll p. 116. ^es. Anty. ^0. Sect. 6.
First, The Question was never propounded, or the State given in these terms:
[An Christus mortuus est pro omnibus?] Whether Christ has dyed for [All] [the
World] [the whole World] but thus, [pro omnibus and singulis] as may be seen
in all Controversies in this point: and that upon this ground, because [All
men] (nemine negante) is taken for all sorts of men, or for every individual,
Twisse vind. great. lib. 1. Part 2 Sect. 22. p. 255^.
the first whereof is granted on all hands, the second in question; therefore
men of any ingenuity have waved such equivocall state of the Question: As to
say, Christ has dyed for all men: So that that Discourse, or that proposition
that says no more then this, that he has ransomed (all men) (the world) (the
whole world) comes short of the Question.

Secondly, The Question has not been propounded, or stated in an unlimited or
indefinite sense, as [An Christus mortu us est pro omnibus and singulis] and no
more, [Whether Christ dyed for all and every man, in any kind, or to procure
any good] but these controversies have been restrained to eternal life, and
pardon of sin its inseparable prognosticke: And the assertion of the Defendants
(on his side) has been this, [Christus pro omnibus and singulis inpetravit
peccatorum remissionem, Corv. in Mol. Cap. 27. Sect. 1. 424.
and salutem] as see may any see in the Arminian Tracts: The Testimony of that
great and acute Remost. has it thus; [Morte Christi omnibus and singulis
reconciliationem, peccatorum remissionem, ac salutem aeternam esse partam,
sententia nostra est:] That is, [That by Christ his Death, there is procured
for every man reconciliation, pardon of sin, and eternal Salvation, it is our
judgement] Therefore that Discourse, and that Proposition that hold forth no
more but this, that he dyed for all and every man, and not signifying the
determinate end and good that he impetrated for them, comes short of the
genuine state of the Question, and that Question is Equivocally propounded, and
the words spoken in pursuance of it are vainly and impertinently produced. That
I may a little clear this business, and prove to any understanding that this
state of the Question is to be heeded in these Controversies: The word
Redemption is to take its denomination from the misery which we are redeemed
from; according to a Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal misery, and Thraledome,
there is a Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal Redemption; if spoken of such a
misery from which all are redeemed, then it is an universal Redemption: if of
such from which some only are redeemed, then it is a special Redemption. Now
the misery which man in general and every individual lay under, was graduall,
and a complication of more deaths then one, as our Author confesses, Page 99.
where he gives it the name of deaths in the plural number, and it is apparent
from Scripture, that all kinds of deaths mentioned there, are the fruit of sin,
Romans 5.12. By sin death passed, all death, but we find in Scripture a death
Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal: as Joh. 11.4. Ephesians. 2.11. 1 John 1.16. Rev.
2.11. By Temporal death we were to lose our natural life, a separation of the
Soul from the Body, and in that death to lose all natural comforts which
tended to our comfortable living, and so the whole Creation made for our use to
be reduced to its first nothing; By Spiritual death we were to lose our
Spiritual good, the Image of God, and his graces, to become dead in sins,
alienated from the life of God, and so to be denied his glorious presence for
ever, which makes up the greatest part of Eternal death; this third not being
different from the second specifically, but only [gradu and duratione.] And to
all this there was one degree of misery more, all this was remedilesly (without
a Savior) and incontinently without delay to fall upon man, [In the day thou
eatest thou shall dye the death.] Now had not Christ intervened and interposed,
the Justice of God could not have brooked one moments respite. Now here is a
great latitude left for Christ by his Death to procure some good for every
Creature, for every man, and yet the freedom from Eternal death, and
procurement of Eternal life, not to be so general as to reach to all men.
Yea, in this case Christ did interpose, and every man has benefit by it; Every
man is freed from the present incumbency of the misery, and so to a life of
nature, and so to the use of the Creatures, they being given to man not qua
(integer) but qua (homo) and that every man is thus far redeemed from the
incumbency of the misery none has denied, common experience shows. But then
whether or no those are such as Christ in Scripture Phrase is said to (dye for)
and to ransom: Or whether to all so, and in such a measure freed, He is said
in Scripture to intend Eternal life, it is very questionable, and never yet
proved. The end of God and Christ in giving so much to every man, I will not
now either examine or determine: But one we may be furnished with from the
Author, That though man's condition was such as deserved the present incumbency
of the Curse, yet that, and the execution of many of Gods Eternal purposes
concerning his Son, and his Elect, could not both have their accomplishment;
God having elected his Son Christ to union Hypostaticall, and office of a
Mediator, to give and bestow life to such a number of men whom he had elected
to bring infallibly to Grace and Glory, and that absolutely without any
foresight of faith, or any good, as he grants, Page 118, 119. 120. Which
Decrees could not have been accomplished had the Curse been speedily and
presently executed, then had not Christ been borne, he being to come through
the multiplication of such a long Genealogy, nor his Elect had any being to
have been the Subjects either of Grace or Glory, many of them being to issue
from the Loins of those to whom God had decreed to deny both Grace and Glory:
That this was only the sole and chief end of Christ in interposing, yea for
them that never come to have Eternal life, I will not determine, but leave it
to the Author to consider, whether there was not ground enough for him to
intend some good to every man by his Death, and yet not intend eternal life
for them? Therefore to let this pass for granted, that Christ did so far
interpose himself for every man, as to keep off from him the present
imcumbency of the misery, so to continue to him his forfeited being, a room in
the world, and the Creatures for his subsistence. [And could he make it good
from Col. 1.20. that in this sense he has reconciled the world of Creatures
(wherewith God was angry for man's delinquency) so far as to have them continued
in their borrowed and created being, it could not any thing entrench upon the
Question] By virtue of which interposall he has procured, and every man
enjoys many benefits, I will not undertake to make a full enumeration of
them: but let it go thus far, that every good that any man enjoys it is a
stream flowing from that bloody side of our Savior; And were it so that by
virtue of this he might be said to taste of death for every man, as Heb. 2.9.
To be the Savior of all men, as 1 Timothy 4.10. To have bought them that perish
with a swift destruction, as 2 Pet. 2.1. And that not only (quodammodo
liberati) as the contra Remonst. would supply that Text, Coll. Hag. 143.
but that this they have by the virtue of Christ's Blood: Were all this proved
and stood firm, I should embrace it, I deny it not: Nay, my thoughts are, that
if Christ had not procured it, no man should have had any good, it being as
well against justice to give the least mercy, as Eternal life without a
Savior, for [Justitia constat in minimis.] And were the expression such as the
Remonst. through the great crowd of Notions sometimes let slip in too rude a
drought, Acta Synod. P. ^83.
[Effectum Christi mortis est restitutio in talem statum in quo Deus nobis and
beneficia sua communicare and potest and vult:] That is, [The effect of Christ's
Death is such that God may bestow his benefits as he sees good,] leaving the
words in such a latitude, that they may admit of a diversity of good to diverse
persons, some good to every man, some good only to some men; Herein few
Adversaries would appear. He may give many good things, that never intends
to give Eternal life; But then all this would not satisfy, in all this there
would be a double deficiencie.

1. All this wants proof to be meant, when Christ is said to [dye for] and to
[Ransome,] and to [Redeeme,] As if he is said in Scripture Phrase, to dye for
them for whom he procured some good. I think Scripture does not say Christ to
have dyed for such, but rather for them that were the chief end, and for whose
fake he gives such mercies to them that never come to have life; as to
instance, He dyed not for them to whom he gives any outward privilege, but
rather for them for whose sakes they were so, that so by that they might come
to be, and be brought to repentance, and so to life. And I would entreat the
Author to furnish me with some Arguments to prove that all the good he shows
to those men that never come to life, is not shown them for the Elects sake
chiefly; and that the end why the world is not consumed, is not chiefly that
the Elect might in their times and seasons be brought to Repentance.

2. Herein is not the state of the Question, but we are yet besides the
Controversies, all things have been quiet till they came to say, [That Christ
procured life and Salvation for every man] and in the hottest Disputes about
this Point I find such expressions as puts the case out of all doubt: Amos.
Anty. Synod p. 176.
[Si vago sensu quaeratur an Christus pro Electis aliquo modo mortuus sit, an
pro omnibus aliquo modo, nulla hic est certa and determinata question, nec
sensus and modus determinatus: Neque potest vel posterior pars a nostris, nec
prior a Remonst. absolute negari.] The maine (...) and Question is still where
it was, viz. [Whether Christ has purchased pardon of sin and Eternal life for
every individual man.]

Thirdly, That the state of the Question may fully and clearly appear, there
is some debate in a third particular, and that is about the Act of Christ, as
the first was about the object, the second the end: For, that he brings all
to salvation and eternal life, no Remonst. durst ever yet affirm, or that
Christ by his death has procured that every man shall infallibly be saved,
that they would shake off from them: but this they say, He has procured that
all men may be saved if they believe.

Hence we shall find in all their tracts this distinction of Impetration
Application
of Salvation.

The first, for every man: The second for believers. But because Impetration is
not so familiar to common understandings, we shall find in other terms thus:
[Intentio and scopus Christi fuit omnes servare, Coll. Hag 176.
tamen aliter evenit propter ipsorum culpam.] [That it was Christ's intention to
save all men, but through their fault it happens otherwise.] But herein they
give no satisfaction, but seem to implicate themselves; for strange it is that
anything can (aliter evenire) to Christ's intention: and if Corvinus argue
rightly it cannot: In Molin. 4 cap 28. Sect. 2 page 448.
[Christus exauditur semper sive salvantur sive non, quia orat^cum annexa fidei
condition.] Christ is heard always whether men be saved or no, because his
Prayer had a condition annexed. So why any thing should (aliter evenire) and he
not have his intent whether men believe or no, because his intention is but
(annexa fidei condition) they cannot clearly show, but such insatisfactory
implications are no strange things in the best assertors of that Doctrine. But
the full state of the Question arises out of these particulars thus.

[Whether Christ by his death did intend or purpose to procure remission of
sins, and eternal life for every man either absolutely, or upon any
condition.] The Affirmative is the Judgment of Arminius and his Followers: The
Negative of the contra Remonst. and their Followers. And that Proposition, or
that Discourse, or those places that arise not to that height are vainly
produced in this Controversy.

As for the Discourse of the Author, it either arises not at all, or very
obscurely to this state in its genuine Altitude, but I find an interwoven
miscellany of expresses, sometimes attempting to rise to this State, sometimes
receding from it, pitching his thoughts upon a far less degree: As to
instance, sometimes he says, [ He has wrought for all men that they might be
eternally saved. Page 15.) Sometimes again, bating of this, and putting his
end in his Death, and the thing to be procured thereby, only [That he might be
Lord of all, and have all in his dispose, Page 142.] And with many instances of
both kinds the Reader may supply that have perused his Treatise, as if he
intended his Discourse [A materia prima capax omnium formarum,] turned any way
according to the temper of his Reader: which fluctuating expressions trouble
the minds of his Reader, as not able to conclude what he intends, and is very
unbecomming any who intends to be either ingenuous or faithful in the
business. But I put the business to this issue, Either he arises to this
state, or not: If he does not, what need of that grand distinction so long
insisted on in the first Chapter, seeing that to nothing but eternal Salvation
(or with reference only to that) can the work of the Spirit of God in the
hearts of men be thought requisite? What need of his busy Discourse if that be
not the business he intends to prove, viz. [That Christ procured eternal
Salvation for every Son of Adam?] None ever yet stirred in any other
Controversy, neither needed he fear any molestation. And if he do, then my
next task is to examine how his whole Discourse manageth the business, and
how pertinent his expresses are to the Question thus stated. To which I proceed:

CHAP. II.
1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all.

Heb. 2.9. That he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.


Proposition
THe Sense (as the words import) appears to be, [That Jesus Christ by the
grace, good will, and favor of God, did taste death for every man, and also so
gave himself a ransom to God for all men: and so is become the propitiation
for the sins of the World, and the Savior of the World.] How pertinently these
places are produced, any common understanding may perceive. The Proposition may
well be received, as proceeding from the Texts alleged, or with reference to
the Controversy. But all being jointly taken, do not touch the true state of
the Question.

The first Text, viz. 1 Timothy 2.6. is peccant in the first particular: because
it says not, that he gave himself a ransom for every individual; and this
will appear a clear allegation, if we consider that the Author denies not
but that all men, is in Scripture sometimes taken for all sorts of men,
sometimes for every individual; Therefore, Ante factam distinctionem, (as the
Logicians speak) before distinction be made it is equivocall. And all that I
would have noted here, is, that it is not the plain words of the Text, or
meaning of it, that he gave himself a ransom for every Individual: but that
must be fetched from his reasonings, the validity of which shall be examined in
their proper place.

The second Text, viz. Heb. 2 9. is obnoxious to diverse exceptions, as being
produced to prove the Quest. For we must refer it to the Author, (or rather to
his Oracle) whether there be any such Text or no. Any that well peruseth the
words, (...), may well quere, First, Whether those words necessitate such a
reading, as [He tasted death for every man.] Secondly, Whether they will not
admit a quite distinct and much differing reading, and that most congruous to
the context. Thirdly, Whether if all be granted from the words; yet what this
is to the Question, because the words say not, neither from them is it urged by
the Author, That he tasted death for every man to bring them to Salvation,
either absolutely or upon any condition: I say no more of these Texts here,
because there are two distinct Chapters set apart to treat of these two Texts
severally, therefore there I shall say more of them; only here I cannot but
advertize the Author, that these words [He tasted death for every man] are not
in plain express terms in the Text, nor the Tenent, viz. (That Christ
intended to bring every man to eternal Salvation by his death, either
absolutely, or on any condition) is not in plain terms, and affirmations in
the words, as the Author falsely suggests to his ignorant Readers, but in both
he must be beholding to his own corrupt inferences and reasonings which
(without prejudice to the Scripture,) may be brought to further disquisition.

As for the Proposition resulting from the Texts alleged, it does neither
good nor hurt; until it leave those wild generals, and come to some more
particulars, it will neither prove friend or enemy to the Question of either
side.

It says indeed, that Christ did taste death for every man, but if (the words
were to be so read) he says not to bring them to eternal Salvation either
absolutely or conditionally; Therefore that an imperfect expression,

It says indeed, that Christ gave himself to God a ransom for all men: But
it does not say that he gave himself a ransom for every Individual man;
Therefore this an imperfect expression also.

It says indeed, That He is become the propitiation for the sins of the World,
But it says not that he is the propitiation for the sins of every Individual;
Therefore imperfect.

It says indeed, That He is the Savior of the world, but mentions not
whether he means Savior of the world with [eternal salvation,] whether he
actually saves the world eternally, or merited eternal Salvation for the
world upon faith and repentance, or whether he means any kind of Salvation:
neither does he say that he is the Savior of every Individual in the world:
this also is an imperfect expression; and what the whole is, may be seen by a
view of the several parts of it; it is all imperfect as not being at all to
the Question: And if it should be reduced to a Syllogism it must run thus.

If Christ by Gods grace tasted death for every man, and also gave himself a
ransom to God for all men, etc. Then he intended by his death to purchase
eternal Salvation for every man, either absolutely, or upon condition.

But he did do the former: go: He did the latter: Then the business being thus
framed, it remains our Authors task to prove the consequence of the Major.
So that hitherto we see no plain affirmations of Scripture in his Tenent, of
which we find such a confident boast in his whole Discourse. So that his whole
Discourse making out to us no more then he here in the Text pretends, it is no
other then a progress in impertinencies.

But for his better understanding, he promises five things, which successively
make up five of his first Chapters, all which he mentions Page 2. The first
whereof takes up his first Chapter, and it is the difference between,

First, A Redemption, Reconciliation, Salvation wrought by Christ in his own
body with God for men.

2. A Redemption, Reconciliation, Salvation, which he effects by his Spirit
in men to God.

Which distinction he supposes will make the matter clear, which indeed,
makes the business more full of obscurities then before. For my clearer Answer
to this rude distinction, I must also premise some few particulars, if it be
possible to reduce the indigested conceptions of the Author to some reasonable
perspicuity. And they are these.

. 1. That the word (Salvation) is too wide a field to rove in without a
limitation, seeing it is a general term applicable to any deliverance from
any thing that either is, or was an enemy to man's well being. As,

1. That Sentence that was past upon Adam and all his Sons* for the present and
speedy execution of it was a grand enemy to man's well being: And the
deliverance from it (even in the next moment of reprievall) might deserve the
name of Salvation; though I know no one place that speaks of it under this
notion of Salvation; nor does it acknowledge the love of God to be expressed to
any only in this, and no further.

2. Any outward temporary misery, thraldom, danger, is an enemy to man's
well-being; and a deliverance from such has in Scripture the name of
Salvation. Act. 27.31. Heb. 5.7. 1 Pet 4.18. 1 Pet. 3.20. Jude 5.

3. That ignorance (of God, and Jesus Christ our Peace) which is in us, is an
enemy to our well-being; seeing that without Hearing no Faith, without Faith no
Salvation by him: therefore the deliverance from this ignorance by the coming
of the Gospel, and the preaching of it, is in Scripture called a Salvation.
Luke 3.6. compared with Isa. 40.3. Act. 28.28. 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 2.3.

4. The wrath of God which he has conceived against sinners is an enemy to our
well-being; and to be delivered from it by Reconciliation is a Salvation: Romans
11.11. and 15. And if Reconciliation be not a Salvation, why puts the Author
them together, as being Synonimous?

5. The enmity in our hearts against God is an enemy against our well being;
and to be delivered from it by Conversion and effectual Calling is Salvation.
1 Cor. 9.22. Tit. 3.5. Luke 19, 9. 2 Timothy 2.10. 1 Timothy 1.9. Nay, although it is
but a graduall emendation of men's lives in regard of some gross sins to which
they were formerly given, is Salvation. Jude 23.

6. Any want or imperfection coming short of that blessed state of Innocence
is an enemy also, therefore to be in consummate and complete happiness in
Heaven is Salvation (...), 1 Pet. 1.9.

7. Sometimes the word Salvation is comprehending all these, as Math. 1.21. And
in any place where Christ is said to come to be the [Saviour of his people.]
These being considered, that Discourse that treates of Salvation indefinitely,
without a specification of what Salvation it is meant, is but a rambling in
obscurities.

. 2. That to the enjoyment of any one of these, or all these, there are two
distinct Acts requisite, viz. Impetration or Merit, and actual Application, or
bestowing of it, according to Merit and Purchase. It is against his wisdom to
impetrate a benefit at so dear a rate without applying it, or intention to
apply it. It is against his Omnipotency and perfection not to apply that which
he intended to apply, and against his Justice to apply any Salvation, without
that Application or Salvation applied were first merited and impetrated. Hence
it may be truly said, [Impetratio est applicationis fundamentum, and applicatio
est impetrationis complementum] Impetration is the foundation of Application,
and Application the Complement and perfection of Impetration, and both together
make an entire Salvation. And the first Act, viz. Impetration, or Merit, is
not, nor can be called Salvation, Reconciliation, Redemption, any otherwise
then Metonimically; as Christ himself is called our Salvation, Luke 1. and our
Peace. And so it is called Salvation, with reference to the Salvation perfectly
applied, either as actually done, or as infallibly in time to be done. But
properly Salvation is not wrought perfectly in Christ, for they are (opera ad
extra) necessarily requiring an object without, and they must be terminated
upon the Creature; as there is no Act without an Object, so no Salvation, or
Reconciliation, except there be some that are reconciled: and if they be in the
first Act reconciled or saved, in any of the forementioned degrees, the second
Act is frustaneous in respect of that degree. And the Remonst. though they gave
it the name of Reconciliation, Redemption, Satisfaction, yet they carefully
expressed themselves how they meant: Acta Synod. 289 Corv in Mol. cap 28. Sect
11. page 437.
Not that any Salvation, or Reconciliation were actually wrought for men, or
acted upon the Creature, but that they were in such a condition that God would
be reconciled upon such and such conditions, therefore called Salvation, because
there may be a Salvation and Reconciliation, but not that there is one
actually; therefore that Discourse that confidently terms that first act done
in Christ a salvation, Reconciliation, Redemption, without further explanation,
evidenceth that the Author is willing to lie under the censure of an
Impropriety, that he may lie hid in obscure expressions.

: 3. That those two Actions viz. Impetration, or Merit, and actual conferring
or applying any of those forementioned salvations belong not both to the same
party to do. The first is Christ's, and so his as none else, he alone as
Mediator satisfied and merited because he only dyed. But the actual
conferring of any Salvation is so Christ's, as it is also the work of the
Father, and so not of Christ as Mediator, but then his as having a share in
the offended Deity: And for this the frequent Testimonies of the Remonst. are
sufficient Testimonies to them that adhere to there principles: as [Christus
impetravit ut Deus possit sua beneficia communicare, Acta. Synod. 283. Corv.
in. Mol. c. 28. Sect. 11. p. 437.
] and [per mortem Christi via est aperta, ut Deus vult nobis reconciliari;]
Where there is a manifest difference betwixt the Agent in Impetration, and the
Agent in Communication; but had we no such Testimonies, the Scriptures would
plainly evince it, which attributes the active and bestowing the good, merited
by Christ's Death, to God the offended Party, and that in distinction from
Christ the Mediating Party that merited them. As 1 Cor. 5.19. Romans 3.22.23. Rom
8.33, 34. 2 These. 2.13, 1 John 3.1 Ephesians. 1 5. Wherein we shall find
Reconciliation, Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, etc. to be done by God
as the efficient, in distinction from Christ the Meritorious Cause; Col. 19,
20. This the Author seems to grant in his first Discourse, wherein he says,
the first Act is done by Christ, the second is done by his Spirit; which second
is not so his, but it is also the Act of the Spirit and of the Father also. And
the Apostle takes in all in one place, Pater nobis benedixit omni benedictione
in Christo. The Father of Jesus Christ blessed us with all spiritual blessings
in Christ: By which it is plain, that Impetration belongs to Christ as
Mediator, Application to God the offended Party, and to Christ as he makes one
in that Essential Paternity that gives all good: And therefore that Discourse
that treates of both Acts as done by the same Person in the same respects, is
erroneus, as does his.

. 4. That the difference was never yet about the distinction of these two Acts,
Whether they are Acts distinct or no, none ever yet attempted to confound them,
(neither was there ever any need so to do) but the difference has been about
the division of them, Whether they may be divided one from the other or no?
(That is) Whether Christ Impetrated any Salvation for any man to whom it shall
not in time be infallibly applied? Amesiu^. Anty. Synod. ^69.
And this may appear by the decision of Amesius, [Distinctio inter
impetrationem and applicationem facile appareat, sed haec decerptio aut
seperatio eorum (qua boni impetratio tatis fingitur, ut (illa posita) fieri
possit, ut bonum illud nemini communicetur aut applicetur) est plane
Antechristiana:] And therefore that Discourse that is spent in proving these
only distinct, (which was never denied) is labor vainly expended as is his.

. 5. That to the Act of Christ in purchasing, meriting, or impetrating any
Salvation for us, or any man, there is requisite, not only his Death, but his
Resurrection also, his Ascension, his Session and Intercession, all the Acts of
his Mediatorship concur to make up that one Act of Impetration, without all
which it had been imperfect. The Remonst. not being willing to acknowledge it,
have been at great variance about the sharing the Impetration and Application,
their due share in the stock of Christ's Mediatorship, Coll Hag. 147.
and have said and unsaid. They of the Conference at Hague, adjudged the Death
of Christ to belong to all, as to the Impetration, and his Resurrection to
Believers only, so by consequence to the applicatory Part: Seeing that is only
to Believers. But yet not trusting to that, one of that Conference afterward
thus says, Corv. in. Mol. c. 28. Sect. 12, 437, 438.
[Fructu^ nullum nullamque mortis efficacia^ esse citra Resurrectione^ verum
est non dicimus Christum pro omnibus mortuum esse tantum, and non pro omnibus
resurrexisse*] So that in their Judgment his Death brought forth no fruit
without his Resurrection; and if his Resurrection did concur to the
Impetration of Salvation, why all the rest of the Acts of his Life should not,
I would be informed. And in reason it will follow that if it be Christ's task
as Mediator only to Impetrate, then all his Acts as Mediator must go to the
perfecting the Impetration? It was not Death barely that did merit Salvation,
but the death of such a one as must overcome Death, and so present himself
before God in Heaven, that could effect that business. As in the Law there was
Mactatio Sacrificii, and Ostensio Sunguinis, The killing of the Sacrifice, and
showing the Blood within the veil, Lev. 16.11, 15. Without which no Atonement
made, no not so much as appertained to the Priest: So no Atonement purchased or
merited without the Mactation of the Lamb (on the Cross,) and the Ostension
of his Blood within the veil in Heaven in his Ascension, which is called his
appearing in Heaven for us; Heb. 9.12, 24. And that appearing for, it must
needs be part of his Impetration, else should he not answer his Type; the
Priest in the Law was to offer a Sacrifice, and to offer Prayers for the
People, so Christ also out High Priest. Hence is it that Christ makes this an
end of leaving the World, viz. To prepare a place, Joh. 14.2, 3. He says not
to bestow a place, but to prepare; without which ascending to Heaven, and
showing himself there that he had shaken off man's sins, and overcommed death,
the Kingdom had not been sufficiently prepared. And hence is it, as I
conceive, that he says, If I go not away the Comforter cannot come, either in
the powerful operations of his Grace, or comfortable persuasions of his
Spirit, that he could not scale any comfortable tidings to their hearts that
Christ had done for them if he had not ascended, that finishing his Impetration
he ascending sent him to them. Thus the Author grants, Page 7.

8. He appears and Advocates for us to procure pardon of sins, etc. And to
present himself, and the Covenant of precious Promises, therefore his
ascending, and Advocation belongs to the impetration or procuring life. Hence
that Discourse that divides the Acts of Christ about our Salvation, and that
as Mediator, some to Impetration, others to Application as he does, is not
sound and Orthodox.

Which generals being well considered will make way to the methodicall
examining of the Authors distinction, and his Discourse upon it. The
distinction follows.

First, A Salvation, Redemption, Reconciliation, which Christ has wrought in
his body with God for men.

Secondly, A Salvation, Redemption, Reconciliation, which Christ has effected
by his Spirit in men to God.

Which distinction, the Author excudes to that end it might be both heeded and
understood, which if he had as really intended as he spoke, he would have made
it to bring pertinency and perspicuity along with it; pertinency, that it might
deserve to have been heeded, and perspicuity with it, that it might be in a
capacity of being understood; but so wild are his expressions herein, that his
Reader is put to a double task, both to search out his intricate meaning, and
also to refell it; the first being of far greater difficulty, which savours
not of Controversall ingenuity. And that which (by his other expresses) we may
conjecture to be his meaning, being granted in its latitude, affords no clear
decision to the Controverted truth, as in the close of this Chapter I shall
show.

It is not easy to determine whether by this distinction, our Author intends
to discover two distinct Salvations wrought by Christ, or two distinct Acts in
Christ working and effecting one and the same Salvation; which if our Author
had heeded to discover, his Discourse had more tended to satisfaction, and been
better understood.

If he mean distinct Salvations, then he should have discovered what they are,
and how distinct; for truth we may grant in this thus taken, That there is a
Salvation from the present Incumbency of the misery wrought out and effected by
Christ for all men: And there is a Salvation from enmity of heart, by
effectual calling wrought by the Spirit of Christ, and this is to none but
Believers: But what clearenesse this brings to the Controversy in hand, is
not yet clear to me.

Besides if he thus mean, though these Salvations be distinct, yet as his
distinction is clothed, with circumstances it falls to the ground; for his
first Salvation he speaks of is so wrought out (for men) that it is not done
(in) or (upon men,) but such is not the Salvation from the present incumbency
of the Curse, for that is so wrought out (for) that it is also acted (upon)
men, applied to every man, there being nothing requisite to the application of
that but what is common to all men: And his second Salvation is so wrought (in
men) that is distinct from, and opposed to, wrought out (for men) (else his
distinction is not good) but this is false, for no Salvation is wrought in or
upon men, but it is wrought out for men, Impetration being the foundation of
all Application; therefore these two are ill brought as members
contra-distinct, seeing they are coincident in one and the same Redemption.

But if he mean, his distiction of two Acts concurring to every Salvation,
viz. a [working for] and a [bestowing upon] a procuring for, and applying to;
As I suppose he does, not only because this distinction is in use in all
Arminian Tracts in this Point, as the business of their elaborate structures,
and the hinge about which they turn: But also from our Authors own
expressions in every leaf almost of his Discourse, as to instance, [The pardon
procured, and in his hands to bestow, Page 42, 43.] [He would work out a
Redemption, and procure life, and it is in him for men, Pa. 50.] [If Christ had
shed no Blood to procure remission for them, Page 137.] [He has procured
Salvation, and made them salvable, and calls them that they might be saved,
Page 157, 158.] By all which and many more it appears plainly, that by his
first Salvation he means no more then the first Act of Christ in procuring or
meriting of Salvation: And by the second he means the Actual applying of it
upon such conditions performed; and if this be all, I must inform him that
this has been well heeded long since, and fully understood, and yet the
business not cleared beyond all doubt of his side.

And I would then know, Whether his distinction be not something allied to that
of the Arminians of [Impetration and Application] the one for [every Man,] the
second for [Beleevers] only, and what difference there is betwixt him and an
Arminian? Save only that his expressions are more absurd: though he cries out
of a heavy Calumny so to be charged. And when our Author gives a more distinct
discovery of himself, he shall have a more distinct Answer.

In the next place, I shall examine both members of his distinction apart; of
the first now, and first to consider his expressions in it: Secondly, the
Scriptures he produced to back it. The members run thus:

[A Salvation, Reconciliation, Redemption, which Christ has wrought in his
Body, for men, with God.] Wherein,

1. I desire satisfaction, why he calls the Act of Christ in meriting or
procuring life for men A Salvation, without further explanation: Meriting or
procuring being an Act, relates to the Agent, and is terminated in him, but
Salvation is a transient Act that runs into an Object: It is an effect, and
therefore must have an object on which it is wrought. Salvation is (opus ad
extra) and therefore to say that that is terminated in Christ, is absurd; As it
is a work ad extra, so it might have an object (ad extra) also, Corv. in Mol.
Cap. 28. Sect. 11
and if none be saved, there is no Salvation. Indeed, the Remonstrants called
it a [Reconciliation,] but then they explain themselves, that it is not an
actual Reconciliation: But therefore called so, because Reconciliation is
procured; and if the Author had so discovered himself he had been ingenuous;
but herein in my Reason is not satisfied. That those things that are procured,
And in time to come to pass, may be laid down as being in Act, when they are
not so, because of the infallible futurition, I grant: as he that believes not
is condemned, and he that believes has eternal life, Scripture thus
speaks; but that the act of Christ in procuring only that men may have life,
notwithstanding which most men perish; and the end whereof is not the Salvation
of men, that such an act should be Salvation, Reconciliation, Redemption,
neither Scripture nor Reason speaks; therefore I demand a reason of that his
expression.

2. Why he so expresses it, as if the first Act, viz. of Impetration or merit
was in Scripture Phrase, as done [in his body,] when the Scripture says, the
second Act, viz. of Application is done [In that body of his flesh,] Col. 1.20.
Which place evidently treats of the application of his Death, and
Reconciliation of their hearts to God by being brought in to believe, who were
strangers and enemies in heart to God before, yet notwithstanding this is said
to be [(...)] in that body of his flesh, I rather wonder why our Author should
produce such an expression, (making it the seat of Controversy) without
further explanation, when it so easily might be explained; Let him tell me how
that Reconciliation was wrought [in Christ's Body,] Reconciliation is a thing
subjectated in God, Xanchy in locum.
existing only [in mente divina] not in Christ's Body. Expositours to clear
this unanimously say, that [(...)] is put for [(...)] [In] for [by,] as is most
frequent in Scripture, as one says, [Quasi dicat reconciliavit per oblationem
Corporis sui,] And therefore said to be [In his Body,] because it was done by
those sufferings which were subjectated in his Body, in which regard he was
said to bear our sins in his Body, (that is, the punishment of our sins,) but
our Reconciliation properly is not said to be in [his Body.] That indeed
whereby he merited it was in his Body. The means of our Reconciliation are
twofold in Scripture, [His Body,] and [His Blood,] the one broken, the other
shed; but of this latter it is said to be (...), by his Blood, [as it were to
expound the other, that though it be (...), yet to be meant (...), by his Body]
Col. 1.20. If this be so, then not the first Redemption, or procuring of
Salvation, or Reconciliation only; but the second also, even the application of
it is said, and also truly is (In) that is (by his Body) Seeing that we are
said to be redeemed [by his Blood,] Rev. 5.9. Which place our Author averreth
to be meant of the application of Christ's Death, therefore the circumscribing
that first Redemption with this Phrase (In his Body) is groundless.

3. We shall view the expressions wherewith this is clothed, that so we may
Judge how pertinent his alleged Scriptures are, [it being his boast that he
has so many plain Texts.] First, It is said to be an Act of Christ as Mediator
distinct from God the offended Party. Secondly, to be done [in his body] as
opposed to be [done by his spirit.] Thirdly, With God for men, as opposed to
[of God upon man.] Fourthly A reconciling of God to man as opposed to
[reconciling man to God.] Fifthly, This is said to be for every man. Now our
next task is to consider how pertinent his Texts are to make out this. [ Joh.
4.42. We know that this is indeed Christ the Savior of the World.] The meaning
of Which place, if our Author Divine right, must be this; [We know now that
this is Christ that works out Salvation for the world,] and this exclusively,
and confining the word [Saviour] to wo^^ing it with God, and that opposed to a
working a Reconciliation in the hearts of men, an empty exposition very
improbable to the meaning of them that so said upon their being brought in to
believe as they were 39. And so had the work of God on their hearts by his
Ministry, certainly in such a time; if they say [his is the Savior of the
World] they mean such a Salvation as is by faith in Christ: Now what that is
let the Author judge. And he said to be the Savior of the world, because they
knew he it was that came to merit Salvation, so as it should be applied in time
by Faith. Shall we take the liberty thus to expound Scripture, and say, Math.
1.21. [He shall save his people from their sins,] That is, he shall work out
with God a Salvation, which yet may not be applied? And Luke 1.47. [My Spirit
rejoices in God my Saviour] thus meant, in him that works out Salvation with
God for me, notwithstanding which I may perish? How shall we herein perplexe
the Word of God? Let the Author show me where Christ, or God is called Saviors
and respect not had to the Application of Salvation either present or to come.
Acts 5.37. He is a Prince and a Savior to give repentance and forgiveness of
sins. Savior there looks at the actual bestowing of Salvation, he then is
said to be a Savior from sins, when he gives Repentance and Remission; And
the nature of a Savior is clearly set down, Neh. 9.27. [Gavest them Saviors
that saved them.] Now that Christ in procuring life may be called a Savior I
grant, but then it is with reference to the actual application of it in time
to them for whom he procured it. Indeed Corvinus attempts to prove the word
[Saviour] in [1 Timothy 4.10. In Molin. c. 29. 468.
He is the Savior of all men] to be thus meant, [Quia quantum in se paratus
est omnes salvare,] but he gives to me but little satisfaction, for he proves
not that this is meant of any other Salvation than what is actually applied:
And that expression, [He is ready to save as much as in him lyeth] is no
congruous exposition of this word [Saviour,] for in his Judgment, He may be
ready to save and yet none be saved, but if none be saved, how Christ should be
called a Savior I cannot comprehend; But to close, I say to this Text Joh.
4.42. If he mean that this Text includes and takes in the Act of Christ in
procuring salvation for the world, this I deny not: but this I affirm also, it
takes in, and has an eye to the application of it to the world, that is, [Men
living in the world,] and then it favors him not, for his first Redemption is
such as has no eye to the certain and infallible application of it.

[1 John 2.2. He is the Propitiation, etc.] The sense of which place he makes
to stand thus; [He has wrought out remission and reconsiliation for our sins
with God, and so for the sins of the whole world, and that in distinction from
the application,] but this very short of the meaning of that place; that the
word (propitiation) has more in it then a solitary procuring of remission as
distinct from application is plain from the word it self, and other
Scriptures; The word (...) comes from a word which signifies to be actually
appeased, placated, reconciled, actually to remit the fault; when the Publican
prayed [(...),] did he desire only that God might be in a capacity or
possibility to pardon, or that pardon and remission might be wrought out for
him with God, notwithstanding which he might want it? certainly he was not
content with such a boon; But now for God to be actually placated, reconciled,
this is to enjoy the application of Christ's Blood, else is Corvinus short in
his reasoning, [Per ejus mortem est placabilu, and placand^ si credereat,]
which intimates that when he is (placatus) appeased, and reconciled, then is
the Does of Christ applied. Now let us consider the words of the Text; the
words are [He is the propitiation.] and the Author must grant a difference
between these things. First, It is one thing for God to set forth his Son to
be a Propitiation. 2. A second, for Christ to do that by virtue of which he is
to be a propitiation. 3. A third for Christ by virtue of that done to be a
propitiation; the two former do not require Faith ^o their actual
accomplishment, but the third does. Hence is he said to be propitiation
[through faith,] Romans 3.25. Which clearly demonstrateth that for Christ to be
a Propitiation is the application of his Blood: Christ by his Death made God
only [Placabilem] placable, and this puts no man into actual possession of
remission, as our Author says Cap. 6. and in his Judgment, not into any
certainty of its; but this reaches not so high as for Christ to be a
propitiation, but stays here, He is to be one, or May be one if men believe,
for till men have remission actually, or else in a certainty of having it, he
is not truly said [to be a Propitiation. In Molin. c. 28.445.
] No better testimony would I desire in this case than Corvinus himself, who
on Romans 3.25. thus says, [Deum Christum proposuisse propitiatorium, sed tale
ut id nobis futurus sit si modo in cum credamus, and docet quomodo Christus
futurus sit nobis propitiatorium (viz:) per fidem.] Which clearly bespeaketh
that when Christ is a Propitiation, Ibid.
that is meant of the application of his Death by Faith, and this he not only
averreth, but strongly proves; thus, [Ista pertinent clarissime ad
applicationem non impetrationem; quomodo enim potest esse ut nobis impetret
remissionem per fidem, nisi sides nostra una cum sanguine ejus sit coprotium
remissionis, quod est absurdum;] The sense thus, He cannot be said to procure
remission by faith, unless our faith was a coprice with his Blood, in meriting
remission, which is absurd; therefore this Phrase belongs to the application,
not impetration, and this very pregnant and full, though I conceive against
himself; for to compare that place to the Text in hands does not Romans 3.25.
[He is set forth to be a propitiation through faith] clearly affirm that when
he is said to be a Propitiation, it is to be meant through Faith, and so of
Remission, not only procured but applied? And does not the place 1 John 2.1, 2,
say He is the Propitiation? it says not [God has set him forth to be a
Propitiation,] nor yet [He is to be a Propitiation,] but thus [He is a
Propitiation,] which is given us clearly by the Remonstrants own Confession,
to signify the Application and the [ Mortis (...)] and to mean the actual
enjoyment of pardon of sin, which may further appear if we consider the
persons of whom he speaks, viz. such as did believe, and had overcome the
world by Faith, as in 1 John 4.10. [But that he loved us, and gave his Son
apropitiation for our sins,] Let us consider is this all the love that God
bears to Believers, to give Christ that he might be in a possibility of being
a Propitiation, that he might only procure Reconciliation, notwithstanding
which they may miss of it, nay is it not incongruous to say he has procured
reconciliation for them that believe, if they believe? This cannot be the
meaning of the word [Propitiation] when spoken of Believers, because they do
believe and so have it applied: And let the Author show where he is called a
Propitiation, or said to be one, but where mention is made of Believers; and
these things being considered, I wonder why our Author, or any Remonst.
whatever, can (upon their own principles) produce this Text to prove that
which they would have done to all and every man; when it is granted by them
that Reconciliation is not applied to all. Now to conclude this Text, He is
said a Propitiation, in that by virtue of his Mediation, Reconciliation is
applied, as he is said to be our Peace, Col. 1.10. and our Redemption, and
Sanctification, and both metonimically; And that he may be said to be a
Propitiation for them that do not yet believe, I will not contend against it,
but men it is with respect had to the certain futurition of it, which is all
one in this point with the other.

And that this Phrase, [He is a Propitiation,] necessarily presupposes his
meriting and procuring remission, as the ground of application, I grant: But
that it does not principally point at actual Remission, (whereby he is said to
be a Propitiation) the Author should do well to prove. These I transmit to the
disquisition of the Author, expecting satisfaction in the Premises, for this
will help us in two points.

1. That this place does not favor any such Salvation wrought by Christ with
God, distinguished and divisible from the application, and such as may be
attributed to, and as done for, every Son of Adam.

2. It will help to allay the Controversy about the Phrase (whole world) and
determine who are comprehended under it; Whether every man in the world to whom
Remission is not applied, or all believers throughout the world to whom it is
applied, and so he is a Propitiation.

[2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world etc.] The sense of
which place, if it second our Authors allegation, must be thus, [Christ was
with God working out Reconciliation with God for men, whereby God is reconciled
to man: and this not to prove any work of God in man reconciling man to God;]
And such a thing if he can extract out of this Text, he will show himself a
Divine Chemist, but in this business he bewrays want of consideration, or
common understanding.

1. That which he propounds is an Act of Christ with God, an Act of the
Mediator distinct from the offended Party, as appears by his expressions,
[Effecting it with God;] So that if it had spoken his words, it would have run
thus, [Christ was with God reconciling the world,] but see a diametricall
difference, it says, [God was in Christ reconciling, etc.]

2. That which he is to prove, is whereby God is reconciled to man, and that
opposed to man's being reconciled to God, and so should have run thus, [Christ
was reconciling God to man,] but see a diametricall difference, it says,
[Reconciling the world to himself,] and so prevails with men to God, it says
not (...), but (...), which belongs to the second Redemption; as he
confesses P. 11.

3. That which he is to prove, is such a Redemption, Reconciliation, as is
separated from the application of it, or at least which may be so, and that
because it is done for all.

Now, if it had been clear for his purpose, it should have run thus: [Christ
was with God reconciling God to the world, not, not imputing their sins,] and
this it should have been, for his Redemption is such as puts no man into
possession of Remission of sins, as Page 33. But see a diametricall difference,
[Reconciling the world to himself and not imputing sins to them,] and any may
see that that text, wherein the Application of Remission is plainly set down
as an attendant, is weakly produced to prove such a Redemption from which
Remission may be separated, and that because Remission of sins belongs to the
Applicatory part, the Remonst. being Judges, Corv. in Mol. Ca. 28 Sect 26 Page
447.
[Si per reconciliationem actualem intelligas remissionem tum non est
distinguenda ab applicatione quia est ipsa opplicatio.]

4. Let us see how he warreth with himself: He says, that the Phrase [God was
reconciling us to himself,] Ver. 18. Meant of the application of his Death;
thus Page 66. And yet the same Phrase he admits not to the same sense, in
Ver. 19. For ^etwixt these two, viz. [Reconciling us by Christ, committing to
us the word of Reconciliation:] and this, [In Christ reconciling the world to
himself, putting into us ^e word of Reconciliation,] I should gladly see any
momentous difference: he seems to stumble at a twofold difference.

1. That Ver. 18. says [By him,] but Ver. 19. says [In him,] so he seems to
urge Page 66. But this is of no force, because (...) and (...) are often
promiscuously used each for other, and (In him) and (By him) are all one in
Scripture, as often appears in my following Discourse.

2. That Ver. 18 says (us,) Ver. 19. says the [world,] but this avails not,
because when he says the [world] he means only (men living in the world,) or
the world (quoad partem credentem) in the believing part thereof, and then the
(world) and (us) are little different.

5. That which he here proves, is the work of Christ for men, not of the
Spirit in men to God, and so not of the Reconciliation of men's hearts to God.
But I admire with what face or plea he could father such an one upon this
place. Let us consider a while of the time of which it is said, God [was]
reconciling; Some I acknowledge, (and of worth) hold, that this is meant from
Eternity, so he was reconciling, that is, preparing a way to reconcile the
world to himself, and were the words alone I should subscribe to this, but as
the words run I cannot see the necessity or congruity of this Exposition;
because the words run, [(...), Intimating, that then when he was reconciling
the world to himself, he was also putting into the Apostles the word of
Reconciliation, which I conceive not to be done from Eternity but in time.

And happily our Author may say (He was,) that is, when Christ offered himself
on the Cross; But neither this congruous, for he put the word into the
Apostles before the time of his offering himself: I rather for the present
conceive, that the Text means of the reconciling of the hearts of men to God
by the Gospells Ministry: When he was (...): That is, when he was giving it to
them by Commission, and putting it into them by inspiration, then was he
reconciling the world to himself in that Ministration; And it appears to be
such a Reconciliation as is effected by the word of Reconciliation, but such is
that whereby we are reconciled in our hearts to God: And so it said to be of
the (world) that is, men living in the world; and to be (in Christ) as God is
said to bless us with all Spiritual blessings, (even effectual Calling and
Conversion) in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. And it is said to be the word of
Reconciliation, because it is the instrument of Reconciliation; and the
Argument which he uses here to the Corinthians is fetched; thus; God having
this work for the Gospel, viz. to reconcile us to himself, and this he has
done by it, when he first put it into us, and ever since, so it is expected
that by this Ministration ye also should be reconciled.

This sense of the Text I transmit to the Judgment of the Learned, and till I
see further, I must conclude that this Text speaks of the Application of
Reconciliation, and that of Gods Act (by virtue of Christ's merit) in the
Gospels Ministry, and not of the Act of Christ with God for men, there is no
one word that favors such a conceit; and if this be true, then it not only
shows that where the Scripture speaks of the Application of Reconciliation,
yet uses such a general expression as the (world,) which yet in every
Judgment is not common to every Son of Adam, therefore we may conclude that
the word (world) does not imply in it every Son of Adam, which may stand in
some stead in this Point: but also it fails the Author and serves him not
for his purpose, to set forth such a procuring of Reconciliation, as may be
separated from the Application.

[ Romans 3.24. Justified through the Redemption in Christ Jesus.] Which place
our Author produces as holding forth the Act of Christ as Mediato^r in
procuring Remission of sins, and such an one as may be where the Application is
not, and so separated from actual Remission and Justification; but he
certainly concludes his Reader too credulous that will assent to this without
any proof, when there is so many leading circumstances to the contrary; his
conceit has no strength neither from the word [Redemption,] nor from the
Phrase [In Christ,] nor from both jointly. Not from the word [Redemption,]

1. If we consider the Authors own placita upon Rev. 5.9. [Thou have redeemed
us by thy blood,] In which he says (though upon small ground) that the word
[Redemption] or [Redeemed] is meant of the Application of his Blood, being
brought in to believe, and in this sense brought to back his second Redemption
mentioned Page 5. Therefore if the word [Redemption] in his Judgment signifies
the Application of his Blood, we cannot believe that it signifies his first
Redemption, that may be separated from the Application, unless he prove it so.

2. If we view the placita of Arminius himself, the Master Builder in this
Artifice, Arm. in Perk. Page 78.79.
[Redemptio enim notat non passionem, non actionem ullam Christi, sed passionis
and actionis apotelesma, eventum fructumque etc. Ex applicatione dicuntur
redempti, etc. Per illas actiones redemptio impetrata est, and per fidem
applicata, itaque demum sunt redempti;] That is, Redemption notes not the
Actions or Passions of Christ, but the event and fruit of both: Men are said to
be redeemed by and in the Application, by those Actions he impetrated
Redemption, but it is applied by faith, and then are they said to be redeemed;
a fair and full Testimony in this Point.

3. If we consider the Text, and the business the Apostle is about to prove,
which is, that we are justified by Faith and not by Works: This he presses in
the former part of this Epistle, and in this Chapter much, as ver. 20, 22, 25,
26, 28, 30. In all which we are said to be justified, ((...), which are
equipollent) by or through faith; Now to me it appears (and I suppose will to
any that looks upon the Text with a serious eye) that this Phrase [(...), ver.
24. Justified through the Redemption,] speaks the same thing, with [(...),
Justified by faith, ver. 22.] And so the meaning to be this: We are justified
through faith in Christ, as in the next verse follows, (Faith in his Blood)
and this called Redemption, because then we are redeemed, being brought into
believe, in part freed from sin, and in a certainty of Heaven; as Tit. 2.4.
Redeemed from vain conversation.

4. If we consider the nature and frequent use of the Word [Redemption] or
[Redeemed;] I have not observed the word (...), or (...), or any word from that
root to signify any thing but the application of good, as Romans 8.23. (...),
Redemption of our bodies, that is perfect, and freedom from all vanity. Ephesians.
1.14. (...), till the Redemption of the purchased possession] That is, the
actual and perfect enjoyment of heavens glory, and here plainly distinguished
from the purchase by Christ. Ephesians. 4.30 (...), To the day of Redemption,] not
the day of Christ's procuring or meriting, for that was past, but this to come;
and it means the day of restoration of all things, when Believers shall
possess actually perfect glory. Tit. 2.4. (...), Redeem us from our
Iniquities,] Is it not expounded by purging us from our sins in the next words?
Heb. 19 (...), Obtained Eternal Redemption,] The first word holds forth the
Impetration or procuring, therefore the word Redemption must mean the
Application, unless we will say, [Impetravit impetrationem] which it absurd.
But what need I spend time herein? I refer it to the Author to produce any
place where the word (...), or any word from that root is used as signifying
the Act of Christ in purchasing or procuring that thing that is never applied:
I confess the word (...) I find used to signify the price of Redemption, as
Exodus 21.30. The Septuagint read it (...), He shall give the price of ransom
for his soul. So 1 Timothy 2, 6 (...), Pretium Redemptionis; But then in both it
is so called from the necessary and certain futurition of the Redemption and
Application, and therefore looked at as done, therefore called (...): The word
(...) with his compounds never signifying [Nummos solvere,] but [Vinculo
solvere,] not to solve a price, but to loose the bonds; therefore if the Author
will but be constant to himself, subscribe to his Master, consult with the
scope of the Text, or consider the genius of the word (...), or Redemption, he
cannot make his Allegation good from this word Redemption.

Secondly, Happily he may give this sense of the word Redemption, because it is
said to be [In Christ) but this will prove as empty as the former. For if this
be not so to be meant, as (...); or in the next ver (...), Faith in Christ, or
in his blood: So that as (...) is one with Faith by which we are redeemed, so
(In Christ) is as much as to say the object of our Faith; For which I do not
earnestly contend; yet it will appear, that (In Christ) is no more then (By
Christ,) and so showing the means by whom we come to believe, as ((...)) for
((...)) very often, as Col. 1 16. (...), we say not In him, but By him all
things were created: and that by the authority of the Text, for it adds by way
of self Exposition in the same verse, (...), by whom all things; neither can I
think the Author trusts to this, because he is not constant to his
expressions herein; for though he here say, that this first Redemption is in
Christ, yet sometimes both together, In and By, seeming to expound the one by
the other, as P. 22. Sometimes By, not In, as if he would supply the one with
the other, as Page 54. But this is not all, (one who though a strong Remonst.)
puts it out of doubt in his Judgment, [In Christo, id est, A Lapide in ocu^.
Per Christum, Haebreum enim (...) id est, (in) significat (per) vel
(propter.)] Now if (In Christ) be no more than (By Christ,) then this denotes
the Application as well as the Impetration, for so by him we are glorified,
nay, blessed with all Spiritual blessings in him, Ephesians. 1.3. Nay, in this sense
Redemption signifies clearly the Application, for the Application is by him,
that is, by his Impetration, so that he has nothing from (Redemption) or (in
Christ) to help him. But let him have it as he desires, that this speaks of
the Act of Christ in procuring Remission, and Reconciliation, and
Justification, we shall make it appear it helps him not, and stands us in
much use: That which is to be proved in these Scriptures, is the Act of Christ
done for All, and such an one as may be separated from the Application, such an
one as puts not any man into the possession of Justification: so Page Cap. 6.
No nor yet imports any future Application, it being done for All, so many are
not justified or partake of it, but such a one, this place proves not, for
this speaks of such a Redemption as through which we are justified Actually,
as we are justified by Faith: as Ver. 21. Which words [through which] notes a
reciprocation, every one that has that Redemption are justified by or through
it, and whoever are justified, are justified through it; which Reciprocation is
clear in Ver. 22.25. Now if this Redemption be meant of Christ's Act in
procuring for all, and yet such a one as through which men are justified, then
all that have that Redemption must be justified; so all and every man must be
justified in our Authors reasoning, but this he disclaimes, Page 95. In answer
to the third Objection; And it is clear to any eye, that that place that
speaks of a Redemption through which we are justified, is vainly produced to
prove such a Redemption, notwithstanding which most men may miss of
Justification, but such an one is his first Redemption.

Again, I shall embrace his Exposition, and thus urge: If Redemption here
meant be the Impetration or procurement of Christ, and yet it said to be such
as through which we are said to be justified Actually, then it must follow that
Impe^ation is always seconded with Application, and Justification in time
applied to all those for whom it was Impetrated, which how destructive it is to
the whole Arminian Fabric in this Point. Any knowing man may judge:

[1 Pet. 2.24. Who in his own self bare our sins in his own Body, that we
being dead to sin should live, etc.] That this Text holds forth the Act of
Christ in procuring Remission and Life, I grant; but that it does so his own
Principles deny, however that it holds forth such a Redemption as is common to
All, or distinct from the Application of his Blood, he cannot prove.

1. He says, Where the Person is changed, that place is not to be understood
as meant of the first Act for all men, but of the Act of the Spirit in the
hearts of men, as being spoke of Believers; so he says, Cap. 10. Page 53. And
the ground is, because there it is spoken Applicatively, and so not so large as
when in the third Person plural and general, And he instanceth in 2. Cor.
5.21. [He was made sin for (us,)] because there the Person is changed and
produced in the second Person plural, which cannot show for how many Christ
dyed; therefore he concludes such places speak of the application of his
Blood: And of the same nature is this quoted Text, both in the same Person, and
spoken applicatively of Believers: Yet this is produced to prove a first Act of
Christ as done for All, He must Balaam-like cast about for Divinations to
reconcile himself to himself.

2. That which he is to prove, is such a Redemption as neither brings men into
the possession, nor aims at as its chief end; But this Text disavoweth such a
work. For first, That the Application is intended in his bearing our sins is
clear in the after words, [That we might live to righteousness,] and Cap.
3.18. [That he might bring us to God;] And secondly, for the Application it
self, not only as intended, but also effected, Ver. 25. [Ye are returned to
the Bishop of your souls,] Therefore how pertinently this Text is produced to
prove a Redemption, from which the Application and intention thereof, is and
may be separated, let any judge.

Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6. Of both these I shall have occasion to speak more
largely in their proper places, therefore here I wave them.

[ Joh. 1.29. That takes away the sins of the World.] That this place
presupposes the Act of Christ in meriting and procuring Remission, I grant;
but to say that it does not also include the Application thereof seems
improbable; Can Sin be taken away and the Blood of Christ not applied? Isa.
6.7. There taking away Sin is expounded by having sin purged away; but to have
Sin purged away is not but by blood sprinkling, and so in the Authors Divinity
the application of the Blood of Christ. Let the Author consult with Romans 11.27.
And let him tell me whether that taking away sin be the Application of the
Death of Christ or no? Happily the Author, or some for him may say, when God
takes away Sin that is the Application, but when Christ takes away Sin that is
the Impetration of Remission. Let it be so, but then Christ in his Impetration
looked at the Actual taking away of sin, and it follows in time, else could
not he in that Act of his be said to take away Sin. All which places being
laid together, as being produced to prove his first Redemption, are a heap of
mistakes; and whereas he professes himself to have read the Scriptures ten
times over, I must conclude that he wants common understanding to balance
his reading, or by over affecting his cause, willing to betray his
understanding to weak conceits, and for his first Branch we must either have
new proofs, or these created. But were they effectual for his purpose? Yet,
why are they produced in this Controversy? They only prove thus much, that
Christ did impetrate and purchase Remission and Life; this none yet that I know
deny but the Socinian, with whom I think he engages not.

Having laid down his first Redemption; attended with a sufficient Train of
impertinent Scriptures, he proceeds to lay down the several particulars or
gradations by which Christ did ascend to this work for men: Why, by the way,
let the Reader observe where they are not proved to be for all and every man,
they are impertinent, and where he attempteth so to prove, shall be brought to
the Test,

[1. To this purpose he appeared, was manifested, came into the world to take
away sins, 1 John 3.5.

2. In this appearing and manifestation he was made flesh.] These two may well
pass, as not pertinent to decide any part of that Controversy. We grant that
he did purchase Life, it was his work, and to that end he was made flesh and
came into the world, and this is true though he purchased Life for none but the
Elect; but yet these are not well martialled and ranked: I would know a reason
why his being made flesh is set in order as second to his manifestation and
coming into the world? He was made flesh in his Conception, but he came not
into the world till his Nativity: But it is absurd to say, first he was Borne,
secondly, conceived, but of this sort is the Authors Method: as if even those
things that did nothing at all engage him, he could not name them without
bewraying himself.

[3. Being thus in the nature of mankind he was set and stood a public Person
in the Nature and room of all mankind.] Here lie confounded expressions of a
different nature; To be [A public Person,] and [In the Nature of Mankind,]
and in [The room of all Mankind,] are different one from the other, and all of
them short of clearing the truth of his procuring Life for every Son of Adam.

1. A public Person he might be, and yet not in the room of every
Individual: If he had stood in the room and stead of the Elect only, it had
bespoke him a public Person, in that he represented others and not himself
only* As in State affairs, a Burghes of a Corporation is a public Person,
because he acts not as a private Person, but representing others: But his being
a public Person does not argue him to stand in the room of all men in the
Kingdom or Country, but of that Corparation only where he was chosen.

For the second, [His being in the Nature of mankind,] is a truth, but if
produced to prove his procuring Life for every man, is very weak: For if
Christ had redeemed far fewer then he does, yet it would be requisite for him
to take upon him the Nature of Man, and stand in the kind, for he could not (as
God had decreed it) redeem any one Person but he must take upon him the nature
of Man: Therefore to argue thus, He took upon him the nature of man, therefore
he stood in the room of every Individual, is not valid Argumentation: Yet
this is the reasoning of Arminius, Naturam assumpsit humanam omnibus communem,
respectu cujus non est inter homines differentia. In Perkin. 74.

For the third, [Standing in the room of Mankind;] The Expression is either
improper or false; for him to stand in the nature of Mankind is true and well
expressed, because (Naturam assumpsit non personam hominis) he assumed the
nature not the person of man, and the nature is rather of the kind or species
than of the Individualls, therefore we may say he stood in the nature of
mankind: But to say Christ stood in the room of mankind is improper; for (His
standing in the room of) the effect and benefit of was intended to
particulars, Individuals are represented, not the kind of man: Thus we find it
expressed in these Disputes, Twisse vind. great. 266. Corv. in. Mol. cap. 27.
427.
[Anne Christus sustinuit personas omnium an electorum tantum?] Whether Christ
sustained the persons of all, or the Elect only? It was the persons, not the
kind of men, that were adjudged to death, and therefore the persons not the
kind must be freed from the same. This Arminius himself will teach him; [Salus
convenit non generibus sed singulis, In Perkin 192.
singulis praeparatur non generibus, singulis negatur non generibus.] And upon
better thoughts I know he will say that Christ stood in the room of
Individualls, not the kind, and his own expression herein improper. But
happily by All mankind, he may mean all the Individuals of mankind, but then
it is false, and rests still at his unperformed task to prove, that Christ did
stand in the room of every Individual. Something I express wherein he
attempteth to prove it, by some reason and some Scripture, his Reason is this,
[As Adam did who was the Figure of him that was to come.] Thus arguing: Adam as
public person, stood in the room of every Individual man in the world,
whereby all and every individual comes to be plunged in sin and misery;
therefore Christ being to answer him as the Figure, must stand in the room of
all Individuals also, but the strength of these I shall examine in a few words.
I hope the Author will not say that Adam stood in the room of any but his
Off-sping, and those that should come of his Loins by natural propagation,
and so those that were to come of him And that he stood in the room of any man
in any other Notion than as coming from him naturally, I would have the Author
to prove, and for this reason, that our Savior though he was an Individual
man, yet not coming by natural propagation, but supernatural overshadowing
the Virgin, and so without the help of man, and so was it that he came out of
the Loins of Adam, as the Author says, Page 119. Hence was it I say, that he
had no sin, he was not under that general Contagion that lies upon all Adams
Sons, he was not defiled from him; and let me put this supposition, If God
should now, as at first, Create more men, they not coming from Adam by
Propagation, they should not be interested into Adams Sin and Curse, therefore
it is clear that Adam did stand in the room of men, not as men, but as his
Sons, and to come from him. Now let the Comparison go forward, and let Christ
answer his Type: Adam as a public Person stood in the room of all his
Posterity, and those that are his Sons and come from him: So Christ stands in
the room of all those that are his Sons, and come to have a being from him: If
he should stand in the room of more he should not answer his Figure; but this
he might do though he stood in the room of the Elect only, for none else come
to have a being from him, and to be his Sons; So that it seems clear, that
the Comparison betwixt Adam and Christ lies not in the certain and defined
number of Individuals, but the relation wherein they stand each kind to their
own root; So that here is little in reason, I shall examine his Scriptures.
They are two.

[1 Cor. 15.21, 22, 45, 46. Romans 5.14, 18, 19.] That these places hold forth
thus much, that as Adam was the Fountain of Death, so Christ of Life: As Adam
conveyed Death to all his, so Christ Life to all his, I grant; but if he will
have any further, let him bring good probation and I shall examine it; Let us
consider his alleged places severally.

1 Cor. 15.21, 22. [ As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive.]
Which Text seems to speak of the Resurrection at the last day, Ver. 21. Now
that every Individual shall be raised at the last, and so made alive to stand
before his Judgment Seat, I grant, and it is nothing to the Quest. But let us
see further, I conceive this place speaks not only of Resurrection in
general, but Resurrection to Life, which is only called Resurrection in
Scripture, the Resurrection of wicked men to be condemned for ever, the
Scripture honors it not with the name of Resurrection, the Members of Christ
are called Emphatically the Children of the Resurrection; Luke 20.36. Now of
this Resusurrection the Text seems to speak, and of this let the 22. v^r. be
understood, [ As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive.] Is
this now to be understood, as if all those who dyed in Adam are made alive by
Christ, or only all those that are his and so come of and from him? Let
Arminius and Corvinus themselves judge, they do not attempt to prove that all
that dyed in Adam were, or shall be made alive by Christ, (as it is there
meant) but they expound the place thus, Armin. in Pork. 191. Corv in Mol. c^p
27.430.
[ Quoad locum 1 Cor. 15. non diffitemur ibi Emphasin non esse in voce [omnes]
sed in vocibus [in Christo] and sensum esse per Christum vivificabuntur omnes
qui vitae restituuntur, and a Christo vita ut ab Adamo mors fuit:] That is, the
Emphasis is not in the word (All) but in the words (In Christ;) and the sense
this, as Death came by Adam, so Life by Christ: In which sense it is received
by us, but comes short of this Assertion, [That all that dyed in Adam shall
be restored to Life by Christ.] Again, let the Text it self judge what is meant
by that All that is made alive by Christ, Ver. 23. [First Christ's, then they
that are Christ's at his coming;] And does the Chapter speak of any other? Who
is there that is not perverse, but he may see that the (All) that are made
alive by Christ, is all those that are his and come from him, as all that dyed
in Adam was all his, and so they answer one the other.

So for the second Text, Romans 5.18, 19. It is of the same nature with the
former, and sets out Christ the Root and Fountain of Righteousness and Life,
as Adam was of Sin and Death, as appears by the Conclusion, Ver. 21. [That as
Sin has reigned unto Death, so might Grace by Jesus Christ,] and further it
cannot (in my Judgment) be carried; Indeed it says, Ver. 18. [As by one,
Judgment came on all men to Condemnation, so by one the free gift on all men
to Justification of Life;] But this is not more pregnant then that of 1 Cor.
15.21, 22. And thus I say to this also, All Adams Sons by his Sin Judgment
came on them to Condemnation, and so by the righteousness of Christ the free
gift came upon all them that come from him to Justification of Life: and this
appears in Ver. 27. where this latter (All) is supplied by [They which receive
abundance of Grace, and this gift of righteousness,] If the Author will have
more from the Text, let him prove it and I shall receive it; Therefore neither
of these places confirm this, That Christ stood in the room of every
Individual Son of Adam. Yet thus far I go with him, All those he redeemeth by
his Blood, in their rooms he stood; and as this is produced as a particular
gradation in his work of procuring and meriting Life and Salvation I grant it;
But being produced as that which is done for all and every Son of Adam, it
still lies under a Non probatum est. Besides to wave all that has been said,
and to grant him that he stood in the room of every Son of Adam, yet he does
not touch the Question; for then he must prove that he stood in their room for
this end, to procure Remission, and Eternal Life for them which he does not in
all this. Indeed our side have ever been peremptory against Christ's standing in
the room of an but the Elect, and they prove it thus, [Quorum personas
sustinuit pro illorum pecca^s at isfecit, Perkin. A Cat. Twissevn page 266.
] for their sins he satisfied whose persons he sustained. Now I shall not
undertake to determine against them (the least dram of whose worth it would
be ambition in me to think to counter-ballance) but to profess my self not
yet to have attained their light, and to see the necessity of that
Argumentation, why he might not stand in the room of many so far as to procure
for them a freedom from the present Incumbency of the misery (without which
many of his Elect could not be, nor be brought to Repentance) and yet not
satisfy for their sins; only Remission and Pardon of Sins, and Eternal Life
require a satisfaction for Sin, but the other does not: And of such a taking
their Persons on him as to procure life for them, I suppose they m^ne when they
say he stood in the room of the Elect only, and this I subscribe to, and of
such is the Question: And though we grant him that Christ for some good did
stand in the room of all, yet he is short of the Question.

4, [Being such a public Person in the nature and room of all mankind, he
also became for them under the same Law and Obligation in which they were,
which charged them with Sin, and bound them over to punishment, by virtue of
which all the punishment, the whole Debt of mankind became his] That Christ
became under the same Law that they were under, whom he intended to Redeem, I
grant; But this enferreth not that he intended to Redeem all that were under
the same Law: He Redeeming but his Elect only, yet he must become under the
same Law that every man lay under, because all men lay under the same Curse and
Law. It was never yet questioned whether Christ became under that Law under
which every man was, but whether he redeemed every one that was under that Law.
He would speak something, and attempteth to prove it from Gal. 4.5. [He became
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law;] True, Those whom he
redeemed were under the Law, else needed no Redemption; but does the Text say
or infer, that he redeemed All that were under the Law? Let the Author view
again. Thus he uses to argue, He justifies the ungodly, therefore All the
ungodly; And will he say, He has chosen the foolish things of the world
therefore he has chosen all the foolish things? Therefore his Assertion, [By
virtue of which coming under the Law, the whole Debt and all the Sin and
punishment of mankind became his,] wants proofs; the who Debt of mankind
does not appear to be his; This I say, that for whose Sins he came (under this
Law) to satisfy, He was rightly challenged with their Debt: and that this
being under the Law, is a gradation in his procuring Life for men I grant; but
that he became so to free every man from the Law, lies still under a Non
probatum est.

5. [Being thus in the nature and stead of mankind under the Law for them, God
was pleased to challenge the whole Debt of him, and to impute all the Sin the
Law could charge mankind withal unto him, and to arest and call him to an
account, and enter into judgment with him for all.] Which labors with the
same deficiency that the former does.

First, This is little different from the former, for betwixt these two, [All
the punishment and whole Debt of mankind became his:] And this, [All the Sin
and whole Debt that the Law could charge mankind withal, was challenged of him
and imputed to him;] There is no difference.

Secondly, That Christ stood charged with all the sin, and the whole Debt of
those whom he intended to redeem and satisfy for their sins I grant; but that
he stood charged with all the Sins of every man, and the whole Debt that the
Law could challenge any man withal was challenged of him, this is not yet
proved, which only is to the purpose; he attempts to prove it by some
Scriptures.

1. [2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not
imputing their Trespasses to them;] True, he did so to men living in the world;
But will our Author say that non-imputation of Sins is every man's privilege?
Is it congruous to Scripture Phrase to call every Son of Adam blessed and
happy? For so are they that have not their Sins imputed, Psa. 32.1, 2. Such an
Assertion as this viz. That Pardon, covering, not imputing Sins, is the
privilege of every Son of Adam, I leave to the Founder of it, and must dissent
till I find more cause of embracing it.

2. Isa. 53 6. And made him to be Sin for us. 2 Cor. 5.21. Laid on him the
iniquity of us all. 1 Pet. 2.24. He himself bare our sins: Hence he concludes,
the Iniquities of every man was laid on him, he was made sin for, and bare the
sins of every Son of Adam; strange reasoning! Does the word (us) or (ours)
spoken of, and by Believers, bring in every Son of Adam? This is not suitable
to himself; For Cap 10. Page 53. He speaking of that very Text, 2 Cor. 5.21.
says, [Speaking of the Application to them that have believed, he changes the
Person and faith, He made him to be sin for us.] Yet here this Text is produced
to prove that he bare the Sins of every Son of Adam.

3. Psalm. 40.12. [Innumerable evils have compassed me, mine iniquities have
taken hold on me,] What he will hence infere I cannot well determine; true it
is that hence he may infer that Christ was encompassed with innumerable
evils, and that very many Sins had taken hold upon him, and that those
Iniquities which he had undertook to answer for, took hold on him, whereby he
might say Mine Iniquity has taken hold on me, But what is this to the Point
in hand I know not? If he intend hereby to prove that all the evils of every
man had taken hold on him, this is a weak inference: But thus far I conclude
with him, that all those for whose Sins he undertook, he stood charged with all
their sins that the Law could charge them with, but that he stood charged with
all the sins that the Law could charge any man withal, that is yet to be
proved.

6. [Having on him our Sins, God laid on him the punishment and Curse that was
due to us for those sins, and so dyed as a Sinner in the room of us all.] This
is for substance nothing distinct from the former, for betwixt [His being
charged with our Sins] and [Having our Sins imputed to him,] and his [Having
the punishment of our Sins laid on him,] there is no difference; Yet here are
some improper speeches and fallacies. Improprieties I say in the first words,
[Having on him our Sins, God laid on him the punishment of Sins;] It is beyond
my capacity to conceive how Christ had on him our Sins, before he had on him
the punishment of our Sins; he had not Sin formally, but only imputatively he
bare our Sins: True, but that is Metonimically, Sins for the punishment of our
Sins, and then was it when he was wounded for our Transgressions, Isa. 35.5.
And I remember not where the Scripture ever speaks Christ to have our Sins on
him as distinct from his having the punishment of them on him; Therefore if he
make them distinct he must free it from Impropriety, if they be the same, then
from a vain Tautologie.

The fallacy is in the next words, [In the room of us all.] If the Author
means as the Apostles and Prophets did and must (in the Authors own
Principles from the change of Persons) (us all) that is, we all that are
Believers, then it is true, but nothing to his purpose; But if by (us all) he
would understand [Every Son of Adam,] it would be indeed pertinent to his
business, but false and destitute of probation, he instanceth in Isa. 55.5.
Gal. 3.13. 1 Cor. 15.4. 1 Pet. 3.18. Romans 5.6. Which cannot clear that the
Apostle speaks of them under the Notion of men, and so in common with all men,
but as Believers, and so proper to them: And this the Author puts out of doubt
in his own inference from the change of Persons. And certainly the Apostle
writing to Believers, saying, He was made sin for us all, can afford no such
Interpretation. He attempts to prove it by 2 Cor. 5.15. For we thus judge, that
if Christ dyed for all, then are all dead, and he dyed for all, that they which
live might not live to themselves, etc.] The sense of which Text, if it favor
him, must run thus, For we thus judge, that if Christ dyed for every Son of
Adam, then was every Son of Adam dead, and he dyed for every Son of Adam that
they that live might not live to themselves but to him that has dyed for
them;] but I leave this to every Intelligent Reader, to judge whether it be not
herein set upon the rack: This cannot be produced from the words themselves,
nor made well to accord with the foregoing or following words, but he loves to
give us words without any meaning. But I desire the Author or any Reader to
examine whether this be not the sense? For we thus judge, that if Christ have
dyed for all, [That is in Scripture Phrase, for all whom he intended to bring
to Salvation; all those whom his Father had (for that end) given him;] Then
have all dyed, [that is, all those for whom he dyed have dyed to sin.] [Now the
ground of this is, the Connection betwixt the end of Christ, and the execution
of it in the next words:] And he dyed for all, that those that live [not the
life of Nature, but of Grace and Faith,] might not live to themselves, but to
him that has dyed and rose again. Now in this Exposition these two things are
only to be proved: Then other things will follow, and they are these; First,
That that Phrase [Then are all dead] is meant death not (in) but (to) Sin.
Secondly, That the Phrase [That they which live] is meant of a Life of Grace
and Faith, not the Life of Nature: Which being cleared, the place will not only
not help him, but afford a good Argument against him; which particulars I
shall clear by these four particulars.

1. The Apostles scope in this present Chapter, that which he is about in this
and the foregoing Chapter, is to show the believing Corinthians, that he with
the rest of the Apostles, did neglect earthly things and were heavenly minded,
and desired to approve themselves to God, and for their good, Cap. 4.1, 2, 8,
9, 10, 16, 17. Cap. 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13. And also to press the same upon
them, Ver. 17. Now that those words, Ver. 14, 15, Contain an Argument to prove
and back this, is evident; and that to show a ground why they did so, and the
Corinthians should do so; and the Argument is drawn from the Death of Christ;
[For we thus judge, that if Christ dyed for all, then are all dead;] Now it may
be questioned whether this Argument be drawn from the cause, or the effect of
Christ's Death, that is, whether he means thus, Then were all dead in Sin, and
so need to live to God: Or thus, Then have all dyed, that is, in Christ that
dyed, in whom the Sins of Believers were crucified, as Romans 6.6. Happily our
Author will say the first, but I conceive that is not his Argument in this
Text, and that on these two grounds.

1. Because then the Apostles Argument to Believers is not so opposite and
full, because there was no greater engagement on them to live to God, then upon
every Son of Adam; which agrees not with the whole series of the Word of God,

2. Because then the words of the Apostles should have run thus, Ver. 14. For
the Condition of Man constrains us, and lays a necessity on us and others
to live to God and not as they do. The love of Christ constrains us; And if
the Argument be drawn from the effect of Christ's Death, Then it is clear the
meaning is this, Then are all dead; all for whom he dyed for are dead, have
their old man crucified with him, and so are or shall certainly have sin
weakened and killed, and live to God, because he dyed for that end.

2. From the Apostles expresses in the foregoing Chapter, where he mentions
that Life which he here inserts, and may herein be his own Expositour: Cap.
4.10, 11, 12. That the Life of Jesus Christ might be manifest in our Bodies,
etc. Where life is undoubtedly taken for a Spiritual Life, which he speaks
of, Cap. 5.7, We walk by Faith, is nothing but we live by Faith, as Gal. 2.20.
And these may expound Ver. 5. where he says, [That those that live must not
live to themselves,] Where it is thus meant, that those that live the life of
Christ, etc.

3. From the usual Phrase of the Apostles in other places when he persuades
Believers to the same duties, and uses the same Argument, as Romans 6. the
twelve first verses, where from Christ's Death he exhorts them to death to Sin,
and a life in Righteousness, but more particularly Ver. 10, 11. Likewise
think ye also that ye are dead to Sin, but alive to God in Jesus Christ our
Lord. So Cap. 7.4. Ye are dead to the Law by the Body of Christ, that ye should
live to another, even to him that raised him from the dead.] Now is not this
all one, and nothing differing from the Text in hand, yet here is meant a death
to Sin and the Law, and Life to God in the Spirit.

4. From the Insatisfactory replies of the Remonst. who have endeavored to
remove this Exposition.

1. They say, [glossema istud (peccato scilicet) non est in Textu,] That is,
that gloss (to sin) is not in the Text:] True, it is not, neither was it
affirmed to be in the Text, but to be the meaning of the Text, and this they
produce no Argument to evert.

(...). Hag. 170.
2. [Sententia est, quod ii pro quibus Christus mortuus est, in peccato mortui
erant,] That is, this is the sense, That all those for whom Christ died were
dead in Sin, as Ephesians. 2.1.5.] That place in Ephesians. 2.1.5. is not to the Apostles
purpose in 2 Cor. 5. therefore cannot be expected to be in the same sense;
Besides in Ephesians. 2. the Text affirms that they were dead in Sin, and by sin,
which this place 2 Cor. 5 mentions not, that is a gloss that is not in the
Text, we may also affirm with them.

3. Verba illa [omnes qui vivunt] possunt accipi ut omnes homines viventes]
That is, those words [Those that live] may be taken for all men living.] True,
and we are where we were; we grant that it was that all men living the life of
Christ and Grace, might not live to themselves. But this does not yet please
them, they mean all men living the life of Nature, but this is not proved; we
find not that every Son of Adam is bound to live to Christ, or that it was his
end and intention: They would feign prove it in Acts 3.26. To turn every one
of you from your Sins; but from every one of you, meaning Israel, to every Son
of Adam one and other, the Argument is invalid. So that by all these
particulars it may appear, that by (are dead) is meant dead to Sin: And by
(They that live) is meant life of Christ: Then how this makes for him let any
judge; and thus we may argue.

That all for whom Christ died are dead to Sin, but every Son of Adam neither
is, nor shall be so dead, therefore that All does not take in every Son of
Adam. A more clear sense of the place I shall beglad to receive.

7. [Having thus suffered and died for our sins, he rose again the third
day, and rose acquitted of all the Sins imputed to him, and a Triumphant over
all the Enemies of our Salvation.] That he did so no man denies, he had no
Sins imputed to him, but over them he became a Victor; and this is true, though
we say he suffered for the Sins of the Elect only: unless he prove, that he
was acquitted from the Sins of every Son of Adam, and so a Triumphant over all
the Enemies of the Salvation of every Son of Adam, which is his task to prove,
and that which he holds, but this he does not so much as affirm, much less
prove, and this is his weakness.

8. [All this Oblation of this his Sacrifice he did dignifie through the
oneness of his will with his Fathers, etc. which is more then if every man had
suffered, and accepted of God as if all had suffered.] Herein we agree that it
was with God as if all for whom he dyed had suffered; but herein still is he
deficient, he proves not that it was as if every Son of Adam had suffered:
Certainly then no man should suffer again, for Justice it self requires not
a double suffering for the same Sins. So that now to reasume these particulars,
I say again, That his being made flesh, his coming into the world, being made
in the nature of mankind, standing in the room of mankind, made under the Law,
having the Sins of men imputed to him, and enduring the punishment that was due
to them, and standing acquitted of them, and that in all these his will to be
one with his Fathers, all these are requisite to his procuring of life: Herein
we agree, and herein the Controversy not touched; but that any of these, or
all of these were done for every Son of Adam to procure life Eternal for them,
he does not yet prove, and therefore comes short of his general Doctrine.

Having spoke of his general Redemption, he comes to speak of his special,
the particulars whereof (though liable to exception) yet are not pertinent to
the Controversy: yet some I shall insert of greatest concernment; He to prove
the Application of the Death of Christ by the Spirit of God in the hearts of
men, he produces Rev. 5.9. [Thou wast slain and have redeemed us by thy Blood
out of every tongue and Nation.] Now, The Reader must understand that this Text
is produced by us against his general Redemption; and thus we urge, that if he
redeemed them out of tongues and nations, then all were not so redeemed, for
some there are and must be out of whom they are said to be so redeemed. Now
upon this ground the Author cunningly shuffles this Text in among others,
treating of the Application of Christ's Death, that so it might unsuspectedly be
taken in the same sense, but this a foul perversion. Now that the Text
speaks of the Act of Christ in procuring Life and Redemption, and that by
bloodshed, I am enduced to conclude from these grounds.

1. From the word in the Text, which though we read it, [Thou have redeemed,]
which word may be distorted to that sense; yet the word is (...), Thou have
bought us, which word plainly relates to the price paying, which was his Blood
as shed; which word I conceive cannot be produced in the whole Scripture in any
other sense, and is not this word pressed by our Adversaries in that sense? in
2 Pet. 2.1. denying the Lord (...), that bought them; but surely those were not
redeemed by Bloudsprinkling, and why they should put any other sense upon the
word then in that place they themselves plead for, I cannot see.

2. From circumstantiating expressions in the Text: as that he is said to
redeem by Blood. Now the Application of the Blood of Christ to the hearts of
men is done by Spirit: But between Spirit and Blood there is a wide difference;
the one is the efficient, the other the meritorious cause of the Application.
But he says, [True it is by Blood; but it is Bloudsprinkling;] but this gloss
is not in the Text; and should we say so he would presently ask us what
belongs to them that add to the Scripture, but he does not only say that which
the Word says not, but that which it explodes; As for his expression [by
Bloudsprinkling] it is a quite distinct thing from Blood, because the
sprinkling of Blood is the Act of the Spirit; and the Text says, [Thou wast
slain and have redeemed by Blood,] which refers that Redemption by Blood to
his Death and Bloodshed.

3. Because the Act of Application by Bloudsprinkling is so the Act of the Son,
as that it is also the Act of the Father, and the holy Spirit; but that which
is here said [The Lamb, thou art worthy, etc. because thou was killed and have
redeemed us by thy Blood, etc.] Cannot be said of any but Christ, and that as
by his Bloodshed procured life for us.

The Authors reply may draw more from me, but herein he savours strong of an
Arminian; thus they envade the Text, as if it spoke o^ such to whom the Blood
of Christ was Applied, Acta. Synod. 360.
and in whom it had its full efficacy, [ Quis non videt hic agi de illis quibus
non tantum impetravit, sed per sidem applicavit, etc] But this solves it not;
the Application is inserted in the next verse, but the Impetration only in the
9. verse, which impetration did tend to a further Act.

Again, as he did set down diverse particulars that conduced to the effecting
of the first, so he does now some that conduce to this second, and thus goes
on:

[For effecting of which Redemption Jesus Christ was exalted at his Fathers
right hand, Acts 2.33. Act 5.31.] But herein I am unsatisfied, why his exalting
to his Fathers right hand is made an Act of Application, more then his
Resurrection from Death, I think he has no ground to disjoyne them, they are
conjoined by the Apostle, Romans 8.34. Certainly all the Acts of his Exaltation
tend the same way.

2. I conceive (as I have formerly hinted) that all the Acts of Christ
mentioned Romans 8.34. Tend to perfect his Impetration and procurement of
Salvation; For if he had not Risen, Ascended, Interceded, the Purchase had not
been made, or Salvation impetrated for men; though nothing else was to be paid
as Price but Blood; yet something else was to be done, there was to be
[Ascensio Sacerdotis and ostensio sanguinis,] The Priest was to ascend into the
veil and show the Blood, else no Atonement procured by the Priest: Therefore
this is not well divided from the other in the first Redemption, or procuring
of Salvation.

And why may not he as well say that he dyed to effect that Redemption, as he
was exalted to his Fathers right hand? For both came under the same Notion of
effecting that Reconciliation. And the cited place Act. 2.33. speaks no more
then this, that he was not only to dye, but to be raised again and exalted,
else could he not as God, give them Repentance and Remission of Sins. All this
proves not that his Session at his Fathers right hand is an Act of
Application, or tended more to it than his Death and Passion. As for his
subdivided particulars in Page 6. I grant them as being nothing to the
Controversy: until he come in the 7. Page wherein he delivers something
that deserves examination, which is this;

[In some sort interceding and putting in for Transgressors, even the Sons of
men, yet in, and of the world: Isa. 53.12. Joh. 17.21.23, That so the men of
the world might be convinced and allured, etc. But in a special manner does he
intercede, being Advocate for his chosen ones, etc. and presents them to his
Father holy and spotless, Ephesians. 5.22.] Wherein are sublime discoveries worth
our notice.

1. Whereas he says, [Puting in for Transgressors, etc. but in a special
manner interceding for his chosen ones,] seems to intimate that
[Transgressors] and [chosen ones] are not coincident; which is not only
contrary to the truth, but himself, in Page 120. And what special favor
interceded for, or manner of interceding that he does not use for
Transgressors? This is a nicity beyond my reason, and I fear his own too.

2. Why should Intercession be so ranged as to make a part of his Application?
He seems to be touched with Arminius his Magneticke, who says, Sacrificatio
pertinet ad meritum, intercessio ad applicationem, meritum acquisivit
sacrificio, pro applicatione intercedit. In Perk 70. But it is against reason,
for if he Intercede it must be with God, and for men; And does not Reason and
his own Principles tell us that this must appertain to his Impetration? Nay,
does not he say, Page 8. [By this he procures the grant of Dispensation?] And
why should that which the Author pleades Is (for all) be produced as an
ingredient into that Redemption which is proper only to Believers?

3. I demand one place or places of Scripture, that hold forth the distinction
of general and special Intercession, especially now he is at his Fathers
right hand, for so he urges both kinds, nay at any time, this is a stream
from the Arminian fountain, but not from the Sacred Fountain of Gods word,
those Texts alleged come short as not proving that he Interceded for all and
every Transgressor, or Crucifier.

4. Why does he Connexe [Allure] and [Convince?] As if always and whom God
intends to convince he intends to allure: The World ( Joh. 17.21.23.) he
would have convinced, that Christ was the true Messiah: but that he would have
them allured to come to him is a presuming on the Text to affirm. The Devils
believe that, and are convinced; Mark. 3.11. But he never intended to allure
them: Many souls are not convinced that Jehovah is God till and by their
destruction, Ps. 83. last. But then I cannot think that God allures them; Many
are not convinced that Christ was sent till hell seize on them, and then they
shall [every Tongue confesse] but then God intends not to allure them, it is
too late; and therefore though we grant that Christ prayed for his, that the
world might be convinced, yet it will not follow that he prayed that they might
be allured: And for his general Intercession for all, seeing so many Texts
confine his Intercession to Believers, as Romans 8.34. Makes Intercession for
us, Heb. 7.25. Makes intercession for them that come to God by him, Heb 6.20.
He entered into the heavens for us, viz. Heirs of Promise, ver. 17. Heb. 9.24.
Who appears in heaven for us. 1 John 2.1, 2. We have an Advocate with the
Father: And by our Author Page 54. it is urged as a privilege of Believers; and
not one place in the whole Scripture that makes out a general Intercession, I
cannot but judge it an Oracle of flesh and blood, and not of God.

5. I would know a ground why he changes the terms? When he speaks of the
general, and for Transgressors, he gives it the name of Intercession only:
But when he speaks of the special, for his Chosen Ones, he gives the title
of Advocation, as the Reader may observe: As if there was some momentous
difference betwixt an Intercessour and an Advocate, which the Scripture
affords not, for that in Romans 8.34. Makes Intercession for us; And that 1
Job 21. We have an Advocate, are all one, And can this flourish with
Phrasiologies tend to any thing but to bleate the eyes of his ignorant Readers?

6. I would know a reason why to the second, viz. his Advocation, He confineth
his presenting them holy to his Father; as if he did intercede for some in
heaven whom he did not so present: And herein I demand one Text to show where
Christ appears in heaven for any, either as Intercessor, or Advocate, and does
not present the Persons of such holy to his Father? That he intercedes in
heaven for all, and yet presents but some holy to his Father, is the Language
only of our Author, not of Scripture, and when these particulars are duly
scanned, his simple jumbling and confounding Notions, beyond either his own
understanding, or any man's else, will clearly appear: From which jumbling and
confused Discourse he comes to raise a double Salvation; and he thus speaks;

[1. One common, the other special and eternal of each it is fit distinctly
to mention.] That it is so sit to speak of them distinctly I grant, and it
would be well he would speak as distinctly as he pretends, that we might
understand it; he should have explained what he means by that special and
eternal Salvation; if he mean by it our perfect glorification in heaven,
which in Scripture Phrase is called eternal Salvation. Heb 5.9. Then it
seems he intends Grace and Faith to belong to the common, not special
Salvation, which is contrary to himself in many Pages of his Discourse: But if
by it he mean Grace and Glory, Faith, and the Inheritance, then does he speak
of Faith and believing as not being an eternal Salvation, as Page 10. [Yea
with some he goes further, so as that they believe, though departing from this
grace they may perish, etc] Hereby we see because he speaks not distinctly he
speaks not as is fit. But he adds,

[The one Christ works for all men, Page 9. The other he works in men to
God, Page 12.] O that the confused brain of the Author could produce it self
in any reasonable perspicuity; why does he say, that the common Salvation is
wrought only for men? Is it not bestowed on men? As to instance in his
particulars, as the preservation of the Creatures, the patience of God, means
of knowledge, etc. Are they not given to men? And acted upon men? Have they
them not? Why then are they set down as only wrought out for men? Certainly
herein he could not promise himself satisfaction. And so for the special
Salvation wrought in the hearts of men by his Spirit, why does he say it was
only wrought in men? Was it not also wrought for men by his Blood, before it
was wrought in men by his Spirit? I think the purchase of Christ is the
foundation of every spiritual good whether Grace or Glory, Ephesians. 1.3. His
expresses herein therefore are preposterous, but herein is his mistake, he
should have made his distinction run between the Acts of Christ in procuring
and applying; but he speaks of a distinct good bestowed some to all, some not
to all, which is not only useless in this Controversy, but also admits not of
his Expressions: Seeing those things which are special are wrought out for
those that have them, and those that are common are not only wrought for, but
conferred on men.

But he inserteth several particulars as branches of this common Salvation,
Which I shall examine.

1. [The earth and Inhabitants thereof which by Sin are dissolved he bears up
the pillars of it, Psalm. 75.3, 4. Heb. 1.3. And the frame of the Creatures for
man's use preserved, Psalm. 145.8, 9. Math. 5.45. Col. 1.18. And this a witness
of his goodness, Act. 14.17. and 17.24.31.] That the Fabric of the world,
and the Creatures thereof (by sin forfeited) are again restored and
sustained, and continued for man's use, and that by virtue of Christ's Sacrifice
and interposall, I verily believe, and needs it must so be, man being upheld in
his being, the Creatures must be so for his subsistence: and that man is so, is
clear, and must be so (if for no other end, yet) for this, that his Elect
might come to have a being, and so come to Repentance: Thus far I have formerly
granted, and grant this general Salvation; And this is the Hellena on which he
seems so enamoured, but it serves him not, it is nothing to the Question,
this he might do and yet have no thoughts to bring most men to Grace or Glory.

But if I had an inclination to deny it, his quoted Texts prove it not, there
is not any one of those places alleged, except Col. 1.18. that has any show
of proving that Christ as Mediator procured the being of the world, and the
Creatures therein; few of them speak of Christ, but God essentially, the
living God, Creator of all things, as Psalm. 75.3, 4. Psalm. 145.8.9. Math.
5.45. Nay with express distinction from Christ, God man, as Acts 17.24.31. The
rest of Christ as God, and as Creator and Preserver of all things, as Heb. 1.3.
Therefore I could advise him to seek out more pertinent Texts for his purpose.

2. [By him is procured patience and long suffering of God, and much bounty in
many mercies to men, as 2 Pet. 3.9. Rev. 2.21. Psalm. 19.14. Psalm. 136.25. And
this to lead men to Repentance. Romans 2.4.] That patience and long-suffering is
procured for every man, that is, that the Curse is not incontinently executed
on them, and the world dissolved, I will not contend: But his Texts prove it
not, they speak of the efficient, not the meritorious cause, who is so
patient, not who procured it, but grant it, this is not pertinent to the ^oint
in hand: He may be patient and long-suffering to all, and yet not intend the
Salvation of all to whom he is so patient, neither is God patient to every Son
of Adam to lead them to Repentance: Could he prove that God or Christ intended
the Repentance of every man, I would confess and prove too that he intended
the eternal Salvation of every man; For Repentance of any is not willed but as
means to that end, and it is considered as means in tendency to the end: But
the former he proves not, as for that Text, Romans 2.4. It speaks of another
patience then what every Son of Adam partaketh of, viz. the patient waiting of
God in the Gospells Ministry, or such a deferring of Judgment, as has the
Gospel annexed, as appears in the whole Chapter, but such an one every Son
of Adam has not enjoyed: Besides this patience and long suffering of God
leads to Repentance; that Moraliter, not physice, by swasion not efficiency
works not Repentance, but admonishes to Repentance; and so this place is
expounded Act. 17.30. Now he admonishes every man to Repent, which shows
that the patience of God without the Word is no fit means to bring men to
Repentance: Now this place which denotes such a longsuffering that every Son
of Adam has not, is not well produced to prove such a work, as is common for
every Son of Adam; and that God intends by his patience to bring every Son of
Adam to Repentance, it is not easy to grant, and as hard for the Author to
prove.

3. [By him is procured some means, with some light, therein, and according
thereto, to lead men to Repentance, etc. though to some more dark, some more
clearly.] First, to remove such generalities and indefinite Expressions fit
only to deceive; then his Expresses will the better appear: That Christ did
procure means, and Light, and Spirit, to lead men to Repentance whoever yet
denied? This comes too short of his Doctrine, for that he procured means to
bring every Son of Adam to Repentance, this neither he nor any else has yet
proved; That he procured means, and God gives such means to every man whereby
they may know something of God I grant; but that he gives to every one so much
as leads them to Repentance, this is doubtful, every measure of the
knowledge of God serves not for this business: I would know what he thinks
of those that have only Verbum rei, the Book of the Creatures to read on? True,
They may know something of God, as Romans 1.20. As his Power, and Godhead; yea,
so much seen of him (the Text says not as to bring them to Repentance, but)
as may leave them without excuse; and that (not for not Repenting, but) for
their Idolatry, because there is so much seen in the Creatures as may convince
men of the Deity of God, that he is not made with hands, nor any such Creature
as they worshipped, Ver. 23. But how will he prove hence that the Creatures are
fit means to bring men to Repentance? To bring men to Repentance there must
concur these things; A fight of Sin to be Sin, A sense of our condition
without it, A Hell to affright, with other things; but which of these are
obnoxious to them that have but the light of Nature only? For the knowledge of
Sin to be Sin, the Book of the Creatures discovers not: St. Paul said, I had
not known sin, but by the Law, Romans 7.7. And that not the Law of Nature, or any
thing written only in Nature, but lex superaddita, A Law that was not always
known, that said (Thou shall not lust,) Besides that men repent, it is
requisite that men should know it is a duty to Repent; For that which
discovers not that, cannot be said any way to lead to Repentance: But does
the Creature or the light of Nature command this? The time before the Gospel
comes admonishing to Repent, is a time of ignorance of that duty, Act. 17.30.
Again, it is requisite that men know the danger of not repenting, the
punishment due to Sin, that show men the necessity of repenting: But how does
the Creatures dictate any such thing? Therefore that which discovers not Sin
to be Sin, nor it to be our duty to repent, nor the danger of not repenting, or
the benefit of repenting; such a thing is not a fit means to lead us to
Repentance. But at the end of this his Assertion I find some Scriptures
annexed, I shall perpend them to see if they affirm any such thing, as that
God gives to every man such means as may, and to that end to lead them to
Repentance.

[ Romans 1.19. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
etc.] And what is there in that Text but this, viz. That something of God is
seen in the Creatures, as his Power and Godhead? which might keep them from
Idolatry, or worshipping of such things as they did worship, but not so much as
to bring them to Repentance for that Idolatry, the Text says no such thing.

[ Acts 17.24, 30. Now he admonishes all men every where to repent.] This is
the same nature with the former; It is spoken of those, and to those that
worshipped the unknown God; as Ver. 23. To which he adds these words, and
tells them that God Created the Worlds, and placed the bounds of our
Habitations, as Ver. 24, 25, 26. and this (...), Ver. 27. That they might
enquire after the Lord to know so much of him as to convince them that the
Godhead is not like to Silver or Gold, or the work of man's hands, as ver. 29.
But that it was for such an end as to bring them to Repentance, the Text owneth
not, nay it altogether disclaimes; as Ve. 30. (The time of this ignorance God
regarded not,) as if he should have said, when there is only the Creatures and
light of Nature in regard of the duty of Repentance, it could be no other but
the time of Ignorance, seeing that by that light they neither knew that they
should, nor how they should Repent. But now he admonishes all to Repent, no
such admonition by the Creatures, then had his words (But now he admonishes)
been to no purpose: Therefore his joining 24. and 30. verses together, as if
he intended to prove that by the Creatures God intended to lead men to
Repentance is very weak and frivolous.

Now if he shall reply, that Romans 2. says, The Gentiles did the things
contained in the Law and that by nature; and therefore why not Repent? I
answer, Let the Text be well weighed and we shall see a difference betwixt
(Legem implere,) and (Ea quae legis sunt facere,) to do things that the Law
commands, and to fulfill the Law. The second requires that what is done, be
done out of obedience to a known Law, the other not: The Gentiles might do
something that the Law commanded, as Seneca, Plutarch, who gave good rules of
life, but not out of obedience to any Law of God; but was it otherwise, though
the Law of Nature taught what to do, yet it teaches not Repentance for not
doing of it, because the first Law of God admits it not; He commanded to do
or else adjudged to suffer the Curse. To come to happiness by Faith and
Repentance is a secret of the Gospel, which all the light of Nature is never
able to discover, nor the severity of the Law did ever admit.

[ Romans 10.18. No doubt their sound went through all the earth.] Which place he
alleges to prove that the Gospel is preached to every Son of Adam to bring
them to Repentance, or else I know not to what end, but of this it falls
short; To pass by the several Judgments of men on this place, for it is not
very clear what the Apostle means by the 18. ver. But admit that we grant
that the Gospel is gone out through the world, yet that Text is not of
greater. Latitude than that of Col. 1.6. Where the Apostle says the Gospel had
commed to all the world, and brought forth fruit, but he will not say that the
Gospel had commed to, and brought forth fruit in every Son of Adam: And I
leave it to be the Authors task to prove hence that the sound of the Gospel
comes to the ears of every Son of Adam, that was, is, or shall be; So that
yet it is not clear that Christ procuring means for every Son of Adam to
bring them to Repentance.

4. [By him is sent forth at one time or other some Supernatural light and
motion of his Spirit, etc. Tending to, and striving with them to reprove them
of sin, moving to Repentance, seeking after God, etc. Joh. 1.5.9. Pro. 1.23.
Joh. 16.8, 9. Genesis 6.3. Mic. 2.7. And thus he calls many, yea, all the Sons
of Men.]

1 If (By him) denote Christ the Bestower, and efficient in sending that
supernatural light, as I conceive he does by Joh. 1.5.9. then it is nothing to
his purpose, for then it plainly belongs to the Applicatory part; but that
which he is to prove and illustrate is the Impetration, and procuring, as all
the former particulars run: Therefore I would know a ground of the change of
his expressions, seeing this with the other set forth the same Act of Christ.

^mnes homines ^igna vocati^e vocantur. Arm. in Perk. 59.
2. I am yet to seek for proof from tht Author, or else where, That every Son
of Adam has Supernatural light to bring them to Repentance: What will he say
of those that have only the light of Nature, and perish without Law, Romans 2.
Will he say that such have supernatural light? Certain those that Act merely
by nature, and natural light, have not a supernatural light, for then
natural light should be supernatural: Yet he urges that God calls every
Son of man to Repentance, A stiff Arminian; His Scriptures I shall examine.

Acts 17.30. [Now he commands all men every where to Repent.] Hence inferring
he calls every Son of Adam: But let us wave what men may possibly raise to
please themselves, let any sober mind judge, whether the Text means every Son
of Adam, or those only, and that All to whom the Gospel comes, and then when
it was preached: Else why should he say, (But now he admonishes?) if that any
were called to Repentance, to whom that Gospel came not, as well might they
have been admonished before it came: And so that word (Now) been Useless: Or
can we think that the admonition of some to Repent, could beget an Obligation
in every Son of Adam to Repent though command came not to them? Certainly not,
because the time of the Gentiles ignorance God regarded not, and their
non-repentance, though the Jews were before both by John, Math. 3. And by
Christ himself, admonished to Repent, as if it were not their duty till that
command came to them: according to the Remost. rule, Lex non lata non obligat.

Math. 23.14. [The word of the Gospel shall be preached through the whole
world] Not now to stand on the Phrase (whole world,) I shall give him the
Phrase in the desired Latitude. And what does the Text affirm? No more but
this, that the Gospel shall be in the last days preached through the world;
this we may expect, and pray for, but yet it is not so, much less can he prove
that God by the Gospel has, does, and will call every Son of Adam, that have,
are, or shall be, this he is to prove, but yet has not proved it: have not
Millions dyed and known nothing of Christ? And are not many now without that
knowledge, and yet in little probability of enjoying it?

Prove. 8.4, 5.31.34. [O men I call unto you.] And does this place prove any
more then this, that wisdom strives with those to whom she utters her voice,
and those are men, yea, simple men and fools? And this is no more then this,
Now he commands every man to Repent, Acts 17.30. But how does he prove hence
that wisdom striveth with those to whom she utters not her voice? Or that she
utters her voice to every Son of Adam?

Isa. 45 22. [Looke unto me and ye shall be saved, all the ends of the earth
shall be saved.] And will our Author infer hence that every Son of Adam shall
be saved? If not? then I say this Phrase (The ends of the earth) does not imply
every Son of Adam, and if not, this Text is nothing to the purpose: This Phrase
signifies no more then those that were far remote, as Isa. 5.26. Where (Nations
from far,) and (ends of the earth,) are equipollent, So Isa. 43.6. [From far]
and [from the ends of the earth] speak one thing, and this Phrase sometimes
means the Gentiles which were many of them far remote from Jerusalem, and so
they speaking of them called them the ends of the earth, as Isa. 49.6. to be [a
light of the Gentiles,] and [Salvation to the ends of the earth] are
Synonimous: So Jer. 16.19. And what does this Text prove more then this? That
those that are a far off, Gentiles, Sons of the earth, shall have Salvation as
well as those that were near Jerusalem; and so calls them that are a far off
to him: But what is this to Gods calling every Son of Adam to Repentance? He
may call them that are a far off, and yet not call every man that is a far
off; but of this stamp are the most of his inferences.

5, [By him is procured and sent forth to men, whilst they yield to, and do
that which by this light, and these motions of his Spirit he leads to, an
increase of mercies, etc. Genesis 20. totum. 2 Chronicles. 11.17. 2 King. 10.30. Romans
2.14, 15. Prove. 1.33. Prove. 8.32, 35. Joh. 8.31, 32. Act. 10.1.] The Authors
expresses herein are something dark and obscure, for his words may have a
double sense.

First, That God by him sends forth to men whilst they yield to, or in yielding
to that light which he formerly gave them, (to which yielding to that former
light he himself enabled them) an increase of Grace and Spirit; this I grant
as a truth, and this he does to men; but then this is not full for his purpose,
for thus he does not to every Son of Adam; for then every Son of Adam must have
some light of Grace and Spirit, which he cannot prove, and so be enabled to
improve it to any increase, and so at last be saved; but this he will not own.

Secondly, He may be thus taken, That God by Christ sends an increase, and so
has tied himself to give an increase of light and Spirit if men use it well
which they have; which being thus general, comes not up to the Authors mind,
for this proves not that he calls every Son of Adam to Repentance, nor that
every Son of Adam has this Light and Spirit given to them to improve; but I
think rather he means, as he must if he speak to his purpose, That God has
given to every man some light of Nature and Gospel, which if they improve well
they shall have further light till they come to be saved, according to that
Saving, [ Habenti dabitur, to him that has shall be given,] As his Master
Arminius has done before him, In Perkin. 218.
[Vide mihi an non in isto dicto (Habenti dabitur) promissio ista contineatur,
qua Deus spondet se gratia supernaturali illuminaturum, qui lumine naturali
recte utetur?] If this be his meaning, then I demand whether men have a power
and ability to use natural light well? His decision herein will be useful to
us. 2. I say that though God sometimes use this Method of giving to them that
improve, and taking from them that abuse; yet this is not always his Course,
it is no unbended rule, as if Grace should be dispensed according to works;
Sometimes he is found of them that sought him not, Isa 65.1, 2. Capernanm that
abused both the light of Nature and Gospel had means, when Tire and Sydon
that would have repented wanted them, Math. 11.21. Debauched Sinners against
Nature and Grace have enjoyed converting Grace, when more moral men have been
passed by: This the Remonst, confess, Deum pro liberrimo arbitratu saepenumero
populos quosdam licet profanissimos, and peccatis plurimis implicitos, and
rectae rationis dictamini non obtemperantes, e reliqua turba deligere and ad
vocationem Evangelii vocare. Antidot. Remonst. 73. Many Moral men, as
Plutarch, Plato, Socrates, Phocion, whose rules are admirable, and lives
blameless, and improving the light of nature as well as any, yet we never find
that Supernatural Grace was given to them. When many so abused Nature and
Grace, as to become Idolaters, Adulterers, Fornicators, Buggerers, Thieves,
Drunkards, yet for such to be Sanctified, Justified, Washed, is no strange
thing; 1 Cor. 6.11. Where was the stop in the former, that they had not an
increase of Light and Grace? And where was the improvement in the other, that
deserved a new supply of Grace in Conversion? And as for these Texts cited,
they prove but this, that God sometimes rewards an improvement of
Evangelicall Grace with more Grace: But they prove not that is Gods unbended
Method in giving or denying Grace; neither is this any thing to this purpose,
to prove Christ procuring Life and Salvation for every Son of Adam, because
every man has not that upon the improvement of which he promises more Grace.

6. [Yea, with some, where the Gospel comes, he goes further, so enlightening
them to understand the report of the Gospel that they do believe.] That he
does so is a truth, but why inserted I see not.

1. Has he to soon forgotten that the thing which he pursues is such as is
done for all, and to clear it, he gives us a taste of that which he says
expressly he gives but to some; this cannot be pertinent.

2. He here supposes that the Gospel is but dispensed to some, which is no
propitious Assertion to his former, viz. That God by the Gospel calls every
Son of Adam, one time or other, in some degree or other.

3. Whereas he speaks of a (further illumination,) either he means of such
as have used their first means well, or with such as do not; if the former,
then this is nothing different from the former, viz. [If they abide in his call
they shall know the truth,] and therefore deserved not to be ranged as a new
particular: If he mean the second; then that Method of God for prounded in
dispensing Grace is here infringed; Therefore this must either be (at least) a
Tautology, or a contradiction to his first particular.

4. Has he so soon forgotten, that the thing which he is to prove, is the
procuring and working out with God for men? And he here produces an Actual
bestowing and applying of the Blood of Christ, if to the enlightened and brought
in to believe, be to have the Blood of Christ applied? All that might be said
may not, I may not follow him so far in his extravagancies as I might,
sufficient is it to take notice that this is not opposite to his purpose, it
being done only for some, and not for all and every Son of Adam.

We may reasume the whole number of his particulars, and stand to wonder what
light they bring to this Point, or what he helps mean understandings in these
dark Controversies by the perspicuity of his Method and order: That we may
review them alitle jointly, that which he is to illustrate to them is the
common Salvation, which is Christ's working out with God for men Remission, and
Eternal Salvation, and such as is done for all, and as it is a working out for
men, distinct from working in and upon men: His first and his last particulars
are not opposite, because they are such as are effected on, and in men, as it
is to be for all men. So all the rest intermediate particulars are not
opposite, seeing they are not, nor by him proved to be procured, or to be
dispensed to all and every man; take them altogether, and what do they clear?
What do they prove? Nothing certainly, and serve for nothing, but deceive and
confound his Readers: and thus I conclude, Let him numerate never so many
particulars procured for, or bestowed on men, if they be not such as are means
in Gods series of Dispensing Eternal Life, I shall not contend, but pass them
by, as not pertinent to the Question, and leave them to him as not only
procured for, but actually conferred upon men, but if he produce any such
things as are the means to bring us to life, as Grace, Supernatural light,
the call of the Gospel, etc. Then I deny that such things are either procured
for, or bestowed upon every Son of Adam, which he often affirms, but never
yet proved.

Having thus immethodically propounded and displayed the particulars of his
Common Salvation, he proceeds thus to affirm.

[In some sense, and in truth all may be said to be Reconciled, Redeemed,
Saved, yea Justified, in him, though most be destitute of every of these.]
Which is as much as to say, Those may truly be said to be reconciled, etc. that
neither are, nor shall be reconciled, etc. Indeed, I find sometimes that God
calls things that are not as if they were. Rom 4 17. And Faith has this
privilege, to see at a distance things that are not as if they were; but then
let us consider what they are, not merely possible but future, such as God by
his power can, and his unbended purpose has determined, and his faithful
Promises has assured us shall come to pass; for such things to appear to
God, or a faithful eye, as if they were, is no strange thing: But for such
things as are never to come to reality, no nor ever was so intended, as the
Reconciliation, Justification, and Salvation of many were not intended by
Christ in his Death, as the Remonst. say; and for such as neither are, nor
shall be effected, for such to be called as done, and to say that such men are
Reconciled, etc. which neither are so, nor shall be so in time, seems to me an
incredible absurdity. But he will happily say, They may be said to be so,
because they may be so: They are under such conditions which if they perform,
God is ready to do all those. Well, be it so: Why then should they rather be
said Saved, then damned, till the condition be performed: I hope the way is
indifferent to Damnation as Salvation, as the Parties believe or not believe,
for the Gospel says believe and be saved, and also believe not and be damned,
and men may accidentally contract a sorer Condemnation if they believe not;
Therefore why they should rather be said to be reconciled and saved, because
they may be saved by Faith, then that they are damned because they may be
damned by unbeleefe: Nay, why may not men conclude sooner that they are not
reconciled and redeemed, (especially casting an impartial eye upon themselves)
seeing they find themselves more prone to reject him then to receive him: to
stand out then to believe in him, I see not.

Again, It is not suitable to denominate them Justified and Reconciled that
neither are nor shall be endued with Faith: And why may not men be as well said
to be Glorified in Christ, as Justified and Reconciled: Yet it is no sober
expression to say that every man, yea, the damned Spirits are glorified in
Christ; Certainly the Scripture calls none Reconciled, Justified, Redeemed,
Saved, but such as are so, or shall in Gods time be so,

But again, how he can thus conclude for every man from the Premises I see
not: He produces not one particular which he can prove to be common to every
Son of Adam; but the first viz. an upholding in their being, both man, and the
world of Creatures; But are all said to be Reconciled, Redeemed, Saved,
Justified, because they have their being continued, and the world of Creatures
also for their use? Certainly, there is no necessary dependence, or because
some are made partakers of Supernatural light, the Gospel, and an increase of
light, are all and every Son of Adam said thereby to be Justified, etc? But he
attempts to back it both by Scripture and Reason, I shall examine both: His
Scriptures are two.

[ Romans 3.22, 23, 24.] Herein I need not call out the disquisition of more
piercing eyes to search out his fallacy, but any common capacity to explode his
palpable absurdity; does the Text speak of a Potentiall Justification,
wherewith all may be said Justified, and yet all miss of it, and yet be
justified? The Text speaks of a justification by Faith, which is an Actual
Justification, and there is none so justified but they partake of it. If the
Text had favored him it should have run thus, [The righteousness of God for
all with God.] But it says, The righteousness of God unto all and upon all.
Again, the Text says, It is unto and upon all: But does the Text mean All
and every Son of Adam whether believing, or not believing? Let him view the
Text: That Justification by which every man is said justified, is such as is
without Faith; But the Text owneth none such, it says upon all them that
believe; that is the Circumcision and uncircumcision, Jew and Gentile, as ver.
30. there is no difference, but the believing Gentile as well as the believing
Jew is justified freely: This the Remonst. acknowledge with the Scripture,
Nullus nisi fidelis and qua fidelis est justificatur, sive a condemnatione
absolvitur. Ant. 87. Strange it is to me that the Author should dream that
this Text should call every Son of Adam justified.

[ Romans 5.14.18.] As for the 14. ver. I cannot apprehend any show of Reason,
the dint is in the 18. ver. where the Text says, [By the justifying of one the
benefit abounded toward all to justification of life.] But

1. First, Here we see not any show of reason to say that all are justified:
The Text (from any thing that Christ did) does not say every Son of Adam may be
called justified: where is there any such word?

2. This place speaks not of any potentiall justification, by which those may
be said justified that Actually are not so; but is an Actual Justification,
and that opposed to an Actual Condemnation, and expounded in the 19. ver. by
being made righteous, and that as in Adam were made sinners: that Justification
which he is to prove hence, is such as is appropriated to them that are not,
nor ever shall be justified: But let him show and prove where any word in that
Chapter seconds such an one as that.

3. The Text says indeed, [Free gift came upon all men to justification of
life.] But what is that (All?) To be taken with, or without a limitation? Let
us compare the Apostle with himself; The business of Justification by Faith
in Christ Jesus, is a thing that the Apostle takes often occasion to treat of
in this Epistle; yea, it is his maine drift in this former part of his Epistle,
and this he had said before was upon all, Cap. 3.22. but it was upon all that
believe, and that the Promise thereof might be made sure to an All, Cap. 4.16.
But it was sure to all the seed, and when he speaks of the same thing in the
same Epistle, that it is upon (all men) why should we take him in any other
sense then he explaineth himself about the same business? Even they seem to
be spoken with the same breath; and so no other sense to be given to this place
but this, (upon all men,) that is, on all them that believe; and that as the
Condemnation came on all them that come from Adam, so the righteousness of one
came on all men that come from him, and here lies the perfect Analogy betwixt
Christ and Adam; and this will more appear if we well consider the Text: That
Redemption and Justification which he gives to every Son of Adam, is such as
only is wrought out for men, but not on men, for this is to partake of Actual
Justification; but of this latter the Text speaks, it says, [It comes on
all men] but Justification is upon none but Believers, Romans 3.22, 23, 24.
Again this Righteousness is said to come upon all, as the Condemnation came
upon all by Adams Sin, but Condemnation came Actually upon all, so that they
were without a Savior, in an infallibility of perishing. So this coming of
Righteousness on all must be Actual too, and so as all on whom it so comes
shall infallibly come to glory and life Eternal, but so Righteousness comes
not on every Son of Adam, but Believers only. Again, This (All men) in Ver.
18. is supplied and expounded Ver. 17. by those that receive abundance of
Grace, and the gift of Righteousness, which makes it appear that is an
Actual Justification which the Apostle speaks of here, and therefore
favors not such an one, which may be though none partake of Justification;
and such an one as none can be truly said to be justified with, but those that
Believe, therefore owneth not such an one as is competible to every Son of
Adam; So that the validity of his Scriptures I see not, I shall examine his
Reason.

[It may be understood and believed as well as this, that all men were made
righteous in the first Adam, and were truly righteous in him, of which
Righteousness none ever yet felt or partaked, Romans 5.12. And so though all
recovered, etc.] The Question is not how it may be believed and understood if
it was so in truth, but whether it be so or no.

Secondly, We may grant the whole, both may be understood alike, that is
neither of them at all. I know no Scripture that says all the Sons and
Posterity of Adam were made righteous. That Text Eccles. 7.29. faith no more
but that man was made righteous, which is true in that Adam and Evah were so,
Not that every Son of Adam was made holy; none were made holy but those that
were Created, but his Posterity were not created; holiness was not derived to
any by propagation. A ground why every Son of Adam is not said in Scripture to
be righteous in Adam, I conceive is this, to be made righteous as Adam was, is
a real denomination and quality induced into the Patient, and that by a
transient Action, passing from the Agent into the Patient, but such an Action
there cannot be [In subjecto nondum existente] In a Subject that has not
actual existence; So that our Author must clear this to us before he can make
it the standard of our belief of the former, that every Son of Adam is
Reconciled and Justified in Christ.

Thirdly, I shall grant him that all are, or were made righteous in Adam; yet I
cannot subscribe to the other, neither is it any way explicatory of this, that
All Adams Sons are made alive and justified in Christ; for let us consider,
there were none made righteous (or could be so said) but those that were to
come from him by propagation (and under that notion as coming from him) he was
made righteous, and betrusted with Grace as a public Person to convey to his
Posterity and such as came from him, so that all that come from him, his
offspring, we shall grant for Conference sake that they were made righteous in
him: Now will this infer or help us to understand that all were justified in
Christ? It helps us to believe that all that do, or are to come from him were
made righteous in him, but no further; for what ground can be deduced from
Scripture or Reason, that (as Adams Figure) Christ makes more righteous in him,
then come from him to have a being from, and in him? let us grant him that all
the Sons of Adam were made righteous in him, because they were to come from
him; yet we cannot yet yield or understand that every Son of Adam is justified
in Christ, because they have not, nor ever are to have a being from him. Having
laid down his reason, he produces a dissimilitude betwixt Adam and Christ, thus.

[As the first Adam being a living Soul and of the earth, He lost all our
souls in his Fall, without remedy on his part: So the second Adam is a
quickening Spirit, the Lord from heaven, and loses none, but who ever now
perishes, destroys himself, and loses his own soul.] The absurdities and
obscurity of these expresses far exceed the pertinency or usefulness to the
Point in hand.

1. The Author pretends a dissimilitude, but yet he brings an (As,) (So,) As
the first Adam lost: So the second Adam loses none. Now there is none but
knows that these words (As,) (So,) set forth a similitude, as the Apostle
when he would show a Similitude betwixt Adam and Christ, Romans 5.18, 19, 21. he
says, As by offense of one, etc. So Righteousness, etc. But when he shows a
dissimilitude, he uses other expressions, as (For,) (But,) as Ver. 16. For the
judgment was by one, etc. But the free gift is of many, etc. But we may expect
no better from the Author, but this Obiter.

2. He says, The Scripture shows that dissimilitude, but he shows not
where. The Apostle Paul, who undertaketh the business of the difference and
similitude betwixt Adam and Christ, Romans 5. yet this he mentions not.

3. This Phrase [Loseth none,] is very fallacious and doubtfully laid down, it
may be taken either Actively or Passively, Actively to cast away or to destroy;
so it is taken when he says Adam lost himself and us all; if he thus take it
then Scripture neither does nor can, set down such a difference, Adam
destroyed, but Christ destroys none: differences are (Inter Entia) positive
beings do usually afford differences; and we shall find that when the Apostles
show discrepances betwixt Adam and Christ, they give them still betwixt Adams
losing, and Christ's saving, not Adams losing, and Christ's not losing, this
would import that Christ's Office was only not to destroy. Again secondly, It
may be taken Passively, that is, He suffers none to perish, and thus is it
taken when Christ is said not to lose; as Joh. 6.39. and 18.9. So Christ's not
losing is nothing but his not suffering to perish, if it be thus taken, then
the dissimilitude must run thus, As Adam lost all, so Christ recovers all: And
as all were lost by Adam without remedy, so Christ recovered all infallibly,
and without fear of being taken out of his hands, he shall suffer none to be
lost, no not to lose themselves, (for then are they lost) and therefore he
removes all external and internal principles that might destroy us. Joh.
10.28, 29. Now if this be his dissimilitude the Scripture no where owneth it;
Indeed we read that Christ loses none of them whom his Father gives to him,
or those who come to him, but that he suffered none to perish I read not: So
that if by (Christ loses none) he means that Christ destroys none, it is
in vain produced Against them that grant that he came not to condemn the
world but to save; But it by it he mean that Christ suffers none to perish, or
has done what in him lies to save every Son of Adam, this he must prove. That
after plea (Whoever perishes destroys his own self) seems to appear
under the face of an Argument to prove that Christ has done what in him lies
to save every man, but it is not valid, for men may destroy themselves and yet
Christ suffer them to perish, and if he suffer them to perish, he does not what
in him lies to save them; We might destroy our selves though Christ do
nothing for us, nay, our destroying of our Souls was the occasion of Christ's
coming to save us, therefore the destroying of our Souls has no dependence
of Christ's saving of us.

Having thus vented his Paradox, and as he thinks, backed it, be comes to
reassume his former position, which seems to be the result of his mind and
thoughts, thus.

[He has so saved all men, etc. that he makes all salvable, so as there is a
possibility in, and through, and with Christ, for all men to come in into him,
to believe on him, and be eternally saved in believing.] He has not produced
any thing as done for all, and proved it also to have been done for, or to all,
that may bring every Son of Adam under a possibility of believing, and so of
being saved: This I see is that on which many seem to dote, therefore I shall
a little expatiate my self herein; First, I must remove all Equivocation, when
he says [possibility] he means, I hope, only a possibility, for otherwise we
may say that Christ intended to make Salvation possible, that is, in making of
Salvation certain he made it possible, certainty including a possibility, but
not e contra. But his expresses herein seem to aver, that the chief and
first end of the Death of Christ (so far as it respected man) was that he
might make the Salvation of man possible, nothing different from the result of
Arminian exercitations, wherein we shall find thus, [Christus impetravit ut
Deus possit and velit communicare sua beneficia, Acta Synod. ^83 In Molin. c.
27. Sect. 3.
certa lege and modo,] And this latter word (velit) is no more then (possit
velle,) that he might be able to will and to bestow good things, as appears by
Corvinus, [Finis proximus mortis Christi fuit ut Deus possit hominem peccatorem
velle salvare,] That is, The immediate end of Christ's death was that God might
will to save Sinners, and save his Justice; but seeing the Author disclaimeth
the Arminian, therefore I pass this by with this monition, That he be wary
lest he fall into their Doctrine; and to return to our Author again, it seems
to me erroneous that the end of Christ's Death should be to make men's Salvations
possible, and that on these grounds.

1. The Scripture furnishes us with no such Phrase as (Possibility of
Salvation) but it treats of the end of Christ's Death often, Math. 1.22. He
shall save his people from their sins. Joh. 1.29. He takes away the sins of
the world. Math. 18.11. He is come to save; It does not say that he might
possibly save, or to procure a possibility of Salvation, this is no where found.

2. If he propounded to himself only a possibility of Salvation, then though
none be saved, yet Christ has the end and travel of his soul; for though
none be saved or believe actually, yet the possibility remains entire, Acta.
Synod. 285.
and this will be found the sowrest pieces of Arminianisme: Thus they say, [
Impetratio sarta tecta manet perfecta suis numeris constat etsi omnes maneant
increduli, etc.] But how harsh this may be to any Christian Ear, let any
Reader judge, and I wish the Author be not driven to say that Christ in being
Lord of all (which may be without the Salvation of any,) he sees the travel
of his Soul, as he seems Page 142. And this to defend this mere possibility
the end of Christ's death.

3. Let us consider, was there not a possibility for God to bring men to
Salvation and happiness, yea Sinners, without the Death of Christ? Was God
tied under such an impossibility that he could not save Sinners (to which he
was naturally propense) till Christ by his Death released him? I have not
observed any that deny the former, or affirm the latter; The Remonst, (who
would accept of such a help if they durst lean thereon) say thus; [Si potestas
and jus salvandi consideretur in Deo absolute, Corv. in Mol. c. 28 Sect. 11
tum Deus si voluisset, potuisset nos salvare citra Christi satisfactionem.]
And therefore seem to wave this as the end, viz. to procure a possibility: So
the same, Cap. 27. Sect. 3
[Non dicimus Deo impetratam simpliciter potestatem salvandi acsi Deus pro
absoluta sua potestate, etc.] That is, we say not that Christ procured only a
possibility of saving; as if God could not without Christ save Sinners. But
happily it may be said, true, God could by his absolute power, but not in
justice, save Sinners without satisfaction, Deus etiamsi pro sua omnipotentia
facile possit, non vult tamen tales (...) and apostatas salvare. Ant. 68. To
this I answer, In that he could by his power, he could his justice
notwithstanding; for God cannot by his absolute power do any thing against his
Justice, no more then he can sin or deny himself; or cease to be God, this
would be impotency, not Omnipotency. Therefore in saying he can do it, we (In
eodem instanti rationis,) affirm he can do it his justice notwithstanding, and
this follows upon the principles of Arminius, In Perk. p. 2, 3.
[Ex hoc antecedente Deus hoc fecit, sequitur necessario ergo just,] If God do
it, it is enough to conclude it just. Again, It may be said that Christ did
not procure a power to save, but a possibility to will to save, as Corvinus
inserteth, [Vt posset peccatorem velle salvare salva justitia,] That he might
will to save, and yet his Justice safe. To this I answer, If he had a power to
save, he had a power to will to save without Christ, for he cannot do any thing
that he cannot will; and this is true in Arminius Reason, Vaum includic
alterum, nemo potest credere, nisi potest velle credere, quia nemo credit
nolens. In Perkin. 592. So I argue, Deus non potest salvare nisi possit velle
salvare, quia Deus nominem salvat nolens. And if he can will to save us without
Christ, then he can will to save without Christ, Salva justitia, otherwise he
cannot will it, he cannot will to do any thing injustly. And that he had a
possibility to save, and to will to save without Christ's Death, and that his
Justice safe, to me seems evident, because neither a possibility to save, nor
a possibility to will to save, no nor a will to save, is against the Justice of
God; this I have propounded to let the Author see, that seeing God had a
possibility to save Sinners without Christ, and their Salvation was possible
before, and without Christ's Death; then to let him consider how derogatory to
Christ's wisdom it is to say that his end in dying was to make the Salvation of
man possible, I cannot conceive that he would shed his blood to procure that
which was in being before, and without his Death.

4. For his expressions associated with this, viz. [A possiblenesse of men's
coming in to Christ and believing.] It is a far different thing from the
former; when our Salvation is said to be possible, we mean in regard of God,
that God can bring us to Salvation: but when our faith is said to be possible,
it may be referred either to God or man: That God can by absolute power bring
men in to believe, or else that we have a power to come in or believe, what he
means is very dubious: The ground of coupelling these together is yet
obscure, for our Salvation eternal may be possible, and yet faith not
possible, for God can bring us to Salvation without Faith if he please; and if
by the possibility of our believing he mean only a power in God to bring all
men in to believe, I grant there is such a possibility, as there is a
possibilite of more worlds being created, but then this is too rude and
indetermined to make either the end or effect of Christ's Death.

Neither is it clear that Christ prepared a possibility on man's part to
believe, because he did not procure that all should enjoy the Gospel without
which men cannot believe. Romans 10.14, 15. A possibility to believe is too
unworthy a thing for Christ to purchase at so dear a rate: Christ purchased
Grace, not Nature, for us, but Posse credere est naturae, A possibility to
believe, is a Privilege of Nature, not Grace. I desire a more clear
explication of himself, then shall he have a more perspicuous Answer.

He having summed up the particulars of this common Salvation, (but weakly
seeing they cannot be proved to be the share of every Son of Adam) he comes to
repeat his special, what he does for Believers, and that in Page 11, 12, 13.
with several unjustifiable expressions, which because they are not pertinent
to the Question I wave them till he come in the 14 Page to give us a Sum.
total. and entire result of this elaborate Chapter thus.

[Now between these two Salvations, that with God for men, and that in men to
God, etc. the Scripture does often and many ways distinguish.]

Parturiunt montes and nascitur -- Behold the issue of this fruitless piece,
has he been in so long a travel of opposition and has brought forth nothing
but what every man grants? Let me again interrogate, where does he find it
denied that the purchasing and applying, the procuring for, and bestowing upon
men any good, are two distinct Acts? Nay, What Treatise finds he, where it is
not strongly asserted? and therefore he needed not to have been at so much
pains to prove it; But by this foundation we may guess what structure we
shall find. But yet the manner of their distinction, as he lays it down, is
something observable, and such as we find no where else, as follows.

1. [The former is called a reconciliation by his Death, the other a saving by
his life. To. 5.10.] that his procuring reconciliation by his death, should be
here set down under being reconciled by his Death, is something distorted and
improbable; Does the Author conceive that those words do not denote actual
Reconciliation? If they do, (as it is clear they do) then this is the second
Act, not the first, only Application, not procurement of it; The Text says
not, If he merited Reconciliation for us, much more shall we be saved by his
life, If the Text had favored this conceit, it would have run thus: If he has
procured Reconciliation by his Death, then shall we be actually reconciled by
his life, but it runs not thus; the inference is not from Impetration to
Application, but from Reconciliation to Salvation, two distinct degrees of good
applied, the Scripture yields no such difference, because both Impetration, and
Application of all good, is said to be by his Death, and by his Blood.

2. [The former was a Reconciliation wrought for the world by God in Christ:
The latter a Reconciliation of some to God by Christ. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.] Herein
lies a twofold difference couched, but both absurd.

1. He says, The one is (For men,) the other (In men:) But this is no
difference, for herein they both agree; The second, viz. the Application is
wrought out for men, as to instance, the Grace and Faith that is given to some
by which they are overcome, is also wrought for, else how comes it to be
applied, or how can it be called the Application or Sprinkling of Christ, if
the Blood of Christ did not procure the Application?

2. He says, The former is wrought by God, the latter by Jesus Christ; As if
he should say, the Impetration or procurement was done by God, the Application
was done by Jesus Christ; which foppery discovers it self sufficiently, the
contrary of is most true, the Impetration is Christ's Act, the Application is
Gods, if this be true [Christus Impetravit ut Deus possit, etc] And herein is
one difference, the procuring is the Act of Christ as of one that dyed, the
Application is Gods the offended Party.

3. [In effecting the former he came from the Father, for the effecting of the
other, he went again to his Father. Joh. 16.28.] Herein can lie no
difference, because his coming from the Father, and going to his Father, both
were requisite to his first Act, viz. Impetration or procurement, else are not
his own expresses Orthodox, Page 8. where speaking of things done after his
going up to his Father, he says, [Thereby he does present before his Father,
etc. and so procures the grant of dispensation, etc.] Which evidently clears
that his Ascending is no part of his Application, but an Act that tends to
the perfecting of his procurement, and that done as Mediator. Again, His
coming from the Father was not tied only to Impetration, but it was also for
the effecting of Application. He came to save them that were lost. Math. 18.11.
And he dyed not to procure purging only, but that he might Sanctify, to
Sanctify to himself a peculiar People. Ephesians. 5.25. So that if the parts of
his distinction be so coincident, that we may say, For the effecting of the
former he ascended also to his Father, and for the latter he came down from
the Father, then his difference falls to the ground: as for that Text Joh.
16.28. it shows only that Christ both came from, and also goes to the
Father; but it says not, that he came down only to procure, and went to him
to apply the good things procured: So that we may see what liberty he takes to
distortour Saviors words to apply them to his own conceits without ground;
Nay our Savior seems to disclaim it, for there is more the soly Application,
when he says, [I go to prepare a place for you.] Joh. 14.2. His third is the
same with this, therefore I mention it not.

3. [The one is a Redemption (for us) in Christ: Romans 3.24. The other a
Redemption (of us) in Soul and body. Luke 1.74.] Many leaves would not serve
sufficiently to display the vanity of this distinction. First, This denotes
that the Redemption of our souls and bodies was not wrought out for us, which
is erroneous; if he import not so much, his distinction is frivolous. Secondly,
That denotes that the Application of Christ's Blood is not effected or shown
till our souls and bodies be glorified, which is false; the giving of any
Mercy, the means of Grace, his Patience, is the Application of his Blood; And
if he mean not the former, he weakly expresses the latter, by the Redemption
of us in our souls and bodies. 3. The first he says is only (for us) when in
his sixth particular he produces Christ's Lordship, Patience, Goodness of God
to men, as this first Redemption, but these are not only for us, but of us, and
to us; endless are his absurdities, but I close with this other, that Text
Romans 3.24. is abused, that mentions not this Phrase (For us,) therefore
serves him not for his purpose; there is no expression there but what agrees
to the second Redemption, viz. Application, therefore serves not to prove a
discrimination. I shall use only one more.

4. [The former is affirmed in Scripture to be for all men: Joh. 3.17. The
latter is for and to Believers only,] To this I Answer.

If he can carry this by Scripture, then his weakness appears in expressing
himself so remissely, as to contend in this Chapter only for this, that they
are distinct; if the first be for all, the second for Believers only, then they
are not only distinct, but separable one from the other, and one may be where
the other never is; and this is a degree beyond distinction.

2. Whereas he says, (That the latter, viz. the Application of his Death is
only for Believers,) how diflonant is it from himself and his best friends the
Remonst. who unanimous that Remission of Sins and Eternal Salvation is
procured for all men, not only for Believers? Indeed they say it is only (to
them) but (for all,) for if they be confined to Believers, not only (to them)
in regard of enjoyment, but (for them) also, in regard of procurement, his
common Redemption will be but a mere Chymaera.

3. If he say, That the Impetration or procuring of Remission and Eternal Life
be for all and every Son of Adam, then he must prove it by Scripture, that
Text, Joh. 3.17. proves it not, it speaks not of such a Redemption,
Salvation, as may be divided from Eternal Life, no nor barely of Impetration,
but as it relates to Application to follow, as when he says, I come to save
that which was lost, and he shall save his people from their Sins, Math. 1.21.
Neither does the world World there mean every Son of Adam, but he came to save
the World, that is Men living in the World: his inference here from is no
plain Text, but a corrupt reasoning from a clear Text. Again, that Text Joh.
3.16. confirms me in this Point, that Christ did not procure life for every
Son of Adam, because he there says, it was that only Believers might not
perish: It says not that every one might not perish if they believe, but that
those that believe, the number of which was well known to him. Now if Christ's
will was one and concentricall with his Fathers, he procured life for none but
Believers: So that then not only the Application is to, but the Impetration for
Believers only, what then becomes of his Doctrine, That he procured life for
all men whether they believe or no? I see not; this is no Scripture Language.
So that now having examined his particulars of distinction, and finding them
full of confusion, and not distinct enough to be understood, I shall give the
Reader a taste of some new Divinity.

1. That Christ dyed for some for whom he did not live again, as in the first.

2. That he came from the Father for some, for whom he went not to the Father
again, as in the second.

3. That he was abased for some for whom he was not exalted, as in the third.

4. That he shed his Blood for some for whom he presented not his Blood as
shed, as in the fifth. All these he averreth, in that he says, the former of
all is done for all and every man, the latter only for Believers.

Thus have I embowelled the distinction, the Chapter that treats of it, his
expressions therein. And little perspicuity or pertinency to the Question can I
find therein, and so confused that I fear few of his Readers can gather from
it what he holds, or what they should close withal, neither can any ingenuous
man show what he has gotten of his Adversary herein; that which is truth in it
no man denies, yet a miscellany of Obscurities, Errors, Contradictions,
interwoven, it is the basis of the whole Discourse, therefore I have been more
prolix in dissecting it, lest I should over-looke any pertinent truth; (they
are so few) tedious I know it must be to them that are verst in more polite
Notions; but the Nature of my Antagonist requires it; things of less
concernment shall be passed over with less disquisition; And what he delivers
herein appears to me not to be the meaning of 1 Timothy 2.4, 6. Heb. 2.9. And his
Proposition being taken in this sense here delivered, is not made out in those
Texts: And what provision he is supplied with from this distinction so
prosecuted, for the taking down of the edge of our Arguments, shall be seen
in its proper place.

CHAP. III. Of diverse ends of Christ's Death, and of which is here meant.
THe Author conceiving to find strength from the consideration of the ends of
Christ's Death, enters this Point, And I confess it helps much to decide this
Controversy, therefore I shall (to my Talent) bend my thoughts to examine what
he delivers herein. He says thus.

1. The first end and that which is general, and of largest extent was to be a
Ransom, Sacrifice and Propitiation; and this has three distinct ends in it.
1. In respect of God offended, that his Justice might be satisfied. 2. In
respect of Jesus Christ, that he might be Lord of all, and have all in his
dispose. 3. In respect of Mankind, to take out of the way all that stood
between God and Man, and kept back streams of mercy,
2. To seal and confirm the New Testament of precious Promises. Math. 26.28.
Luke 22.20. 3. To be a witnesse-bearing to the Truth. Joh. 18.37.
Wherein the Author does well to pitch upon the first and maine end of Christ's
Death, (and that in regard of the Creature,) for to treat of intermediate ends
would have been but obscure and impertinent to this Point: because when we
speak of intermediate ends, they are such as are but media, means in relation
to the first end; but to treat of means when the question is of the end, is
something preposterous. When we treat of the end of Christ's Death, it is
presupposed that we mean that which in relation to man is considered under no
other Notion but as end, therefore he does well to speak of a first end; but
whether he do so well, to say that that (which he lays down) is Christ's
first end in dying, must be further enquired into.

Now when he says, (First end,) I hope he means, first in Gods intention,
and Christ's, for from the intention of Agents is the priority and posteriority
of ends deduced. Now I say, [to be a Ransom, a Sacrifice, a Propitiation] are
not the first end of Christ in dying, or of God in giving his Son; and this is
clear, in that these all do [Tendore in finem ulteriorem,] Tend to a further
end, for he is all these that men might be eternally saved; Himself is clear
for this, [His being a Ransom and Propitiation was that all men might be
eternally saved: Page 18, 19.] And if he did not, Reason would presently
convince him, as shall afterward appear; these then tending to a further end,
are not the first end, in that they tend to a further end, they are means, and
in so being, they are not first in intention: then should God intend first the
means, then the end, which is absurd.

Again, if the Author will have the procuring life and Salvation, and opening
a door, that men only may enter, and to make men salvable only, (for thus he
interprets his Phrases of Ransom, Propitiation,) to be the first end in
Christ, then I hope he will give us some Scripture that so speaks: Scripture
seems to speak otherwise, Joh. 3.17. I came not to condemn but to save.
Math. 18.11. He came to save that which was lost. 1 Timothy 1.15. He came to save
Sinners; which places I know the Author would thus temper, to make them
salvable; but this is an unwarrantable perversion, and all these which he
produces they are but subservient to this first end; as to instance, As God
had (out of his free constitution) designed a way of his own dispensations,
before man can partake of heaven the Justice of God must be satisfied, Enmity
taken away, we Reconciled, Hence this made end of God and Christ in his Death,
Col. 1.20. To reconcile us, which suppose Justice satisfied, but this is not
willed for it self but in tendency to a further end, and is not the first end;
but that Text gives a further, Ver. 22. To present you holy and unblameable to
him.

Again, That we may be partakers of happiness, the handwriting against us
must be blotted out, and every thing that stands cross must be taken away: So
that this is an end of Christ's Death; Col. 2.14. But this was not done, or
intended only for it self, but in tendency to eternal Salvation, and the
actual enjoyment of it, for only to this is our sinful estate contrary, and
therefore a further end appears, Cap. 3, 4. to which this serves but as
means, [Yee shall appear with him in glory.]

Again, That men partake of heaven, the stain and power of Sin must be taken
away, and we Sanctified, and Regenerate; So that this also is an end of Christ's
Death, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. but this not for it self, but with a tendency to further
end: Ver. 27. that he might present it glorious (...), not [Vt sistere possit,]
but [Vt sisteret,] to cause it to stand before him glorious, denoting that the
actual enjoyment of heaven, and as certain, is his first end.

Again, That men be glorified, it is requisite that Christ be Lord of all, and
have power over all flesh; this therefore is an end of his Death, Romans 14 9.
but this not for it self intended, but a tendency to the first end, Joh. 17.2.
He gave him power over all flesh that he might give eternal life to as many as
thou have given, (...), It is not [Vt dare possit,] but [ut dacet] that he
might actually, certainly give eternal life. And more intermediate ends may be
produced, which may be called ends in regard of his Death, but yet not the
first end, but rather as means tending to the first end, and so all these
three particulars under his general they all cannot make up a first end, but
are as means to the first end: Therefore his setting down them as the first
end is not Orthodox.

Again, That to procure life, that is, that men may have it, is not the end of
Christ's Death, that is the first end, and maine end: Then it must follow, that
though none be actually saved, yet Christ has his end full and entire, and as
much as he desired, this indeed the Remost, say, but I cannot yet see it the
Language of Scripture.

Again, it is a rule that [Acquisito fine quiescit movens,] when any Agent
has attained his end it rests with it, but Christ and God do not rest with a
possibility of man's Salvation, or in a door being opened, but they go on
further, Actually to lead into that door, to invite, solicit, expostulate,
persuade, that they might actually be saved: He says not, Why O Israel will
not ye come into a possibility of Salvation? But why will ye dye? Why will ye
not be Actually saved? Nay, the Author grants, that he does not only propound
means, give the Gospel, and so open a door by moral swasion, but also
overcome and overpower, by Physical efficiency, the hearts of his Elect, and
bring them in to believe, and bring them into his Kingdom; thus Page 120. Now
I demand, whether Christ did procure this? Whether Christ and God aimed at this
in Christ's Death, and so propounded it as an end? If not? Quo pacto is it
applied? Is it not the sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus? If it be so, then that
was not the first and maine end of Christ and God to make Salvation possible,
but that Salvation should be certain and Actual. So that we may see how in
considerately the Author expresses himself about the ends of Christ's Death.
My next task will be to examine what influence these expresses have upon the
Question in hand, and also of what ends, whether intermediate, or ultimate,
these Texts, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. treat.

For the first, I conceive that this Treatise of the end of Christ in his Death
does not only not help, but utterly overthrows his Doctrine. Herein I shall
examine, first, whether the maine end (Actual and certain Salvation) was
intended for every man: Let this be my Query, When Christ gave himself, or
determined to give him, was it for this end, to make Salvation of every man
Actual and certain? If it was? Then I say, if all do not come to Salvation,
he misseth of his end, which is not to be appropriated to any rational Agent,
that has power to do what he wills, and to bring about his purposes. Herein
I suggest to my self some Remonst. denying that an Actual, certain, and
absolute Salvation of any is the end of God or Christ in his Death: as
Arminius, [Non actualis peccatorum ablatio, non actualis remissio, non
justificatio, In Perk. 77.
non actualis horum aut illorum redemptio, quae absque fide and spiritu Christi
nemini contingunt, etc. That is, not Actual Remission, Justification,
Redemption, (so no Salvation) which happen to none without Faith:] or with
Corvinus, [Quod ad applicationem salutis attinet non intendit eam pracise and
absolute, In Molin. c. 28. Sect. 8.
sed voluit intercedere fidem hominis, As for the Application of Salvation, God
willed it not absolutely, because he willed Faith to come between, viz.
Christ's Death and Salvation;] For the assertion it self, I have proved that
the Actual and certain enjoyment of heaven is the (finis ultimus) in regard
of the Creatures: because all the rest, even Impetration it self is but an
intermediate end; It remains that I reassume their reason whereby they prove
it is not; and they are unanimous in their reasons, and it is this, Because God
willed that men should be saved by Faith; I shall not expect to vye Authority
with them; whose Learning and moderation I may admire; yet I must freely
accknowledge that the strength of that Reason is not clear to me, no more then
this. A man intends not a thing absolutely, because he will effect it (per
m^dia) by means; or this, A man does not absolutely intend to dwell in a
house, because he intended to build it first, or being built, to cleanse and
garnish it first; but these are not valid, because he may intend to act the
means, and then why he may not absolutely will to act the end I see not; so if
God intend absolutely to give and work faith, which is the means of
Salvation, then he may be said to will Salvation of men absolutely, though he
wills Faith to intervene.

Again, I can suggest to my self my Antagonist answering thus: [As for his
Elect he propounds their certain and actual Salvation as his end, but for the
rest, His end is that they may be saved.] Therefore to engage with this, for
that is my task to encounter my Antagonist. For the rest of men that are not
Elect, what is his end? That there may be a salvability, or possiblenesse with
God of their Salvation? This I have before showed cannot be the end of Christ
to procure it, because such was without Christ's Death, and that he might do it
too and yet be just if he pleased; no man will purchase his own Land, nor
Christ by his Blood procure that which allwaies was without that procurement: I
am yet to learn that any thing obliges God to punish Sin without
satisfaction, but his free constitution and determination, whereby he becomes
a Law to himself: But God no where has revealed that he wills, that without
satisfaction man's Salvation shall not be possible; indeed, he has tied
himself not to save actually without satisfaction.

Again secondly, I desire a proof from Scripture of this twofold end of
Christ, one for his Elect, that their Salvation may be certain, a second for
all the rest, that their Salvation may be possible, which if he can do he will
perform a great task.

Thirdly, I demand how this end can stand with that Decree of God, and that
from Eternity, of giving those that are not Elect up to destruction, for
contempt of means (which he foreseeth) as the Author averreth Page 120. leaving
no way in Gods purpose for the possibility of their Salvation? Now if Christ
propounded this as an end to procure life for them, how is his Will one with
his Fathers?

Fourthly, Concerning the possibility of men's Salvation, I know he fetches it
from the means of life propounded, it is to be had upon condition, Believe and
thou shall be saved. Now if Christ's end, first and chief end, was this, that
man might have life, and miss of it upon unbeleefe, and so be dealt withal
according to the Tenor of the Gospel, or as the Author says, [That he might
condemn or pardon as he saw ^t, Page 17.] Then it will follow, that
Condemnation will have equal share in his end with Salvation; but this is no
Scripture Language, which says, I came not to condemn the world, Joh. 3.17.

But if this draw more from the Author, I shall answer more, by this it seems
not probable that the maine end viz. the certain and actual enjoyment of
life, was not in Christ for all, and every Son of Adam.

Again, Let us see whether those intermediate ends which he reckons up
often, can be said to be for all, and every Son of Adam; and herein we must
consider that the satisfaction of Justice, taking away Sin, abolishing Death,
slaying enmity, becoming Lord, these are as means conducing to that end, Now
ends are desired for themselves, means but for the end, certainly then they
run in an even aequipage; those things which are willed but for another thing,
are willed but in the same respect with the other, for time, place, person,
manner, for if he should will the means to more then he wills the end, then
his will must be carried on the means without an end, or stronglier to the
means then to the end, both which are absurd, and so Christ be said to
satisfy his Fathers Justice, to take away Sin, to take away all that stood
cross to our Salvation, to abolish enmity, and that at so dear a rate, when
he never intended to bring in any to partake of life; which cannot, I conceive,
be received but with detriment to Christ in his unspeakeable wisdom. No
neither is Impetration the first end. (As I conceive) the Question may be
asked, Why Christ did Impetrate? And if the Answer be given, it shows plainly
that the Impetration is not the first end: If we say that Christ impetrated,
that it might be applied, the Remonst. do not oppose, but leave it in dubio. An
applicatio fit Impetrationis finis non dispute. Corv. in Mol. Cap. 28. Sect. 8.
Nay, all that he produces against its being the absolute and procise end, is
this, that he intended Faith to come between, Finem istum non esse absolute
intentum sed ita ut ad applicationem requisita est conditio. Which in my
judgment, do not se invicem destruere, for Faith may be requisite and yet the
Application absolutely intended.

I might take every particular by it self, and dwell upon the absurdities that
attend every one of them, but I must not be so voluminous; As when he says,
[The first end was to take away Sin before God for men, Page 16.] And this he
says is for all men, every Son of Adam: both false. It is not the first end,
for may not the Question be asked, Why he takes away Sin from before God? The
Answer, if he will give it, confuteth him, and tells him there is a further
end: neither is it done for all, the expression it self is rude and absurd (to
take away Sin before God for man,) the word (to take away) must have a term
from which, and that must be either man or God: And can he take away Sin from
before God, or from Man, and Man not be possessed of Justification? this is a
mystery; Is it not all one for Sin to be taken away from before God, and for it
not to be found when it is sought for? Jer. 50.20. But is this the privilege
of all, or of Gods reserve only? Let the Author in his next give me one place
and prove it too, where this or any of the attendants is said to be done for
every Son of Adam? Many things I leave to the intelligent Reader to save me a
labor in; I conceive that this consideration of the end of Christ helps him
little, I shall examine if his next do more.

CHAP. IIII. Of the diverse manner of mentioning these ends in Scripture.
HE thinks to extract much from the diverse manner of propounding the Death of
Christ with the ends of it; as in that sometimes more ends are joined,
sometimes one only: Also the Ransom is considered as in it self made, or as
made known, or as men are convinced by it: Also, it is delivered in a different
Person, sometimes in first, sometimes second, sometimes third Chapter: These
are the Allegations of his whole Chapter; but what matter there is in all these
I shall Examine.

[Sometimes that end of his Death which was for Propitiation, or Ransom, is
coupled with the end which was to testify love, and faithfulness in his
Ministration, propounded for our example, and then such general words, as
[world,] [all men,] are not used, because his Ministration on earth did not
reach to all the world.]

1. This seems to affirm that the Ransom and Ministration of Christ are
distinct ends and not coincident, which I see not clear, seeing his giving
life a Ransom is the greatest piece of Service that he did for us, in doing
this he did all: And this was not only one, but the greatest piece of his
Ministration. In that our Savior says, [I came to serve, and give my life a
Ransom for many;] He does not in his latter words discover a distinct end, but
rather it is an explanation of the service of which he speaks; to any eye it
may appear, that to [Serve,] and to [give his life a Ransom,] speak one and
the same thing: Christ's words otherwhere seems to clear it, Luke 22.27.
Having eaten the Supper with his Disciples, taking his last leave, bequeathing
himself to his Cross, he says, (I am as he that serves,) which to me
refers to his Death that was shortly to ensue; And do not the Apostles words
clear it, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. where he makes the Death of Christ, and his being
obedient to the Death of the Cross, the explanation of his being a Servant?
Nay, do not the Authors words clear it: He says, Page 21. [His faithfulness
in Ministration is set down as an example to us to lay down our lives for the
Brethren: 1 John 3.16.] Now what is that which moves us to lay down our lives
for the Brethren all along in Scripture, is it not Christ's laying down his
life? Yea, that Text plainly speaks of it as this Argument to move us; whereby
it appears, that to serve, and to give his life a Ransom, are one, and not
distinct ends, therefore his expresses are not consonant to truth: As if he
testified greater love and faithfulness, or more prevalently moved us to give
our lives for the Brethren, in any thing than in this giving his life a Ransom.

2. Whereas he says, [Such general words are not used because his
Ministration reaches not to all.] This is nobis causam tradere, to give us the
Question: If his giving his life a Ransom was his serving, and his serving
reach not to all, how can the other? where is his Doctrine then? And till he
can prove that his serving, and his giving his life a Ransom are distinct, I
shall accept his position, viz. his Ministration reached not to all the world,
so neither his giving his Life a Ransom.

[Sometimes that end which was for Ransom, is coupled together with that end
which was for sealing the New Testament, which belong not to all men, but his
chosen ones, that have partaken of his heavenly Call; and then such general
words as cannot in any sense be appropriated to some particular, as (world)
(all men) are not used, nor yet such a word as may not be applied so generally,
but so as his word may be applied to either or both senses as occasion shall
serve. Hence Math. 26.28. This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for many for the remission of Sins,]

1. Whereas he speaks of a [New-Testament, and the sealing thereof, which
belongs not to all;] either I understand him not, or he understands not
himself: First, I understand not whether he means not the Testament it
self, or the sealing thereof belongs not to all: for he loves to lurk in
ambiguities, (though but poor shelter,) If he mean the latter, then he
intimates that the Covenant is not sealed to so many as it is made, which is
not probable: If he mean the first, I am yet to seek what he means by the
New Testament; if I understand him, he means nothing but the new Covenant
promised to Abraham, and Adam, and preached by Christ and his Apostles. Now
that Covenant and Testament are Synonimous is clear from Scripture, Heb. 8. in
many places mentions the Old and New Testament, in 8, 9, 10. verses, which
allude to Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. but there the Text runs Covenant, not
Testament; Nay, some Translations read Heb, 8.8, 9, 10. Covenant, some read
Testament; where ever the word Covenant or Testament is used, it is by the word
(...), So Matthew. 26.28. it is (...), And Gal. 4.24. some read it two
Testaments, but it is (...), And in that Text cited by him Heb. 9.14, 15.
Mediator of the New Testament, yet it is (...). So it is clear that Covenant
and Testament is all one. Indeed every Covenant is not a Testament, but in this
case every Covenant that God makes with us is made in Christ, and sealed with
the death of the Covenant-maker, therefore a Testament. And this appears by
his own words, [All which being by Covenant, Page 20.
or as in a Will and Testament plainly recorded, are called the New
Testament.] Now if I understand him in all this, he speaks thus much, that
[The new Covenant belongs not to all, but to his chosen ones;] but herein I
think he does not well understand himself. Now that he thus means appears
by his own words, Page 20. [For such as believe, and so come in to Christ,
there are for them many gracious Promises from Christ and his Father, contained
in one general, viz. Eternal life:] But here he engages the Remonst. against
him, they contend that God does (Novum foedus inire cum onibus,) Enter into a
new treaty with every man; and Corvinus labors in vain when he thus proves,
In Molin, c. 29. Sect. 15.
[Quare quum primum foedus pertinuerit ad omnes quia cum primo homine ut gener
is bumani stirpe fuit initum, oportet ut eadem sit ratio secundi foederis;]
That is, As the first Covenant was to all men, seeing made to the first Man, as
the Stock or Root of all; So it is requisite it should be in the second;] and
it has hitherto been the task of the contra-Remonstrants to prove that the
new Covenant belongs only to some, as appears in that from Gen 3. Ibid.
Molin pleades it to be peculiar, but Corvinus answers, [Merito dicimus esse
generalem quum non probas eam restringi.] But now the Author saves us that
labor, we have it ex confesso; but that I may in a few words present him with
the consequences of this his Assertion, I would have him show me what is the
new Covenant? I know he will say the Promise of eternal life; so he intimates
Page 20 and of those things that conduce to it: Then I ask how this life is
promised, absolutely, or upon condition? I know he will say upon the condition
of Faith, Believe and thou shall be saved: and so all the conducements to
eternal life, and life it self, as Page 20. are by the new Covenant tied to
Faith in Jesus Christ. Now let him tell me, are not all under this Covenant? Do
not all come under the Notion of salvability by virtue of this Covenant,
because they may have life upon believing? Are not all under the Command of
believing? And does the Command go without the Promise? Let him stand to his
own principles, and speak out. Can every man be said to be Reconciled,
Redeemed, Justified, Saved, if they be not under such a Covenant or Promise of
having Actual Reconciliation, Redemption, Justification, Salvation, if they
believe? What is that new Treaty that he speaks of Page 17. into which God
brings all men? Nay, this overthrows his whole Discourse. What Gospel is
there to be preached to them that are not under the Covenant? The Gospel
says, Believe and live; but is this to be preached to them that are not under
the Covenant of having life upon Faith? These if he be fixed to his own
principles are of some force. It is not enough to say that the Covenant belongs
only to Believers, that they shall not perish, for he holds that yet every
particular it is true of them that they shall have life (and it is so promised)
upon believing, as he urges, Page 130. [It is so a truth for mankind, that it
is a truth for them all, that whoever of them believe shall not perish but have
everlasting life.] And what is this but to be under the Covenant? The business
must come to this issue, that there are two new Covenants, the one under which
the Elect is, the other under which the rest are, which will be hard to prove;
or else that all men are under the Covenant of Grace; or thirdly, that God has
not entered into a new Covenant and Treaty by Christ with every man, according
to which God may confer and deny life, both which latter are dissonant to
himself, and destructive to his cause: This I say, not to oppose his
Assertion, viz. [That the New Testament belongs not to all:] If it had not been
his, it should have been mine; But I herein discover, when a man understands
not himself, how soon he may cut his throat with his own knife, and strangle
his opinion with his own words.

2. Whereas he says, [Belong not to all, but to his chosen ones] he is here so
confused and indistinct, because his chosen ones may be all men in the Authors
Divinity, for he makes an Election to Service, with which all are Elected to
Service, Page 118.

3. Whereas he explaineth (Chosen ones) by [partaking of the heavenly Call.]
Herein he needs an Interpreter, Page 9.
because in many places of his Discourse he contendeth for this, that all men
partake of the heavenly Call, as [Thus he calls in some degree or other all the
Sons of men;] And to this end, that they might be convinced of Sin: Page 23.
There is a difference between partaking of the Call, and the efficacy thereof,
in being by it wrought upon to believe; the latter I confess he says is not
to all, but the first is, if he divine right; Therefore for him to say, [To his
chosen ones that partake of his heavenly Call,] unless he will have all to be
chosen, involveth himself, and if he will, he does no less for to say (it
belongs not to all, but to his chosen ones, and those that partake of the
heavenly Call,) which may take in (all) is absurd: But any may see he seeks so
to temper his Pen, that his Reader may mould him either way according to his
own temper, but this becomes impostors rather then those that pretend they
preach Christ.

4. Whereas he says, [And then such general words as (world,) (all men,)
which cannot be (in any sense) applied to some only, are not used;] wherein he
tacitly implies that the words [World,] [All men,] are never taken for some
only; The proper decision of which will fall in another place; therefore I
shall only put him in mind of his own words, Page 30. where he says, [The
Phrase (All men) is used so, as it cannot be meant of Gods people, good men,
hearers of the Word, etc. nor the Elect of God.] Certainly then if all the
Elect of God, and all Believers, and Hearers of the Word of God be excluded,
this Phrase is to be meant but of some: and now his task will be to give a
good Reason why the words (All men,) may not mean, all the Good, excluding the
Bad, as well as all the Bad, excluding the Good; the propriety of Language is
indifferent to either; Nay, shame will not suffer him to prevaricate, but he
confesses Page 31. [That there is an All of upright and Believers,] as 1 Cor.
4.5. Every man shall have praise of God, as well as an All of Bad, 2 These. 2.3.
So that I need not oppose him in his Assertion, he does it effectually for me
himself.

5. Whereas he says, [He so speaks as the words may be taken in either or
both senses, as occasion shall serve,] Is an affirmation concerning Scripture
beyond all president, that one word (like Rebecca her womb) should contain in
the bowels of it two such different senses as (All,) and (but some only,) and
that to serve two Sentences, as men shall refer it to one or the other, this is
to make his own Calumny that he groundlesly laid on our backs to be his own
burden: that is, to make the Word of God like the Heathen Oracles, true
whether way soever we take them; neither is there any need in this place so to
torture the words of Scripture, for both Phrases, viz. (Blood in the
New Testament,) and [Shed for Remission of Sins,] will both agree in (many)
taken in one sense, and that taken as signifying only some. But whether all
this tends, it is not easy to determine, but I conjecture it is this, to
prove that where he speaks of Christ Death, and uses this word (Many) it is
no argument against him, because (All) are (Many,) and the word (Many) may
comprehend (All) Thus the Remonst, speak, and I suppose he intends: but then
he must know this is brought but as a probable Argument, that seeing the
Scripture says (All,) sometimes (Many;) it is probable that (All) is expounded
by (Many,) and herein it is still in force, that seeing more places may be
brought (yet hundreds to one) where the word Many excludes All, then where it
takes in All, we are to follow most frequent acceptance of Scripture unless
we find some let from other Scriptures, or the Analogy of Faith.

Again, He urges something from the various consideration of the Ransom, thus.

1. [As made in Christ with for God men, without the knowledge of men.

2. As made known in the Gospel, that they may be convinced.

3. As men thereby wrought upon to receive him, and submit to him, and believe
on him; the two first are common and general, the last peculiar not common.]

Here we have many words to little purpose; in this Controversy ransom was
never yet taken in any other sense then as made in Christ, and made known in
the Gospel: It was never yet questioned whether the Application of it was
common, or whether every man was wrought upon by the Gospel to receive him,
therefore he might have reserved his decision in these words, [The last is
peculiar not common,] till it had been seasonable. And this he says is common
to all, and every Son of Adam, but he proves it not.

2. As for the second, viz. (The making of it known in the Gospel,) he
affirms it to be general, and done to every Son of Adam, but he produces
not one Text that proves it: Yea, he elsewhere affirms, that every man has
so much light as that he may be thereby convinced, because he has not
believed, as P. 23. But this wants its proof from the Word of God:
Certainly if some shall be judged without the Law, some shall be judged
without the Gospel, for those that are judged without Law, are judged merely
by the light of Nature, but such are judged without Gospel, for Nature merely
so, discovers no Gospel, and why those that never knew it a duty to believe,
can be said to have so much light as to convince them for not believing, I see
not. Certainly that which does not convince me that it is my duty to believe,
cannot convince me it is my Sin not to believe; the Remonst. durst not rise so
high as to say that every man had so much light; Arm. in Pork. 158, 159.
but thus, he either has or might have had, if he had used naturals well, or
had it not been for their Predecessors that refused Grace and supernatural
Light, as [Causa cur Deus non omnibus and singulis hominibus Christum revelet,
haec est, quod parents illorum verbum Evangelii repudiaverunt.] And if instead
of proving the third not to be common, (which he undertaketh) he had proved the
former two to be common to, and for every man, he had better quit himself. As
for that Expression, [He shall so far see the travel of his Soul,] argues
that either he sees not some part of his travel, because he inserts that
diminutive (so far;) or else that Christ in his bitter Passion traveled with
nothing but this, that men might be convinced that Christ is their Lord, either
in Salvation or Condemnation: both which are absurd. Now by this distinction he
has gotten nothing, because that the hearts of all men are wrought on by the
Gospel to receive Christ, no man has said: and that the Ransom was made in
Christ with God for every man, or discovered to every man and Son of Adam, no
man (that I know of) ever yet proved.

Having dispatched a twofold diversity, he comes to third, and more elaborate,
but as little successful, and that is from the diversity of Person, and he
says thus.

[The Ransom in himself [as the Creation of men by Christ] is mentioned
diversely in respect of Person.] Herein I may not pass by his fallacious
jumbling together Creation and Redemption, which are not of equal latitude and
extent, which I should not have noted here (seeing there is a particular
Chapter for it,) but that his fallacy herein may dazzle the eyes of his
non-discerning Readers, therefore I only now say thus much, that betwixt
Creation and Redemption there is no proportion nor Argument validly drawn,
either Negative or Affirmative; as if all those were Redeemed that were
created; Certainly if Creation should be the measure of Redemption, then all
Creatures should be Redeemed, yea devils; and those Creatures that had the
pre-eminence in the Creation should have it also in Redemption, but we see it
in both contrary, in that the fallen Angels are not redeemed at all; and these
two [He has Created all things, Col. 1.16.] and [He has reconciled all
things.] Ver. 20. Are not of the same latitude: For take the latter in the
largest sense you can desire, yet it will come short of the former; in that he
created all things, yea Thrones, Principallities, even Angels that fell: but no
Scripture says that he reconciled them. Besides whom he Reconciled he dyed
for; but it is no Scripture Language to say that he dyed for all things, or for
all that he Created, but only for man, in so much as he assumed no other but
man's nature; of this more in its place, only this I desire, that he will stand
to his principles, Page 31. [That the matter treated of alters the sense of the
same words,] and so from Creation to Redemption, the Argument will not follow;
this being considered I proceed.

[Sometimes in the first Person singular, concerning the speaker, Gal. 1.20.
Who gave himself for me. Job 10.8. Thy hands have made me; no reasonable
understanding can infer hence, therefore no other.] The drift of this is to
take away the force of those places, Joh. 10. I lay down my life for my
sheep. Ephesians. 5.25. Gave himself for his Church; and this Allegation is
framed to his hand in the Conference at Hague, where the Remonst. seeking to
evade such Texts, answer thus, true, [Mortum est pro ovibus, pro populo, Co^
Hog. 1^
anne ergo pro solis ovibus, pro solo populo? sic Gal. 2.20. Paulus dixit
Christus tradidit se pro me, anne licebit concludere ergo pro nemine
praeterea?] That is, [Christ dyed for his Sheep, for his People, but will it
therefore follow that he dyed for his Sheep and People only? so Paul says Gal.
2.20. Christ gave himself for me, will it follow that he gave himself for
none besides?] And is not this the current in which the Author runs? But let
the Author know that still those Texts are valid to prove that Christ dyed for
his Sheep only, for we must know there is a difference betwixt Individuals, and
a species or kind in this way of arguing, as when we say, [Petrus est
rationalis,] and when we say, [homo est rationalis:] It is one thing to say [
Peter is rational,] another to say [Man is rationall] In the first, it is not
Peter only, but in the other, it is man only; to instance in that Text Gal.
2.20. he says, I am Crucified with Christ, and I live by Faith in the Son of
God, none will infer hence, that only Paul was, and did so; but if he had
said, Believers are Crucified with Christ, and live by Faith, then I hope it is
as valid as if he had said Believers only. Now Peter is rational because a
man, and Rationality agrees first to man, and then to Peter because a man, so
though not Peter only, yet Man only is rational: So Paul is redeemed because a
Sheep, but being Redeemed, agrees first to the Sheep of Christ, then to Paul
being one of them: Therefore though not Paul only, yet for his Sheep only, and
this place contradicts it not. And if the Authors understanding had been but
of a reasonable size he might have seen this.

[Sometimes in the first Person Plural, where the Speaker couples those he
speaks to with himself, as he delivered him up for us all, Romans 8, 31.
Propitiation for our Sins. 1 John 2.1. No right reasoning can infer hence,
therefore no other.] To this I answer, That seeing the Apostles in their
particular Epistles wrote to particular Believers, as in Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, those Expressions do not argue that he gave himself for no other
Believers then those to whom he wrote, yet herein he touches not the force of
the fore alleged places: for (this notwithstanding) yet those places speaking
of his dying for his Sheep which comprehends all Believers, Such places may
be understood as if he had said for his Sheep only. I remember not where his
cited Texts are produced by us as arguments on our side; yet there is more in
them then he discovers or refelleth: As for that Text Romans 8.32. It is plain
he wrote to Believers, and Saints, Romans 1.7. Now the Question is, whether he
speak those things of them as (Men,) or as Believers? As to instance, [If God
be for us who can be against us?] Ver. 31. Let the Author tell me, Is it the
Interrogation of every man or men, or of Believers as so? this will decide it,
to consider, whether the first words [If God be one our side] be to be taken
Hypothetically, or Categorically? It cannot be taken Hypothetically, only upon
supposition, if God be on our side who is against us: For thus Reprobate men,
desperate devils, condemned sinners, may say, if God were on our side who could
be against us? but certainly there is more in the Apostles words then what the
Devils may say; no certainly the words are to be meant as affirming that God
was for them, therefore certainly concluding none could be against them, and
for this I find the authority of a strong Remonst. and one of our Authors
Judgment, who calls these Texts [Impenetrabile sanctorum scutum] an
impregnable shield of Saints, not men as men, ^orn. a lap. ^n locum.
and he gives the sense thus, [Quis daemonum vel hominum insurgat ut nostram
impediat salutem, cum Deus eam cu^at per aeternam praedestinationis propositum,
vocationem, justificationem and glorificationem suam.] But if he did not so
say, the Text does evince it; seeing all the after particulars, as Ver. 32, 33,
34. run all positively, he has done so and so, therefore who shall condemn:
Now let us consider, can Believers, or all men generally say, as Verse. 31, 32,
33, 34. who can be against us? Who shall lay any thing to our charge? who shall
condeme? What shall separate? we are more then Conquerours over all those;
Certainly only Believers and (qua tales) can draw such conclusions.

2. Verse 32. says, [Shall he not much more give us all things,] which
contain all things necessary to Salvation, and Salvation it self; But is this
the deduct that every man may make, [If he spared not his own Son, much more
shall he not give us all things?] Their own principles admit it not; therefore
it is clear that when he says, He gave him up for (us,) much more will he
give (us) all things with him, he means himself, and them to whom he wrote,
as Believers, so as to take in all Believers, and (as Believers,) and it must
follow, that such things do agree omnibus, yet solis, to all, yet only to
Believers.

3. If he had taken the words (us) in the former verses, in such a Latitude as
that it might take in every man, and Son of Adam, Certainly then his query in
the 33. ver. [Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?] had been
short of his purpose, and very impertinent; from that it is clear, that by
(us) he means Believers, (for so Elect and Believers are terms Convertible,
that is Elect, and such as are, or shall be Believers, are one in
signification;) and he seems not to stay his Expresses in their Persons, but
rather their condition and qualification, which being considered, let us come
to right reasoning, which the Author pleads much for, but affords as little
as may be; Let but the Author take any Expression where he uses the word (us)
from the 31. to the 34. Verse, or elsewhere in the Chapter, for it is often
repeated, and tell we whether the Apostle does not plainly define (not how
many, but) what kind of men they are, for whom such things are done, and of
whom such things were spoken, as ^o instance, [What shall we say then?] that
indeed does not number the Individuals, but it defines the condition, and that
with a discrimination, viz. none but Believers, and they all may make such
conclusions. So in this, [God being for us who can be against us?] This argues
not that only them to whom he wrote, were out of the verge of any adverse
thing, it clearly affirms that only Believers are in such a condition as
nothing shall prevail against them. So in this, [He delivered him up for us
all.] This denotes not the precise number, nor argues that he was given up
only for them to whom he wrote being Romans, but thus far it is firm that he
was given up for Believers only, and this suffices us. So that when the Author
says, [No right reasoning can infer hence therefore no other,] It is true if
he mean no other Individuals, for he was so given up for them, as that he was
also for all other Believers; but right reasoning may infer that he was given
up for none other but Believers; and where is the obliquity of this reasoning?

[Sometimes in the second Person with personal Application, as my Blood which
is shed for you, Luke 22.20. 1 Pet. 1.18 19, etc. Reason must yield, such
sayings show not how many he redeemed.] This is of the same nature with the
former, therefore the same answer is to be given; Th^se Texts show not the
precise number, but the condition of them that are so redeemed, as that Text, 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. [Ye were redeemed from vain conversation,] none ever said that
this Text does show the number of them that were redeemed from vain
conversations, for many Gentiles were to whom he wrote not; neither has any
denied but that this limiteth the condition, that only Believers are Redeemed
from vain Conversations, as in the next verse, [And he was manifested in the
last times for you.] It does not show for how many, but yet it does for whom he
was revealed, viz. Believers, as appears in the next words, [Who by him
believe in God,] hereby any may see through those mists which he casts before
clear truths.

[Sometime in the third Person with special Application, and that sometimes to
the better part, as Joh. 10.15. (I lay down my life for my Sheep,) Sometimes to
the worse part, as 1 Cor. 8.11. (the weak brother for whom Christ dyed,) no
sober mind will say that any of these alone resolve the Question for how many
Christ dyed.]

1. For his expresses, I demand why he puts a weak Brother in the number of
the worse part? methinkes the name of Brother (though weak) should have got
him a place in the better rank.

2. As for his assertion, [No sober mind will say that any of these alone show
for how many he dyed [It is weak and impertinent, we never yet attempted to
define the precise number, but the condition of them for whom he dyed, we say
only for Believers, we meddle not for how many Believers, or Sheep he dyed.
Now if he deny that the Text, Joh. 10.15. shows for whom only he dyed, he has
drunk so deep in Arminius his Cup, that he is not sober yet; and to clear
it, let us view expressions of the like nature, that in this we may follow the
genious of Scripture; Romans 4.11. Abraham is there called the Father of them
that believe. Now does not this denote that he is the father of none else? as
that Phrase (of being Father) is there meant, we must so grant it, if we
compare it with Gal. 3.7.29. And in that it says he is the Father of them that
believe, it is exclusive of such as believe not.

[ John 3.16. He sent his Son that those that believe might not perish but have
everlasting life.] Let the Author tell me, does not this Text so confine
eternal life to Believers, as that none but Believers shall have it?

[ Ezekiel. 34.11. I will search my Sheep and bind them up, and bring them
again,] does not this so confine these to his Sheep as that he will do them to
none else?

[ Matthew. 25.33. He sets his Sheep on his right hand.] Is not this clear
that he sets none but his Sheep on the right hand? Nay, in this Chapter,
take any verse or part of a verse where the word Sheep is, where they are said
to do any thing for him, or Christ to do any thing for them, and tell me if
such be not exclusive of all other, as firmly as if the word (only) had been
expressed; as my Sheep here my voice; He calls his shape by name; his sheep
follow him; I know my sheep; does not all this speak thus much, that none but
Sheep hear his voice, he calls none by name and leads them out but Sheep,
none but Sheep follow him, he knows none but Sheep? for of others he says, I
know you not, nay, in that Phrase, [The good Shepherd lays down his life
for his Sheep] does it not exclude all that are not his Sheep? does any
Shepherd venture his life in the behalf of the Woolfe, or any Sheep that is
not under his charge? Now seeing this Phrase runs so in so many places in
that Chapter, I say that no sober mind will say that just in this verse it
should admit such a latitude as that he may be there said to lay down for any
but his Sheep, such expressions in Scripture have Materiam necessariam, and
(...), the terms are convertible. But that I may clear it fully, in the same
section there is something that will seem repugnant to this, and the objection
may be thus framed.

[It cannot be meant so as if Christ dyed for none but his Sheep, because the
Scripture says, he dyed for some that may perish, 1 Cor. 8.11. etc. And thus
the Arminians in the Conference at Hague object, Non pro ovibus solis, quia
Paulus dicit pro me se tradidit, sed non pro illo solo, ac Scriptura testatur
Christum mortuum pro eo cui contingit perdi and qui velox judicium sibi
accersunt. 1 Cor. 8.11. 2 Pet. 2.2.] Which though it be unworthy of such
objectours, because the argument is weak according to their own principles;
for Christ may dye for his Sheep only, and yet dye for them that may perish,
because with them this is truth, that they that are sheep may perish if
Corvinus be right, In Molin. c. 21. Sect. 6.
when he says, [Justificati possunt reprobari,] But it is worthy an Answer
from us because we hold no such thing; but this Obiter.

To answer to 1 Cor. 8.11. whence our Author would prove that our weak may
perish for whom Christ dyed.

1. Was it so, this would not disprove that Christ dyed for his Sheep only,
only it would aver that some for whom Christ dyed may perish; for certainly
in that he calls him here a Brother, he grants him a Sheep, he should have
produced a place that he dyed for some that are not sheep.

2. But no such things follow from this Text, it questions, Shall he perish?
And commands, Let him not perish, but it affirms nothing that he may or may
not. Now we must be wary what Enunciatives we deduce from Intergatories or
Mandatories: Suppose the Text had gone further,, even to an affirmation, and
said, [Thou have caused him to perish for whom Christ dyed,] this would not
argue any effect to be transient into the Patient, but to be with the Agent as
if it had been done, as Heb. 6.6. [Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son
of God afresh:] This argues no re-action upon the body of Christ in heaven;
but that a fresh they brought the guilt of that Act upon them, in that they
testify they would crucify if opportunity served. So Matthew 5.28. He that
looks on a woman to lust (...) he has committed adultery, this does not
argue any actual deflouring, this cannot be merely by the eye of another, that
would be a man's or woman's inevitable misery to be involved in the guilt of
another obliquity, yielding neither direct nor indirect concurence: But it
means for his part he has done that which is before God Adultery, having
gone so far in the fact as opportunity will give leave; so in this case
(destroy not thy Brother,) argues not that a Brother may perish Actually, but
that a man by offensive and scandalous walking may bring the guilt of a
brothers destruction on him, because such an one that will needlessly be a
scandal to his Brother, does not much care though his Brother perish, As for
that Text, 2 Pet. 2.1. I might produce many expositions that are given to it,
and all with great probability, any of which show the weakness of his
reasoning: but herein I am no way engaged thereto. If our Author will but
consider that the question is, whether Christ purchased life and Salvation for
his Sheep only? we affirm it, he denies it upon this ground, because he
(bought) others; but this is a weak Inference, he bought them, therefore he
purchased Eternal life for them: Emption does no way suppose Redemption, he
may buy them into his dispose and be their Lord, and never intend eternal life
for them.

[Sometimes in the third Person general without any application restraining,
as to be the Savior of the world: 1 John 4.14. He dyed for all: 2 Cor. 5.14,
15. And such sayings fully answer the Question, for how many Christ dyed; the
like may be said, how many have sinned, shall dye, rise again.] That such
general terms are used I grant, that therein it is shows for whom, (when he
says for how many, I think he mistaketh, for from thence he cannot give me
the number) I grant, but that there is a further thing contained in these
generals than was in the former, I deny, the Apostles (All) and yet
expressions less general are equipollent as I have shown, and after shall.
And whereas he croudes that expression, [He has dyed for all,] among these,
All have sinned, All must dye, All must rise, as if the word All must have the
same signification in all them, is fallacious, and against his own Judgment
he says that the same Phrase used about diverse things has not the same sense,
so Page 31. [The Scripture speaking on diverse occasions, of diverse Persons, to
diverse purposes, etc. Take the words (All men,) (Every man,) in a scanter or
larger sense*] he must not then blame us if we swallow not that down, which he
has not the immodesty to own, though much advantageous to his cause. And
whereas he says, [These general places are not to be opposed by those with
restrictive application.] True, but they are to be explained by them, that they
are expositours one of another; we need not doubt but the general cannot
expound particulars, but the particulars may the general, and that 1 Timothy 2.6.
Heb. 2.9. speak generally I grant, but that they settle us in the sense
without comparing with other places I question: So in all this what he has
strengthened himself, or weakened us, let any judge.

CHAP. V. Of diverse ways of propounding the Death of Christ in Scripture, and
how here in 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9.
HE begins with such ways of propounding, as (he says) do not show for how
many Christ dyed.

1. [Sometimes for an example to Believers to follow in love, and as a motive
thereto, Ephesians. 5.1, 2.] This is a truth, but then let us consider the manner of
propounding, when the Apostle propounds the duty of love, we may assure our
selves he uses the most forcible arguments, and that would be the great love
of God, for certain it is, the greater the love of God appears to us, the
more forcible argument it is to love others; but in our Authors judgment, the
love of God is then magnified when it appears to be to all and every man;
therefore certainly the Apostle would have used this argument if it had been
truth that Christ gave himself for every Son of Adam. When our Savior
exhorts to love of Enemies (though a sufficient argument he might have had
from the love of God to some being enemies) he uses this argument, because in
truth he might, that Gods love is to all, Sun shines on just and unjust, Math
5.44, 45. Then did he magnify the goodness of God: Certainly then if it had
been so that Christ had given himself for all, he would have expressed it, as
the most forcible argument of love.

[If the love be of Believers one to another, then he thus sets it forth, as
having loved us.] True, but then we must consider what kind of love it is that
he exhorts to, it is not such as is common to all with Believers, but a love
peculiar to Believers: Ephesians. 5 1, 2. Walk in love one to another; we are to
bear some degree of love to all as to compassionate them, but inward love of
complacency we owe only to the Saints. Col. 1.4. Now let us consider what is a
suitable argument to move to this, a love that is common to all, or a peculiar
love? Certainly a common love cannot be a fit argument to move to a special
love, it seems consonant to reason, that as it was a peculiar love he exhorted
them to, so it was a peculiar love he exhorted them by. Now if he exhort them
by a peculiar love, and this love is limited to, and expressed by, his giving
himself for them, it cannot be meant of such a giving for them that is common
to all with them.

[If the love be to be enlarged to any relation, as Husband and Wife, then
thus; has loved his Church and given himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25.] True, But
let us consider that the love of Husbands is to be such to their Wives as
excludes love to any other; Then certainly the love by which he moves to it
is such as is to h^s Church and no other: for that love which is common to all
cannot be a fit argument to a peculiar love to our Wives only; he says not,
Husbands love your Wives, for God is good, he loves all, causes Sun to shine
on good and bad, then might a man thus argue.

I must love my Wife as Christ loved his Church: But Christ loved his Church so
as that he loved every man else, therefore I may love my Wife yet so as to love
every woman, what would this open a door unto and follow our Author? and this
cannot be avoided; therefore his giving himself for his Church, being an
argument to move to a special love, cannot be thought to be in common to all.

[If the love be to be exercised to unbeleeving ones, or Adversaries, then it
is thus, he has suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2.18, 24. for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.14,
18.] The Author mistaketh those Texts, they show not our duty to love
Adversaries, but to be obedient to froward Masters, and to be patient under
sufferings for well-doing, and as an argument he uses Christ's Death for
Sinners, and for them being Sinners. But to take his argument as it is laid
down by him, the love is a general love to all, even enemies. Now certainly
if the thing had been true, he would have used this as an argument, for he dyed
or suffered for all, but this he no where does, no nor by a division which
takes in all, as he dyed for just and unjust, but only unjust; not meaning all
unjust, but them Believers who were unjust when Christ dyed for them: Therefore
considering that in such a case it is a most pregnant argument, and he not
using it, it may appear that it is not a truth that Christ gave himself for
all and every man. Under this rank of Scriptures there are few others that
require any answer, they being not places used by us, therefore might be passed
by; but one place or two I shall mention.

[1 Cor 8.11, 13.] Which place, he says, contains an argument to make love
operative to Brethren. But let us consider the expression: If the Authors
Doctrine had been truth, certain it would have run thus, [Shall a man perish
for whom Christ dyed?] Because he says that Christ dyed for all men as men:
But he says, [shall a Brother perish for whom Christ dyed?] As if he dyed for
none but such as come under the notion of Brother.

[2. Cor. 5.14.] Which he says is an argument to make love operative to all
men, but therein he is deceived, there is no such duty commanded in that Text.
But the Author discovers his ingenuity in that he brings this Text in the
number of them that do not show how many he dyed for, when they say he dyed for
all, and in other places is produced as a proof for his first Redemption for
all and every man; one more there is of some consequence.

[Sometimes it is propounded to such as are overseers of Congregations, as to
admonish them to keep this Doctrine firmly, and teach it. 1 Timothy 1.11.15. To
provoke them to watchfulness over them. Act. 20.28. To constancy in
sufferings. 2 Timothy 3.8. But these show not how many he dyed for.]

1. As for that Text, I wonder that he should say that that place, 1 Timothy 1.15.
shows not how many he dyed for, what was the reason that in Page 3. he brings
this place to prove the first Redemption for all and every one? And that place
that proves that, certainly shows for how many he dyed, for he dyed not for
more then All, however the Author has lost his memory in the crowd of Notions.

2. For that Text Act. 20.28. We must first consider that this is a special
and peculiar care that the Apostle exhorts to, and the arguments by which he
moves is twofold: First, Their Charge, they were made overseers. Secondly,
Christ's Purchase, he purchased them with his own Blood. Now clear it is that
that care the Apostle exhorts them to was a peculiar care, and that first
argument from their Charge was a peculiar and special Charge, and so must the
second be also of Christ's Purchase, for still I ground my reason upon this,
[Aequalis acquisitio non potest esse fundamentum inaequalis curae.] What reason
can be shown why the Death of Christ, and the Purchase with his Blood, can be
given as an argument to move the Elders to a peculiar care over the slocke
above others, if he equally purchased others with them. It is not congruous
with Scripture to give such Heterogenious arguments; when God commanded not to
shed the blood of men, he says not because he is a Creature, for this being
common with other Creatures moves no more to the care of man's life, then to
care for any Creatures life; But thus, for he is the Image of God, and this is
peculiar to man from other Creatures. Let the Author search the Scripture, and
see whether it gives any argument from a common thing to move to a special
duty and faithfulness over such and such. Till I hear further I shall
conclude that Christ purchased none but the Flock.

So that these places produced by him, although they do not define how many he
dyed for, yet they clearly say that he did not dye for all, and by clear and
strong intimation aver that he did not give himself for every man in the
world.

A second sort of ways of propounding follows, wherein he says, that we have
it shown for how many Christ dyed, as follows,

[Sometimes it is laid down as the foundation laid to offer life, and bring in
such as knew it not, to believe. Joh. 1.29. and 3.16, 17. Sometime to such as
believe, to show what Gospel was preached among them, 1 John 4.14, etc. To be
a ground of praise for such as believe not. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
And here shall we find the question resolved how many he dyed for.]

Whereas he says, [It is propounded as a ground to offer life, and bring in
men to believe,] He seems to aver these three things, all which want truth,
however probation.

1. That wheresoever the Death of Christ is propounded as a ground of offering
life, it is propounded in general terms, as All men, Every man, The world:
But this is false, for it is laid down as a ground of Faith and offering life,
Joh. 3.16, 17. 1 Timothy 1.15. Math. 1.21. Joh. 11.51. In all these it is as
plainly propounded for a ground of offering life as any he can produce, yet not
in general terms.

2. That where it is propounded in general terms, it is propounded as a
ground of Faith and offering life: but this is false, for in 1 Timothy 2.6. there
it is in general terms, but it not to offer life, or beget Faith, but to move
Believers to love, and to exercise it in praise for all men: as Ver. 1, 2.

3. That there is no ground to offer life unless it be propounded in general
terms: but this is false, for that in Joh. 3.16. is a firm ground of offering
life, and the marrow of the Gospel, yet no general terms: Though this be
true, that Christ purchased life and Salvation but for some of all sorts, yet
this is ground enough of offering life to all of all sorts, and to admonish
every man to repent.

So for the rest much may be said to them, but in all there is not the least
beam of light added to the Truth, multitude of words serve only to bleare the
eyes of his Reader, and this advantage he has by them, the Truth has none;
and clear it is that those Texts 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. are to be explained by
places that are propounded to the same end, which do not at all necessitate
them to be taken in that general seace.

CHAP. VI. Of the differences of the extent of the same word, when spoken of
and by men, and when of and by God, also when the opposition is betwixt men and
men, and when betwixt God and men.
THe end of the Author in this Chap. (as I conceive) is this: Seeing the Seat
of much Controversy is placed in these words (All,) (Every,) (World,) urged in
all places cited by them, to be taken in an absolute general sense, taking in
all the Individualls in the world: But by us they are urged to have a limited
sense, as we instance in many Scriptures, wherein they cannot be taken so
largely; His intent therefore is to show the weakness of our Allegations, and
that our places are not to be rules for the expounding of theirs because ours
are spoken of and by men, theirs of and by God; but how he quits himself
herein I shall in few words examine. Now wherein we both agree is as follows:

[That the same words in diverse Sentences may differ much in signification and
extent, and yet by the Sentence the signification will clearly appear; thus he
says Page 28.] This I acknowledge and shall improve, for then,

1. Why does the Author say that (All,) when spoken of Creation, and when of
Redemption, must be taken in the same sense and latitude, will he not be so
far fixed to his principles as to suffer the diverse matter treated of to
alter the signification of the same word?

2. It deserves examination, whether the matter treated of in those places
does suffer the words to be taken in that large sense, which light is to be
fetched from Scriptures, which teaches us that the word (All) when spoken of
Redemption is to to be taken so largely, or else what he says will want proof.

Again we agree in this.

[It is ungodly and unequal to compare God and man, and to make them to be
alike and equal, Isa. 40.13, 14. and mere ungodlines to compare the words,
works, and thoughts of God with man's, and to make them equal and alike, Isa.
55.8, 9.] Thus he urges Page 29.

This I grant: But then I must advertise the Author of two things.

1. It is one thing to compare the beings of man and God together, of which his
quoted Text speaks, which cannot be alike, and another to compare Gods
Actions and words, which may be alike sometimes, as we are commanded to be like
our heavenly father, this last is no such ungodliness as he pretends.

2. There is a difference betwixt man's words as coming from man and opposed to
Gods, and man's words as coming from God and the dictate of his Spirit, of this
second sort it is no ungodliness to compare them to Gods, for they are his
own, which will be useful to us.

Thirdly we further agree in this.

[It is easy for men to understand a difference in the extent of the same word
spoken of and by God, and spoken of and by men, and when the opposition is
betwixt God and men, and when between men and men.] This I grant, for 1. Joh.
2.20. he says (ye know all things,) and Cap. 3.20. he says, (He (viz. God)
knows all things,) no reason will hence conclude that God knows no more
then man knows, or that man is omniscient,

2. It is easy also to know the difference of the same word when spoken of and
by God, if so be it be concerning diverse Actions, as 1 John 2. [The Spirit
shall teach you all things,] and Cap. 3. he says, [He knows all things:] So
Joh. 2.24. [He knows all men:] and Joh. 12.32. [I will draw all men to me;]
No reason will infer that he will draw all, or so many as in that place he is
said to know; so when he is said to create all things, and to reconcile all
things, Col. 1 16.20. both cannot be taken in the same latitude and extent,
because he made the fallen Angels, but he never reconciled them.

3. It is also clear that many places speaks of God, and is spoken by God,
and holy men inspired by God, which is all one as if it was Gods immediate
word, yet those words (All,) etc. cannot bear that large extent, as Matthew.
2.3. Mark. 13.13. Luke 16.16. Ioh. 12.32. Acts 2.44. 1 Cor. 14.5. 2 Cor. 3.2.
Phil. 2.21. Col. 1.28. But what need I fill Paper and trouble the Reader, when
my Adversary confesses that the word (all) is sometimes taken for all upright,
sometimes for all ungodly: certainly then those words when spoken of and by God
are not always to extend themselves to that large sense he pretends, which
being true, shows the weakness of that distinction, and freeth those
following examples from that ignorance, rashness, which he out of greater
ignorance and rashness charge them with.

And still I admit,

[That if a man spoke of a Family, and say this man governes all, it is to be
meant of all in the Family, so of a Corporation and a Kingdom,] But he must
observe this, that so we could not understand unless that the word (All) in
propriety might have a limited sense.

And we grant also, [That if we say God governs all, we mean all in the
World,] But if our Author had gone on to make his matter out he should have
said, [So if we should say Christ redeemed all, we must mean all in the
world.] Herein he would have erred, seeing there is no proportion betwixt his
Gubernation and his Redemption, the difference of matter treated of admits of a
difference in the signification of the same word, according to his own
principles. And herein the Author is at a loss in all this, for all that he
has said in this business is to make way for this, That where God or Christ
is said to Redeem or Ransom all, it must be all and every man in the world;
but this will not be admitted, though when we say God governs all, we mean
all things in the world. Now to proceed to the Texts alleged by us, Luke 2.1.
and 15.1. Ioh. 3.26. Act. 2.8. Where we urge that world, whole world, all men,
every man, are not to be taken in that large and general senses; therefore
without further reason we cannot grant those places alleged by him to be so
general; he thus answers, [It will be found either ignorance or rashness to
compare, and make of like large extent the word (world) in Luke 2.1. and the
word (world) in 1 John 2.2.] But it will be found an ignorant Calumny so to
charge us, we make them not of like large extent, as if he were the
Propitiation for the sins of no more then was in the Roman Empire, or went then
to be taxed, this is absurd to affirm, and a wilful injury to fasten it on
us; but thus we say, that as the word (world) in Luke 2.1. (being spoken by the
Evangelist inspired by God) does not take in all and every Individual in the
world: So neither the word (World) in 1 Ioh. 2.2. though spoken of God and
Christ; and where is the ignorance and rashness in all this?

As for that Text Luke 2.1. [There went a Decree that all the world should be
Taxed.] If it had run thus [that all should be taxed] it had suited with his
expressions, and we might easily apprehend it to extend to no further then all
of the Roman Empire: But this more Emphaticall [that all the world should be
taxed.] Let the Author tell me why, when the Spirit of God is to speak of some
only in the Roman Empire, he should use such a general word as (All the world)
it this Phrase might not be taken in a limited sense even when it is spoken of
and by God. So the (All) that came to Christ, Luke 15.1. we make not of large
and like and equal extent with the (All) he dyed for: 2 Cor. 5.14. As if he
dyed for no more then at that time came to Jesus. But thus we say, that if when
the Evangelist says, All came to him, it takes not in every Individual
Sinner in the world: So when the Apostle says Christ dyed for all, it is not
necessarily taken in that large sense which the Author pretends; and all this
shows no weakness in our cause, the weakness may be easily seen
elsewhere. In the close of this Chapter he descends to show how many ways
those Phrases (All men,) (Every man,) (World,) (Whole world,) are taken: But no
whit pertinent to his business in this Chapter, yet I shall recite them,
happily some may be advantageous to us.

1. [For every one of mankind without exception, as all are gone out of the
way, all have sinned, all must appear before God.] This we grant, but he
cannot prove that the Scripture affirms Christ to have dyed for (All,) or
that those places wherein Christ is said to dye for (All) to be taken in this
sense.

2. [For one another, rich and poor, Believers and unbeleevers.]

If he mean all and every one of those kinds, then it is the same with the
first, and so a vain repetition, and if but some of those kinds, then it is
nothing against us, for that is still a limited sense, and we grant that he
dyed for all; and those places that say Christ dyed for all we willingly grant
them in this sense, whether spoken by men, or by God.

3. [So as not meant of Gods people, good men, Believers.] True, and more
opposite proofs might be produced then he brings; but this is not against
us, or for him, because he himself will not say that Christ dyed for this All,
and so to exclude his People and Believers, or any place so to be taken whether
spoken by man or God.

4. [For all upright, Believers, spiritual men.] Which he does not plainly set
down as a fourth acceptance of the Phrase (All men,) which had been honest
and ingenuous dealing, but he tacitly implies it, as if he would not have
that taken notice of, as any may see Page 31. and he had good reason so to
express himself, for it does not a little help us, for it that place 1 Cor.
4.5. where (All men) is used, does not take in every individual man in the
world, even then when it is spoken of God, it may also be that those places, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. though spoken of Christ, are not taken in that large sense
that he pretends: And then to what issue all his words in this Chapter come,
let the wise judge. Something I find in Page 31, 32. purposely set down to
prevent mistakes and cavills, he says thus, [The Death of Christ as a Ransom
is to be understood of the Death of Christ as risen, and ascended,] Which words
have neither pertinency nor perspicuity, they are of no use at all in this
Chapter, or the business treated of in it, neither can they well be
understood, therefore they no way conduce to prevent mistakes, rather to raise
them: his words are so laid down as that no man can tell whether he make his
Resurrection and Ascension conduce to his Impetration or Purchase, to his
Application, to say, [That it was the Death of Christ as he is risen again and
ascended,] May admit of either, there is a difference betwixt things associated
and coupled in the same Action: The manhood of Christ with his Divinity
suffered, but not the manhood and the Divinity: Faith with Works justified,
but not Faith and Works: So his Death with his Resurrection was the means of
Purchase or Ransom, but hence it does not follow that his Resurrection and
Ascension are themselves means of procurement, or belong to the Impetration;
And this ambiguous way of expression he borrows from the Arminians, as
Corvinus, [Cum amissae salutis Impetratio immediatus fructus est Christi mortis
talis mors omnino intelligitur quae resurrectionem habeat conjunctam.] And that
to serve at need their contradictions in this point, In Molin, cap. 28.438.
sometimes affirming, sometimes denying, that his Resurrection and Ascension
belong to his Impetration: But this I say as formerly, that Resurrection and
Ascension is so conjoined with his Death that it has equal share in the
Impetration, and has no share in the Application, as in every bargain the
bare depositing so much money as is agreed for any where, is no true payment,
but the bringing of it to his house to whom it is paid, or at a place
appointed, so in this, though nothing more was to be paid as price, yet
something else was to be done viz. presenting that Blood as shed, without which
no perfect Impetration, as in the Law there there was as we I ostensio as
mactatio, the showing as the shedding of Blood.

But to return to the Author, either his Resurrection and Ascension belong to
the Impetration, or not? if not? whether tend these words? [His Death,
Resurrection are herein comprehended. Page 32.] Meaning his first Redemption,
and such as is done for all, which in his Language is the Purchase or
procurement, and if it do, whether tend these words? as [For effecting the
other, viz. the second Redemption (which is the Application) he left the world
and went to his Father.] In one part he affirms them to belong to the
Impetratory part, in another to belong to the Applicatory part: and is this to
prevent doubts and cavills. Whoever follows the Author shall run into
uncertainties and contradictions; and as careful as he is to prevent mistakes,
and confident that any that will may understand, yet I dare avouch, that not
any of his admiring Readers can give a good account of him, neither do they
know whereof he affirms, I wish he himself knew better.

In his seventh Chapter, I find the Authors Catechism wherein he has the
privilege of framing both Questions and Answers: But therein there is nothing
but what is spoken of elsewhere, therefore there being nothing worth repeating
I pass over to the next, which is more material.

CHAP. VII. Of the more enlarged proof of the Proposition.
THe Authors scope in this Chapter is to prove his assertion by the place that
Christ stood in, viz. of a public Person, and that as he was to answer his
figure Adam who was a public Person, and his inference is this; As the first
Adam being a public Person stood in the place of every individual man, so
Christ as a Public Person must stand in the room of so many, else he
answers not his Figure, and this is the sum of this Chapter* but how
strongly this argues for him I shall briefly examine. But before he treat of
the Comparison it self he gives us some premises which deserve a little
examination.

1. [The business which we are to view is the work of Redemption wrought by
Jesus, and so of those works from God, outward, and toward his Creatures, and
so not of those works which are in himself, so only in Christ, and for
Christ, as his secret Counsels of Election, etc.]

First, This premise altogether needless, because the business we are about
is Redemption, he need not therefore fear that any would translate the
Controversy to Election.

2. Why would he rather dispute of Gods Acts upon the Creatures, then his Acts
in himself concerning the Creature, does not he know that he works according
to his Will? and does not he say Page 120 121. [Looke how his word declares
him to proceed in his works, such we may be sure was his Purpose and Decree?]
Therefore I think it is as safe to dispute the case whether God decreed to
redeem all. As whether he has Redeemed all by Christ, therefore in this case
this premise is but Empty.

3. His expresses seem to infeere, that only his Decrees or Election are in
Christ, and for Christ; but this untrue, for all spiritual blessings are in
Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. but no Scripture says that Gods Decrees are for Christ, of
this may be seen more fully afterward.

4. What use this premise has in pursuit of that public place Christ stood
in, and proving herefrom that he dyed for all and every man, It is not easy
for any to determine, and I can count it no other but verbosity, that the
Reader from multitude of words might conclude abundance of matter.

2. [However Christ was figured by Adam in the common place he stood in, etc.
yet there is a great difference between those two Adams and their work: the
first was a living soul, might have stood, and all his with him, but no power
to rise and live again, but the second was a quickening Spirit.] This premise
might well have been spared, as I believe he will say in the close. For,

1. I think there is none so blinded with his error, as to think that Christ
and Adam agree in all things as public persons.

2. It being granted, yet I shall improve it to clear these three particulars,
1. Adam and Christ as they are public Persons are not equal and alike in all
things. 2. If we find not the particular things wherein they agree, and wherein
they differ, much may be said in this Point to little purpose. 3. That it
deserves examination, whether the precise number of Individuals be not one
thing, wherein they differ, and whatsoever is brought to prove it must not be
the comparison it self or public place, but something that proves
particularly that they agree in this, or else he says nothing.


3. [There is an abundance in Christ beyond that appearing in the Type, so that
therein Christ comes not short, but goes beyond the Figure in that wherein
it figured him.] This is but one and the same with the former, for in that he
said, they were not alike in some things, he presupposed that he went beyond in
some things, and came short in some things, or both. But,

1. That difference from Romans 5.16. I grant, by one offense sin entered: But
the Pardon is of many offenses; But this gives no light to the deciding of
this Controversy, whether Christ procured Pardon for every Son of Adam or no?

2. As for his second, viz [Christ leads to a better life than Adam by Sin
overthrew,] I cannot assent unto, because Adams integrity and holiness lead
him to an eternal glory in heaven, and Christ leads to no more, and that
Text, Romans 5.17, 19, 20. is abused by him being quoted to this purpose.

3. As for the third, viz. [That the benefit of Christ redounds to more then
the fall of Adam did damnifie,] Lies under a (non liquet,) for I conceive the
Act of Christ as Mediator is only restorative. Now in such an Act how could he
restore more then Adam hurt? None else needed Christ; I conceive by his Texts
alleged that he means the Angels: But that they have any benefit by Christ's
restoring Act, or stood in need of any such, his Scriptures prove not at all,
for how Christ should do Angels good, being in the nature of man, more then he
could do man good in the nature of Angels, I see not: If Christ did Angels
good it was in regard of their stability, but why Christ should have a hand by
way of merit in their stability, more than he should have had in Adams
stability if he had stood, I see not: But I suppose if Adam had not sinned
there had been no place for Christ's merits.

4. It deserves examination, Whether Christ may not come short of his Figure
in some things, as well as exceed in some things, and yet answer his Figure,
and so his coming short in the precise number of Individuals, and yet answer
his Figure well enough? Not now to insist upon the Impertinency to the Authors
present business, I shall examine the Comparison it self, Adam and Christ as
two public Persons, he urges thus:

[The first Adam stood in a public place not singly for himself alone, but
in the room of all mankind, etc. not only as they were in his loins, but by
virtue of the account and work of God, and Covenant between God and Adam, so
what God did to him he did to all mankind: So the second Adam stood in public
place, not for himself alone, or for some, but all mankind, all fallen; else
had he been short of his Figure, whereas God did more honor to Christ then
Adam.] Herein we have the sum of the Argument, what is in it shall appear,
and first I shall show wherein we agree, then wherein we differ, we agree in
these things.

1. That as Adam stood as a publipue person not singly for himself as one, but
for others, so Christ as a public person not for himself but others.

2. As Adam by virtue of his public place stood in the room of so many as
God by virtue of that Covenant betwixt Adam and God appointed he should: So
Christ stood in the room of so many as God appointed in that Covenant betwixt
him and Christ, thus far we agree. But he would have them go one thus far,
that as Adam stood in the room of all that came from his Loins, so Christ as
public person should stand in the room of all that came from the first Adams
Loins, and herein we differ; and as he says, [As Adam stood in the room of
all that came from his Loins, so Christ stood in the room of all that came
from Adams Loins,] making the Analogy to run thus. So we say, That as Adam
stood in the room of all that came from him, so Christ stood in the room of
all that have a being from himself; And is not the Analogy betwixt Christ and
his Figure as clear and full in our Assertion as in his? So that though they
for whom Adam stood, and they for whom Christ stood, differ in the precise
number, yet they agree (in aliquo tertio,) being both the peculiar issue from
their own root, receiving from the one death, the other life.

This he has no way to enervate but by affirming, [That Adam stood in the
room of mankind, not as because they came from his Loins, for so they were
after his fall, and loss therein of the virtue of that public place, but by
virtue of the Account, Covenant, agreement, between him and God,] Wherein we
have his assertion it self, then the reasons to back it: The assertion, viz.
[That Adam stood in the room of mankind, not as or because they came from his
Loins,] This is contrary,

1. To reason, because Adam as a root could propagate neither life nor death,
but to such as came from him and as so; to what can a root communicate either
good or bad sap but to such branches as grow out of it self, by virtue of
which coming out of it, it has a mean to conveying such to it as it has it
self?

2. It is contrary to all men's Judgments both dogmaticall, and polemicall,
they all grant, that Adam was betrusted with no more than came from his Loins,
but the testimony of the Remonst. are the most convincing in this case; I^
Molin c. 9 Sect. 1.
See Corvinus [Ita representavit genus humanum in origin, ut sibi and posteris
simul peccaverit, That he did so represent mankind as in the root, that he
sinned for himself and his Posterity.] See Spiscopius, [Communicatio homini
facta est ut stirpi generis humani, Part. 2. disp. 15. Sect 4.
cujus inobedientia reatus ad omnes posteros lege naturae perveniret, That the
Communication was to man as the root, that the guilt of the Law of nature is
to come to his Posterity.] See Arminius, Disp. private. These 31. Sect. 9
He speaking of that stipulation betwixt Adam and God, says that God betrusted
with Grace for himself, and that those gifts [Ad posteros transmitterentur,]
and that he wanting them, [posteri etiam iis carerent,] and thence concludes
[Hinc accidit ut omnes homines qui naturalter ex ipsis propagandi fuerint morti
obnoxii evaserint,] That is, those that come of them by natural propagation,
all which clearly demonstrate thus much, that Adam as public person conveyed
death to mankind as coming from his Loins, and to so many as come from his
Loins and no more.

3. This assertion is contrary to himself, Page 119. where he says, that [the
first man was made a public person in the room and place of all mankind, to
stand or fall for all that came from him by propagation;] what is this but to
say that he was a public person for them as coming from his Loins? So Page
48.

4. Yet further it apeares that he stood as a public person for them, not as
men, but as such as came from his loins, because though Christ was truly man
yet by virtue of his public place, he neither had profited him if he had
stood, nor did hurt him by his fall, did not convey sin and death to him as to
his posterity, and the reason of this is because he came from him not by
propagation, but supernatural overshadowing, and something in his own words
there as to this purpose, Page 119. [He decreed that all the rest of mankind
should come from this first Adam by propagation, except his Son Christ.] Having
thus examined his assertion, I shall perpend his Reasons and they are weak as
that false.

The first is this, [For so they were after his fall,] arguing, that because
they came from him by propagation after his fall; therefore by his loins:
strong reasoning! If our Author will not have it, because they came from his
loins, it must be because they were mankind: But is not reason as valid
against this? thus, not as mankind, because so they were after his fall? nay,
does it strongly overthrow him, for seeing now after the fall men are his
offspring, and all such, and none but such as come from his Loins are guilty
of sin and death, does it not appear that he was a public person for all
such as came out of his Loins, and under that very notion?

His second reason is this, [It was by virtue of the Covenant between God and
Adam.] A fond and weak reason to oppose these two, and say, [not as coming
from his Loins, but by virtue of the Covenant,] they agree very well: and we
may say it was for them as, or because, they came from his loins, because it was
the agreement betwixt God and Adam, that he stood as a public person for
himself and his Posterity, and such as came from his Loins: If he will
believe any thing Arminius himself, [Ratio faderis a Deo cum hominibus primis
initi haec fuit, ut si ipsi ingratid permonerent, ad posteros dona
transmitterentur, si se indignos facerent, posteri vero ^s carcrent; hinc
accidit ut omnes ex ipsis propagandi, morti obnoxit evaser^nt.] So that now
reduce the Authors assertion to truth, and let us say, That Adam stood as a
public pe^^ in the room of all that came from his Loins, and under that very
notion; And then the Analogy will come to this, even so does Christ the second
Adam stand in the room of all those that come to have a being from him; And if
the Author would have it driven any further he must prove it: Indeed he would
fain conclude as [In this his public place he is not betrusted with fewer
than Adam.] And he would prove by such Arguments, [Else will he come short of
his Figure.] But this is no convincing Argument; for first it is no paradox to
say that in some things Christ comes short of his Figure, for in our Authors
Judgment they are not alike in all things. Now in the rules of proportion, it
is no more discrepant to come short than to exceed: And upon this ground that
can be no reason against his coming short in this particular, because he is to
answer his Figure; for this notwithstanding he may exceed and go beyond, in our
Authors Judgment. Secondly, If he stand in the room of all them that come to
have a being from him, he answers his Figure that stood in the room of all
that had a being from him, although he did not stand in the room of every
Individual, or the precise number of Individualls. And if a part of Scripture
did affirm that unless Christ stood in the room of the precise number of
Individualls, he should come short of his Figure, I should yield to him in this
point, but till then he must give me leave to think this Reason of no force.

A second Reason by which he proves it is this, [God honored Christ more then
Adam.] True, and herein, Adam was a root of Life and Death, life if he had
stood, and death if he fell: But Christ was to convey only life, herein Christ
was more honored than Adam. But the honor of Christ is not placed in the
precise number of them for whom he stood, so as that he that stands in the room
God should honor most, for then in that God honored Christ more than Adam, it
must follow that Christ stood in the place and room of more than Adam lost, or
that came from his Loins, which is absurd.

As for the second particular which he observes in this Similitude betwixt
Adam and Christ, Page 44. is not pertinent or useful to the Controversy at
all, therefore I shall wave it.

A third which he observes is the [Effect and fruit of this public
business, It was public, and concerned all mankind, the disobedience of the
first Adam, overthrew all mankind, so as in and by him they were all deprived
of life, etc. So the obedience of the second Adam has recovered and restored
all mankind, so as in him they are restored, redeemed, and made righteous.] It
matters not what comes from the Authors Pen, but what proceeds from the mouth
of Scripture; but this no Scripture speaks.

1. No Scripture speaks that Adam stood in the room of all mankind, that is,
of every individual man, the Author confesses that he stood not in the room
of Christ.

2. Adams sin lost not every man, he lost not Christ himself, but only such as
came of him by propagation, which Christ did not: both these particulars are
concealed, if not denied, by him, though contrary to himself.

3. No Scripture says, That as Adam lost all that came from his Loins, so
Christ recovered all that came from the first Adams Loins.

4. No Scripture says, that Christ's recovery concerned all that came out of
Adams Loins.

5. The Scripture no where says, that if as Adams loss concerned all that
came from his Loins, so Christ's recovery must concern all that came from
Adams Loins, rather the contrary: 1 Cor. 15. [All dyed in Adam, so in Christ
all shall be made alive.] The All in the former part is Adam, and all that came
from him: but the All in the second part, is not all that came from the first,
but the second Adam, Verse 23. First Christ, and then Christ's at his coming. So
that what is herein spoken the Author speaks, but not Scripture; he produces
some places, Rom 3.24, 22. where it says, All are justified, and the
righteousness of God on (All) but herein he diabolically clippes the Text
wilfully, leaves out that which would decide the Controversy, it is not all
that came from Adams Loins, but all that believe. So Romans 5.18. [Free gift
came on all men to Justification of life.] True, but it is on the All that is
mentioned Cap. 3.22, 24. as may appear by the 17. verse, it says, not on all
Adams Sons, or all that came from Adams Loins.

A fourth particular which he observes from this comparison is this, in regard
of the virtue and operation of this public business, thus; [When any comes
to have a being from the first Adam, they do necessarily in that participation
of his nature partake of the guilt, etc. So when any do come by a spiritual
birth to have a being in Christ, in that participation, etc. He now freely
imputes it to them,] This being well considered will show his weakness, and
the truth at once: For,

1. How is it that every man in and by partaking of Adams nature, and coming
from him, partaketh of the guilt, if he stood not as a public for mankind as
coming from his Loins, which he even now denied?

2. I demand, Why those that come to have a being from the first Adam partake
of his guilt and misery, is it not because he stood in their room? And is it
upon this ground, that as it was intended in his standing in public, so it
takes place in them that partake of his nature: And as they that come to
partake of his nature come to partake of his sin, because he stood in the room
of them that should partake of his Nature; So must it not A pari follow, if a
reason being demanded why them that have a being from Christ come to partake of
his righteousness? Is it not to be answered, because he stood a public
person for them? What is this but to aver, that as Adam stood a public
person for all his: So did Christ for all his, and all that were to have a
being from him. Which falls short of what the Author intends, and what he
has obtained in all this pursuance of this Comparison, only thus much
appears, that herein they agreed, both conveyed their proper influence to them
that came of them, but they did both to the precise number of Individuals, he
proves not in one word of his Discourse, nor one place of Scripture. And all
this, and all that which follows being of the same stamp with what went
before, rises not so high, as to prove that Christ obtained life for all that
came from the first Adams Loins.

CHAP. VIII. Of the joint mention of Creation, and Redemption by Christ.
HIs scope in this Chapter, is to prove his Assertion by the joint mention of
Creation and Redemption, thence inferring they are of equal extent, because
mentioned together, and thus urges, [His great love appears to mankind, in
that when Adam lost himself, and all mankind, etc. He would not suffer him to
perish in his death, etc. but would work a recovery for him what ever it cost
him.] Thus in the beginning of the Gospel he puts in this, [All things were
Created by him, and that light was the life of men; what can be less seen
than this,

1. That God made the Creatures for man, yea so loved him that though he was
fallen, yet he would work out a Redemption and procure life.

2. That it is for men that were made by him, as his Creatures, not a part but
the whole.] And herein is the top of the Authors reason in this Chapter: But,

1. How does the Author prove, that either in 3. or 4. verses of John 1. the
Text mentions the work of Redemption, I conceive he cannot prove it to
speak of any thing but Creation: No not verse. 4. [In him was life and that was
the light of men;] speaks only thus much, that in the Word there was life,
even when he made the world, and that life was the light of men, from that life
came the light of men: and till he make this clear, this Text serves him not.

2. Grant this, yet does the joint mention in the Text argue an equality of
exten^ Let us then follow this rule, and say from Verse 10. [The world was made
by him, and the world knew him not.] What does this less infer than this,
That the world that knew him not was as large as the world that was made by
him? but this is false, if any at all in those times knew him, which Scripture
tells us there did. So from Col. 1.16.18. [By him were all things Created, and
he is the head of his Body;] We may say his Body and Headship is as large as
his Creatures, or the things that were Created by him, this would be strange
reasoning, and of the same mould is his inference fron John 1.2, 3, 4. But if
he had minded the Text he might have seen some thing against this Inference,
for speaking of Creation, it says, (All things) were Created by him: but in
the other it says, that light was the life of (Men,) and if it come short in
this, it may come shorter; yet no violence to the joint mention of Creation,
and Redemption.

Again, Speaking of the recovery of Man, and of the Creatures to their purity
for man's use, etc. he thus speaks,] [And is not all this affirmed in the
Gospel, where Creation and Redemption are mentioned together? Col. 1.16, 20.
And where this general term (All things) is mentioned in Creation, Verse. 16.
Reconciliation, Verse. 20. Preservation, Verse. 17. and what less does this
infer, then that the peace wrought for mankind, is as large as Creation and
Preservation of mankind?] I willingly acknowledge with his Query, that nothing
can be less seen in those places than that; For where it speaks of Creation
it takes in the fallen Angels, and the rest of the Creatures: but where it
speaks of Reconciliation it cannot. For the fallen Angels I know the Author
will say he never did reconcile, and for the rest of the Creatures it is not
suitable to Scripture to say he reconciled them; He created the bruit Beasts,
but Scripture no where said that he reconciled the bruit Creatures, for whom he
reconciled he dyed for, but Scripture says no where that he dyed for bruit
Creatures; he being in the nature of men, dyed only for men, and reconciled
only men, and so from that place it does appear that the (All things) Created,
and the (All things) Reconciled are not of the same latitude and extent.

That which is of moment is in Page 52. as follows, [In that Creation is used
as an Argument to induce us to Faith and Confidence, Job 10.8, 13. and 14.14.
Psalm. 129.16, 17. 1 Pet. 4.16. And coupled with Redemption in this business,
Isay 43.1. Now if he has not wrought a Redemption as large as mankind created
by him, what force can there be in this Argument grounded on his Creation?] The
work of Creation indeed is used as an argument of a threefold duty.

1. Of uprightness, as Psa. 139.16, 17. and this is such as every man may use,
I am his Creature therefore I ought to serve him uprightly.

2. Of prevailing in Prayer to move God to take away his hand, because we are
his Creatures and not able to endure his hand. So Job 10.8, 13. And with this
sometimes God is moved; The extravagancies of their lives, Psalm. 103.9, 14,
15. But this is such an argument as every one cannot urge, as if God was
always moved toward every one that he made, he may do much for his Children
because they are weak Creatures.

3. Of confidence in Gods power, and ability to save, as Isa. 40.9, 10, 11, 12,
etc. And the Argument thus framed, he is as able to save us as to create us:
But all these are nothing to his purpose, because the work of Redemption is
not in any of those places joined with Creation; And I never observed that the
Creation is used as an Argument to persuade us of Gods willingness to save, as
if he would save because he did Create, much less that he makes Creation an
Argument to persuade us of Redemption, as if he would Redeem us because he
Created us.

But where both are joined together, as Isa. 43.1. there is a perfect Argument
both of his Power and Will, but his Power is drawn from the Creation, and his
Will from Redemption. So 1 Pet. 4.19. He is able because Creator, willing
because faithful. Now these are Arguments that his own Children may make, and
to persuade them of his Power to save (which is common) may use the Creation
which is common, and to persuade them of his willingness, which is peculiar,
they use his Redemption, and what of all this? It does not yet infer
Redemption to be as large as Creation, for the All Created goes beyond the
All Redeemed: And the more the Reader observes, the more he shall see of the
Authors weakness herein; force enough is there in Creation to evince Gods
Power, although his Redemption be not so large.

CHAP. IX. Of the constant changeing of the person, when having mentioned the
general, it mentions the especial.
THe Author his scope in this Chapter, is to make it appear that those places
that are produced by us, with applicative restriction, are nothing against him;
being such as treat of the special favors of beleivers, which is not the
business he treats of, and this he does by suggestion to his reader: that
where the Scripture speaks of ransom and redemption wrought in him, it
speaks in general terms, but where it speaks of choice benefits, it
speaks in applicative expressions.

But when I prove these three particulars that follow, this will prove invalid.

1. The Scripture uses not this method in those Scriptures which he urges,
and his Scriptures are these, 2 Cor 5.19, 20, 21. where he says [Reconciling
is to the (world) and that is the redemption wrought in him: and ver. 21. He
was made sin for us; there is the special benefit of believers] wherein he
intimated these two things. 1 That the word (reconciling) in the 19 verse is
meant of Christ's act as Mediator, working out a reconciliation with God for
men, but this is a non probatum. I showed the contrary in the foregoing part of
this discourse: that word both 18 and 19 verses, whether to be understood of
Gods actual reconciling himself to us, not imputing our sins, or his
reconciling us to himself: it is to be meant of the application of his death,
and the choice benefits of beleivers, as is confessed by him elsewhere; yet
this is said to be the (world) that is men living in the world 2. He would have
hence, that ver. 21. [He has made him to be sin for us.] speaks of the
choice benefits of beleivers; this I approve not; but mind him of these two
things. 1. His selfe-contradictions; for when he was treating of the first
redemption, for all, and as wrought in Christ, page 4. he produces this place
to prove it, and here speaking of the second which is applicative to beleivers,
be brings this place to prove it, we may see with what judgment the Author
speaks. 2. This phrase plainly denotes the death of Christ and redemption
wrought by it; for to (die for) and (to be made sin for) are terms of the
same signification, yet this is said to be for (us) and not in general terms.
Nay it is plain, that the first words speak of the death of Christ, and the
second viz. [That we might be made the righteousness of God] denote the
application; but here is no change of person: both in the same; he made him
sin for (us) that (we) etc. Therefore his device on this place falls.

[ Gal. 4.4.5. Speaking of that which he did for all, he says, redeemed them
that were under the Law; but speaking of the especial privileges of Adoption
he changes the person, and says, that we might receive the adoption of
sonnes] wherein he would them, the first words to be without a restriction, and
in general terms; but he does not here, nor elsewhere prove it, in redeeming
them that receive the Adoption; he redeemed them that were under the Law, and
the Text says not that he redeemed all that were under the law.

2. He supposes that adoption is a more special benefit then redemption,
which the Apostle owneth not; he puts as great emphasis and dignity on the one
as the other, both spiritual blessings, with which he blesses Beleivers,
Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. So for the rest of his texts, they are a little invalid:
and let the sober-minded reader view those texts in his sense. He reconcileth
every man, that we might be made the righteousness of God: He redeemed every
man under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. He suffered
for all unjust, that he might bring us to God; is this a probable
interpretation? as if that God, that he might bring some to God, should redeem
and reconcile all, and then view them in our sense. He reconciled us, being men
living in the world, that we might be the righteousness of God in him; he
redeemed us being under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, he
suffered for us being unjust, that he might bring us to God. And now let the
reader judge which is most commodious, and if this second, then any may see
both parts relates to the same persons.

2. The Scripture does not only not follow that method in these cited places,
but also in other places, as John. 10.15. 1 Th^s. 5.8, 9, 10. Where speaking of
his death, he makes it not to run in general terms, but with a restriction.

3. Suppose it was so, yet the one is but to explain the other, as, He has
suffered for the unjust, that is for us unjust, that he might being us to God;
so that his invented method herein, and arguments thereon fall to the ground.

CHAP. X. Of the Consideration of 1 Timothy 2.6.
HEre we are come to the grand Text of difference, where Christ is said to give
himself a [Ransome for all men.] Now to the transaction of this Text, I shall
place the controversy only about the phrase [all men] and the reader may know
that the author would have it meant, [de singulis generum] as to take in every
individual of every kind. We on the other side, would have it meant [de
generibus singulorum,] so as to take in only all the sorts and kinds of men,
and herein stands the controversy about this Text: now how strongly he proves
his interpretation, it is my next task to examine. And herein he has a
threefold field to run in, viz. the force of the words themselves, the
circumstances, the scope of the Text; and he think^s all these and every one of
these is sufficient to evince it, that this Text is to be understood of all
Adams sons. First he says,

[For the sense of the word it self (All,) appears to be meant of Adam and
all his sons, because the opposition is between God and men.]

First, the sense of the word it self cannot carry it to that meaning, because
the Author himself confesses that the word (All) is many ways taken, so as
not to take in every of Adams sons, as page 30. Therefore that word or phrase
that is indifferent to be meant of all and every son of Adam, or of some, or
in a sense not so large, cannot of it self be any convincing argument of its
own signification; in any place the matter treated of must administer light
herein, as the Author confesses page 31. Neither is that plea of the
(opposition betwixt God and men) of any force; by this phrastologie he means
when God is said to do any thing for man, or men, or every man, then it
means all Adams sons; but this is very empty; when Christ is said to draw
all men to him, does it take in every son of Adam, and when 1 Cor. 4.14. The
Apostle says, (all men shall have praise of God) does this take in all Adams
sons? and will he follow his absurd reasoning and say. [Every man, so all
were created by him, every man, and all that have being from Adam, and so his
nature, being men, etc.] with many such frothy expressions as he does. page 55.
How would this wrack the Scripture, and so in page 56. He pursues this phrase
(All men) with the many acceptations of it, but to small purpose he shows that
sometimes it is taken for all Adams sons, and sometimes not, but this is not
wisely inserted here, he affirming that the sense of the word it self will
carry it to all Adams sons. And he gives us some occasion to think that he
has deserted this sense of the word, and has found out another more probable
but less propitious to his doctrine: in the end of page 56. the Reader may
observe he has changed the face of his assertion, and in that the question.
For in page 55. he gives it thus: [this word all, means Adam and all his
sons.] But in page 56. he gives it thus, [All men, 1 Timothy 2.6. principally is
meant of natural men, sinners, sons of Adam, unbeleevers, unregenerate men.
He would hereby insinuate to his unwary reader that we deny, and he is to prove
that Christ gave himself a ransom for natural men, sons of Adam, sinners;
when he and all know that it is his task to prove, and his former assertion
that he gave himself a ransom for All [naturall men,] [All Adams sons,]
[all sinners,] this is no fair dealing, but egregious and unjustifiable
dissimulation, and all those reasons in the former part of page 57. being only
to prove the reversed face of his assertion, are impertinent and not worth
reciting; yet we may see his gross and bold impudence, that after he had
propounded the place, as meant of [naturall men] [sonnes of Adam] [sinners]
without this particle, All, and proves no more: yet page 57. he shamelessely
triumphs. That it appears that the words (All men,) are meant of Adam and
all his sons; it is too frequent with him to carry all in his conclusion, and
nothing in his premises. Having thus fruitlesly traversed the first field of
probation, viz. the sense of the words (All men;) he steps in to the second,
viz. the circumstances of the Text that attend these words; he produces many
circumstances as follows.

[1. It is the Apostle that exhorts Timothy and the Churches to pray for all
men; and they are beleivers that are to pray for all men, and they are others,
even all men, in the third person generally that are to be prayed for, he says
not for some of all sorts, but for all men: and naming but one sort of them, he
says all of them] Indeed I find the Remon. thus arguing, [proquibus orare nos
vult Deus, act. Syno. 323.
pro illis mort^ est Christus; at vult nos orare pro omnibus] that is, for whom
he commands us to pray, for them he gave himself a ransom: but he bids us
pray for all, ergo,] but our Authors words are so confused, that it is far
more difficult to form his words into an argument, then to answer it. But to
this I say, (though it may be questioned,) I shall grant it, that all in the
first verse, for whom we are to pray, is of the same extent with the all, in
ver. 6. for whom Christ was a ransom; this proves not that (All men) ver. 6.
takes in all Adams sons, because the All in ver. 1. does not so. But will
some say, are we not to pray for Adams sons? I answer, in some cases not; but
admit we are, it is a truth, veritate rei, not veritate loci, Scripture
elsewhere happily may; but this place dictateth not thus much to us. And all
that the Author inserteth, I grant; he bids believers to pray for all men, but
this is to repeat, not prove, or however to prove Idem per Idem, as to say,
All men, is to be understood of all Adams sons, because it says all men;
excellent probation. And whereas he says, [It says not of all sorts some, but
all men;] it is unworthy the nameing, so I may say: it says not [all Adams
sons, every individual, but all men] it says neither [of all sorts some]
nor [all of every sort] but uses a phrase that will admit either meaning; now
this is the question which is meant? let the Text determine: it runs not
into Individuals, as [Nero, Caesar,] etc. but into kinds; as [Kings and such as
are in authority under them:] because all sorts were ordained to be useful to
the Church; and he instanceth in Kings, because they have the greatest
influence into the growth of the Gospel; therefore it is probable, that though
he say (All men) he means [All sorts of men.] And whereas he says, [naming
but one sort, he expressly says all of them,] it is an express falsity; he
says not for (All Kings) but all such as are in authority under them: that is,
all degrees or kinds of power under Kings: But he attempteth to answer
objections, page 57. the first whereof is not material, the second is worth
examining.

[ Objection. May we pray for such as we know have sinned the sin against the
Holy Ghost?

Answer, No, etc. For then they are separated from the All men, etc.]

Reply, But does the sin against the Holy Ghost, make him that commits it to
cease to be one of Adams sons, or of men, or natural men, or unbeleivers?
certainly not. Indeed it makes him to cease being one of that all which we
are to pray for; but then, does it not clearly evince that, the phrase (All
men) does not take in every son of Adam? for, if the Church or a believer may
pray for all men, and so obey the Apostles command, though one or many be left
out that have sinned unto death, what is more clear then that the All in ver.
1. does not take in every individual son of Adam?

A Second circumstance is this.
[By the Apostles care to settle beleivers persuasion in this, that it is good
in the sight of God to pray for all men; praying for Brethren they doubted not
of; but whether for all men, unbeleivers, persecutors, many might doubt; this
he removes, 4. 5. 6.] This circumstance is in nothing different from the
former, both fetched from his command, to beleivers to pray for others, namely
unbeleivers. But besides, he is mistaken herein; the business here insisted
on, is not praying for enemies as well as friends, as Math. 5.44.48. For this
they might do, and yet leave the Apostles command unsatisfied of praying for
Kings: we may pray for many friends and enemies, yet pray for no Kings; but
were it so, he most know, 1. That this does not enforce a praying for all Adams
sons; for many men in the world, are neither friends nor enemies to many
private Christians. 2. Neither does it urge, that all in ver. 6. is taken so
largely; as if nothing but Christ's death for every son of Adam could prevail
with us to this duty: for if he died but for some, and that some were enemies,
it is argument enough to move us to pray for enemies.

A third circumstance follows.
[By the motives by which he moves them to pray for all men; viz. Gods good
will to mankind, and what in Christ he did for them, like that Mat. 5.44.45.
Whereas the motives to pray for beleivers are something more sweet, etc.] Had
these words been wisely martialled, they had appeared in the form of an
argument used by the Remonstrants. [Deus vult omnes salvos fieri; act. Synod.
321.
ergo Christus pro omnibus and fingulis mortuu^ est] That is God will have all
to be saved: therefore Christ died for all and every singular man; to which I
answer, first, if the word (singulis) had been in the antecedent, as it is in
the consequent, they had spoken beside the Text, and I shall grant that All
ver. 4. and All ver. 6. are both of like extent; but neither reaches to every
son of Adam: he must first prove the word All in the 4. verse, to take in All
and every individual son of Adam, before he can produce this word or any thing
affirmed concerning it, as an argument to prove All in the 6. verse, to be so
general: and whereas he says, that the arguments used here are like them,
Math. 5.44. it is false; there is a wide difference betwixt the making of the
Sun to shine, and rain to fall, and willing their salvation.

The Fourth cirumstance.
[By the manner of praying enjoined, viz. Without wrath and doubting; this is
not incident to believers in praying one for another, as when they think of
them that have wronged them; but believers praying one for an other is in a
sweeter manner.] That which he seems to drive at in these words is this, that
the Apostle would have us pray for others besides believers; but this no man
denies: it was never our assertion, that we should pray only for beleivers;
but that which we question, is whether the Apostle commands us to pray for
every individual son of Adam; and this manner of praying without wrath and
doubting evinceth it not: for even among believers, there may be quarrels, and
dissentions, by reason of which he might bid them pray one for another, without
wrath or doubting; but however this is far from proving that we are to pray
for every son of Adam. For if we are to pray but for some unconverted and
enemies, it is requisite that we pray without wrath or doubting, because wrath
and doubting are as incident to us praying for some as for all, so that those
some be enemies to us. But again by wrath and doubting, it may be questioned,
whether they be referred to God, that is without wrath, a foolish charging of
God if he defer to hear us; and doubting of his faithfulness or power to
help us: and if thus, this is not only requisite for believers praying one for
another, but to be an ingredient in all their prayers of what nature soever.

The Fifth circumstance.
[By the things prayed for, viz. That God would order their hearts that we
believers, might lead quiet and godly lives; but things to be prayed for
Beleivers are of a higher nature, John. 17.9.21.] Herein also he bends his
force to prove that we are to pray for unbeleivers, which is not the thing in
hand: but this is so empty, that it is so far from proving, that we are to pray
for every individual son of Adam, that it does not urge a necessity of
praying for any more then believers: for the thing prayed for, is as sureable
for beleivers as unbeleivers, that their hearts should be so directed, that
they under them may lead quiet and godly lives. David and Solomon and other
believing Kings prayed for it, Psalm. 72.1, 2, 3, 4. Secondly, whereas the
Apostle says (that we) he makes not a distinction betwixt beleivers and
unbeleivers, as if the sense was thus, pray for unbeleeving Kings, that we
believers might live, etc. but it relates to their place of subjection in that
body politic: and so, that we who are under them might lead godly lives, for
thus must beleivers pray when yet they are under beleiveing Princes. Besides
from the matter prayed for, it appears not that by all men, is meant every
son of Adam, because every son of Adam has not an influence into the godly
and quiet lives of any state, or any beleivers in any state or government.

The Sixth circumstance.
[By the manner of mentioning them that are to be prayed for. All men, Kings,
men in authority, of which very few Beleivers, etc.] The author must know that
we are to pray for Kings, not as believers, or unbeleivers, but as Kings; as
they are in eminent place and rule, and so have an influence in our holy lives,
whether believers or unbeleevers: besides he can infer hence but this, that we
are to pray for unbeleiving Kings, but this proves not that we are to pray for
every son of Adam. Yet he confidently concludes it of his side, but it is
his boldness that presumes, not his reason that proves; he has produced many
circumstances, but yet they are so rudely applied to this business, that the
expressions spent about them, cannot but be tedious to the intelligent, because
they have not the least show of reason to prove that the (all men,) mentioned
either in the 1.4. or 6. verse, does take in all Adams sons. Having spoke of
the sense of the words themselves, the circumstances that attend them; he comes
to the third sort and rank of proofs, and that is from the scope of the Text,
and he thus speaks.

[From the 1. to the 8th verse, no further thing is mentioned but what belongs
to all men to hear, and what Christ has done for all: and what we are
indebted to all men. Romans 5.14.15.16. Phil. 2.15.16. Mat. 5.44.] And this I
conclude from page 61. is the scope of the Text which he hints of, but let the
Reader well observe, the vanity of this last, will seem as great as the former.
For the business that he is to prove, is that (all men) comprehends in it
every son of Adam; and this he proves from the scope of the Text, which
speaks of nothing but what belongs to all men: So that this is the dint of
his reason (all men) takes in every individual man, because the Text says
(all men;) the strength of his reason is admirable. If he had said the Text
treates of such things as belong to ever individual son of Adam, then he had
said to the purpose, but that I fear upon examination would want weight;
therefore it is as good to speak that which is impertinent, as that which is
to the purpose, and not be able to prove it. And if he had said so, let us view
the method of this new disputer; his affirmative is, that Christ gave himself
a ransom for all Adams sons, and he proves this by the Text, 1 Timoth. 2.^.
And being asked how he proves that Text speaks of all Adams sons, he says
because that speaks of such things as are common to all Adams sons; and so
in this circle he may run (in infinitum) but further to explain the scope of
the Text, he thus says.

[It appears to be a laying down of the Gospel, as it is to be preached to
every creature.] That it is a truth of the gospel which is to be preached, I
deny not; but that the intention and scope of the Apostle, is to lay down a
platform of the Gospel to be preached, is no way evident; the scope is to move
believers to pray, as he confesses, page 28. But admit it, yet it follows
not that that phrase all men, extends to every individual; for then it must
follow, that to say, [Christ gave himself a ransom for every individual man]
is Gospel; but where proves he that? I know he will say from this Text of 1 Timothy 2.6. Still all must come to that issue, it is Gospel because 1 Timothy 2.6.
so says, and that Text says so because it contains the Gospel, and this is
still like the authors reasoning.

[2. It is laid down as a ground of praying for all men.] True, and so we
grant that Christ gave himself a ransom for all; and what is he better? he
leaves the question untouched in all this large discourse; he proves not yet
this Text commands us to pray for every individual son of Adam: but grant
it, yet it follows not in strict reasoning, that the all in ver. 6. must be
so large; for in his own divinity, the one being an act that man is to do,
(pray) and the other an act that Christ does (give a ransom) this diversity of
matter treated, will admit of a diverse signification of [all men;] but besides
Christ's giving himself a ransom for some of all sorts, is ground enough for
us to pray for every man of all sorts; therefore our praying for all men does
not argue (all men) in the 6. verse to take in all Adams sons.

3. A third thing (after many subservient particulars in page 60.) which has
the most probability of reason is this, [Herein he shows the will of God
concerning the mediator and men; and what he would have him do, viz. Save all
men, and free them from the necessity of perishing;] which was formerly laid
down and answered in the Third circumstance: only here is an expression
scattered which I assent not to, that freedom from the necessity of perishing
only is here brought to expound the word, Save, but this I disprove thus.
Those which actually perish, are not in Scripture phrase said to be saved. But
such as do perish, may be freed from the necessity of perishing; therefore
they that are only freed from the necessity of perishing, are not said to be
saved.

But to the thing in hand; as for that Text, 1 Timothy 2.4. I find no Text in all
the Scripture so tossed up and down with variety of interpretations as that
Text. As (1.) That he wills some of all sorts. (2.) He wills all to be
saved, that is, all that are saved, are saved because he wills it to be so;
So Lombard, Lib. 1. did. 46.
[Quia nullus fiat salvus nisi quem velit salvari.] (3.) That he wills it,
(voluntate figni) by those things that are the signs of his will, as his
commands, promises, threatenings, but not by his will of decree. (4. He wills,
that is he causes us to will that all shall be saved, as Gal. 46. The Spirit
is said to cry abba Father, that is it causes us to do so, Rom 8.26.28. The
Spirit makes requests, that is it helps us to make requests. (5.) That God
earnestly wishes and desires that all should be saved eternally, and he gives
them all means conducing thereunto. (6.) He wills all shall be saved, that
is, brought to the knowledge of the Gospel which is called salvation, Heb. 2.3.
(7.) All to be saved, that they should be made salvable: the first five are all
cited by that great Jesuit, Cornel. a Lapid. in locum, and their several
authors; the last is his own, the four former he rejects, his own he
explaineth not, nor says plainly that he wills the salvation of every
individual, or however proves not unless by ver. 6. Because Christ is said
to give himself a ransom for all men, quite contrary to our author; the one
clears the 4. by 6. verse, the other the 6. by 4. verse, but I think both
amiss, for he that proves the one by the other (which way soever) proves
[ignotum per ignotum] an obscure phrase by a phrase of the same obscurity; and
till the business be further cleared, I conclude, that that phrase (all men)
in any of these verses, is no competent witness either for it self, ot for
its neighbor. And the last of the seven interpretations the author fastens
upon as the sense of the Text, though against all Interpreters: and the
language of the Scripture; but if he be asked how he proves it, that the word
(saved) is meant to make them salvable, he has this method at hand, he proves
it by this Text, because it is said to be to all Adams sons: and if he be
asked how he proves that, this Text speaks of such a salvation that is
common to all Adams sons, he proves it by this, because the Text speaks of
what Christ does for all men, viz. make them salvable, and from such circles in
his reasonings all along, he is not able by an easy exorcisme to free
himself.

As for his objection which he pretends to answer, if he had not devised a
too absurd frame of it, the weakness of his answer had been very evident; I
shall frame it for him, and the drift of it is this, to prove that the phrase
[All men] vet. 6. is not proved by [all men] in the first verse to be taken in
such a general sense, but rather the first verse proves, that the sixth verse
cannot take in every son of Adam, and the argument is this.

The all that are to be prayed for, is as large as the all he ransomed.

But the all to be prayed for, takes not in all the sons of Adam.

Ergo, the all he ransomed, takes not in all the sons of Adam.

To this he answers, [This argument has no force, Paul directs to pray for
all men, and John shows how long we are to pray for some.] But this answer
has less force in it; for, all that he says being granted, yet further I
demand, whether when we know any to sin unto death and so pray not for them,
we cannot fulfill the command of God, in praying for all men? certainly the
command of John does not overthrow the command of St. Paul, both may be obeyed,
but both cannot of the (all men.) in 1 Timothy 2.1. take in all Adams sons, and
the argument is firm thus. If we fulfill the Apostles command of praying for
(all men) when yet we pray not for every son of Adam, then that phrase (all
men) does not take in every son of Adam.

But the former is true. Ergo the latter is true also.

This proposition, viz. [The all to be prayed for, is as large as the all he
gave himself a ransom for] he disavoweth; and the absurdities which he says
follow are not worth naming; and any may wonder why he should not receive this
proposition; for in page 57. 58. he contendeth that the (all men) to be prayed
for, takes in it every son of Adam: and sure I am that the all ransomed is
not nor can be any more then all. And how the author acquitteth himself in
this Text let any judge. So that if it be asked, how many Christ died or gave
himself a ransom for: we may without equivocation and false gloss answer
with the text for (all men) but we shall be guilty of both if we say, for every
son of Adam, for that the text means not, nor says.

CHAP. XI. Of the sentence in Heb. 2.9.
AS for the persons to whom the Epistle was writ, the occasion of writing, the
person writing, the reason why his name is concealed, etc. are such
circumstances as no way comes within the verge of our enquiry; in this point I
shall consider the words from which he fetches so much strength to his
doctrine as he conceives: in so much as he makes it a champion text in his
frontispiece to defend the whole work.

His words are these.

[That by the grace of God he might taste death for every man.] The whole verse
is thus, being directly rendered from the Original. [We see Jesus made little
lower then the Angels, through the suffering of death, crowned with honor and
glory, that by the grace of God, etc.] Now here are two things affirmed of
Christ. First, that he was made a little lower then the Angels. Secondly, that
through death he was crowned with honor and glory; now it would give some
light into the after words, if we could tell on which of these two they depend,
or to which they relate: I must confess it very obscure; The Author page 65.
seems to make them relate to both, as if he was made little lowet then the
Angels, that he might taste death; and also crowned with honor and glory,
because he tasted death for every man; but this least probable; for then the
word (...) must signify both, (ut) and (quia) both (that) and (because) which
is not likely; but let the dependence be what it will: for the words
themselves, I propound these following Queries. First, whether these words
[(...)] be well rendered thus. [That by the grace of God he might taste death
for every man.] And whether it may not bear this reading, [That by the grace
of God he might taste of every death, or (de tota morte) of all or whole
death:] That he might taste (...). This reading I shall clear to be no way
contrary to the Scripture or Grammatical construction; then that the context
clearly leads to it; the most forcible objection from Grammar, is that
(...), being a verb of sense, governs a genitive case without (...). But
although this be true, yet it is well known that this language delights in
such pleonasmes, and redundancy of prepositions is the elegancy of this
language, when yet the word will govern the genetive case without them.

But some may say, that if it had been so meant, the words would have been thus
placed, (...), but to this I answer; that in the chapter there are two, and in
the verse one president, for placing the verb between the adjective or
relative, and the substantive.

And the (...) or (...) is often for totus not omnis: as Ephesians. 4.16. (...) the
whole body; so (...) whole death: so that here is not one word rendered but
justifiably by Scripture.

Secondly this is most agreeing with the context; for if the Author will have
these words to relate to his [being made lower then the Angels, and suffering
death,] it very well agrees thereto; for, if it be asked why he suffered such
a death, which death is not confined to the perfective act, when his soul was
separated from his body, but extends to all the acts of his humiliation, from
his incarnation, to his expiration; for so all this was the death for which he
was crowned, as appears, Phil 2.7.8, 9. His taking on him the form of a
servant, as well as his submitting to the cross, was that which got him that
name; now if it be asked why he suffered such a death, of such latitude and
extent, it was that he might taste (...), of whole death, both top and dregs,
no part of that death we lie under shall be untasted off. Or if we will have
them relate to those words, [He was crowned with honor,] it well agrees with
them; for if the question be asked how he came to be crowned with honor and
glory as he now is; the answer is not to be given, or the cause fetched from
the latitude of the persons for whom he was humbled, because his first act of
humiliation, viz. his taking our nature upon him, was (...), for every man for
whom he afterward died; and if the ground of his glory was drawn from the
latitude of persons for whom he suffered, his Father had as good ground to
glorify him at his Incarnation, as at his expiration, but that he did not: but
the ground is fetched from the latitude of sufferings; when he had taken our
nature on him, and undergone a series and method of sufferings in his life, and
the dregs of all at his death, and so drunk his potion, and done his work by
tasting (...) of all or whole death; then and therefore he was crowned; having
so much suffered, he entered into glory; and so we see it well agreeing with the
words foregoing.

And it well agrees with the words that follow. [For it behooved him etc. to
make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.] Now that word
(For) shows that this 10. verse relates to the 9. and that he did (...),
that he might be perfect through sufferings; now when is Christ perfect through
sufferings? whether when he has suffered for all men, or when he has tasted
of all sufferings, or whole death? certainly if the former, then he might in
his very incarnation be said to be perfect through sufferings, for that he was
for all for whom he died; but this neither reason nor Scripture teaches, and
it is most congruous to both to affirm the latter: and so Heb. 5.9. says and
seems to refer this perfection to the ultimate act, and then he was made the
author of salvation. Nay, further we find verse 17. that [it behooved him to
be like unto us in all things.] still expounding his being perfect in
sufferings, that is when he has sufferings that we were liable to, and so
might know how to help us in all afflictions, he being like to us (...) in
every death or affliction, then is he perfect through sufferings. This I
determine not, but desire the Author to transmit it to his oracle; and I leave
it to the judgment of the learned: and if it be found congruous, then this Text
makes but little for him.

Query. (2) Wave the former sense; how can the Author fetch his general
expression from these words, (...), as if it was to be read for every man? the
substantive is not expressed, but left so as indifferent to be rendered, every
believer or son of God, as every man, or son of Adam: the word (...) or any
word from it, when set alone is not always to be rendered All men, or every
man, as John. 12.32. (...), it is not I will draw all men, that is not
verified, but plainly from John. 3.15. [where it says, [the son of man is
lift up that whoever believes might have eternal life] appears to be meant
of every one that believes, and so 1 Cor. 4.5. (...), praise shall be given,
is not (...) to every man, but (...) to every faithful man, as verse 2. So
that he will have it thus (...), for every one that believes, as John. 3.16.
Romans 1.16. or (...) for every faithful man, as 1 Cor. 4.5. or (...) for every
son, as Heb. 2.10. for every such man I grant he tasted death; but if he will
have it so large as every man, or that pertaketh of humane nature, that he must
prove.

Quere, (3) But if it was (...) for every man; how would he prove it to extend
any further then 1 Timothy 2.6. all men; and so not to mean men of every kind?
for so, sons he has of all sorts of men, of which sons he speaks, verse
10. certain it is the word [(...)] in the singular, Heb 2.9. cannot more
intimate the particulars in any kind, then the word [(...)] in the plural, 1 Timothy 2.6. Therefore his first conclusion page 64. needs no ecce, it is so
empty; So that if the question be asked, for how many Christ tasted death, it
cannot be answered from the Text, for (every man) that is as the Author
expounds it, Every individual son of Adam.

CHAP. XII. Of the Consideration of like Scriptures speaking in like manner.
HIs drift in this Chapter, is to borrow some strength from other Scriptures,
pretending that it is the ordinary language of Scripture, and not of 1 Timothy
2.6. Heb. 2.9. therefore his several Texts I shall examine.

[2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not
imputing their trespasses.] This text I have formerly treated of in my second
Chapter, and there shown that this Text favors him not for two reasons.
First, because this Text speaks of the application of the blood of Christ, as
I have shown by four particulars in the second Chapter, to which I refer
the Reader, which the Author is very averse to, and strongly denies, but
weakly disproveth. His reasons why this means not of the application by his
spirit is twofold; [1. It says not God will be reconciling the world to
himself, as speaking of the work of his Spirit;] as if no work of God upon
the hearts of men by his Spirit was done and past, so that it might not be said
he was so working; certainly he had reconciled many men's hearts to himself by
the Gospel, long before the Apostle spoke these words; so that though he spoke
of that act of his spirit, he might say (...), God was reconciling; therefore
this is no convincing argument. [2. It says not God was in the world
reconciling, as if he spoke of the application in the hearts of men.] Neither
is it so to be meant [in Christ] as if God working in the heart of Christ. But
in Christ, as no more then [by Christ] and [for Christ] but this phrase is as
suitable to the application of his blood, as well as the procurement by his
blood, if the Apostle say true, Ephesians. 1.3. If all spiritual blessings be
given us in him, then surely reconcileing our hearts, being one, is also in
him, and in verse 10. he plainly says, that the faithful are gathered
together in one in Christ: therefore though it says not in the world, but in
Christ, it may well be meant of the application of Christ's blood in the hearts
of men.

A second reason why this place favors him not, is; Because though it did
speak of the Act of Christ as mediator procuring reconciliation; yet it does
not say for all, or every son of Adam, but for the world: which phrase is
taken in Scripture not so largely, as 1 John. 5.19. [The whole world lies in
wickedness;] this cannot take in every son of Adam, because may are affirmed
to be of God in the same verse, and so not to sin, however not to lie in
sin. So Colos. 1.6. though the Gospel brought forth fruit in all the world,
yet not in every son of Adam, 1 Timothy 3.16. believed on in the world, but not
of every son of Adam, but men living in the world.

Some reasons he attempts to produce, to prove that this world means all Adams
sons, and those reasons he draws from, 2 Cor. 5. his general deduction is
this, [What world it is that he reconciled, let the Text show,] so I say also,
he urges thus. [The world of mankind, verse 11. we persuade men;] it is true
he persuaded men, not God, as Gal. 1.10. and the world of mankind, men living
in the world; and thus we grant that God was in Christ reconciling men. But our
Author would have (men) in verse 11. to denote every individual man, but this
without ground; for this phrase, [He persuades men] is of like sense with Luke.
5.10. [thou shall catch men.] and 1 Cor. 14.3. [he that prophesies speaks
unto men] but these take not in every son of Adam, nor can be so meant.

2. He thus urges, [And these men that must appear before the Judgment seat
of Christ.] Verse 10. true, and such we grant God in Christ reconciled, but not
all that must so appear; for though all shall appear, yet he speaks not of
all that shall appear: it is we that have the earnest of the spirit, verse 5.
we that walk by faith not sight, verse 7. we that love to dwell with the
Lord, verse 8. we that covet to be acceptable to the Lord, verse 9. it is the
same we that he says must appear before Christ's judgment; and the same we,
we grant, are reconciled in Christ. But none of all these former take in all
the sons of Adam; therefore are not well produced to prove the word World,
verse 19. to take in every individual son of Adam.

[3. He urges, And those men that were dead, verse 14.] True, let him well
understand the Text, and I grant it; all that were dead to sin, as I have
showen in the second Chapter, and then I grant that Christ reconciled the All
in the world that died to sin and themselves: but this takes not in every
son of Adam. And so for the rest that he says in this point, from what I
said in Chap. 2. may appear not to avail any thing to prove the word world in
verse 19. to take in every individual son of Adam: So that this Text helps
him not.

A second Text is,

John, 1.9. He is the true light that enlightneth every man that comes into
the world.] And his deduction here from Is this, [through the ransom given
there is some light afforded to every man.] Lombard citing this Text, gives
this sense, [Non quod nullus sit qui non illuminetur, sed quia nisi ab illo
nullus illuminatur;] and this with no little probability.

But Secondly, the Author should have showen what enlightening this speaks
of; it may be so understood as no way to favor him, as not speaking of the
same thing whereof he affirms: it seems to speak of the light that he put
into men in the creation, as may appear from verse 5. and 10. immediately
after these words; we find the world was made by him, he cannot (I believe)
prove it to be understood of the redemption.

And herein he proceeds to show, how many ways the Scripture affirms the
same of the world.

1. Of the world in general. John. 1.29. and 3.17.] I know what he means by
(general) if he mean as it is a totum aggregatum, of which an action may be
predicated, yet it agrees but to one part of it; as the world is said to lie in
wickedness, when it agrees only to the unbeleeving part, and so he shall
convince the world of sin, that is, the unbeleeving part: so on the other side,
he takes away the sins of the world, that is, of the unbeleeving part thereof,
this I grant.

2. Of the world distributed into its parts, some believing, some not. John.
3.16.18.] But will the Author say that he came to save both parts of the world?
the Text says no such thing, but that those that believe might not perish. God
is said to love the world, it is true; but distribute this world into its
parts, and what love does the Text set forth to both its parts? his love to the
world, as (totum quid) is there intimated, and shown in his love to the
believing part thereof, and to the believing part in that they shall be saved:
but wherein is the love of God expressed to the unbeleeving part, let the Text,
or the Author from the Text speak. So that though he be here said to love the
world, and that is distributed into parts, yet no love is expressed to both
parts of that distribution.

3. Of the world opposed to Believers, in the world. 1 John, 2.1.] It is clear
to every eye that there is no opposition at all in that Text, only a
diversification. (2.) Neither can he prove that there is a distinction of
believers from unbeleevers, but only of some believers, to whom he wrote from
believers all over the world. (3.) For such an assertion as this, that Christ
gave himself a ransom for a world opposed to believers, it is such as cannot
be found in any beside our Author: the Remonstrants that have made the number
as large as may either by show of reason or Scripture; yet they profess that
[In horum numero censeri non debent impaenitentes, Act. Synod. 285. 286.
increduli, rebels, etc. qua tales,] that is, in this number of All, the
unbeleeving and impenitent, are not to be reckoned; and thus, [Infidelibus and
rebellibus qua talibus gratia impetrata non est:] that is, grace was not
impetrated or procured for the unbeleevers, as so. But if our Authors words be
true, that he died for the world opposed to believers; then he dyed for
unbeleevers as so considered; but this no Scripture speaks.

4. Of the world divided and such particulars set out as cannot be the Elect of
God. John. 12.47.48.] We had before in the second acceptance, the world
distributed into its parts, and now we have it divided into its parts; here is
judicious distinction betwixt distributed and divided. (2.) That Text does not
say that he came to save that part of the world, which he says cannot be meant
of the Elect of God. (3.) It is not evident that that place speaks of such as
are not the Elect: many may not receive the word of Christ for the present, yet
be one of Gods chosen, and thus much the Author confesses page 69. thus, [Yea
even among these are many of Gods Elect and chosen, to whom these sayings
agree,] and one of these sayings is this, [neither receives nor perceives the
things of the Spirit.] Yet now this expression, (he that hears my words and
believes not) must needs set out such as cannot be Gods elect and chosen ones.

5. Of the world, as the Elect are in due time called out of the fellowship of
it and distinguished from it, whilst many of the Elect are in it.] He produces
many Texts wherein the word (world) is thus taken; but he produces not one
place wherein it is said that Christ came to save that world, and therefore he
herein requires no answer; yet I say of that world he may be said to be the
Savior, yet in respect of them that shall be called out in time; but that he
is the Savior of that world, out of which all his Elect are taken, no
Scripture speaks; and therefore that fond flourish which he makes in those
after words, the Reader may see he has little ground whereas he says [Of the
World every way taken he is the Savior,] he cannot, nor has he proved that he
is the Savior of both parts, believing and unbeleeving, nor the world opposed
to believers, nor such as cannot be called the elect of God, nor that world out
of which all the elect are chosen.

But after this spacious digression upon the word (World) he comes to affirm
that [the Elect is never called the World:] something like that of the
Remonstrants, [vox mundus in Scripturis nunquam electos significat] that is,
act. Synod. 301.
the word World does never signify the Elect, which I shall not at this time
disprove, but content my self with this, that there is no need to prove it;
sufficient it is now to prove that the word All does not take in every son of
Adam, and that that thing is said to be done to, and by, and in the World, that
is done but to and by and in the believing part of the world: and this is not
hard, Col. 1 6. 1 Timothy 3.19. Romans 4.12.13. with others, in which places I
think also the word World denotes only the Elect of God, if believers be
such. But still in prosecution of this, he has several Queries, as

[If we look at such as stumble at Christ, does not the Scripture say, such
perish for whom Christ died?] To which I answer no; no Scripture affirms any
such thing, not that Text, 1 Corinthians. 8.11. It is not affirmative but
interrogatory.

And bring upon themselves swift destruction, denying the Lord that bought
them. 2 Pet. 2.1. I have said something upon this text before, but because it
again offers it self, I shall add a few words more; true it is they are
said to deny the Lord that bought them; that is, as it is generally received
(...), according to their own and others judgment; as Ahaz is said to
sacrifice to the Gods of Damascus that smote him 2 Chronicles. 28.23. And how can
the Author prove that Christ did ransom or buy them any more them the Gods of
Damascus did smite Ahaz: the one says they denied the Lord that bought them,
and the other sacrificed to the gods that smote him; but I know the Author will
not say that the Gods of Damascus did really and indeed hurt or smite Ahaz, but
he thought so. This I overthrow not, but to it I add thus much, it was not
only as they thought, but [Secundum vanam jactantiam,] as they boasted, they
spoke proud swelling word, spoke much of Christ and his ransom; now it is
frequent in Scripture to upbraid the sons of men with such things as they
boast of, as if they were so indeed, as Ezekiel 28.12. and so making their
boasting an aggravation of their sin, as Romans 3.17.23. thou that gloriest in
God, and in the Law, do thou by breaking of the Law dishonor God? So it was
not an ordinary sin that these false Prophets are branding, not barely
denying him that bought them, for so every unbeleever does in his judgment,
but this is more then every unbeleever is charged withal; seeing he that names
Christ is tied thereby to depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. And they boasting
of Christ they were more obliged then others not to deny him, but they did deny
the Lord that bought them, that is not that the Text looks at the reality of
the thing, but their boasting that it was so, which made it be an aggravated
sin in those false Prophets; and how this agrees with the persons spoke of and
other Scriptures, let the Author perpend, and if so taken, how much it serves
his turn let him also judge.

Are they not said to have trodden under foot the Son of God?] Thus the
Remonstrant urges, [Apostatae dic^ur filium dei conculcare, act. Synod.
etc. ergo filius dei illis aliquo modo est datus, fangu^ testamenti ad aliquod
gratiae faedus cum illis constituendum effusus, etc.] That is they tread under
foot the Son of God, therefore he is in some way given to them, and his
blood shed to make some covenant of Grace with them; the strength of which
inferences I am not able to see; for they being gathered to the Church, and so
hearing Christ preached, so outwardly professing him, they afterward falling
off and not applying themselves to believe on him for salvation, tread under
foot the Son of God; and this they may do though Christ did never purchase
life and salvation for them; as a man may kick the image of his Sovereign in
his coin, though it was never intended for him.

Are they not said to be trees twice dead, Jude, 12.] Yes we read so, but
whether the argument framed therefrom be valid, I question; for thus he
reasons, they are twice dead, once in Adam, now a second time by their
sins: now this second death supposes a life intervening which they have from
Christ; but this is extorted, and not the sense of this nor any other
Scriptures. For

1. For this supposes all Adams sons to be made alive, and to be alive, with
a life that is beside what of nature: for this spiritual death in sin, is
opposed to a spiritual life; but this is not the language of Scripture, not
one place that I know that says all Adams sons are alive.

2. It is frequent with Scripture to speak of things that do appear only as
if they were, as Saint Paul, Romans 7.9. Without the Law I was alive, that is I
thought so, but when the Law came I died: here is a second death, but that is
opposed to an apparent life; so why may not this Text mean a death opposed to
an apparent life of grace, which by their seeming holiness they seemed to
live, but when they discovered themselves, they are said to die the second
time? and this seems backed by the context, Clouds without water; Trees
without fruit, twice dead.

3. Scripture phrase speaks that condemnation in Hell is the second death,
Rev. 20.14. cum 6. and this spoken of men as if it was actually so, when yet it
means but thus, that it infallibly shall be so; as he that believes not is
condemned, that is, shall be in condemnation: he that believes has
everlasting life, that is, shall have it infallibly. So this twice dead, that
is, they are such as shall certainly die the second death.

4. It is usual with Scripture, speaking of that which is thoroughly done, or
done indeed, to express it by twice done, or done doubly, Jer. 17.18. Destroy
them with a double destruction, is destroy them thoroughly, or to the purpose,
or destroy them indeed. So twice dead is dead indeed, thoroughly dead, dead
every way; to this Mr. Perkins in his exposition propendes.

5. The Authors Argument makes death in sin to be second death, but this
Scripture speaks not, Rev. 2. Rev. 20.6.14. Therefore the sense of his cannot
stand, nor his argument from it.

CHAP. XIII. Of answering the most usual and strongest objections against this
truth.
ANy that looks upon this title, and his first lines of this Chapter, could
promise himself no less then these three particulars. First, that the Author
takes these arguments that are most usual, and those that are of the greatest
force. Secondly, that he propounds such in their proper force and vigor, as
they are propounded by his adversaries. Thirdly, that he gives to these
pertinent and satisfactory answers; but that he in all these comes short,
shall appear by the following discourse.

The first Argument that he seems to answer, he propounds thus.

[The Scripture in such places as 1 Timothy 1.6. etc. are not to be understood in
the sense they import:] Wherein he persuades his readers that this is produced
by us as an argument to prove the contrary to his assertion; but this is false
and bewrays his ignorance; it is produced as an answer to the arguments
formed on their parts, thereby putting them to prove that those Texts are taken
as he pretends: seeing Scripture is not always taken as it seems to import.
This responsory assertion of ours so much intrencheth upon his over confident
concluding upon many Scriptures, that he rejects it as many ways obnoxious,
and affirms the contrary thus. [The Scripture speaks sometimes plainly,
sometimes metaphorically, parabolically, yet always truly, and so as the words
import, for God is a God of truth, Psalm. 31.5.] The weakness of which
expressions may appear to any; for it may be understood, that when we say some
Scriptures are not to be understood as they seem to import, we mean not that
they are not to be understood as the Spirit it self means, or as they are
used by him to express his meaning, but not so as they seem to us to import;
not always according to the nature and ordinary signification of the word
which the Spirit uses. Now let us see how he oppugneth this.

1. He says the Scripture sometimes speaks (plainly) sometimes
metaphorically, parabolically.] Now in that he says it speaks sometimes
plainly, it grants that sometimes it speaks not plainly; now when the
Scripture speaks plainly, we know, viz. when the sense of the words is so
applied to the words in their native and common signification, that he that
knows the one, may know the other. But when do they speak not plainly,
certainly it is when he that knows the nature and usual acceptance of the
words used, and follows that and so mistaketh the true sense, when the sense
is beyond the native and usual sense of the word, then the Scripture speaks
not plainly: as to instance with the Author in metaphorical etc. speeches,
such are tropicall and changed from their native signification, unto a foraigne
signification; (as his paedagogicall rudiments may inform him) but when they
are so changed, they mean not as they seem to import; but thus many Scriptures
speak as the Author confesses; now thus to say, is no way to confute us, but
to confirm us.

2. That expression [He speaks always truly,] is no argument against us,
because though he means not as the words seem to import, yet he speaks
truly; the truth of his words are so deduced from the conformity of the sense
to his own mind, not to the native use of the words.

He afterward thus argues.

[When the Scripture says that by the grace of God he tasted death for every
man, and gave himself a ransom for all men, etc. That any of us should say
his words have not the sense they seem to import!] Wherein he seems to
wonder that any should presume so to say, but it is groundless; for the sense
that Thomas Moore puts upon those Scriptures, is that Christ by his death
procured eternal life for every son of Adam, and this sense the words seem
to import, else he forgeth it without any ground; but that is not indeed the
sense, my whole discourse shows; therefore we may well say, they have not the
sense they seem to import. Again be thus urges.

[The mysteriousnesse of the Scripture stands not in any equivocall hiddennesse
or doubtfulnesse of speech, as the Oracles of the Heathen Gods, that might be
made true which way so ever taken, though contrary to what they imported; but
Scriptures though mysterious are so full of unchangeable truth, that when by
the Spirit the knowledge thereof is given, it will appear to be right and
plain, according to the words in which it is expressed.] But all this is not
against us; for, 1. True, they are not equivocall, that is, relating to the
mind of the speaker; now God never meant to deceive as the Heathen Oracles,
yet may the Scripture have a sense beyond what the words import, or seem to
export, because they are mysterious. 2. He is mistaken in the Heathen Oracles,
they were not made true contrary to what they imported, because they were so
framed as that they might import either way; as, [Aio te Aeacida Romanos
vincere posse.] 3. The truth of the Scripture is unchangeable we grant, but it
will not thence follow that some places have not a sense beyond what the words
naturally import; and when we know the sense, we shall say that it is true
according to the words in a tropicall or figurative transmutation, yet not true
as the words naturally import: but it matters not how plain the sense is when
we know it; but how is the sense obvious to us before it be revealed? Whether
may we not follow the native sense and import of the words, so far as to take
up a sense contrary to the meaning of Christ? if so, all that that he says is
but empty; but that we may, is clear from Nicodemus, John. 3.4. the disciples.
Mark 8.15.16. the Jews, John. 2.19.20. in which places they judged of his
speeches by the natural import of the words, but in so doing cried. But this
assertion of ours, viz. [That the Scripture has not always the sense that the
words import or seem to import,] is backed with four several reasons as he
produces it, which he attempts to disprove, but how he performs I shall
examine.

Reason. 1.
[Because these expressions, (the Vine) [this is my body] [I am the doore] are
not meant as the words seem to import.] These instances he produces,
therefore I shall engage with these, though more might be produced and others
more clear: thus we urge, if these places be not meant as the words seem to
import, then all Scriptures are not; to this he answers thus. This reason is
unjust, injurious, absurd, false, so of no strength: and thus he runs up his
black mouthed catalogue, Page 75. which in close will be his own share; he
would prove it injurious thus;

[It is confessed by all Interpreters as an argument against Papists, that what
ever is necessary to salvation is therein plainly delivered, as the humble and
diligent reader may easily understand,] but he may know

1. That no Interpreter says that every scripture is plain and easily to be
understood, neither are we engaged so to say in any controversy between us and
the Papists; they say indeed that many are and such as are necessary to
salvation, but this is no way injured by saying that some Scriptures mean not
as the words seem to import.

2. They may say that what is necessary to salvation is plain; but many places
that are urged by the Author, as they relate to the point in controversy, are
not absolutely necessary to salvation. Necessary it is for us to know Christ to
die for sin, and to be the Messiah, and to procure life for them that
believe; but whether for some or for all, it is not necessary to salvation to
know; for I am not so uncharitable as to think other, but that many holding
his doctrine are saved, and I hope he is not so uncharitable as to hold that
they that hold against him cannot be saved. I believe Heaven has a great
harvest of them that never could assent to his doctrine: therefore to say that
those Scriptures that are not absolutely necessary to salvation to be known,
are not to be meant as the words import, is not injurious to the saying of
Interpreters, that proceeds upon such as are necessary to salvation.

3. They may say that such necessary truths are plain to an humble and
diligent rearer; true; but we say to an unwary and arrogant Reader, that to
foment his own conceits will snatch at the natural import of the wo^d to
uphold it, to such the sense may not be plain, nor as the words import; the
humble and diligent Reader may easily perceive that many places are not meant
as the words import. So that in this here is a clamor of injury, no proof.

He would prove it unjust thus.

[It is unjust, seeing it is granted by Interpreters that hard and difficult
places, as Sacramental, allegorical, parabolicall, are to be opened by plain
places, not plain places obscured by them.] This though true, makes nothing to
the proving what we say unjust. For

1. That which we affirm is (that all places are not meant as the words
import;) now in that he mentions hard, difficult places, as Sacramental,
parabolicall, allegorical, he confirms us; for in such expresses, the sense
is not as the words seem to import.

2. It proves not the assertion unjust, because we do not obtrude any sense
upon 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. from such hard places; only show that as in those
places the sense is not as the words import, so it may be in these, leaving the
sense to enquiry: and where is the injustice in this?

3. He says in the beginning that it is unjust to say that these words [I am a
door, a vine] do not mean as the words import; yet now he says these being
pa^bolicall, are to be explained by plainer Texts; but what needs that, if they
be meant as the words import? this is not to evince us, but to contradict
himself.

He prooveth it absurd and gross thus.

[It is gross, intimating as if the sense of the words seem to import that
Christ was a door of wood; or as if the bread was transubstantiate into the
natural body of Christ, whereas there is no words importing such a sense.] But
it is not half so gross as the Authors understanding, that knows not how to
distinguish betwixt the words and sense of the words; we say the words mean not
as they seem to import. And he says it is gross, intimating that the sense of
the words import Christ a material door: gross indeed, but this is not the
sense of our assertion. But this we may say, that the words may seem to import
some such thing, though it be but a gross conceit; true it is that any that is
acquainted with Scripture language may be able to explode such a sense; but
those that are not so well acquainted with it may as well by the import of the
words think Christ to be a material door, as Nicodemus of a natural birth,
his Disciples of a material leaven of bread, when he spoke of the leaven of
heresy and hypocrisy; and the Jews of the material Temple, when he spoke of
the Temple of his Body; yet in in all these (how gross soever) they followed
the natural import of the words. But he illustrateth himself in this manner.

[If a man say to his servant, reach me my cloth in the press, and a Dame to
her maid, turn the cheese in the press; the child cries to his mother, the
pot runs over: cannot these be understood in the sense that the words
import?] Certainly, Animus fuit in patinis, his mind was in his dishes, or in
the potridge pot; but if his understanding had not run over with the pot, he
might have seen a wide difference between a Metonymy, and a Metaphor: the
instances that he produces are no way opposite to the case in hand; for if
they had, they should have run thus. If a man should lay to his servant I am a
press, o^ the child to his mother, I am a pot, let the Author tell; may such
sayings be understood in the sense they seem to import? I am necessitated to
traverse his exotricke examples.

He proves it false thus.

[It is false, for Christ is the door and way of entrance into peace with God,
and he is the true Vine indeed, John. 15.1.] Be it so, yet as he intends his
own meaning, the natural import of the words does not afford it; we say not
that he is not the door of entrance into God and peace, but that by the
natural import of the words themselves such a meaning cannot be deduced:
besides Christ is no more a door, or a Vine, then he is said to be the seeds
man, the field the World, the good seed the Children of the Kingdom, the Tares
the children of the wicked one, the harvest the end of the World, the reapers
the Angels, Mat. 13.37.38, 39, but these have not a real identity, but a
similitude, as verse 24. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a man that sowed, so
in the rest, so in this, it means but thus; Christ is like a door, and like
a Vine, bears an analogy with them, therefore the Text says, he spoke to
them this parable, John. 10.6. relating to the same business: yet if any shall
think him a material door, they shall be deceived, though he say I am the
door. As for that phrase [This is is my body] he thus answer^th,

[He says not this bread is my body, nor any word to color such a gross
conceit as transubstantiation.] Whereas he says [it says not [this bread is
my body,] he must mean as if Christ should say this [meaning his own body, he
being there present,] is my body; but this is weak and absurd, not to insist
upon those reasons deduced from the Sacramental use and relation, betwixt his
body and that which he spoke of; but it could not be Sacramental if he meant
his body; for it could not be both the sign and thing signified. Not to insist
on reasons deduced from our showing Christ's death till he come, in breaking of
bread, as 1 Cor. 11. which cannot be, if the bread broken and given was not the
sign of the body of Christ. Nor yet to insist upon frequent use of Scriptures,
wherein such expressions are used, to call a thing by that which they only
represent, as Genesis 41.26. [The seven lean Kine are seven yeares] etc. But this
argument I chiefly propound; when he took the cup, and said [this is my blood]
what did he show them? some drops of his blood? certainly he meant not his
blood, but the wine that he took; let him decide himself, Luke. 22.20. (...)
[this cup is my blood.] then it is absurd to say or think that the other
should not be [this bread is my body] and was not the Author ambitious of
confuting a Papist after the new fashion? he could not but see that that word
[This] relates to bread which he took; now the words being thus, following
the import of the word [Is] may we not run into the error of
transubstantiation? let but the Author grant the Papist that the bread is the
body of Christ, as they take the word according to its natural import, that
is, really, identically, corporeally, and they will not be beholden to him to
grant it transubstantiate; for if it be what it was not, it must be
transubstantiate into what it is; so that now what injury, injustice,
absurdity, falsity there is in our first reason let any judge; and clear it is
that the Scripture does not always mean as the words import, no not in those
Texts mentioned; therefore those Texts, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2 9. may not be
understood as the words seem to import.

Reason. 2.
The second reason by which we prove that all Scripture is not understood as
the words seem to import, is this; because the phrases (All men) (every man)
etc. seems to import no less then every son of Adam; else the Author would
not so confidently fasten that large sense upon them; but in many Texts such
phrases mean but some of Adams sons; therefore not to be understood as the
words seem to import; to this he answers.

[This reason is already answered, and proved vain and fraudulent in Cap. 5.]
In this reason there are two things, the Antecedent and Consequent; the
Antecedent is of two branches. First, that (All men) (every man) seem to
import no less then every son of Adam. Secondly, that in many places it is
not so largely to be understood: the consequence is this, therefore every
Scripture is not to be understood as the words seem to import. Now let any
perose his fifth Chapter, and see which of all these he has proved vain and
fraudulent. In my sixth Chapter I have remooved the supposed vanity and fraud
of this reason, by proving these three particulars.

1. That where the speech is of God, and by God, those phrases take not in all
Adams sons.

2. That those phrases are not to have the same latitude in Redemption as in
Creation.

3. That the business treated of in 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. does not evince
those places to have that large extent, to which Chapter I refer the Reader;
therefore this reason is also valid.

Reason. 3.
The third reason by which we prove that Scripture is not always meant as the
words import, as he produces it, is this [Because the death of Christ is often
said to be but for many, and those many his Sheep.] Now before I reply to his
answers, I must premise the authors unjust forgeries in these 2 particulars.

1. This is not brought by any (that I know) as a third reason, but may be as
an illustration of the second: thus (All men) (every man) in 1 Timothy 2.6. etc.
do not take in every son of Adam; because the death of Christ is in
Scripture said to be for many, for his sheep.

2. None says that the Scripture says (but for many) but we say that it is so
to be understood: therefore All men, cannot be proved necessarily to take in
all Adams sons. to this he answers.

[This reason is weak, for the word many signifies all and every, as Dan.
12.2. Romans 15.19.] Be it so, yet let us see where the weakness lies most; we
argue thus. The death of Christ is said in Scripture to be for many, and that
many his sheep, therefore meant but for many; Therefore when it is said to be
for all men, it is not clear that that phrase takes in all Adams sons. He
thus reasons. The word many sometimes takes in all and every, therefore there
where it is spoken of the death of Christ, it must take in every son of Adam;
or thus, many, in Dan. 12.2. is not meant but of some; therefore many, in Mat.
26 28. is not so meant; let any judge which is most weak; one particular
cannot conclude negatively against an other particular* nay suppose (many) in
some places take in every son of Adam, yet in most places, ten to one, it
excludes the largest sense, then we may justly doubt whether that place, Mat.
26.28. be so large in extent.

[This is equivocall, subtle and fraudulent, seeing when (All men) (every man)
is affirmed of the death of Christ, and the ransom and fruits thereof only is
affirmed for them.]

This reply is more full of weakness then subtilty; for let this be granted,
yet this is not refelled thereby; that it is not clear beyond all doubt that
(All men) (every man) take in every son of Adam. For

1. The words (All men) every man) are used when yet there is higher matter
spoken of then death or ransom as he takes ransom.

2. When he speaks of death or ransom, it is sometimes expressed generally
but in more restrictive terms.

3. When in that case such general words are used, they are not yet proved to
have such a general sense as to take in every son of Adam. All these I have
proved at large before, therefore little there is in his answer.

[This reason is false and ungodly, for it is no where in Scripture said that
Christ gave himself a ransom but for many, or only for many, or only for
his sheep, and it is ungodliness to add to or are from the word of God.]

Be it so, what is it against us? we say not it is the words of Scripture, but
that it does not yet appear to us but that it is the true sense, because that
the word (Many) in most places of Scripture excludes that general sense, and
means (but many) therefore till better proofs to the contrary, we may
conclude that that Text, Mat 20 28. is meant but so many; and what ungodliness
or falsity is this? no nor adding to the word; for that Text 1 Timothy 2.6. says
not that Christ is a ransom for every son of Adam, but our Author says it
is the sense of it, yet he is not willing to be charged with adding to the word.

Neither do we say that it is the words of Scripture, that he laid down his
life for his sheep only: (therefore thus to charge is both false and ungodly)
but we say it is so meant, as may appear by the current of promises and the
whole series of John 10. and we need not fear to affirm this, more then John.
3.16. to be meant of Believers only, when he says [That those that beeleeve
might not perish,] but of this I have spoken at large formerly.

[This reason is deceitful and erroneous, for the Scripture does not say those
many he died for are his sheep.] Wherein we may see the Author has an
excellent faculty in multiplication of particulars without necessity; he had
before at his second charge objected against it that it was (fraudulent;) now
as his fourth, he charge it with (deceitfulness,) and as his third he
charged it with (false,) no^ with (erroneous;) I wonder that as he charged it
with ungodliness, he does not charge it after with impiety; certainly he
wants matter seeing he uses so many words ridiculously.

2. We find not express words thus, [those many he died for are his sheep,]
neither do we so affirm, but by comparing Scriptures there is that by good
consequence; for John. 10.15. faith [I lay down my life for my sheep.] Mat.
20.28. says it is for [many,] therefore these are affirmed by good
consequence, that those sheep are many, and that many are sheep. So Isay. 53.
says, [He shall justify many,] and Romans 4.5. says, [He justifies the
ungodly;] thence we conclude, that many is ungodly, and those ungodly are many:
the Author and all the Remonstrants take liberty thus to argue, Mat. 20.28.
says, it is for many, yet 1 Timothy 2.6. says it is for all. Hence they conclude
that those many are all; and this reasoning we allow give us but liberty so to
argue, and that which we say appears no deceit; and in that Mat 20.28. says,
for many 1 Timothy 2.6. for all, John. 10.15. for his sheep, we dare hence
conclude, that (many) (All) (sheep) are concentred in one, and thus we reason,
many are all and all are sheep, and those sheep many, and the error herein
is no where yet made clear to us.

[As for that Text John. 10.15. it is much abused, for our Savior does not set
forth the difference between such as he died for, and died not for, etc. But
those that believe on him, and those that believe not on him. verse. 4,
5.14.26.27.] Whereby it appears that he has not yet discovered the chief
drift of that Chapter, which is to show the difference betwixt himself the
good Shepherd, and those hirelings which he so sharply charges, verse 12. So
that neither of those differences are principally intended. Yet,

2. Both those differences are secondarily intended and prosecuted; for be it
so that he puts the difference between them that believe and them that believe
not, what differences are they? let us peruse the Text: one is, they that
believe are sheep, those that persist in infidelity are not so, ver. 26. this
is now in relation to God, all are believers or unbeleevers; so all are sheep
or goats, but there are other differences, something what they do for Christ,
something what Christ does for them; as [his Sheep know him,] others do not:
his sheep [heare his voice] others do not. ver. 14. Herein is a double
difference clear, betwixt them that are sheep and are not, and them that know
him and hear him and them that do not. So in the things he does for them, [I
know my sheep, ver. 14.] others not, [ Mat. 25.12.] now will any say that here
is not a double difference? viz. betwixt them that are sheep, and them that
are not; the one be knows, the other not; as also between them that are
known of him, and them that are not; the one as sheep, the other not. So in
the other, [I lay down my life for my sheep,] now is not here a clear
difference two ways, betwixt sheep and not sheep? the one he died for, the
other not, and another involved in it, betwixt them he died for, and those for
whom he died not; the one are his sheep, the other are not: So in ver. 27, 28.
he says, [My sheep hear me, and I give them eternal life;] here is a
manifest difference between sheep and not sheep, the one have eternal life,
the other not: as also between them that have eternal life, and them that have
not; the one are sheep the other are not; such as these, and all these have in
them [differentiam convertibilem] convertible differences that may be formed
either ways; therefore the abuse of the place lights upon himself; for in
showing the difference betwixt them that believe, and believe not; that are
sheep, and those that are not: he likewise shows the difference betwixt them
that Christ died for, and them for whom he did not.

[Neither does he show the privilege of all he died for, but of those that
believe on him through the Ministration of the Gospel.] These are still
opposed very ill; for in showing the privileges of them that believe, he
shows also of them for whom he died; for he lays down his life for his
sheep. But if we soberly consider the Text, it will appear that he lays
down the privilege of them for whom he died. For ver. 27. he says, [my
sheep hear my voice,] does he not there show the mutual privileges of them
that are sheep, and also of them that hear his voice? those that are his
sheep hear his voice, and such as hear his voice are his sheep. ver. 14. [I
know my sheep,] does he not there show that all that are known of him are
sheep? ver. 28. [I give my sheep eternal life.] does he not there show, that
all to whom he gives eternal life are sheep? if any hear his voice, or know
him, or he know any, or give life to any but sheep, then are his expresses
invalid. So in ver. 15. [I lay down my life for my sheep;] let him tell me
(and not abuse both reason and Scripture) does not he here show likewise that
all that he died for are sheep? if so, then he shows the privilege of all
he died for, they are sheep, therefore hear him, he knows them, and gives to
them all eternal life; and what is more clear then this?

[Nor was our Savior so much treating of his ransom giving, etc. as of his
Ministration of the Gospel, and so his love and faithfulness in it, in laying
down his life for the ministered to; and therein gave us an example not to make
propitiation for sin, but to testify love in suffering.] What pains takes
he to abuse himself, his readers, and the Text at once? For

1. It appears plainly that verse 15. does chiefly and only speak of his
ransom giving in that it treats of laying down his life; for in giving his
life he gave a ransom, Mat. 20.28. [Shall give his life a ransom for many]
why should he so abuse the Text, as to say it treats not of ransom giving,
when it manifestly treats of giving his life?

2. Whereas he says, [not so much of his ransom as ministration of the
Gospel,] seems to intimate that his giving a ransom or dying, is no part of
his ministration; that there is a wide difference between them; but he herein
abuses his readers; for his giving his life is the greatest part of his
ministration. Mat. 20 28. [But to minister and give his life a ransom for many]

3. Whereas he says, [not so much of ransom giving, as his love and
faithfulness in giving his life for the ministered to;] intimating that his
giving his life, is not a giving a ransom: but does not he herein abuse
Scripture, his Readers, himself at once^ what is ransom but the life of
Christ, Mat. 20.28. his life a ransom for many?

4. His last clause, viz. [as an example not of making propitiation for sin,
but to testify love,] intimates these two things.

1. That where the ransom of Christ is spoken of as our example, it is to move
us thereby to make propitiation for sin, wherein he miserably abuses Scripture.

2. That where it speaks of ransom giving, it is not set down as a motive
to love and suffer for the brethren, wherein he abuses not Scripture only,
but himself also; for page 26. he says thus, [The death of Christ in respect
of ransom is propounded to believers as an example to follow in love.] Either
now he must intimate these two things, or his expresses are very frothy; behold
then how inconsistent, empty, and absurd his expressions are, and how
insufficient they are to enervate that which we say in the prosecution of this
reason?

Reason 4.
The fourth reason which he recites, (although his martialling them up in
order, first, second, third, and fourth, proceed from his own gross conceit,)
yet it is well put in by way of answer to an objection which might arise from
the premises; for if any shall ask why Christ meaning but some, should use
such words and expressions, as by their natural import may seem to take in
every son of Adam, the reason is ready at hand, [That so the Gentiles might
not exclude themselves, nor the Jews exclude the Gentiles, when either might
on good ground; Christ being sent to the Jews, not to the way of the Gentiles,
and he commands his disciples accordingly.] This reason he undertaketh to
refell: and first he would show the absurdity of the assertion it self, viz.
[There was great reason why, when he meant but some, he should yet use such
expresses as may in their natural import seem to take in all,] and takes
much pains therein as follows. [That any other doctrine or contrary words
should be necessary to deliver the Gospel within these our times is monstrous
to affirm.] The reason of which, comes to this issue; it is monstrous to
deliver the Gospel now in our times in contrary words: Therefore it was
monstrous for Christ to deliver the Gospel, or his Apostles to deliver the
Gospel, in such expressions as might seem to import every man, when yet they
meant but some; where lies the strength of this Argument? Christ in himself
and his Spirit inspiring the Apostles were Legislatores, might use what
expressions they pleased, we are tied to those which they used; besides we say
not they were contrary expressions; for though he used such expressions as
might import a further meaning, yet they were not contrary to truth nor his
own meaning; for as he says, page 73. [to any that understands, the truth
of of his word will appear to be right and plain according to the words which
he uses.] But he further urges.

[Those whose faith we are to follow, are such whose words, etc. hold forth
Christ, yesterday, today, and the same for ever.] Which is so far from
overthrowing us, that it confirms us; he was for ever the Redeemer and Savior
both of Jews and Gentiles, which Gentiles should know it and be gathered to
him in his time; therefore in his time he used such general expressions that
might bespeake so much both to the Jew and Gentile; these general terms now
used make no change in Christ, but the contrary.

[Do not the words of Christ and his Apostles express their meaning?] This
fond Query has had its answer already; yes they do so, but their meaning is
not always according to the natural import of the words.

[Did their words serve but for their times?] Yes, for ours and after times,
and so much the reason intimates; for in that it was to make way for the
Gentiles to come in, it is to serve till the fullness of the Gentiles be come
in; but this I say that the occasion of those expressions had its rise in those
times.

[Have any of us found fitter words to express the Gospel in these times?] No,
that were high presumption; we are tied to the expressions which are used by
the Spirit of God, we are not to dictate to him what if fit for him to use; but
was Christ and his Spirit so bound? his reason herein is this, because we
cannot find better words then he has used; therefore it was not fit for him
to use such general expressions, when yet he meant but some: what piercing eye
can discern the strength of his reason? It is irksome to follow him in such
froth and impertinency that can neither please nor satisfy the learned. But he
comes at last to an ecstasy.

O ye Heavens be astonished!] O the admiration of ignorance! at which the
Heavens may stand astonished, in that he triumphs in such weak reasonings, and
at his impudence in putting such into print to scourge the ears of the world.
We conclude Christ was free to use what words he pleased: we not so; his
expresses were true, though not conformable to our understandings; and though
he used, such as [All men] [Every man] [whole world] yet they were no way
contrary to his meaning, though he meant but some, or but many, or his sheep;
they may (been convenire inters^) well agree in one; which arises of all the
needelesse allegations produced by him. page 78. 79.

He then invadeth the reason it self, why Christ should use such general
expressions, viz. to temper those particular ones which he had used before,
with which those general might agree, yet cure some mistakes that might and
did arise from the particular; the reason he sets down and then answers, this
reason is grounded on the ensuing particulars which he recites.

The ground of it in full vigor is thus; the legal pedagogy that was the
finger to point at Christ to type him out, was exhibited only to the Jews, as
privileges relating to Christ, as Romans 9.4, 5. When he was foretold by the
Angel, he was said to be the Savior of his people, Mat. 1.21. The Jew coming
under that notion only; Christ himself said he was sent but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 15.24. He forbad his Disciples to go into
the way of the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5. Hence we conclude that seeing he came to
redunate both Jew and Gentile, that he should use some other expressions that
might temper those particular and confining words to the Jews only. To this
he thus replyeth.

[This part of the reason is weak and frothy, for it is evident to a mean
understanding, that our Savior Matthew. 15.24. speaks not of his mission to
die, etc. but his mission for his ministration here on earth, which was for the
Jews, Romans 8.9. which mission with greater enlargednesse he left with his
Disciples, Matt. 28.20.] I shall first clear further the force of the reason,
then rejoyne to his reply; the first I shall do in showing these 3 particulars.

1. That there were many things at which the Jews might take occasion to
stumble at the Gentiles; as Christ being borne of the Jews, the seed of
Abraham, brought up amongst them, exercising his ministry, living, dying
amongst them, chargeing his Apostles not to go to the Gentiles as strangers and
dog; which are clear, Romans 9 3, 4, 5. Mat. 10.5.

2. That from those there was an actual stumbling at them, as a people
estranged and unclean; hence in their Law it was forbidden to accompany with a
Gentile, Acts. 10.28. Acts. 11.3 and when they saw that the Gentiles believed
they admired, Acts 10.45. even believing Jews, Acts. 11.18. they said [then
has God granted repentance to the Gentiles,] a thing which they knew not
before; it was contrary to the received opinion of the Gentiles on the same
ground before mentioned, yea Peter himself was not free from this, in that a
vision was sent to him to prepare him to go to Cornelius a Gentile, and from
his own words, Acts, 10.34. [of a truth I perceive that God is no respect of
persons, but that in every Nation] it was not his thoughts before, they thought
that no salvation was promised to the Gentiles upon faith and obedience.

3. That God did cure this by a vision to Peter, Acts. 10.11, 12, 13. a sheet
in which were all manner of beasts; so he was to feed without discrimination,
and this was equipollent to those general expresses (all men) (every man,) the
one being in the Hieroglyphicke, what the other is in viva voce, and both these
to prevent and remove the same stumbling block against the Gentiles.

Now to consider his reply.

He faith this reason is weak and frothy: But had not his understanding been
of the meanest sort, he might have seen that his mission in Mat 15 24. does not
exclude his death and ransom giving, it mentions nothing but stands as
indifferent to receive any thing that he did as part of his ministration here
on earth, of which his dying was a part and the chief part, and all things
else in reference to it, Mat. 20.28. [To minister and to give his life a
ransom for many,] therefore for him to say not to die but to minister to, is
weak and frothy; and his opposing these two, (death) and (ministration here on
earth,) intimates that either his death is no part of his ministration, or
else that part of his ministration was not done on earth; both most false and
absurd.

[And yet the restraint of his mission to the Jews, is not wholly exclusive;
for then the woman could not have been commended for faith, and helped thereby,
Mat. 15.24.28.]

It makes not whether it were wholly exclusive, yea or no, it suffices us if
there was good ground so to think, as any may see there was, when he answered
to her suite, [I was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,]
now the Jews being ready to snatch at the word, [house of Israel] as their
proper privilege, which is refelled Romans 9. by the Apostle; they might and did
hence conclude that he was sent to none but them.

Besides, Christ went not thither to minister the Gospel by virtue of his
mission, but only to hide and secure himself in those parts of Tire and
Sydon; therefore this accidental act to the Phaenician woman does not argue
that his mission was not confined to the house of Israel. To conclude, were his
mission to die, or only to promulge the Gospel, the one, or other, or both;
yet his speech Mat. 15.24 gave good occasion to the Jews to exclude the
Gentiles from Christ, which he removes, and reason there was he should so
remove it.

[And of the same nature was the sending of his Disciples, and of no further as
yet, Mat. 10.5.] This is but new divinity, to say that the mission of Christ
and of the Apostles was of the same nature, when his Father sent him to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel; he came to save that which was lost, to
redeem, to dye for. John. 3.16. But when Christ sent his Disciples to the lost
sheep of Israel, Mat. 10.5. he sent them not to dye for them, to be their
Saviors; Christ was sent to perform the whole work of ministration, they but
a part, to be adjutant in preaching the Gospel; and true, Christ had done no
more yet, but he was sent to do more, even to dye.

[This could be no reason to darken or streighten the extent of the death of
Christ, much less of using such general terms as all men, etc.] True,
neither did he streighten it, but enlarged it, not larger then it was indeed,
but larger then the Jews did apprehend it; and this was reason enough of using
such general terms as made way for the Gentiles. But he attempteth to prove
that those general terms could not be produced to cure such an offense taken
from such speeches. Mat. 15 24. Thus,

[1. Before the mission of Christ's Disciples, or his speaking to the woman of
Canaan, he was said to be send into the world, that the world might be saved,
etc.] Which proves it not, because although those sayings were before his
speech to his Disciples and the woman of Canaan, yet they were not before such
expressions as were equipollent, and might administer like and equal occasion.
To pass by all the Prophesies, types, prefigurations of Christ which were
exhibited to the Jews only; in which regard they have the pre-eminence of the
Gentiles; but Mat. 1.21. he is said by the angels to be the Savior of his
people: and expressly, Mat. 2.6. Israel, this was enough to create that
stumbling against the Gentiles, but this was before any such general terms.

Besides the word world, does not temper those confining expressions, because
that word might and is used as to include no more then the Jews, they being
most potent and cathol^ke in the world, Luke, 2.1.

[2. Their mission was afterward enlarged to go into all the world, Mat.
20.28. and then no necessity of using words importing more then truth.] To wave
his expresses of [using words importing more then truth,] being the result of
his folly; we may say that their mission being enlarged to all the world, there
was good reason to use such expressions as might admit both Jew and Gentile;
else they would not be received; for Peter for all his commission, he was
questioned for coming to the Gentiles, Acts. 11.1.2.3. and they were not
satisfied till he shows them the vision, which was but equivalent to these
general terms, and then they admitted them, but with admiration, that to them
should be granted repentance.

[3. Whilst these general words were frequent in use, the same is still
affirmed of Christ's administration, that it was for the Circumcision. Romans
15.8, 9*] And good reason because those general expresses were to let in the
Gentiles, not to exclude the Jews; but therein, Romans 15.8, 9. both Jew and
Gentile are inserted, that they might both mutually embrace each other, this
argues not those general expresses were not used to cure a mistake in the
Jews excluding the Gentiles, when there were no such expressions as did let
them in: if he had produced any Text, speaking of the Jews so exclusively as
formerly, then he had said something; but take his reasons as they are, and
they are reasonlesse and miserable, and by this it appears that yet our reason
has more in it then he with all his understanding can resist.

The second part of this last reason as he calls it, is as follows.

[Had not the Jews been for a long time the only people of God, and might not
other nations think themselves excluded, being called strangers, and aliens?
and was not the receiving of the Gentiles a thing new to the Apostles? Acts.
10. therefore there was great reason such general words should be used, which
might inform the Jews, and encourage the Gentiles, and them that went to
preach to them, as it did to Peter to go to Cornelius and his family, which
otherwise he would have been as backward to, as to eat the creatures that he
called unclean; and he was moved thereto, when he knew that of every Nation
those that work righteousness are accepted of God; and this is one reason why
such expressions are so frequent in Scripture,] this reason he is pleased to
brand with the titles of weak and frothy, he foames out little but such
expressions of venom and contempt, but how does he make it appear?

Thus, [The ignorance of some in the mysteries of grace, is no proof that the
God of Truth will speak beyond the bounds of Truth.] Which is the empty reply
that he gave to the first part of this reason, wherein he urges me to say
again that Gods using such expressions, when yet he means but some, is no way
contrary to truth. This I have proved at large, and it is in many pages
confessed by himself, in that All, and every man, are in many places of
Scripture taken but for some, as any may see in my sixth Chapter: all this
being granted, yet the Author may well know that the ignorance of some in the
mysteries of grace, may administer occasion of using such expressions as may
cure that ignorance and mistakes, which yet may be wrested, and by their
natural import seem to yield an other meaning; and where is the emptiness in
all this? So for the rest of his reply, it is nothing but a heap of reitterate
absurdities, which for me to trace, will be as unpleasing in me as in him; when
I am informed of any particular that requires distinct and new satisfaction, I
shall say more: To some few only I shall in few words rejoyne.

He says, page 83. 84. [The Jews that believed, did not contend for preaching
the gospel to the Gentiles, (as doubting of ransom for them) but for fellowship
and partaking of their privileges, being not regulated to them; therefore that
place, Act. 10.45. and 11.18. etc. is misalledged.] Hence inferring, that these
expresses (All men) (every man) being applied to the death and ransom of
Christ, needed not to be produced to cure any such stumbling of the Jews,
because there was no stumbling concerning the Gospel or death or ransom, but
only at their partaking of privileges: now the argument is good, but weakly
founded, as elsewhere when he produces that which is pertinent, he falls
short in proof.

For,

1. There was as fair occasion of stumbling at the Gentiles receiving of the
Gospel, or any spiritual benefit from Christ's death, as any temporal; the
discrimination is more made in spiritual then temporal privileges, as
appears Mat. 10.5. go not to the Gentiles, that is, to preach the Gospel, Romans
9. covenants, glory, law, promises, Christ, were their peculiar privileges,
Romans 3. the oracles of God.

2. That they did stumble at that is evident; by the cure we may gather the
disease; what was the vision to prepare Peter for? Acts, 10. to receive them
into some outward privilege only? or whether to go to them to preach the
Gospel? consult with that Text, any that please; what was the occasion that the
Jews contended with Peter? was it because the Geniles had partaken of outward
privileges? or because they had received the word of God? consult with Acts,
11.1. what is more clear then that the Jews stumbled at the preaching Gospel
to them?

3. To say they stumbled not at their receiving of the Gospel, but partaking of
privileges, is too weak; they are not to be opposed; for in partaking of the
Gospel they looked at it as partaking of their chief privilege; for so it
was, Romans 3.2.3. and 9.3.4, 5.

4. What did the Jews admire, what were they astonished at? not for any
outward privileges, but for the receiving the Holy Ghost, Acts, 10.45. that
repentance to life was granted to them, Acts, 11.18. they thought no Gospel, no
life, no repentance, no Christ, no Holy Ghost belonged to them; this is clear
to any capacity; therefore it is reason that such terms should be used as
might let in the Gentiles: to all these he urges further, p. 85.

[On whose part could it be a reason for such an end? not to the believing
Jews in respect of themselves, because they reckoned themselves the people of
God.] Which might well have been spared, because we plead it not to confirm
the Jews of themselves, but to let in the Gentiles of whom they doubted: yet
something in respect of themselves, that they might not think themselves
solely the seed of Abraham, or because lineally descended, but that they are so
by the faith of Abraham, and all that believe are so, which the Apostle labors
much to press. Romans 9.6.7.8. Gal 3.7.8.9. which is much helped by such
general expressions letting in the Gentiles. [For the Jews in respect of
Gentiles, it could be no reason whilst the ministration of the Gospel was not
sent to the Gentiles.] To this I say, neither were such general expressions
frequent or much used, if at all, till such times as the Apostles commission
was enlarged, but if any be found, it was to prepare them for that business
before hand, as the vision was sent to Peter before he heard of his going to
Cornelius. Again,

[We see it had not that effect with the believing Jews, who were not by such
words prevailed with.] Which is palpably false; for, Acts. 11.18. by that which
was equipollent, viz. the vision, they stumbled not, but received the Gentiles,
now they saw that repentance was granted to them.

Again he urges, [On the part of such Gentiles as were brought to believe,
before the use of such general words, it could be no reason; and yet to them
is the Gospel set forth in general terms.] None of his produced Texts, viz.
Romans 3.22. and 5.12.18. prove that any Gentile was converted before the use of
such general terms; yet the thing I deny not; for be it so, and though no
reason can be produced on their part, yet for others that were to be converted
before the enlarged commission to the Apostles, they were looked at by
themselves and others to partake of those privileges, as being indeared to the
Jews being Proselytes, and so under the notion of Jews; but hitherto there
was no way for Gentiles as Gentiles, and unproselyted to the Jews to partake
of any, which was a mystery hidden till then, revealed in such expressions,
Col. 1.20.26, 27, 28.

Now I shall conclude with his own words, let our weak and and frothy
reasons, his irreffragable and strong answers, and the dealing with Scripture
in both be well perpended, and then we are content that those Epithites,
injurious, unjust, absurd, false, weak, fraudulent, ungodly, deceitful,
frothy, (terms which he much trades in) rest where they fall; and let me
counsel him ere I go from this, to be more merciful to himself, and spare
those loades of epithites of calumny, (symptoms of a bad cause, or weak
maintainers of a good one) for in the upshot they prove commonly his own
share, and so in branding an other, he pictureth out himself to the life.

CHAP. XIIII. Of answering a second Objection.
THe second Argument which he undertaketh to refute as he produces, it is this.

[Saint John makes it an infallible mark of the love of Christ to them for
whom he died and laid down his life, 1 John. 3.16.

But God has not loved every man in the world, for he hated Esau, Romans 9, 13.
but his Church whom he loves to the end, Ephesians. 5.25.

Ergo, Christ did not die for every man.] The former which he produced, was no
argument; and this so miserably abused, that any intelligent man may be ashamed
to own it, and confident I am he cannot produce it from any pen, unless such
as himself, propounding it purposely to make it vile and odious; that wherein
the vigor of the argument lies, is left out, and a superfluity of confusion
intermingled, which gives us a taste of his faithfulness in this business,
which he at first promised; if he do it willingly, he is to be blamed; if
ignorantly, he will not I hope think much to be informed: the argument in its
genuine shape runs thus, and it was the sixth in order in the conscience at
Hague.

[Those for whom Christ died, he loved them (some) with the top and greatest
love that is shown to man,

But so he loves not all and every man with his greatest love.

Ergo, He died not for every man,] that is for every son of Adam.]

The major proposition, is grounded on many Texts, wherein the love of Christ
in dying for us is not set down as an expression of love barely, but with an
emphasis and transcendebly, as Romans 5.8. a love with all commendation or
magnification, 1 John. 3.16. He so loved the world; not great love only but
greatest, John 15.13. no greater love then for a man to lay down his life for
his friend; but Christ's greater, in that he did it when we were enemies;
therefore we propound it not so remissely as he fallaciously, [whom he dies
for he loves,] and no more, but loves eminently with the greatest love.

The minor is undeniable; for that God should love every man most and with his
greatest love, yea the damned with so great, as beloveth the saved withal, the
Arminians durst never yet affirm, Scripture no where speaks, and the Author
himself overthrows, page 89. [to some more especial love is shown.] Now
any may see the wide difference betwixt the argument in its genuine force, and
as he propoundes it, and all his answers fall to the ground, being apted not to
the argument, but his perversions of it, yet I shall reply that I may reduce
him to truth.

As for that Text 1 John, 3.16. it is picked out of purpose by himself, it is
not so clearly holding faith the force of the argument as many others; yet to
take it as it lies, let us consider that it means that transcendent love,
beyond the greatest of man's. Hereby perceive we that love, Cap. 4.10, 11. and
if he so loved us, and behold what love. Cap. 3 ver. 1. Now can every son of
Adam? say, I perceive the greatest love of God to me in that Christ died for
me; if every man perceives the greatest love, then no room for his express,
page 89. [to some more special favor i^ shown.]

His after-plea [The place speaks of the perception of love by beleivers,]
helps not, because it speaks of no other perception then what arose from
the former assertion: [Christ has died for us,] it is a conclusion from
infallible premises which any may conclude that can so premise; there is such a
connection betwixt his dying for and his greatest love, that every one that
affirms the one, does (in eodem instanti) affirm the other; it is no
special privilege of some to perceive his greatest love in dying for them,
but of all for whom he died. Thus for the major.

He then violently assaulteth the minor thus,

[The assumption is full of infidelity and blasphemy.] A heavy charge, if he
can make his charge good; but like ^ailing Ra^shekah, he oftener barketh then
biteth; but how great is his impudence and injury to misalledge his adversary
into infidelity and blasphemy? let him take the assumption as he should
propound it. viz. [God loves not every man with his greatest love,] then
either it is not infidelity and blasphemy, or else he is equally guilty with
us: for he says, page 89. [God gives to some more special love] if so, then
he loves not every man with his special and greatest love; nay, yet further
he says, page 90. [If it had been God loves not every man in the world, it
might be granted and proved,] which is more then he can prove; but if it be a
truth that he loves not every man in the world, then certainly it is far from
infidelity and blasphemy, to say that he loves not every man with his
transcendent and greatest love; no nor ever has loved every man with his
greatest love. Neither is it such blasphemy as he pretends, to say, that he
has not nor does love any but his Church with his transcendent or greatest
love; the Apostle gives great reason so to affirm, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. He
therefore exhorts to conjugall affection, which is the greatest and strongest
of all relations, and to the greatest and highest degree of that kind; and the
pattern of this he fetches from Christ to his Church, and that expressed in
giving up himself to death for them; is it not clear that he loves his
Church with his transcendent and greatest love? nay, this he plainly
affirms, page 9^. from this very Text Ephesians. 5.25. where he says, [That Text
speaks of higher ends of giving himself then ransom, even of the special
fruits of application, ver. 26. so the Author, page 94.] So intimating that the
application holds forth, greater love then the giving his life to procure; but
this is groundless; for though the Text speaks of the application of his
blood, yet the specimen of his transcendent love is not in that, but his giving
himself to that end, [In that he loved it and gave himself for it.] Besides
Scripture speaks as if to give his life to procure, is a sign of greater
love, then to give his spirit to sanctify; the Apostle inforceth from the
greater to the less, if he gave us him to die for us, much more with him will
he give us all things; spirit to help infirmities, vocation, justification,
glorification, Romans 9.32. And when the Scripture commends his love, it is not
that he gives them Spirit to apply, but his life to merit, in that he died; and
no better testimony do I desire then of the Remonstrants themselves. Collat.
Hagien. in Arg. 6.
] [Quum vita nullum pretiosius pignus quia pro alio constituere potest, merito
dicitur summam esse charitatem vitam deponere; hoc cum scipo Christi convenit,
sicut and cum aliis locis, Ephesians. 1.2. 1 John. 3.16.] That is, seeing none can
lay down for any a greater pledge then life, therefore it is deservedly said,
that it is the greatest love to lay down life for one: by which the evidence
both of Major and M^nor appears.

But here in page 90, he instanceth where the blasphemy of our assumption
lies, viz. in contradicting and blaspheming many Texts of Scripture, as John,
3.16. where it speaks of Gods love to the world; true, but is in the believing
part of it, as the afterwords show, for them that believe not, whom God
foreseeth, how does God express his love to them? does he send his son to
die for them? that as many of them (whom he foreseeth to persist in unbeleefe)
as that believe, should not perish? So he says it blasphemeth, [ Psalm.
145.8.9.136.25. where it says, the Lord is good to all,] but does our
affirmation, viz. [that God loves only his Church with his highest and
greatest love?] contradict that of the Psalmist, viz. [that God is good to
all?] let the Author better consider, has the Lord nothing to bestow, unless
he give them the top of his love? Thirdly, he says it contradicts [the force
of all his exhortations, and calls to such as refuse,] nay, it leaves a way
for these, there being not his highest love; for greater it is for God to give
hearts willing to obey his call, which his very words intimate he gives not to
all, therefore loves not all with his highest love. And so for the rest, they
are weak and to no purpose alleged, only apted against this position, [that
God has not loved every man at all,] which is not our affirmation; let them
that broach it maintain it.

But he has a more stupendous piece of blasphemy against our assumption, viz.

[It says he has not loved any other of mankind, no not when he made and
beheld them all righteous, but hated them; Oh fearful to say! that he hates
the righteous, Psalm. 45.7.] But here envy speaks, and ignorance admires; for
we say not, nor can it be inferred from us, that God loved not innocent man at
all, but that he loved not him with his transcendent and greatest love, he did
not manifest the top of his love to him: and this is no such blasphemy or
fearful thing to say; for the gift that he gave to his Church, viz. (His Son)
was greater then primitive grace, or any thing that he conferred in the
creation, and our deserts less; for though in creation we could deserve no
good, and so his gift be free: yet now in in our restoring we deserved much
evil; in creation what good he gave us was only without merit, but he now
bestows all against our me it; hence the scripture puts the emphasis of love
upon the work of redemption, mercy having more in it then mere goodness: by
the former rather then by the latter, he would be known as by his glory. Exodus
33.19. and 34.6.7.

But besides why should he fasten that on us as blasphemy, which will prove the
result of his own words? he says, [to hate is to love in a less degree,]
page 92. now does not God love the righteous in a less degree then he loves
his only Son in? then he hates the righteous by his own doctrine; oh
fearful to say! but thus much is clear, that grant him that God loved
innocent man; yet it follows not, that he loved every man with the top and
greatest of his love; so that our Minor yet stands good.

But he descends to give some satisfactory answer to the argument, and it is
well he does so, for his former words have yielded but little, it is well if
his afterwords yield more; we shall not shut our eyes against it. He would have
the Scripture showed where it speaks of the love and hatred; let it be so, as
also his words which are these. [The Scripture mentions a diverse kind and
degree of love and hatred in God shown in the effects of it.] Now herein I
shall willingly join issue with him, seriously to consider and weigh not only
what Scripture says, but what the Scripture means in such speeches, least we
vent our own conceits unworthy the nature of God; love and hatred is no more
attributed to God, then desire, grief, rejoicing, with all other affections
and passions of men, which in us are perturbations, and why not then love and
hatred? but to grant any perturbations in God, comes little short of blasphemy;
therefore it may be controverted, whether as all the rest of our affections
(incident to us) so love and hatred be attributed to God properly, or only by
an Anthropopathy; as the members of our body are given to him by an
Anthropomorphy; that there is such a thing in God which we call love I grant;
but that the name of love and hatred is but figuratively given to it, that also
I affirm; Gods love is generally thus defined. [Velle dare bonum creaturis,] a
will to bestow good upon his creatures; now this will is properly said to be in
God, but it is (as I conceive) figuratively called love, after the manner of
men, because whom man loves, to him he wills to bestow good: So Gods will to
bestow good is termed his love; yet this is the difference, man's will to bestow
good is an effect of his love; but God when he wills to give good, it is not
any effect of his love, but his love it self. Scripture furnishes us with such
expressions, John. 3.16. God so loved the world that he sent his Son, that
is, his actual sending is an effect of his love, that is of his will to send;
but we never find this nor any such, God so loved that he willed to send his
Son, because his will to send his Son is that love it self. Hence that
assertion of Cortinus in Molin. l. 5. s. 3 [Let him that will consult with him]
about that expression. [Alius affectus mensura alterius affectus and causa quod
deus decretum faciat;] has not stabiliment at all in Scripture; this being
considered, it will appear that Gods love has no augmentation, diminution,
alteration, diversification, Aquin. p. 1^ Q 20. Art. 30. Q. 20. Art. 20. Q. 23.
Art. 30.
but what proceeds from the good things bestowed, or will to bestow them; so
that as God is said to will a greater or less good, so he is said to love more
or less, [Ex part boni voliti unum diligit magis aut minus.] And as the
wills some good freely, and yet some evil for the sin of the creature,
that creature may be said to be both loved and hated, [Idem potest odio haberi
and amari; diversa ratione peccator and amatur and odio habetur,] and that as
God wills to give this man eternal life, and to deny that man the same good,
he is said to love the one, and hate the other, although to both he give some
good. [Deus omnes amat in quantum omnibus dat aliquod bonum; in quantum
aliquibus non dat vitam aeternam, ideo eos od o habet.] These being considered,
I shall make it appear that there is more fear of his confounding the degrees
of his love of compassion then that we should confound his love of compassion
and delight as he speaks. Now to proceed to what he says of Gods love and
hatred: of Gods love he speaks of a double sort.

Love of Compassion. and Delight.


I shall not insist on these terms, though I might and show his want of
wisdom in hinting such expressions without explanation; for true, the
Scripture gives to God [compassion,] but in compassion there must needs be
passion, but none in God: Nor yet to insist upon what he says of either by way
of bounding to each its limits in good things bestowed, though I might
expatiate my self herein; for he makes Gods compassion and mercy to extend no
further then to make men salvable, and his delight to be in the giving union
and possession of all privileges, but this division is without ground; for all
good that God gives to fallen man, even to glory it self, flows from his
compassion and mercy; glory in heaven is mercy as well as any thing we receive
on earth, 2 Timothy 1.18. and all that love that rests not till the party loved be
brought into union etc. is that love of compassion, (though he make it to be
the love of delight,) which properly rests not till all that be done; for
delight is rather in the thing done, then tending to the doing of it; these two
constitute not a good distinction as he boundeth them: but these with many
other things I pass by, and come to examine what he speaks of hatred: that
also he says is twofold.

[1. A not so much loving, as Genesis 29.30.31.33. Luke. 14.26.

2. A positive and furious hatred tending to the destruction of the hated,
Deuteronomy. 19.11.]

Now that a not so much loving should be called hatred, is not clear from
those Texts alleged; as for Genesis 29.30. that Text speaks not of a less
degree of love, but of no love at all, that is, conjugall affection; so he
loved her not at all, therefore hated her: and for Luke, 14.26. there is not
spoken of a less love, but absolute hatred, if they stand in opposition to
Christ; for else it is enough to give worldly respects some part, so that we
give Christ the greatest part of our love; but this is not sound divinity.
Again if a not so much loving be hating, then it is no such fearful thing to
say that God hates the righteous; for certain it is that he loves not them
so much as he does his only Son. But to let this pass, I am now to examine
how he welldeth these weapons to cut down our assumption. That of Gods love he
pursues thus far.

[A love of compassion and mercy, Psalm. 136.25.145.8.9. is such a love as
extends it self so far for the good of man loved in good things afforded,
that a man is made salvable and so much done for him that in accepting, etc. he
maybe saved. Psalm. 36.5.6.7.]

That God is full of compassion, and his mercy is over all his works, and he
saves man and beast, those Texts affirm, and that by the virtue of his
compassion the sons of men come to partake of the well of life we grant; but
all the rest is of his own making: none of these Texts say that every of the
sons of men have so much of Gods compassion as to have life procured for them
by Christ's death, no nor yet that every man enjoys the height of Gods
compassion, this is to be yet proved; for if creatures irration^ll, may have
much of Gods compassion, and yet not the height of his compassion; why may not
some men have much compassion, yet not the height of it: yet our assumption
stands firm.

Again he says, [Lesse love then this was not to the Angels before they fell,
nor less love to mankind before the fall, Ecel. 7.29. Genesis 12.] This though
it serve him not, yet he discovers his folly; for this supposes that Angels
and men had compassion showen them before they fell; but this is false; for
compassion presupposes misery and the fall which was not before the fall; but
what is the result of all this? no more but this, that all men have some degree
of Gods compassion manifested on them; but what is all this to prove that every
man has the height of his compassion? so that his reasoning comes to this
head: every man has some compassion showed him, therefore that is high
blasphemy to say that every man has not the height of his compassion; this is
but miserable reasoning.

Again thus he urges, [The love of compassion, and the hatred that is in a
less degree of love, may stand together both in God and man, Hos. 11.5. Jer.
9.1.2.] This is a truth, nay I shall grant further, that his love of compassion
and his positive hatred may stand together, that is, God may give some
expresses of his compassion to many whose destruction he wills, and whom he
purposes to destroy; and this is so far from overthrowing, that it confirms
our assumption. For it clears this, that every degree of his compassion
enjoyed, does not argue an eye to the salvation of them whom God bestows that
low degree of compassion on; therefore the compassion that God shows to many,
is no argument that every man enjoys also the height of Gods compassion: Yet
hitherto we are untouched.

He says further, [To say whoever he loves with the love of compassion he
loves for ever, or to say he hates (with any other hatred then that which is
in the less degree of love,) any before they have hardened their hearts
against him, etc. is contrary to Hosea, 9.10. to 15. Zach. 7.11.13. and
1.18.28. and 2.4.5.] In which words there is confusion, impropriety, and
fallacy.

1. He speaks confusedly, not distinguishing the several degrees of his
compassion; for it may be granted that to whom he gives some degrees of his
compassion, he continues not that for ever, because some good he may give that
is not to last for ever, viz. a temporal good; yet certainly to whom he
gives his highest pitch of compassion, he loves such for ever: Will he say
that Romans 6.15. is not an everlasting compassion? that compassion mentioned,
Ier. 31.33.34. is not for ever continued: consult with 36.37.

2. He speaks improperly, because though hatred may stand with a less degree
of love, that is, he may deny some good to them to whom he gives some good;
yet it is not proper to say that hatred consists in that less degree of love;
for in that he bestows any good he hates not, neither can hatred consist in
the giving that good, but rather in the denial of a greater good; he hated nor
Esau in that he gave him some good, but in that he gave him not that great good
that he gave to Jacob.

3. He speaks fallaciously, suggesting to his followers that we hold that God
hates with a hatred, that is without any degree of love; that is, he so
wills evil to to them, that he wills not to bestow any good at all; but
this we say not; for the greatest hatred, is to will to deny grace and glory,
but God may give much good to such; he hates not the reprobate with the hatred
that excludes all good; yet some, and many he hates so as to deny them the
top and height of his compassion, and that before they turn away their hearts
from him; and how does he in all this overthrow the Minor? but by this hatred
which he makes to be after their turning away from him. I suppose he means
(or at least should do) his will to deny saving grace and glory, and then
happily

4. He may seem to speak falsely; for his will so to do is not after their
turning away from him, but long before it; there is a double hatred of God
mentioned in scripture. 1. A denial of saving grace to some which he gives
others, whence their turning away from him follows, which others having turn
not away. 2: A punishment of such for turning away; now the first is proper to
our controversy, and it is no way against Scripture to say that such hatred is
before men turn away from God; of the latter his Texts speaks, as Hos. 9.15.
and nothing to the purpose; for more then this cannot be concluded; that God
destroys none till they turn away from him, which any may grant: our
hardening or not hardening our hearts cannot be the measure of his giving or
denying grace, or will so to do, because his giving or not giving saving
grace, is before our hardening or not hardening our hearts; as also because God
does not deny grace and glory to all that turn from him: all turning from him
are not so hated of him. Paul did so in a greater measure then many that God
never willed to give grace or glory to, and in them who are given over, and
denied his special grace and so hated of him; he doing of it in time willed to
do so before time, as be confesses p. 121. If so, he hated them before they
hardened themselves against him; Esau was hated before he had done good or
evil; now if he be hated (as they would have it) in a small degree, without
and before his evil, why may not God hate him in the highest degree before his
evil? Justice is seen in small things as well as great ones; if any shall
say, his foresight of their sins is the cause why he so hates them: I demand
why did not the foresight of Paul's infidelity move him to hate him which he saw
to be greater then of many who were hated, and passed by both in respect of
grace and glory? but he concludes, wherein if ever, he must undo our
assumption.

[For such as while his compassion flows, etc. they will persist till he give
them up to Satan, such are reprobated of God, and so hated of him, Ezeck.
24.13. Ier. 6.16.27.30. 1 Ioh. 5.18
etc. and none but such set forth in Scripture to be hated of God, Prove.
1.23.33. which overthrows the assumption.] Which words are yet very
fallacious, therefore not fit to satisfy us withal; for, we grant such as
persist till they be given up are hated, and that in the highest degree; but
here is the question, do they then begin to be hated of him? does Gods hatred
follow or precede their being given up, yea their persisting? Gods hatred or
reprobation we make no more then a will in God to deny both special grace and
glory. Now did he not will to deny it, nay did he not deny it actually to them
before they persisted? certainly he did, else they would not so persist.

We never find this method, or God thus saying [If thou persist I will
reprobate thee.] Or, [if thou persist till I give thee over to Satan, I will
deny thee my special grace and decree so to do,] let the Author produce such
if he can. But wherein has he in all this overthrown the assumption? his
assertions are overthrown, and therefore have not strength to overthrow this
assumption, that is settled upon such evidence; clear it is, (all that he says
notwithstanding) that God did decree to deny the height of his compassion to
many, long before they persisted in rebellion; if so, then he did not intend
Christ to them, which is the height of his compassion.

Those Texts cited by him do all speak thus much, that every man is not loved
with the height of his compassion, as Romans 9.13. speaks thus much, that Esau
was not so much loved as Jacob; and therein affirms that he was not loved
with the height of his love; for if he had been so loved, he had received so
much grace as to have kept his birthright. And this the Author grants, page
93. [That Esau was hated in respect of peculiar love.] But he says, [The
hatred of Esau may stand with the love of compassion.] Let it be so, yet we are
safe; for his hatred cannot stand with the height of his compassion, which is
our assumption.

Again he says, [If laying his Mountains waste did witness such hatred, did
not the giving him those Mountains testify like love, though not so much as
to Jacob?] Were it so, yet we are where we were by his own confession. Esau
was not loved with the height of his compassion, because not so much as Jacob.

Besides let the Author consider, were not those sayings waste, and so Gods
hatred of Esa^, and love to Jacob, though shown in part in temporal things,
yet to be accomplished in spiritual? how comes the Apostle in Romans 9. to use
this example in his business which was to prove that all Abraham's feed
according to the flesh, were not heirs according to promise? As for his
reiterated calumny, viz. that our assumption confounds the love of compassion
and delight, it is not worth the naming, the contrary has appeared; rather he
confounds the several degrees of compassion, in arguing that because every man
partaketh of some degree of compassion, therefore every man must partake of the
highest degree; but this reasoning can never overthrow our assumption, and so
our argument still holds firm.

I shall again resume it.

Those for whom Christ died so as to procure eternal life for, he loved with
height and top of his love.

But he loves not every son of Adam with the height of his love.

Ergo, He did not lay down his life for every son of Adam, so as to procure
eternal life for them; and what passage is there in all his discourse that
everteth either of these premises, from which the conclusion follows firm?

CHAP. XV. Of the third Objection.
THe third Argument which he pretends to answer is this.

[All they for whom Christ died to satisfy his Fathers justice, are justified
by his blood, etc.

But. But every son of Adam is not justified by his blood, etc.

Ergo, He did not die for, nor satisfy his fathers justice for every son of
Adam,] which argument though any that will may find it propounded in other
terms, in the third argument in the conference at Hague, thus.

Those for whom he died, he so died in their stead, that he did translate the
death which they deserved upon himself, so that they died not; thus to (die
for) is taken 2 Samuel 18.33. Rom 5.7. Romans 9.3.

But he did not so for every son of Adam.

Ergo, Not the former.

But seeing the Argument in the issue comes to one head, I shall engage in the
Argument as he propounds it; and first I shall make the Argument appear in
its native and intended strength. For God not to deal with Christ according to
the exigence of his merits, and with us according to the merit of our
mediator, as it would in ^ench upon the justice of God, so it is granted by
the Author, page 100. Now if Christ did undertake for every man, paid his
debt, satisfied his father justice, and took away sin, and all that stood
cross to our salvation, and abolished death; all which he affirms for every
son of Adam: and so effectually and actually that it is as good with God as
if every man had suffered, and died the death due to his sin in his own
person; for so the Author is pleased to say page 17. certainly then every man
should stand acquitted from that charge, Gods justice should exact no more; for
as justice requires satisfaction, so it requires but satisfaction; the same
debt is not in justice required both of the surety and the principal, and as
it had not been agreeing with Justice to require a second payment, if man had
been able to undergo the wrath of God due to sin, and to rise out of it; so
is it equally disagreeing to justice to require a second payment of any, seeing
Christ has paid it in his own person. For herein he did not die (for) but
die (with) them that so die: Hence I conclude that if Christ satisfied his
Fathers justice for every man, they should be freed from the curse due to
sin, which is to be justified, and this by his merits, which is to be
justified by his blood: this is the genuine face of the argument.

But before I reply to his answers, I shall premise a few things concerning
justification, to which I may refer the several and confused pieces of of
his rude answers; concerning justification, these three things are enquitable.
1. What Justification is, 2. When a Sinner is justified, 3. What justification
freeth us from. The two first will be cleared, in considering that in
justification these three things are comprehended.

1. As it is done in God, and his mind and will. 2. As it is discovered in the
Gospel and pronounced there. 3. As it is apprehended in the heart of the person
justified.
By the first God is said to justify.

2. To declare him justified. 3. The Believer to apprehend or conclude himself
justified.
Justification as it is in God, existing in mente divina, I find such a
definition given by Episcopius; treating of justification, and saying that
justification and remission of sins be Synonyma's, Disp. 45. These. 6.
he says thus, [Remissio peccatorum est voluntas non infligendi paenam quam
peccata promer^ierunt.] That is, remission of sins, or justification is nothing
else but a will in God not to inflict the punishment due to sin; and so on the
other side it must be a will in God to impute the righteousness of Christ, and
to deal with us as righteous persons; now the Arminians have, and our Author
does grant such decrees to be in God eternal, as we must; for he does not in
time will any thing that he did not will from eternity; our justification does
not introduce any change in God all; therefore in this sense it appears to me
that man is justified from eternity.

Armin. disp pub. These. 19. sect. 4.
2. Justification as it is pronounced in the Gospel, is thus defined. [Qua homo
a deo ut a judice justus and praemio dignu^ censetur and pronunciatur;] that
is, it is an act whereby man is of God as judge, esteemed and pronounced
righteous; and of this runs the definition of our modern Divines: as Daven.
de Justif. 310. Ames. Medul. 188. And of this justification the Scripture
always speaks, or most frequently, to wit of the promulgation of it: See
Evangelii tenorem; and so only the faithful and penitent are said to be
justified, and so in present existing, because to such only has he pronounced
justification; and thus he is said to justify the believer or him that
believes in God, or in Jesus: when by the first, as it is a will of God so to
do, he is and may be said to justify the ungodly; Romans 4.5. for so he wills
nor to impute their sins, whilst they remain ungodly, but he never
pronounces any one justified whilst they remain ungodly, Scripture no where
so says. Now in our discourses of justification, we must not confound these;
and if the question be asked when a man is justified, by distinguishing these
two we may clearly answer, that as the act is done in God, so we are justified
from eternity; for thus justification is an imminent action, though conversant
about the creature, yet introduces no physical mutation into the creature,
disp. 45. these. 3
this all grant but the Papist. Episcopius thus says, [Non justae aut sanctae
infusio qualitatis in animam,] that is no infusion of any holy quality into the
mind; and this act does no more make a man (Justificatum,) then election
makes him (electum;) yet none will deny election to be an imminent action; and
why God may not as well justify us from eternity, that is will not impute our
sins, as to elect us, that is, will to bring us to salvation, I am not able
to see. And if any object the usual stream of Scripture language, viz. that
we are justified by faith, and he justifies him that believes in Jesus: by
considering this distinction, we may break through that, and say that that is
only meant of the pronunciation of it according to the tenor of the Gospel;
and the reason why though there be such an act in God from eternity, before our
faith be wrought in us, yet the Scripture speaks of justification through
faith, etc. is because as in judiciary affairs it matters not what the Judge
resolves in his breast, though whom he resolves to acquit, they may be said
to be acquitted; yet men look at his legal sentence pronounced; that by the
law, the person himself, and the spectators, is looked at at his absolution or
acquittance. So in this case, we look at our absolution from the ^nour of the
Gospel, thereby men come to know us, and we ourselves to be justified: this
pronunciation is called justification, and this is to Believers only.

That which in this may seem harsh, is [That a man remaining a sinner may be
said to be justified;] but if it be well considered, it will not appear more
harsh then this. That a man whilst a sinner, is elected to life; both are pressed
with the same pretended absurdities: Again God is said to justify the ungodly
Romans 4.5. but this he does not (quoad evangelicam promulgationem) for that is
only to believers; but believers when so, are not branded with the title of
ungodly; and may not this, [We are justified whilst enemies,] be received as
well as this, [We are reconciled whilst enemies?] Romans 5.10. This I commend to
the Authors consideration.

Again it is to be enquired into, from what justification freeth us; we find
it thus expressed, [A peccato and morte] from sin and death, Ames. med.
and of this Episcopius is a sound interpretor: when it is said (a peccato,) it
is no more then this, [A paenis peccati] from the punishment of sin. Disp.
45. These. 3. [a reatu peccatorum] from the guilt of sin. These. 5. and that
not from the guilt of some, or one, but all sins and all condemnation,
[absolutio a peccatis and omni condemnatione,] from sins and all
condemnation. These. 3. and this Scripture affirms, Romans 8. who shall lay any
thing to their charge? it is God that justifies. And so Arminius, disp priis.
These. 48. sect. 12. disp. 45. they. 6. ibid.
[Ab omnibus per totam vitam perpetratis,] from all committed through whole
life; and when it is said, by it we are delivered from death, he means
eternal death: So Episcopius, [per paenam peccati intelligimus proptie paenam
aeternam, quae mors aeterna dicitur in Scr.] That is, by the punishment of
sin, we mean eternal death; so that now it appears hereby, that
justification exempts not from the being of sin, nor from temporal death,
nor from afflictions; for such cease to be satisfactory punishments, though
they relate to sin, as Episcopius, [desinunt esse paenae, etiamfi non sine
respectu ad peccatum immittantur,] but that which it removes is the guilt and
obligation to eternal death, or if you will, [prosecutionem vindicantem,] the
revenge or prosecution of that guilt.

These being considered, I proceed to his answers to our Argument. Now because
he puts all the untruth upon the Major, I shall resume it in the vigor and
strength of it. Those whom Christ satisfied his Fathers justice for, they are
justified in Gods account, and shall be justified by the manifestation of this
in time, both in the Gospel and their own consciences, and at last be invested
with eternal life, else may Christ complain of injustice.

To this he answers. [All the strength of this Argument is in the first
proposition with the reason annexed unto it.] Then it seems the Minor he
gives for truth, viz. that all are not justified; but then why has he
contended for this, that all, ye every son of Adam is justified in Christ,
as page 10. 45. But that we may see what he has to say against the
proposition, he judges thus at a venture. [This is so contrary to Scripture,
that little need be said; from the comparison between Christ and Adam it
appears, that though all men be in the public person Justified* yet by and
through him, of the benefit of that Justification do none partake but such as
have a being of him.]

If he had showen what Scripture this had been contrary to, that we might have
examined those Texts he had done fair, but he would have his Reade^s acted by
an implicit faith.

2. As for the comparison betwixt Adam and Christ, there was nothing expressed
by him therein that contradicts the proposition; not that preposition, viz.
[none partake of the fruits of that justification, but such as come to have a
being from him,] because all those that he satisfied his Fathers justice for,
shall in time to come have a being from him.

3. His expresses in the comparison betwixt Adam and Christ, are so far from
contradicting, that they confirm the proposition: For he says, [Though all
men be in the public person justified;] does he not here tacitly grant, that
every man by virtue of his death and ransom as public person to be justified
in him? and what is this to what the proposition affirms? viz. that all he
satisfied for, are justified in or by his blood? for to be justified in and by
Christ are not different, and to be justified by Christ and by his blood are as
little different.

[Christ is set forth to be a propitiation through faith, Romans 3.27.] And this
nothing against us; for we say not that all when Christ satisfied for them,
they were justified in the pronunciation of the Gospel, before faith was wought
in them, but that such in time shall be justified and receive the atonement in
their hearts; and his expresses herein hinders not; for they shall have that
faith in his blood whereby they may receive this atonement; again, true, the
evangelicall pronunciation of satisfaction is by faith, but how does he prove
that in the mind of God, they are not justified before faith?

[Justification is not by blood shed only, but the application of his blood.]
His expressions are herein something wild, but I guess at his meaning thus;
that justification is not till another work of the Spirit to be done upon the
heart: but then I say if he mean it as done in the mind of God, it is false;
if as pronounced in the Gospel, it is true; but besides, this is nothing
against the proposition, because we say still, they shall have that further
work upon their hearts one time or other; true also, many have received this
justification that once wanted it, and some want it that shall have it; but
what are these to the purpose of proving that all that Christ satisfied for,
shall not one time or other have it? And as for that expression, [Many of his
elect want it; for whom by this objection Christ should not have died.] Is too
absurd to mention: the objection is far from urging that he died not for
those elect that want this justification: but it affirms that all such,
(though they now want it,) shall have it in time.

[As for that cleansing 1 John, 1.7. and forgiveness verse. 9 it speaks of a
further cleansing etc. to such as are in Christ, and already justified by his
blood; and so not to this purpose.] More pertinent Texts might be produced to
prove the proposition, but this Text is not so deficient as as he conceived
when he cited it: for, whereas he speaks of a further cleansing, it is hard
to guess at his meaning; further then that, he must mean one of these two, or
both; further then justification, or a cleansing further then that which is by
the bloodshed of Christ; but both these are false; that it speaks of cleansing
from guilt by justification, appears by ver. 9. where it expounds it by
forgiving our sins, and that is such as is by bloodshed, appears in that it
is by the blood of Christ; and what though it speak of them that are actually
justified? it says it is by the blood of Christ, that is the meritorious
cause; and this is not impertinent to the business in hand, but proves the
proposition: that those for whom the blood of Christ satisfied his Father, they
came in time to be cleansed from their sins by that blood.

[This untruth is not only false and gross in it self, but denies many
sayings of Scripture, as John, 3.17.18. and 8.24.] Had the Author produced
Texts wherein his managing might be more perspicuous, or discover where his
meaning lies in these, I should have a clearer way for a reply. I have
seriously enquired after the intention of the Author in these Texts, and my
thoughts I have brought to this result, it may be with greater force then he
intended, and it is this, John, 3.17. Christ is said to save the world; yet
John, 16.8.11. he is said to convince the world of sin; and John, 8.23.24. ye
shall die in your sins; by these it appears that all that he died for and
saves, are not justified and saved from wrath; and this may seem a specious
allegation; but it has little in it. For, by (World) in the Authors judgment
is meant every Son of Adam; so that John, 3.16. says he saved the world,
John, 16.8.11. says he shall convince the world, that is in both, every son
of Adam; and so he would have these places compared, to prove that as he came
to save every man, so he shall save never a man, for every man that shall be
convinced of sin, because they believe not; this indeed opposes the
proposition, but no reasonable man can judge to be the meaning of those Texts;
therefore to reply.

1. He cannot prove that those that were convinced of sin for not believing,
did not afterward believe; for every man that is saved, has h^s t^me of
unbeleife wherein he may be convinced for not believing; therefore this Text
convinces not that they did never believe for whom Christ died.

2. That place John, 3.17.13. he says he came to save the world, that is men
living in the world; and he did it, the world is reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.18.19.
their trespasses not imputed; he gives life to the world, John, 6.33. and
takes away the sin of the world, John, 1.29. and yet he shall convince the
world of sin; they shall be judged by believers, 1 Cor. 6.2. and be
condemned, 1 Cor. 11.32. in all the (World) now then cannot be verified of the
world the same way taken; but he saves the world [Quoad partem credentem,]
according to the believing part, and he shall condemn the (world) for sin,
that is the unbeleeving part thereof; so that to conclude John, 3.18. does not
say that they which he came to save were not so in time, nor that Text John.
16.8.11. does not say be satisfied his Fathers justice for them that should be
convinced of sin and so perish: therefore how these Texts can disprove the
proposition I see not.

[It overthrows many affirmations in the Scripture, as that all shall bear
the image of the first Adam, 1. Cor. 15.46. that all are dead in sin by nature,
Ephesians. 2.2. that God justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. etc.] It cannot but be
judged too great a prodigality of time and pains to insist upon such jejune
and empty expressions, that have not the least show of reason; but the nature
of my Antagonist requires it: does the proposition say that all do not bear
the image of the earthy? certainly no. It supposes the contrary that all do;
for it says, that all that Christ died for, shall in time partake of the Image
of the heavenly, which intimates that all at first bear the Image of the
earthy. Justification does not immediately reflect upon the being of sin, but
obligation to punishment; and this may suffice for the two first Texts alleged
by him. As for Romans 4.5. it speaks not of such a justification as is by
faith; it speaks of believing on him that justifies he ungodly, but not of
his justifying the ungodly upon their believing; therefore he misalledgeth that
Text; he is said to justify the ungodly; but believers are never called so;
especially if he reflect upon his own sense of ungodly, page 10. besides the
Text shows not that all the ungodly be justified, do not in time come to
partake of life: hitherto I see nothing of strength against the proposition.

As for that counterpart to the proposition, which he produces page 96. viz.
[many for whom Christ died remain without that justification that is in him,]
wants proof; for those Texts alleged do not make it appear that Christ died
for such as want that justification and never partake of it.

The next thing that he stumbleth at, is the second part of the proposition,
viz. [All for whom he satisfied shall be saved from wrath through him;] this he
presently cries down as false and contrary to Scripture. But what Text? [2
Peter. 2.1.2.] This text I have spoken of formerly, and cleared it from
overthrowing the proposition; it speaks not not a word of satisfying his
Fathers justice for them.

[And this untruth denies the Lordship of Christ, grounded on his death for
all.]

But wherein it denies it he shows not; do we by saying all that he
satisfied for shall be saved, deny him to be Lord of all? as if he could not be
their Lord unless he save them from wrath to come? weak argument! and of this
stamp are the rest that follow, clearly confuted in several pages of this
discourse.

Having spoken of the two parts of the proposition, he comes to the reason by
which the proposition is backed; and he has something to say to that as
follows; the reason, if he do not justify and save from wrath all those for
whose sins he has satisfied, he should be unjust; to this be answers. [A
presumptuous rashness in an intimate charging God with injustice.] But where
lies the rashness, whether in saying if such a thing be granted he is unjust,
or in affirming such, the granting whereof makes him to be unjust? let the
Author judge. Let us see what he himself says page, 97. [That were injustice
not only to require the whole debt again, but even any part of it, either of
him or any other that are discharged by him, or to detain from him or his any
thing that by virtue of his ransom is to be conferred.] So that we see it is
no such charging God with injustice as he pretends, to say that if such a
thing be granted God is unjust; but besides, let us consider it is injustice in
God to require any part of the debt again of Christ, or any other for whom
Christ suffered and was discharged, or any that are discharged for Christ; for
so both are equally alike; now let us consider the Authors words page 4. [All
the sins the law could charge mankind withal were imputed to him; he
suffered the curse, and died as the sinner, and rose acquit of all our sins,
and a triumphant victor over sin and death.] Let him tell us, is it not
injustice in his own language to require part of this debt or all of Christ or
any for whom he stood, and died, and of whose sins he stood acquitted? But he
says he did so for every son of Adam, therefore does not justify the reason
of the proposition, and show the vanity of this his rash charge.

But he thinks to press the reason of the proposition with an absurdity.

[Gods children have complained of trouble by the law in their members, Romans
7.15. and he says of his own children, Psalm. 89.32. I will visit their sins
with stripes.] Wherein it seems strange that the Authors ignorance should put
God to his purgatories to clear his justice; but it is an easy thing to clear
his justice, in that his people have both sins and sufferings: when yet it
would be too clear if they should not have eternal life, because Christ did
not procure that they should be taken out of an estate of sin presently, or
freed from all temporal afflictions, to correct, reduce, warn themselves and
others; but that they should be in part renewed, and at last come to life; but
he in satisfying Gods justice for them did actually free them from the curse
due to sin, which is eternal death; therefore to punish any such with eternal
death would entrench on his justice. I say not that temporal sufferings is
endured as satisfactions for sins. I leave that soppery to the Authors;
neither do I say they are no punishments but corrections; but I say they are
castigatory punishments, not satisfactions; and thus to say is no way
contradictory to any of those Texts quoted page 98. all which show as they were
punishments, so they were for castigation and correction only, not
satisfaction, as the eternal torments of them that perish are; but so weakly
are his Texts quoted all along, as if he intended to make the word of God seem
vile.

The text by which we prove the proposition, is Romans 5.9. [If whilst enemies
we were reconciled by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled shall
we be saved by his life.] To this he thus answers, [It says not that all
Christ died for etc. shall be saved by his life; but speaking of Believers etc.
they should much more be saved by his life.] Which is a mere shift, and no
handsome one neither. For let us but seriously consider he makes
reconciliation, and his death is of equal extent, if we were reconciled by his
death, and so does the Author. Secondly, he makes reconciliation and salvation
of equal extent; nay with a (much more) meaning that is not so great an
absurdity to say we are not reconciled by his death, as to say, that being
reconciled we shall not be saved; then let him consider, does it not strongly
intimate that all that he died for and so reconciled, shall be saved by his
life? as for that gloss, [But speaking of Believers he says that much more
they shall be saved.] It is a perversion of a clear Text; for it says not
[Much more shall we believers be saved,] which it would have been, if his
perversion had been right; but it is much more, we being reconciled, not, [wee
believers,] but [we reconciled;] their confidence of salvation was deduced not
from their condition of believing; but what Christ has done by dying, viz.
reconciled them, and this drawn from the connection betwixt his death and
reconciliation, and our reconciliation and salvation, which clears the
proposition.

The second thing which he charge the reason annexed to the proposition,
with, is [Grosse ignorance in the end of Christ's death as the price.] Of which
he says thus. [It was not that by that act without any more done by him, men
should be presently possessed of all that justification, freedom from death,
enjoyment of life in him.] How he discovers his own ignorance, to make the
ignorance of his advantage known? he discovers ignorance

1. Of the nature of justification; for that expression, [Be possessed of all
that justification,] implies that justification is successive, and retained by
degrees, which is false.

2. Of his adversaries meaning, which is not that presently they should enjoy
life without any more done; but that in time they shall have life and that
spiritual work which leads to it; therefore he is either ignorant, or
perverse thus to say.

3. If we be ignorant in the end of Christ's death, I believe he will not
inform us; he says thus [That he might be the Lord of all men, that he might
have all released to him, and have pardon in his hands, and spirit and life to
bestow as he thinks fit, that he hight justify them that believe, and harden
and adjudge the residue to a second death.] In which discovery he savours more
of Arminian scripture then of sacred Scriptures; thus they define the
impetration, by the death of Christ. [Est restitutio in talem statum quo non
obstante justitia deus de novo beneficia communicare potest and vult ea lege
and modo quo ipsi videtur.]

2. If Christ came to save them that believe, and condemn them that believe
not, then a joint end of his death was to condemn contrary to John, 3.17. I
came not to condemn.

3. Herein is not mentioned that end, Tit. 2.14. viz. to purchase holiness,
that we may be fitted for glory: if he know it not, he is ignorant; if he
wilfully leave it out, worse.

4. This description excludes all purpose to have any saved; but if they either
be saved by faith, or condemned for unbeleife, Christ has his end, though all
perish.

5. That phrase (as he thinks fit,) imports that Christ in his death did
not pitch upon a way by which he would save, but left it indifferent whether by
faith or any other way; if he hold that Christ by death procured life by faith
in Christ, then he is too remiss in that expression as he thinks fit: how
many exceptions are his words herein liable to and discover little knowledge in
the Author? in this business I have shown Chapter 3. that the maine end so
far as it relates to man, is to give eternal life, and all those are but
intermediate ends as to become their Lord, etc.

As for that which he produces as one end, viz. satisfaction of his Fathers
justice, it is not intended for it self, but for something further; now what
can he intend less in satisfying his Fathers justice, then that they for whom
he so did should not answer or suffer for any of those sins? does then, to
say that all those for whom he so sati^fied shall be free from suffering for
those sins, argue any ignorance in the ends of Christ's death? or he that
denies it, it discovers more? let any judge.

But he comes to answer the objection, page 10. it seems he has done nothing
all this while; but how?

[If Christ strive in the means, and they be found hardening themselves, it
increases their debt; and if he punish, he is just.] True, because Christ's
death never procured an immunity from temporal punishments, but rather that we
should have them to correct and reduce us.

[And if he still strive and they refuse, if he give them over to destruction,
is he not just?] If he have received satisfaction for that unbeleife, (as he
has if that be true which the Author says, page 4. that he was charged with
all the sins the law could charge man with; certainly then with all the
Gospel could) then his justice seems blemished in damning them for it;
eternal death is not correctory, but satisfactory.

[Unbeliefe is the maine sin, etc. and this is the debt which God requires,
etc. so that here is not two payments of one debt; but a new debt in despising
Gods goodness.] I demand when he says, [Christ satisfied for sin,] what
sin he means? what only for original, and lest us to satisfy for actual?
or for some actual, and left us to makt out the rest? Was the unbeleife of
Paul, in the time of non conversion, a new debt not satisfied for? can any be
saved and their sins not satisfied for? is any able to satisfy but Christ?
and the sinner be capable of life? O impious doctrine, derogatory to the
sufferings of Christ; is not Christ's work a perfect work, but a man may have
a new debt, that was not thought on by Christ? strange divinity, how must the
dear children of God do with their past rebellions against means of grace? it
is a new debt Christ satisfied not, they are not able? does not he do well to
charge others with gross ignorance, that he may have some fellows? Has he so
soon forgot his protestation against popery, and to defend the doctrine of the
church of England against all popish innovation, which doctrine runs thus

[That Christ suffered for all sins of men, original and actual.] Yet he
comes with a new debt unsatisfyed for, and who must if Christ did not? I would
have the Author tell me what he means when he says, [The whole debt of
mankind became his, page 3.] is not contempt of means and rebellion against
Gods call part of our debt? certainly herein the Author discovered too much
ignorance, with which he is pleased to brand others; certainly those for whom
Christ undertook, he satisfied for all their sins, original, actual,
against Law, against Gospel; his satisfaction was not done to the half to need
a corrivall in that work; therefore such can have no new debt, and such cannot
in justice be bound over to suffer eternal torments for any sin, no not for
any pretended new debt; he has taken away all that stands cross to our
salvation; so the Author speaks, page 18. 19. And all that he says
notwithstanding the proposition stands firm.

CHAP. XVI. Of the fourth Objection.
A Fourth Argument is this.

Those to whom he would not vouchsafe to manifest himself, or to pray for, for
those he would not die. John. 17.9.

But he would not manifest himself to, nor pray for the world of ungodly and
wicked men.

Ergo, He did not die for the world of ungodly or wicked men.]

Before I come to his answers, I shall take notice of his dealing with the
argument to make it fit for his purpose.

1. He confounds two arguments together; for [Manifestation of him self,]
that belongs to an other argument; neither can he give any president of
jumbling these two together, which confusion will make the argument not clear,
and the answers obscure.

2. He cannot produce any that cites John, 17.9. to prove the Major.

3. Nor any that makes the Minor to run thus. [But he prayed not for the
world of ungodly; or the conclusion to run thus. [ Ergo, [He dyed not for the
world of ungodly,] all these are purposely foysted in to make the argument
seem vile; this is no faithful dealing as he promised, the argument runs
thus, in the seventh Argument in Hag. Col.

Those whom he reconciled he interceded for. John. 17.9.

But He interceded not for all and every son of Adam. John. 17.9.

Ergo, He reconciled not every son of Adam. John. 17.9.

The Major is thus grounded, Romans 8.32. he says, [If he give us his Son, he
will much more give us all things,] The Argument is this, if he gave us the
greater, he will certainly much more give us the less; so if he die for us,
he will pray for us; so in the negative we conclude, if he pray not for the
world which is the less, he did not die for or reconcile which is the greater.
Now to perpend his answers, he gives this general and facile refutation.
[This objection is false many ways.] And that which he drives at I guess to
be the ground of the reason, that is the ground of proceeding from the less to
the greater negatively, that he would prove it is no good reason to say because
he would not pray, therefore he would not die for the world, and he urges thus.

[It is not right reason to say God would not make Heaven, etc. whom he would
not preserve in that good estate.] But had he been in his right reason he
would have seen this very impertinent to our purpose; our argument proceeds
from the less to the greater negatively; but his instance proceeds from the
greater to the less negatively: which is unsound and quite contrary to the
business in hand; for to preserve in a good estate is a greater mercy then to
create in such estate only; so that though this is not sound, he will not
create because he will not preserve; yet this is good, if he will not create
which is the less, he will not preserve which is the greater; and this serves
us, the less may include the greater negatively, but the greater cannot the
less.

As for those expresses that touch that part of the argument, viz. [the
manifesting of himself to the world,] it is not to this argument; which
mixture of Heterogeneous expresses will pertu^be the reader in the clear
decision of this argument; therefore I wave them. Again he urges.

[If Christ had said he never did nor would pray for the world, (which he never
said) yet it were evil in us to use that as an argument to deny the truth of
his own words as that he dyed for all and every one.] But rather an evil in
himself, to obtrude such a sense on those places that contradict Christ's own
words, or the true consequences from the same; it is no evil in us to gainesay
the phansy or gloss that the Author puts on those Texts: from this I can
gather little, but that the Author would have all the sayings of our Savior to
take the model of their interpretations from his own conceits upon those
places. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. which is not a reasonable postulatum; as for that
parenthesis (which he did not) if he once said he did not, and it cannot be
proved that ever he did pray for that world, we may presume he means, he
never had nor would pray for them.

[This confounds his love of compassion, common to all, and of delight
peculiar to Believers.] It is hard to divine his meaning herein, unless he
means that his dying for, be only the love of compassion, and his (praying
for) the love of delight; and so to pray for us, to be a greater love then
dying for us; for so he makes the love of delight to be the greatest love; but
this is not apparent by any Scripture; and how this argument confounds
compassion and delight, the Author would have done well to have discovered to
them that see it not.

[This confounds the death of Christ as ransom (for all) and his advocation
that is only for Believers.] I know the Authors understanding is not able to
reach the difference betwixt confounding, and (not dividing;) the argument
contends for the non dividing of his death and advocation, but not to confound
them; the argument and them that form it hold it distinct. But we would have
his advocation and death to be to the same persons, and so his death and
ransom not for all and every son of Adam. 2. Whereas he says, his
advocation is peculiar to believers, I conclude he has lost part of his
lesson, viz. the distinction of Arminius of Advocation into general and
special; for without this how will he free himself from a contradiction, in
that he says here, that his advocation is peculiar to believers? yet he
contendeth page 110. 111. that he prayed for the world, John, 9.21. for
transgressors, Isay. 53.12. for crucifiers, Luke, 23.34. all which he opposes
to elect and believers. 3. How his advocation is proper to believers, (that is
in act) I see not, because he prayed for some that after should believe, and
therefore then did not, ver. 22. 4. That his advocation is proper to believers,
(that is such as are or shall be) I grant; but then why his oblation should be
of larger extent I see not; they are joined acts in his mediatourship, the one
shedding, Col Hag. in Arg.
the other presenting that blood as shed. Hence the Remonstrants grant, [pro
omnibus Christum imercedere ut pontifices ejus typi solebant,] and these acts
are never disjoined but connected, as Romans 8.34. 1 John. 2.1.2. for him to
appear on earth for them for whom he appears not in heaven, Scripture owneth
not: and if he can prove Christ to have interceded for all, I for my part shall
grant him to have offered blood for all; and seeing he grants intercesion to
be peculiar, so shall I conclude oblation also, they being both of the same
latitude; and whereas he says, [This confounds ransom (for all) and
advocation (for beleevers] is a weak confutation, because in in it there is
(petitio principii) a supposing that his ransom is for all and every man,
which is yet (sub judice,) nay clear to the contrary.

Yet upon this weak bat^ery, he can after his usual custom manfully conclude
that, [The whole argument is fallen without further answer.] But why does he
attempt works of supererogation, in producing so many leaves in a business
that is done already? but his meaning is, (as much as it will with all the
rest that follow;) he then attempt the to answer that Text Rom 8.32. wherein
the strength of the proposition lies, and from it we urge, if he gave us his
Son, his Son will give us his prayers; if not the latter, not the former;
to this he thus answers.

[This is not spoken in the third person, nor of ransom only, nor as a
proposition to bring men in to believe.] This antidote like an Empericke he
applies to every Text, not considering how it is applied to the constitution
of the same; for what though it be not in the third person, the consequence is
good, that to whom he gives his Son, to them he gives all things, and that
as firm as if the words had run thus; [If he has given his Son to every
man, how shall he not with him give them all things,] what person soever it be
spoken in, first, second, or third; yet this is firm, that if he give the
greater gift, he will not be niggardly of a less: the argument of confidence
is not drawn from the persons to whom, but the gift that was given. 2. Whereas
he says, that this phrase (He has delivered him up for us all,) means not
of ransom only, it is false and contrary to any common understanding; it is
clear that these words relate to his death in which he is said to be delivered
up for us.

But he urges further.

[It serves not the proposition; for it says not, how shall he not freely
give us all things? but how shall he not with him freely give us all things? so
speaking of his free giving him to us, and with him all things.] A wise
interpretor would stand the Author in much stead, to explicate his meaning
herein; the difference betwixt, [Shall he not give us all things,] and this,
[Shall he not with him give us all things] is very obscure; and had he kept his
own council, we should have remained expectants of some rare discovery; but
from page 107. we may gather what his abuse of the Text is, and what he means
by this phrase, [With him give us all things,] there I find this express.
[They now by believing receipt having Christ and in him life, and being sons
thereby, which gives hope of all good, he concludes, having freely given us
this his own Son, (whom before he delivered up for us,) how shall he not
with him freely give us all things?] So that hence I conceive his evasion is
this, viz. that phrase, [With him,] speaks of such a giving his Son, as
consists in giving his Spirit, by bringing them in to believe; and being so, a
being made sons, and having adoption, and thus having him given us, with him
thus given we shall have all things; but this is injurious to the Text many
ways, as 1. Then the sense must be thus, having the Son and all things with
him, how shall he not with him give us all things? this would be absurd. Let
the Author tell me what thingt are they of which he concludes upon the having
of Christ; are they not all those things mentioned in the Chapter? as
redemption of our body, ver. 23. spirit to help infirmities, ver. 26. the
utility of all things for good, v. 28. conformity to his Son, ver. 29.
vocation, justification, glorification: yea as as a strong Remonstrant
affirms, [Omnia quae spectant ad vocationem and glorificationem nostram.]
Certainly then if vocation and spirit, Cornel. A lapid. in locum.
be those things that he concludes from Christ's being given, then those things
are not included in that giving of Christ; then it would mean thus; if we have
vocation and spirit, how shall he not with those things give us those things?
but this sense I leave to the Author. 2. Is it not as clear as the light that
this phrase [with him] is no more but with him so delivered up for us? there is
no mentioning of a giving of Christ as distinct from his being delivered up for
us, as he suggests. 3. This would intimate that to be brought in to believe, is
set out in Scripture by this phrase of having Christ (given for us,) or having
given (to us,) but this I no where find; where Christ is said to be given
either by his Father or himself, it relates to his death and ransom, as Mat.
20.28. Joh. 6.17. Luk 22.19. Ephesians. 5.2. especially where this phrase,
(delivered up for us) is used, that is most clear, that word (...) I never
read (when spoken of Christ) in an other sense: but when the Scripture speaks
of giving faith, confidence, Sonship, or any of the choice benefits, it says
not, he gives his (Son) but his (Spirit) Luke, 11.12. Romans 5.5. 1. These. 4 8.
and Gal. 4.4.6. the difference is clear on both parts. He sent his Son,
verse 4. He sent the spirit of his Son, ver. 6. So that it is clear that the
Apostle draws this conclusion, not from the receipt of the Spirit of Christ
in believing, but from Christ's being delivered up for them to die; and good
ground: for grace says Sonneship, glory; all come short of Christ himself;
and the argument is strong from the greater to the less; and does not all that
he says appear rather to pervert, then to satisfy the Text?

Thus having done with the proposition, he invadeth the assumption which is,
[That he did not intercede for every man, John, 17.9.].

Now against this he thus says, [That does not say the world of wicked and
ungodly men, as the assumption says.] Neither does the assumption say so, but
when it is altered and corrupted by himself; we say he prayed not for every
son of Adam; we have no reason to say he prayed not for the world of ungodly,
because all the wicked and ungodly are not of that world of ungodly that was
excluded his prayers.

But he further says thus, [The word (world) ver. 9. includes all the Elect
that were in and of the world, and uncalled forth and this appears in that
for the same things for which he prayed for them that did believe, ver. 6.9. he
prays for the same, for them that after should believe on him, ver. 20.] The
contrary whereof does clearly appear; for if at the same time he prayed for
the same things, for some elect and yet uncalled home, ver. 20. it is clear
that when he excluded the world from his prayers, that word (world) does not
take in the elect uncalled, for whom he prays, ver. 20. for then such must be
both prayed for, and yet excluded his prayers, at the same time, and for the
same things; herein he does implicate himself. But rather the word (world) is
meant of those unregenerate men, that neither did nor afterward should believe
in him; for such he prayed not for faith, or union, or perseverance, or glory.
As for that which follows, viz. [All the way from ver. 9. to 21. there is no
petition for any thing, for any before they believe, or yet might bring them in
to believe. [Which is false, if he mean neither expressly, nor implicitly; for
implicitly he prayed for faith, whereby they are made one with Christ and the
Father, unless the Author will say that Christ prayed that such as did not
believe, might be one with him, without the consideration of faith, which I
cannot conceive; certainly in praying for the end, he prayed for the means
inclusively.

But he further urges.

[So that the assumption rendering the word [World] for the wicked, non elect
opposed to elect, makes two sorts of elect, one sort prayed for verse 9.
another sort prayed for verse 20.] These words deserve hissing, rather then a
solicitous answering, and cannot be reduced to common reason; we may affirm
the elect prayed for, though in a diverse state and condition, the elect
believing, ver: 9. the elect unbeleeving, ver. 20. and this without absurdity;
but then we oppose not the elect to the non elect, but believers to such as yet
do not believe, both being elect; neither do we oppose but distinguish them;
we may clearly see two sorts of men. 1. Such as are prayed for, and they are
such as did for the present or afterward should believe: such as did ver. 9.
such as should, ver. 20.2. Such as are excluded his prayers, and they must be
such as they neither did nor should; and I may urge, if by (world) he means
elect unbeleeving, then Christ did exclude such his prayers. But this is false
from ver. 20.

[Or else it grants a sort of people in the world, that are neither of the
world nor of the elect.] But this he spoke at a venture without consideration.
I shall again reassume the parts: those prayed for ver. 9. were elect called
out of the world; those prayed for ver. 20. were elect uncalled, yet to be
called; those excluded his prayers ver. 9. were non elect, of the world and
never to be taken out of it; now let him clear up his sight, and tell me if we
make a sort of men that are neither elect nor of the world; but this serves
with the rest to fill paper and puzzle his ignorant Reader.

As also that which follows.

[Which way soever the assumption will have it, it holds forth this falsehood,
that none of the elect were, are, or shall be beholden to the prayers of Christ
for all or any of that patience etc. extended before faith; or for the means
of grace, by which they are brought in to believe, or for faith, seeing no such
thing is prayed for here for any but the world, verse 21.23.] Wherein these two
things are granted and affirmed. 1. That Christ prays for patience, means of
grace, faith, for the world, opposed to such as believe, ver. 9. or should
believe, ver. ^0. 2. That he prayed not for faith, etc. for any but that
world,] both these are false; the first is false, upon this ground, he
excluding that world from his prayers, for unity with the Father and the Son,
would not pray for faith by which they are to be made one; certainly if he
exclude from the end, he does exclude from the means. 2. How Christ should
pray for them that neither did nor should after believe, any that acknowledges
Christ's prayers not to be frustrate cannot comprehend. 3. This is grounded on
the 21. ver. where it says, [That the world may believe,] and so from hence he
urges that Christ did pray for faith for the world: so presuming that the word
(believe) means saving says, by which we are made one with God and so saved.
But this is not clear. I conceive it only meant of conviction of the mind,
and making them to know, as ver. 23. expounds it as the Devils may do, and
such as neither do nor shall believe; of the like nature is Psalm. 83. last.
Psalm. 59.13. The second is false; for either he prayed for faith for them, ver.
20. which were not of the world, excluded, ver. 9. or else he prayed for
oneness with himself, and glory without faith; this latter is improbable.

But he further urges,

[The Text says not he will not, but in the present tense, in that very time
its not in the preterfective tense, or future tense.] This is a very empty
evasion; for if he once said, I pray not for the (world) [and that
indifinitely, without such limitations as the Author pretends; as [for these
things] or [at this time,] which if he had thus said [I pray not for the world
at this time, or for these things;] this evasion had some color:] but when he
says I pray not for the (world,) and that it cannot be produced either before
or after that he did pray for them, it is no better then presumption to
conclude that either he did it before or after pray for the world.

But to this he opposes.

[He did pray for such as were none of those prayed for verse 9.20. even for
transgressors, Isay. 53.12. crucifyers, Luke. 23.34.] This is the (...) and
height of the answer, both of the Author and most acute Remonstrants to
overthrow the Minor, but not to satisfaction: for those prayed for, ver. 9.
were transgressors, if John be right, 1 John. 1.8. In many things, we sin all;
those prayed for ver, 20. were transgressors, because not called home, and
might be some of his crucifyers whom he prayed for and were converted; now how
does it appear, that seeing he prayed for transgressors and crucifyers, that
he prayed for such as were not prayed for, ver. 9.20. or how will the
Remonstrants prove that he prayed for all transgressors, all crucifyers, which
is to the purpose? therefore this gloss is vain and empty. Yet he seeks to
temper the Text by these words.

[I pray not for the world, that is not so much, so chiefly.] That the word
(no^) is sometimes so used I grant; but if we shall use that liberty to expound
all Texts so, we should destroy the Scripture; as for those examples produced
by him, as 1 Cor. 1.17. it appears that Paul did baptize some; when therefore
he says [I came not to baptize,] it must mean not solely, or not chiefly;
but this gloss cannot be fastened on John. 17.9. because it appears not that
Christ ever prayed for any that never should believe on him; therefore that
applied to this Text, is to pervert, not to satisfy it.

Again he urges.

[The things prayed for, from verse 9. to 20. are of an higher nature then
those things we are to pray for the world or any in it till they be called.]
Which contradicts not only himself, but our Savior also. Himself it does,
because he before said, [Christ prayed for the same things, for them that shall
afterward believe on him: that he asked for them that do believe on him;]
certainly then if he prayed for them that should believe, he prayed for them
before they were called home. And our Savior he contradicts, because for
those things he does pray, v. 20 even for them that yet did not believe;
therefore he does charge Christ with doing that which is unfit.

Again he further urges.

[Christ in John. 17.9. prayed not only as a ransome-giver and a Mediator
between God and man, as 1 Timothy 2.6. but as a Prince, High Priest, the Mediator
of the New Testament, which is no where said to be for all.] Wherein,

1. The acuteness of the Au^hor distinguishes betwixt Mediator betwixt God
and man, and Mediator of the New Testament, which I would have made clear.

2. Affirms that Christ in dying and ransomeing is not a Mediator of the New
and better Testament, but that this belongs to his Advocation, not Oblation;
which I would have him to prove. Heb 9.15. seems to speak otherwise: [He is the
Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death,] where his dying
evidenceth him a Mediator of a better Testament.

3. Whereas he says, [The advocation of Christ is not said to be for all men,]
is to destroy his own words, and grant the assumption, which he has all this
while been so strongly oppugning; and this I grant, and conclude that because
his advocation is not general, his obligation was not; both are of like
extent; and whether he has overthrown or rather established the argument, I
leave to any to judge, and it stands firm thus. Those for whom he would not
pray, he would not die; but he would not pray for every Son of Adam. Ergo, he
would not die for every son of Adam.

CHAP. XVII. Of the fifth Objection.
THe fifth Argument is this.

[Christ died and gave himself a ransom for no more then the Father elected
to sonship, and eternal inheritance.

But he has not elected every man, etc. Ergo, he gave not himself a ransom
for every man.

But the argument in its genuine force runs thus.

[Christ gave himself a ransom to purchase grace and glory, for no more then
his Father had elected to grace and glory.

But his Father has not elected, All and every man to grace and glory.

Ergo, He gave not himself a ransom to purchase grace and glory for all and
every man.]

Let us now view his answers.

[This first proposition is contrary to Scripture, Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy 26.] But
this very weakly, because those Texts speak not of the connection betwixt the
Fathers election, and sons redemption, wherein the strength of the proposition
lies, and that from the oneness of his will with the Fathers; therefore those
Texts cannot be contradicted by the proposition.

[If to possess men of the inheritance had been the first and only end of
Christ his death and ransom, there might have been some color to have paused
on this false and bold assertion; but that is already proved false in Cap. 2.]
Here he discovers much soul dealing, for in that 2. Chap. that end, viz. to
possess men of the inheritance, is not so much as named: much less proved not
to be the maine end of his death, which I blamed in that Chap. that treats of
the ends of Christ's death; because in that discourse he omits, and I think
purposely, the end which Scripture hinteth so much upon, that is to give grace
and glory, for both I make the inheritance, John, 11.5.2. That he might gather
in one all the children of God, John. 17.10. That they might be sanctified
through the truth. Tit. 2.14. That he might sanct^fie a peculiar people, Heb.
9.15. That they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, Ephesians. 5.25. That he might present it a glorious Church; all which
and many other show that a maine end of his death was to possess men of the
inheritance, therefore called (...) the blood of sprinkling, sprinkled upon all
them for whom it was shed. So, not ours in affirming, but his in denying the
maine end of his death to be to possess men of grace and glory, is the bold
and false assertion, and therefore by his own confession there is more strength
in the proposition then he everteth.

But in his afterward, we have a taste of his reason.

[There belongs more then Christ's death and ransom, to bring men to the
inheritance.]

But is this a good reason to prove, that to bring men to possess the
inheritance is not the maine end of Christ death? he leans to the reason of
Corvinus, that God intends not man's salvation absolutely, because he wills
to save him by faith; the non satisfaction I have already discovered; shall we
say that habitation and dwelling is not the maine end of laying the foundation
and perfecting the outside of my house, because there is something more
requisite to my dwelling in it, as cleansing, adorning, furnishing? this would
he weak reasoning.

[The Scripture says he died, etc. that he might be Lord of quick and dead.]

Admit it, yet Scripture nowhere says that that is the maine end of his death;
nay his Lordship and power is but subservient to a further end, viz. to bring
them to glory, John, 17.2. He gave him power over all flesh, that be might give
eternal life, etc. So that hitherto whether the objection deserve abhorring,
or his answers hissing, let any judge.

But he proceeds to examine those Texts that are by himself produced, as
proving the proposition, as Romans 8.28.29.30. Ephs. 1.3. to 11. which places I
have not observed to be applied to this article of Redemption; but in Election,
there we shall find this golden chain used; therefore I am not engaged to
justify them, as holding forth the strength of the proposition; yet if any
have to that end quoted them, I shall guess at their drift herein, and free
them from his responsory cavils.

Romans 8.28.29.30. Their thoughts on this place I conceive to be these, Gods
foreknowledge, praedestination, vocation, justification, glorification, yea
redemption are connected in the same persons, as in a chain, and of equal
latitude and extent; the top of that chain is his foreknowledge and
praedestination, and all the rest runs in equipage with them; Christ is so
one in will with his Father, that he would not redeem any but whom his Father
foreknew and praedestinated to it; his Father so constant to himself, that he
calls, justifies, glorifieth those and only those whom he fore knew and
praedestinated; he works according to his purpose:

That we may understand this more fully, we must consider that the business
which the Apostle is to make clear is this. [That all things, even afflictions
shall work together for good to them that are called of his purpose,] this he
lays down ver. 28. now the words that follow are to make this good, as
appears by the word (For) ver. 29, now that which works this good is this,
[Such shall be glorified,] such as are called shall come to glory, that all
afflictions that are to them in [Serie mediorum] a series of means to that
end, shall further not impede their glorification, therefore shall work
together for good. But this then is to be proved, that those that are called,
shall be glorified, and he proves it by this, such were foreknown and
predestined to glory; so that they that are called may look backward to Gods
predestination, and foreward to their glorification; such as were
predestined, such shall be glorified; but then further this must be proved
that those that were predestined, shall be glorified; this he proves by the
contiguity and connection of all those linkes in that golden chain; whom he
foreknew, he predestined, whom predestined, them he called, whom he called,
them he justi^fied; whom he justified, them he glorified: and so they that love
God and are called, may conclude they were predestined, they shall be
glorified; and hence conclude all things shall work together for good, and
therefore they conclude for many privileges to themselves, v. 31.32.33.34.35.
some whereof are, he gave him for us to death, ver. 33. It is Christ that is
dead, ver. 34. all which they had by virtue of Gods predestination, or
election, ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? I
should willing embrace a better coherence and sense of the place, and if this
be the right it does strengthen the proposition. That seeing all things that
are in Serie mediorum, as means conducing to salvation, bear an equipage to
his election, the redemption of Christ is not to exceed it. And so for Ephesians.
1.3 to 11. there is an ennumeration of privileges from election, ver. 3. to
glorification, ver. 11. but election leads the way, and bounds all the rest.

Now to examine what he answers to these.

[This is a far fetched inference, evading the business in hand; for the
business opposed in the inference, is the redemption made by Christ in his own
body for men; and those places mentioned, speak of the benefits thereof, etc.
yea such as many believers want.]

First here is a falsity; because it is clear Romans 8.32. speaks of the
ransom of Christ and of what he did for men in his body; He was delivered up
for us, and died for us, ver. 34. and whether does the expression denote his
death or the benefits thereof? (Secondly,) suppose it do, yet clear it is
that all there mentioned, and so all that tend to salvation, are but equal
with his election, which confirms the proposition; and this is rather a
cavil then satisfaction. Again he says thus,

[Neither it is said does and will justify and glorify, but did and has
predestined, called, glorified, which I hope none will affirm of all the
elect, much less of all Christ died for.] Wherein he discovers but a gross
understanding of the Text, I hope he will not so limit the sense of it, as that
it shall come short of truth; for all whom he has predestined, he has not
yet called: all whom he has called, he has not yet glorified them. Let the
Author speak, has he called and glorified all whom he has foreknowne or
predestined, or much more had he glorified all that he had predestined,
when the Apostle spoke these words? he himself grants that it cannot be
affirmed of all the elect; but how then shall the truth of the Text appear, if
he confine the Text to that sense? certainly he has missed the mark herein;
for though it be in such a sense as may be w^ll translated [hath] yet is used
in such a Text as will not suffer it to be confined to that sense, but to be
understood [Hath] [doth] [will.] and if this cavil had carried any weight in
it, the Remonstrants certainly would gladly have embraced it, but they
conclude the contrary. [ Nota (vocavit) i. e. vocat, vocavit, aut vocabit,
Cornel. A lapid in locum. Act. Syn. in locum.
(Iustificavit) i. e. Iustificavit, justificat, aut Iustificabit; praeterita
enim more Haebreo ponuntur pro quolibet tempore,] and the Remonstrants jointly
agree herein. [ Justificavit, i. e. approbavit, vel approbaturus, remittit vel
remissurus est, glorificavit id est gloriae praemia donabit,] all arising to
this, whom he (has called,) that is (has) (does) or (will,) so in the rest.
Now the reason why all the words are in the perfect tense (has) is because the
two first (praenotion) and (praedestination) are acts that are past, and the
rest shall as infallibly follow as if they were past already; to some they are
all past; to all the predestined they shall all be; so that the sense is this,
whom he has predestined he has or will call; whom he has called, he has
or will glorify, and all certain from predestination. And this is but
parallel to what he must say upon that Text John. 17.2. [To give eternal life
to as many as thou have given him.] Now by giving to Christ, he says page 149.
is meant [bringing on men to believe in the heavenly call,] and so the sense
must be this [He has given him power over all flesh, to give eternal life to
as many as he has given to him, that is brought in to believe in the heavenly
call.] Now hence I question, had Christ received power to give eternal life to
no more then were at that time brought in to believe? let him answer herein, he
must salve it this way or none. (He has) that is to whom he either has or
shall bring in to believe; so why not this Text? and then thus we shall not be
afraid to affirm of all the elect they either are or shall be called,
justified, glorified; therefore what he says herein is a wilful perversion,
no satisfaction to the text.

Again he urges,

[This reason given to fortify the proposition, mistaketh the end of the
Apostles connection of privileges, which is not to set forth for how many
Christ has died, or shall receive the fruits of his death, but it is to set
forth the privileges of those that have begun to receive the choice fruits of
both his propitiation, and advocation.] True, the end and scope of the Apostle
is neither of these, but to show and make good his own words, viz. [that all
things, and so crosses and afflictions shall work together for the good of
them that are called of his purpose;] yet he does it so as hit he does in it
virtually show who are, and how many are elected, justified, glorified; those
and so many are elected, as some to be called and glorified, those and so many
are called as are elected; those and so many are justified as are elected and
called; those and so many are glorified and shall be, as are elected, called,
and justified, or shall be; and thus they are the boundaries of one an other;
and so, Christ's being given for us, being one of those connected privileges,
it follows that those and only such have life procured and purchased for
them, who were elected to it, and come in glorification to partake of it.

2. It is clear that the Text does not show the privileges of them only who
have begun actually to receive the benefits of Christ's oblation and advocation,
because it shows the privileges of all them that are predestined and
foreknowne; and this the Author grants, page 115. 116. [the concatenation of
these high favors is the privilege of the elect sons of God;] but all that
are foreknowne and are predestined, do not yet actually partake of the choice
benefits of Christ's oblation and advocation; therefore this hitherto is
perversion, not satisfaction.

Again he gives a third Answer.

[This inference from these places destroys the distinction between the
Gospel and the communication of the choice benefits thereof, between the
atonement made by Christ, and the receipt of it by his chosen ones.] But this
without any show of truth; we plead indeed for a non division or separation of
the one from the other, and that for whom he made an atonement, they shall
receive it in time; and this be might have seen, if envy and calumny had not
blinded him, and his sufficiently confuteth him; and this we affirm from this
irrefragable chain, Romans 8. all from election to glorification are inseparable.

Again he says thus.

[The connection it self is wrested for this inference, etc. as if all Christ
dyed for and ransomed, must of necessity partake of all these privileges; nor
as if all that partake of some fruits of his ransom, should partake of them
all; nor as if all that were called, must partake of them all.] But this has
as little force as any of the former words, for

1. The connection is not wrested if we find the death of Christ one, of those
connected privileges; for then it will appear that he that partakes of any
one, shall of all the rest; else how are they privileges connected? none ever
yet doubted of this; now that this is one of those connected privileges, it
will appear if we seriously consider the Chapter; we must know that under
those generals, many particulars are to be included: as under (vocation): he
effectual power and spirit of God by which we are called, and sanctification
the effects of it; under justification is contained the death of Christ the
meritorious cause; and this is one to be included, that not only by consequence
but clearly expressed, as may appear from the Apostles repetition of those
privileges, ver. 31.32.33.34. where he reassumeth the election, ver. 33. [Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?] Also justification, ver. 33.
[It is God that justifies.] He assumeth also vocation in ver. 35. (who shall
separate us from the love of Christ?) they were so far from being separated
from the love of Christ by them, that they are more then conquerers over them;
and such is a spirit befitting them that are called of his purpose, ver. 28. he
reassumeth also the death of Christ, ver. 32.34 [He has delivered him up for
us, and [Christ has died for us,] and that to make up the same confidence,
with election, justification, and vocation; and what is more clear then that
the death of Christ is one of the connected privileges? and then the connection
is not wrested.

2. Whereas he says, [As if all that partake of some fruits of his ransom,
must partake of all.] It is too general to be pertinent; I know not what he
may introduce under the notion of fruit of his ransom; this is our inference,
that whoever partaketh of any of those connected privileges, shall partake of
all of them in time; else they are not connected.

3. Whereas he says, [Nor as if all that were called should partake of them
all.] evidenceth that he does steel his forehead to outface a clear Text;
does he not say whom he has called, he has justified and glorified, that is,
has or will? or else it discovers that he has blinded his eyes so far as to
understand the word (called) of outward call only: but then where is the truth
of the Text, (whom he has called, he has justified) all that are outwardly
called, he neither has nor will justify nor glorify; nay all should then be
justified and glorified, because in his judgment all the sons of men are
called; this will prove no propitious interpretation of the Text.

But fearing that what we have said should prove inpregnable, he has an other
assault, and seeks to enervate it, by proving though it be one of the
connected privileges, yet it follows not that because every one that
partaketh of those privileges had Christ delivered up for them, therefore
every one that have Christ delivered up for them, partake of all the
privileges; and this he does thus. [ Psalm. 111. 4 5. He is gracious, full of
compassion, gives meat to them that fear him; it will not hence follow that
he gives meat, and is compassionate to no other.] Which if it had not been
purposely produced to pervert the Text more then to satisfy, he could not but
have seen this example impertinent to the case in hand; for this in Psalm.
111.4.5. it is clear, it has not such a convertible connection as that Text
Romans 8. from which convertibility the force of the argument is deduced: as
those whom he predestinateth, them he calls all, and only those, and so in
the rest which cannot be in the instance produced by him; for though he be
compassionate to all that fear him, yet all do not fear him to whom he is
compassionate and gives meat; therefore that rock is easily avoided, and the
folly and falsehood lights upon himself.

But that he might illustrate himself in the point of election, he craveth
leave to thrust out some of his own conceits about the same, some whereof that
are most momentous I shall examine; Having spoken of the election of the man
Christ, he says h^.

[So all other chosen, being affirmed chosen in him, Ephesians. 1.4. he must needs be
chosen first, else how are they chosen in him?]

See how presently he takes leave to vary from Scripture; he said as he found,
so he believed; what he believes I know not, but I think that he finds it
not said that Christ was first elected; this phrase if any such be, of which
anon, is so far from arguing him to be elected first, that it does not argue
him elected at all; for when the Text says, (...) Col. 1.16. In him were all
things created, does this infer, that he was first created, or created at all,
and will he thus argue, else how are they created in him? 2. But it may be to
this he will repose, that that place speaks of an efficient, but this Ephesians, 1.4
of a meritorious cause; therefore to instance to his mind Col. 1.14. (...), In
whom we have redemption; does this infer that either he was redeemed first, or
redeemed at all? or will he thus argue? else how are we redeemed in him? So 2
Cor. 5.19. In him we are reconciled.

But (latet anguis in herba,) there is something yet behind which the
Arminians contend for, and which I believe the Author in ends, viz. Christ to
be the first Elect, we elect in him as the head from which our election is
conveyed and by whom procured, Exam. Perkins. 31.
as Arminius himself. [Christus secundum Apostolum non tantum est medium per
quod salus obtinetur, sed tanquam causa meritoria cujus respectu electio nostra
facta sit;] That is, he is not only the means of salvation, but the
meritorious cause of election; and I believe this is the Authors judgment;
thus he [Christ is first elect, and so the root in whom all are elected, page
115.] Now if we be elected in Christ as the root, he must convey election to
us, as the root does sap to the branches; but this is not clear from
Scripture; for if we be elected in Christ as the root, then as the sap is
first in the root, then in the branches, and the same identicall sap which was
in the root, is conveyed to the branches; so must the same election wherewith
Christ was elected, be translated upon us, and so our election be one with
Christ's, and Christ his election one with ours; but neither of these do I for
the present comprehend, for that election wherewith we are elected, is such as
has sinners for the object of it. [Electio versatur circa bomines ut
peccatores consideratos, Ibid.
] but Christ was never a sinner or so considered: so never elected with that
election that has sinners for the object, and as such as needs pardon of
sin, so that our election is not competible to Christ.

Again Christ's election in all Remonstrants and our Author, is nothing but a
destination to that office of a Mediator, and so to a Kingdom for the
recompense of that service. So our Author 118.119. but this election is not
competible to us; for then should we be elected mediators; how then it should
be that we are elected in him as the root, I see not.

But happily he will say that his meaning is thus, Christ was first chosen to
his office of a mediator, and so by his mediation he merited our election, as
Arminius in the forequoted place; so that to be [elected in him,] is not only
for Christ to be elected first, but that he also merited our election, and so,
as reconciliation, sanctification, adoption, glorification, flow from him as
the head, so does election also.

To which I will reply only thus much, this is more then any Scripture speaks,
it is the general consent of Schoolmen and modern Divines, that
praedestination or election has no cause in respect of the praedestinator, so
no merit to move it. But I shall not trouble the Author with testimonies of
this nature, I shall be content with his own words, page 119. [All that
election of Christ and his sons was free from eternity, and no cause but his
will.] Which is altogether false if Christ merited our election; for that which
is grounded on the death of Christ as the meritorious cause, cannot be grounded
on Gods mere will.

Again, though Arminius would have Christ the meritorious cause of our
election, yet he has much to do so to temper his pen as not to betray his
cause and speak truth at once; for let us take a survey of his own words.

in Perkins. 31.32.
[Nam Apostolus inquit nos in Christo electos esse tanquam in mediatore.]

Now if he had been constant to himself, and resolved to make out his own
assertion he should have said, [Cujus sanguine parta est electio nostra,] that
is, [by whose blood our election was obtained,] then he had spoken to the
purpose, but then (as he knew well enough) he had spoken beside Scripture,
therefore he says thus.

[Cujus sanguine nobis salus parta est and vita, and ut in capite ex quo ista
bona a derivantur.]

That is, [by whose blood salvation and life are obtained, and that as head
from whom those good things are derived,] and is this all for us to be elected
in Christ? as he says afterward, Christ to be the meritorious cause of grace
and glory; this comes far short of his being the meritorious cause of our
election; all they can make out is this, viz. Christ is the meritorious cause
of bestowing all good things that follow and flow from election; but there is a
wide difference betwixt election and the good things communicated by virtue of
it.

But still the argument of Arminius and so of our Author is unsatisfied, viz.

[Else how are we said to be elected in him, Ephesians. 1.4.]

To this I only advertise the Author that he maimeth the Text; let him produce
it entire, and satisfaction will be more easy; it is thus, [He has elected us
in him that we should be holy;] now it must be decided whether the phrase [in
Christ] be referred to the word (elected) as if Christ was the meriter of
election, or to (us) as if he elected none but whom he foresaw [in Christ] that
is believers, or to the words [that we should be holy,] that is he elected us
to obtain holiness and other blessings (in Christ,) that is [for Christ,] and
ground there is for this Query, because the Remonstrants take the liberty to be
fluctuating in their sentence about it, especially about the two first
acceptations, sometimes affirming the first, sometimes the second, sometimes
both; the Remonstrants in their Synod. Script. appropriate it to the word (us,
Synod. scrip. 60. in Molin. c. 25. s. 14. in Perk. 32.
) and so to denote the object of election, that is such as are (in Christ)
believers: yet Corvinus who is one of the cited Remonstrants, he applied it to
the word (elected,) so to denote the foundation of election and meritorious
cause of it. And Arminius puts both together, and says both are meant,
which to me seems rather to strangle the text then to interpret it; now seeing
they do so vary, it gives us occasion to think that there may be a fourth
interpretation, which may come as near the mind of the Apostle as any of the
former, and that is to refer the words [in Christ] to the last phrase [that
we should be holy,] and so to show, in whom, that is by and for whom we come to
partake of our holiness and graces, as Col. 1.28. perfect in Christ Jesus: and
if thus, his argument herefrom falls to the ground.

Indeed Corvinius says, [Ista verba liquido conjungenda sunt ad verbum
elegit,] that is, in Molin. c. 25. s. 14.
[those words in Christ plainly appear to be referred to the word (elected),]
but his bare word is all we have for it, and to his adversaries charge he
lays rash bodlnesse if he say otherwise, and I think his share is no less
in so saying without ground; all his reason that I can conceive is thus much,
because they are so near in place, therefore they must be referred each to
other in construction, but this is invalid, for in 2 Cor. 5.19. (...), God was
in Christ reconciling,] where the placing of the words are much alike with Ephesians.
1.4. And Ambrose following the method of Corvinus, referring the word (in
Christ) to the foregoing words, interprets it thus. [Deus erat in
humanitate,] the godhead was in the manhood; but thus Gorvinus himself
interprets it not, but refers the phrase (in Christ) to the afterwords
[Reconciling the world.] So Col. 1.19. (...), etc. [In him it pleased the
Father that all fullness should dwell;] why does he not say that this phrase
(in him) should be referred to the word [it pleased,] as if Christ was the
meritorious cause of that good pleasure; there is as much ground for this, as
that Ephesians. 1.4. yet so he does not I think; but clear it is that though [in
him] be first in the Text, yet in construction it agrees with the last
[dwell,] dwell in him; let the Author rejoyne for Corvinus his friend, and show
me why the phrase [in Christ] may not in Ephesians. 1.4. be refered to the
afterwords, as well as in those places forenamed, and so the sense to be this,
Christ is the meritorious cause of our holiness, not of our election.

Besides, were it so that the words were to be read thus [He has elected us in
him;] yet we may find a more commodious interpretation then this, that Christ
merited our election; and to be elected in Christ, is no more then to be
destined to obtain grace and glory by Christ, and so Christ shall be an
essential to the definition of election; but then, his place shall be in the
good things elected to, not the election it self.

Thus Molineus interprets ^t, elected us in Christ, is no more then to be
elected to salvation in Christ; which Corvinus brandeth with boldness, in
referring the words to [salvation] upon this ground, [verba autem [ad salutem]
non extant, Ibid.
] that is because the words [To salvation] are not in the Text; but then he did
not remember, or not well consider that Arminius whom he defends lies under
the same lash; for he says, in Petk. 31.
[Apostolus inquit nos in Christo electos esse tanquam in capite and
mediatore;] that is we are elected in Christ as in the head and Mediator, when
yet those last words are not extant in the Text; therefore Corvinius might have
had so much candor as to think that as Arminius added these words not as the
Text, but as the meaning, so does his adversary, and then his words are no
opposition. And Corvinus himself cannot deny, but that by [He has elected
us,] is meant to salvation. [Ad salutem electionem intelligi non nego; Ibid.
] so that now let us take the Text as it is meant, [He has elected us to
salvation in Christ,] is no more then 1 These. 5.10. appointing us to obtain
salvation by Christ, and so Christ to be means of salvation, not election; and
this he might have seen from Arminius himself, whom in that section he
defends; for let it be granted that by these words, [He has elected us in
him,] it appears that Christ is the foundation of election, yet then we must
inquire what it is for Christ to be the foundation of election. disp. these. 40.
sect. 5.
Arminius explaineth himself, [esse causam meritoriam istorum bonorum quae
fidelibus in isto decreto destinata sunt,] that is, it is to be the meritorious
cause of all good things decreed in election; and in that enumeration of good
things which we have by Christ, he mentions only grace and glory, not
election. sect. 5.
[Materia est benedictiones spirituales, gratiae and gloriae nominibus
appellari solitae.] So in Disp. pub. These. 15. sect. 5.6. Whence it appears
that election is not any of those spiritual blessings which we have in Christ.
Hence it appears, that the expresses of our Author of Christ being first
elect, or we elect in him as the head, or him to merit our election, is besides
the language of Scripture, and I fear above his understanding; I hold Christ
and his members elected together in one act, and if we should be put upon a
priority in nature, I think first the faithful, then Christ; for it is
suitable to Scripture, to say that Christ was elected to his office, that he
might save his people; but we find it nowhere said, that God elected some to
life, that Christ might become a Savior; certainly the work is in intention
before the workman.



[He decreed to do all this by and through his son Christ and for him.]

Wherein he lurketh under a manifold obscurity. For,

1. It is hard to determine to what these words [to do all this,] are referred,
whether to all that went went before, as election of Christ, of his members to
sonneship, and the rest to service and the creation, setting man in a public
place, creating a world of creatures for man's use; all this he had spoken of
before; or whether only to the fourth Section and the particulars therein
contained, viz creation of man and a world of creatures.

2. It is hard to determine whether by [for Christ,] he make Christ the final
cause or meritorious of all those decrees; the phrase [for Christ] will admit
either: and I may well-query, because his quoted Texts Col. 1.16, 17, 18. Romans
11.36. clearly import the final cause; but there it speaks both of God and
Christ, making the world for him. And his expressions, viz. [doing all this for
his son Christ,] clearly denote the meritorious cause, as it is taken where
ever God is said to do any thing for Christ.

But which way soever he means, in either there is a manifest falsity; for
God did not elect his Son, for his Son Christ, nor elect the faithful for
his Son Christ, he merited not either of those; neither did he create the world
for his Son Christ, he did not merit that; he came to save the lost, we find
not that he merited that the world should be made; these are jumbled notions
that he never found in Scripture.

A third particular observable is that he says, 3. page 119.


[That this decree was free without any foresight of good and evil, or respect
had to it, but because he so willed.].

Herein I must advertise him of his remiss expressions; he should have said,
[Without foresight of good or evil as the cause to determine his election,]
else his Reader may well charge him with a contradiction; for in the next
Section he says thus. [That God foreseeing that Adam would fall and loose
himself and his, he did elect etc.] Now for God to elect foreseeing, and yet
without foresight of evil, is very strange.

A fourth particular is that he says, 4. 119.


[In this praedestination he did praedestinate all his elect sons to the
adoption of sons.] Which neither Scripture speaks nor reason comprehends,
for his elect sons to be the object of praedestination; for them that are
elect sons, to be praedestinated to the adoption of sons, are new found
discoveries: It seems they were first elected, then praedestinated; many have
to little purpose it seems perplexed themselves with the object of
praedestination in their supra, and sub-Lapsarian disputes, some for the mass
not made but to be made, others for the mass made but not fallen, a third for
the mass made and fallen; but they may leave such notions; here is a new
discovery; the object of praedestination, (with our Author) is the elect, but
herein he is by himself.

Whereas he says, 5. 118.


[In that election he appointed a great number of other men to be servants to
his Son Christ, and those chosen in him.]

Wherein he seems to affirm that there is an election of all to service, but
this without Scripture; for that there is an election of all to any thing,
Scripture speaks not, nor that this destination to service is called
election; it is better ranked under reprobation or praeterition, as he himself
gives the hint, page, 41. premis. 1. Where he has these words, [In that
election of some to sonneship, and praeterition or appointment of others to be
servants;] where he affirms that his appointment of men to be servants, is
rather his praeterition or non election, then his election; yet here it must be
inserted in his discourse about election; he is not very constant to himself.

2 He opposes sons and servants, which the Scripture owneth not; they that
are sons are servants both to Christ, and one to another. Ephesians. 6.6. Gal. 5.13.

He says, 6. 119. 120.


[To this end he decreed to use such means, etc. to call both sons and
servants to acknowledge this their Lord that they might be happy.]

To let slip many particulars I shall pitch but on this one, his words import
that God gives means to call such and make such happy (that is eternally,) as
are destined only to service; but this is not consonant to right reason or
Scripture, upon this double ground.

1. For any to be Christ's servants, needs not the call of God to bring it
about, because the non elect are Christ's servants, but either active or
passive, to serve him or he to serve himself of them, and they to be used as
other creatures in his work; and this they shall do whether any call or no.

They that are destined to service, are not destined to sonship, or life, as
appears by his distinction, or rather opposition, page 118. Nay it appears
that such in regard of sonship and eternal life are passed by, page 41. That
is he has decreed not to bring in such to the inheritance. Nay further that
such [being the residue of men not elected to sonship,] are from eternity
decreed to obduration, and to be given up, and that he will not overpower them,
as he does his elect; yet such in his divinty God decreed in time to call that
they might be happy: He blusheth not to affirm this of God; but as well may he
tell us, that when God has decreed the world shall not see light, he shall
create the Sun to enlighten it; but of this more presently.

Making clear the business of election, he thus says,

[God decreed to overcome his elect, freely forgiving disobedience, by his
Spirit making them willing, bringing them in to believe. Secondly, to harden
the residue, and give them up for contempt of means.] Wherein some particulars
are observable.

1. Speaking of the first, he gives the name of elect as well he may, because
that decree to overcome and bring them in to believe, constituteth them the
elect both to grace and glory; but when he speaks of the other sort, he
gives them only the name of [the residue,] as if his decree to harden did not
bring them under the notion of reprobation, as well as the decree to overcome
did bring the other under the notion of election; wherein he is either
miserably blind, or wilfully dissembles, when he professes that he is such a
stranger to reprobation in Scripture. Seeing now he is able to see from
Scripture that God from eternity did decree to harden most men, and reprobation
is nothing else.

2. It is strange that the Author treating of election, should produce this
decree in God to harden most men from eternity; is this a particular of
election? then reprobate men, desperate devils may be said to be elected:
certainly the^e expressions had been better reserved till he had treated of
reprobation, as he does afterward.

But herein a piece of his egregious dissimulation is seen, in that this which
is reprobation, is here shufled in to pass untaken notice of in the business
of election; that so when he comes to speak of reprobation, he may say, (as
he does,) that the Scripture scarce owneth a reprobation but an actual, done
in time; when he had inserted these words in their proper place, he might have
seen that there is a reprobation from eternity.

3. In the pursuance of that act concerning the residue that are not elect, he
willingly stifleth a clear truth; it is granted on all hands that election and
reprobation are opposite, and reprobation denies that which election grants:
therefore when he says that he did decree to overpower his elect by his grace,
it must follow that he did deny to overpower the rest; and so decreed to deny
them that grace which he gives to the rest; and this goes before their
hardening for contempt of means, yea in nature before Gods decree so to do,
and their contempt of means is a consequent of that; God denies grace, and
man contemns it, which is an act in God, first in order of nature in this act
of reprobation; but this he concealeth, which does not discover ingenuity not
to produce the strength of the business, though against himself; for if he
had done it, he would not have been such a stranger to reprobation in God, and
that from eternity.

Many more instances I could produce, to show his rude and impolished thoughts
about election, wherein he has discovered much of himself without any
necessity. But to return to the argument again, at last he arises to this
assertion.

[Through this whole discourse it appears, that the death of Christ for all
men impeacheth not the doctrine of election.] Therefore I shall reassume some
of his expressions again which he has granted, and then let the world judge
how well universal ransom intended by God or Christ, consists with it; he
grants,

[That God did elect but some, and to harden the residue for the contempt of
means, and that from eternity, page. 120.]

Now considering such a decree to harden most men, I gather these two things.

First that there can be no such decree in God, or will to send Christ to
procure life for them.

Secondly, that there can be no execution of such a decree.

Not the first, for then that decree must be either in time or from eternity;
but Arminius will not say that Gods decrees are in time, for he grants that
his decree of election is from eternity; so that I do not conclude for
reprobation from their simultaneity, the one being done when the other is; but
his reason given for election, Arm. disp. de praedest.
will reach to reprobation, and this it is [Deus nihil in tempore facit quod ab
^eterno facere non decreverit, secus deo mutatio impingitur;] that is, God does
nothing but what he decreed from eternity to do. And the Author grante^h, page
120. [All his decrees are done at once before the world or time was;] so that
there is no such decree in time.

Secondly, if it be so as the Author says, then God must decree it from
eternity; but this he does not; for then there must be a decree to harden, and
yet to procure life and salvation for them, which cannot be in God, because
they cannot both have their execution: the same man, no not by divine power,
cannot be saved eternally and damned eternally; let us a while consider, God
wills to harden for contempt of means, he must so will till they come to
destruction, else he changes. He wills to save them by Christ, and this he
must will till they be saved, else he changes; which Arminius dare not admit;
so that those two decrees must be in God at the same time, so that either God
shall decree and not execute, or else the same man shall be both saved by
Christ and hardened, and so destroyed for contempt of means; but neither of
these are to be granted; this controversy, any that will, may find scand by
Corvinus, in Mol. cap. 5. of the antecedent and consequent will; Molineus
weighing the nature and event of such warring decrees, presses that doctrine
with a various absurdity; wherein I shall expatiate my self a little, it being
of no small concernement to the clearing of this point; for although the
controversy betwixt Corvinus and his adversary, and that betwixt me and my
Antagonist seem to be diverse, yet they come to one and the same issue; for
this is the question ventilated in bo^^. [Au Deus simul vel^^ omnes salvari and
aliquos da^^ari,] that is whether God may or does will to save all, and yet to
damn some; and so by consequence at the same time, will to save and damn the
same persons; Cap. 5. de vol. Antec. and consequ. sect. 11.
the affirmative of which is adjudged absurd by Molineus, but Corvinus by his
reason attempts to prove it not so. What are his reasons, I shall in part show
wherein they satisfy me not, and leave the determination to the Learned.

Absurd. 1.
Molin presses that doctrine with this first absurdity, viz. [Deus flatuitur
velle quod ab aeterno certus est non agere, (as Corvinus himself relates
it);] that is, c. 5. sect. 8.
by that doctrine, (God is set out to will that which he at the same time
knows shall never come to pass.) For in willing their salvation, he willed
that to many to whom he knew it should never come to pass, he having at that
time appointed them to destruction for contempt of means, as our Author says;
now such a will is not to be found (in homine insipienti) in foolish man, much
less in the all wise God. I shall press Corvinus only with this, if God will
that which he foreseeth shall never come to pass, then either his decree does
not introduce a necessity, or his prescience not an infallibility into the
event; either of which puts Arminius his Master to a loss, whom he defends; as
for the thing it self, I transmit it to any Judge, how discrepant it is to the
wisdom of God to will, and not only so but to use means, and not only so,
but such means as the death of his son, his only beloved son, to effect
that I say, which he knew shall never come to pass.

To his Corvinus replieth thus.

Ibid.
[Non pugnant aliquid velle agere, and scire te id non facturum, fed velle
aliquid agere and non velle agere illud,] That is, (to will a thing and to know
it not to come to pass, are not repugnant, but to will to do a thing, and to
will not to do it;) which solution does rather divert then satisfy, it being
resolved into that Logical nicity of a verbal contradiction; for though they
do not verbally contradict each other, yet they may easily be found jointly to
be repugnant to the wisdom of God, as in (aliquo tertio) which is as valid as
if they were repugnant (inter se) in themselves; it is not suitable to the
workings of rational agents, to have the will carried out in its acts on those
things which a^e known certainly shall never come to pass; and my reason
does not satisfy me but that the will may be as soon carried out on
impossibilities, as that which the understanding dictates shall never be
obtained; for though some difference be betwixt impossibility and infallibibity
of not being; yet both present to us the non obtaining of that object which
before we will, deterreth us from positive willing that thing; therefore such a
thing would be repugnant to the nature of God; and thus it may be demonstrated;
if he will that which he knows shall never come to pass, then either must
his will not be the cause of things, or his prescience not the measure of
things, nor be infallible; both which not only the general stream of
Schoolmen condemn, but Arminius himself dares not own.

He says, [Intellectus dei certus est, non potest falli, vidit omnia in
seipsis and in causis;] and thus, disp. pub 4. sect. 36 54.
[Deus per voluntatem est causa omnium rerum mediante potentia,] that is, the
prescience of God is infallible, his will the cause of all things; but now let
us consider if his will to save them be the cause of their salvation, then it
must exist necessarily by virtue of that decree and will.] If so, then his
prescience by which he sees it not to come to pass, must be infallible; and
if that be not fallible, then their salvation must not exist; if not, his will
whereby he willed their salvation is not the cause of it; thus must it one way
or other be repugnant to the nature of God.

part 1. Q. 14 Art. 8. and Q. 19. Art. 4.
Certainly seeing his prescience is [mensura rerum,] the measure of all
things; and his will [causa rerum,] the cause of things, as Aquinas says;
needs must there be a due proportion and a fair correspondency betwixt both;
for God to will one thing, and to foresee the contrary to come to pass, this
is to overthrow both.

2. Let us again view the reasoning of Arminius, and we shall further see that
there is a repugnancy betwixt Gods willing a thing, and his knowing such a
thing not to come to pass; in Perkins. 129. 142.
he thus says. [Infallibiliter dicitur respectu praescientiae divinae,
necessario respectu decreti and voluntatis divinae;] and elsewhere, [Ex
praescientia concluditur infallibilitas, ex decreto necessitas,] both come to
this, that necessity proceeds from Gods decree, and infallibility from his
prescience. Now to say that he wills the salvation, and yet foreseeth it not
come to pass, does argue that the salvation of all is necessary; yet the
damnation of some shall be infallible, and so the same thing necessary, and yet
the not being of it infallible; necessary to be by virtue of the will of God,
infallibly not to be by virtue of his prescience; but certainly these are very
repugnant; [necessitas eveniendi and infallibilitas non eveniendi,] a necessity
of existing, and infallibility of not existing of the same thing at the same
time, comes little short of a contradiction, and sure I am cannot both be true;
And therefore as repugnant as the necessity of existing, and infallibility of
non existing are; so repugnant are the will of God of a thing to be, and his
foreknowledge of such a thing not to be, from which will and prescience such
affections proceed and flow.

So that we shall need more then his bare assertion, (beyond which we have not
in that eight section) to convince us that Gods willing some men's salvation, c.
5. sect. 7.
and yet knowledge that such a thing shall never come to pass, are not
repugnant.

Indeed something more we have by way of illustration, but as little probation
as formerly, which it is not amiss to rehearse also; he says, [Deus quando
aliquid intendit and vult, non necesse est ut consideret utrum id obtenturus
sit nec ne;] that is, when God intends or wills any thing, it is not
necessary that he then consider whether he be to obtain it or no,] let it be
so; yet the impertinency of his reply is obvious; the question is not whether
God can will a thing, and not consider whether he be to obtain it or no; but
whether he can will that which he knows shall not come to pass; now betwixt
these is a great difference; they that have tasted of the logical rudiments
know that though we may [praescindere rationalitatem ab homine,] yet we cannot
[amovere,] that is though we may consider a man and not consider his
rationality, yet we cannot consider a man, and consider him not rational; so
in the case in hand, it is one thing for God to will a thing and not consider
whether he shall obtain or no, and another to will a thing and consider
himself not to obtain it; though neither can be, yet I shall grant the first
for arguments sake: yet the second he cannot; and herein this is his
argumentation, God may will a thing and yet not consider whether he will
obtain it or no; therefore he may will a thing and consider himself not to
obtain it or no:

And again he thus says, [ Sicut homo potest desiderare quod non sit
eventurum si modo sciat se obtinere posse, ita etiam de deo dici potest, Ibid.
that is as man may desire a thing which is not to come to pass, if we know he
can obtain it, so we may say of God,] which reply labors not with a single
impertinency, and is unsatisfactory many ways. For

1. The question is not whether God may desire that which he knows shall
never come to pass, but whether he can will that which he knows shall never
come to pass; the controversy is not about his desire but will, as may
appear by that position which his adversary oppugneth and he defends, viz.
[simul possit velle omnes salvare, sect. 11:
and aliquos damnare,] that is, God may will to save all, and will to damn
some at the same time; as also the absurdity which his adversary fastens on him
and he attempts to remove, viz. [Deus flatuitur velle quod scivit nunquam
eventurum;] that is, sect. 8.
God wills that which he knows shall not come to pass; as also his own
words, Quum deus aliquid intendit ac vult, non necesse est etc. that is, when
God wills any thing, sect. 7.
it is not necessary that he should consider whether it will come to pass or
no; now for him thus to reply, brings his argumentation to this issue. Man may
desire that which is not come to pass, therefore God can will such a thing; or
at best thus, God may desire, therefore he may will such a thing as he knows
shall not come to pass; which is no sound reasoning; for though desire may be
(...) attributed to God, which I grant not; yet it will not follow that if he
can desire, he may will that which he knows shall not come to pass, neither
does it follow in man.

2. The matter controverted, is not whether God may will that which is not to
come to pass, but that which he knows shall not come to pass, which is all
one in God, but not in the instance produced by him; he himself produces his
adversary thus speaking, sect. 8. sect. 7.
[Deus statuitur velle quod ab aterno certus est non agere;] and thus, [Deum
intendere quod novit non futurum,] both propounding the absurdity thus, then
God wills that which he knows shall not come to pass; now to this he
says, man may will that which is not to come to pass, and what then? if he
had been opposite he should have said thus, man may will that which he knows
shall not come to pass; but this neither does my reason comprehend, nor faith
believe; and his ratiotination comes to this, man may will that which he
knows shall not come to pass; therefore God may will that which he knows
shall never come to pass, which is but a miserable consequence.

Ibid.
Again he says, [Legislator desiderat ut subditi omnes legem servent, etc.
quanquam eam ab omnibus servatum non iri, non possit ignorari; quidni de deo
idem dicamus?] That is, a Lawgiver may desire that his Subjects may keep the
Law, though he know it is not to be done of all; what if we say the same of
God?] Not to insist upon that diversion translating the question from the will
of God to the desire of God, which in rational agents the one may be
conversant about that which the other is not, for the desire may be conversant
about impossibilities that they might be possible, but the will can never; to
pass by that, there is a manifold discrepancy betwixt man and God in this case:

1. The Lawgiver is bound by Gods revealed will to desire that all keep good
Laws; but God no way bound.

2. The Lawgiver cannot certainly know but that all may keep the Law,
therefore may desire, and will also; but God is not so ignorant.

3. It is not in the Lawgivers power to make all men keep the Law, therefore
he may desire and wish; but not so of God; he may not only by his absolute
power, but modo decenti in a manner becoming himself and man's nature, make all
to keep his Law and be saved; therefore no cause why he should desire.

4. The Lawgiver because he desires, (and desire accomplished breeds joy, but
disappointed breeds sorrow of heart,) uses all possible means that lie in his
power, and which he knows are requisite to make men keep those Laws: but God
does not use all those means which he knows requisite to make men obey and
believe, no not those which he might, and neither does any indecent thing to
his own nature or man's liberty; therefore I see not how it may appear that
God desires the salvation of all, though that similitude hold on man's part.

5. This reasoning and argumentation from man to God, I cannot see to be safe;
too fair a way is there laid open to delirate with the gross
Anthropomorthites, and to make man's imperfection the measure of Gods
perfection; and my Antagonist will tell Corvinus, Cap. 6.29.
that [It is ungodly to compare God and man, to compare the works, words and
thoughts of man, to them of God, and to make them equal and alike.] And the
argument herein comes to this issue. A Lawgiver that knows not but all may
obey, has it not in his power to make all obey; that uses all means to cause
men to obey, may desire that all his subjects do obey; therefore God which
knows that all shall not be saved, and in whose power it is to cause men to
believe and be saved, and who uses not all means that he may to that purpose,
may will the salvation of all; the validity of which reasoning is not clear.
And in all these I can not conceive that his understanding did betray him to
such inconsequences, but rather he desired to dazzle the eyes of his readers
with such phrasiologies.

Absurd. 2.
The second absurdity is this. If God will from eternity the salvation of all,
and yet the damnation of some; then [ voluntas humana efficit ut deus rescindat
voluntatem long optimam, etc. That is, c. 5. s. 4.
then the will of man causes that God does cut of his antecedent will; from
which Corvinus himself concludes the mind of his adversary. [Vis dicere
voluntatem dei mutabilem statui;] that is, thou would say that we make Gods
will mutable; and this indeed is the genuine absurdity that we fasten upon
their doctrine, and upon examination I think it will be found to be neither
(invidiose,) nor (misere,) enviously nor miserably, as he is pleased to reply;
for let us consider God being affirmed by them to will the salvation of all
from eternity, either he must retain and persist in that will to eternity, and
so will it even then when they are actually condemned in hell; or not retain
it. I suppose none will affirm that when men are irrecoverably in hell, that
then God does retain his will to save them; if he do not, then must he needs
be mutable; but this Arminius himself durst not own, but grants that act
whereby he wills any thing is [actus aeternus and immutabilis,] eternal and
immutable, and his reason is, [nihil potest de novo bonum videri, disp. pub.
These. 4.5.51.
and quod illi semel bonum visum fuit perpetuo illi tale videtur:] that is,
nothing seems anew to God to be good, and what once seems good to him
always appears under that notion; therefore what ever he wills, and
however, whether upon any condition or absolutely, he must so will to eternity,
else is he mutable in Arminius reasoning. Gods decrees are eternal, so the
same grants, and upon this ground [ Secus deo mutatio impingitur, disp. pub.
These. 15. sect. 6.
] otherwise a change may be fastened upon God; now that Gods decrees may be
eternal, requisite it is that they be so, both [ex part ante,] and [ea part
post,] that is, both from eternity, and to eternity: he must neither begin to
will that which before he did not, or leave of to will that which before he
did; if either, he nor his will can be said to be eternal. So Aquinas
explaineth himself, part. 1. Q. 19 Art. 7.
[Mutatio est in voluntate cum incipit velle quod alias non volebat, vel cum
definit velle, etc. sed in deo nulla talis mutatio;] that is, the will is
changed either when it begins anew to will what it did not, or does desist
to will that which it did, but no such change is in God; and Corvinus himself
is afraid to own any such change in God; c. 5. s. 4.
he says [Non definit deus velle quod vult voluntate antecedenti;] that is God
does not cease to will what he did from eternity by his antecedent will; and so
seems to aver that to eternity God does will the salvation of all; then it
must follow that he wills the salvation of all, either conditionally or
absolutely, when many are in hell and there irrecoverably; his reason is
annexed, [quia voluntas consequens est cum velleitate in contrarium;] that is,
because the consequent will of God is always with a velleity to the contrary;
the assertion impious, and the reason miserable: so that now the reader may
easily conjecture how the case stands herein; their doctrine throws them
upon one of these two rocks; either God does retain that will to eternity,
and so will to save many when they are in hell, which is ridiculous and impious
to affirm, whether meant of a conditional or absolute will; or else God is
mutable and changes his will, cease to will that which he formerly did will;
the latter of these Corvinus seeks to remove, and thus replyeth.

Cum divinam voluntatem mutabilem esse objecisti, Ibid.
parum attendisti ad ea quae a Thoma disseruntur. 1. Quest. 19. Art. 7. Aliud
esse mutare voluntatem, aliud velle retum mutationem; potest aliquis voluntate
immobiliter eadem manente velle quod nunc fiat hoc, posts contrarium; immo de
homine verum est ut absque voluntatis mutatione destruat quod fecit etiam velit
aliquid facere ac simul intendat postea illud destruere; (that is) when thou
objectest that the will of God is mutable, thou did but little attend the
words of Thomas, who says it is one thing to change the will, an other to will
a change of things; one may (the will remaining the same,) will that this shall
be done, and afterward the contrary; and it is true of man, that without the
change of his will he may destroy that which he made, and will to do that
which he may at the same time will to undo.

In all which he does discover sufficiently, that he has not well considered
the placita of that learned Schooleman, or however as little attended to the
sense, as his Adversary to the words of that angelical Doctor. Clear it is to
any man's reason, that the expresses of Aquinas take place in those things in
which there may be a change; for God to will a change of things, necessarily
supposes that those may be changed: as to instance, God might and did will at
one and the same act to create and to destroy the world; that change of things
argued no change in Gods will, but that he willed a change: but then it is
because the world was capable of that change that is, it was both created and
destroyed, and well might be so, and so the will of God fulfilled in both parts
of it; the same might be said of making Saul King, and taking the kingdom
away; and so the instance of Corvinus, [Man may make a thing and destroy it;]
true, because that thing is capable of such making, and of an after
destruction; but all these are impertinent to the case in hand; the thing about
which we treat, is not capable of any change, no not by divine power; for let a
man be eternally saved, and there shall not succeed an other eternity in which
he may be damned. Let the ingenuity of Corvinus dictate to us.

Can the same man be as easily saved eternally, and damned eternally, as the
world be created, and so successively destroyed; or the same piece of work
made by a man, may be made and then after destroyed? if not, why does he darken
such clear points with the mists of such empty allusions? and herein his
argumentation comes to this issue, God may will a change in things that admit a
change; therefore he may will a change in things that cannot (no not by divine
power) admit any; or thus, he may will to create the world, and to destroy it
without a change of his will; therefore he may will the salvation and eternal
damnation of the same man at the same time; or thus, when he wills to make
and destroy the same thing, he wills but a change not changing his will;
therefore he changes not his will when he wills the salvation and damnation,
and both eternal, of the same man, at the same same time; but of these I may
say as he of his Adversary, [Jnvidiose omnia and misere.] Thus far I urge,
seeing there can be no change in this, there must be a change in his will, in
such a will as that is.

Absurd. 3.
If God will at the same time the salvation of all, and the damnation of some;
so by consequence the salvation and damnation of the same persons at the same
time; then [inducitur pugna inter duas dei voluntates;] that is, there is a
fight and contrariety betwixt the wills of God; to will to save and yet to
damn the same persons, are repugnant disagreeing wills, because they cannot
both have execution. To this Corvinus replyeth, [Diversitas objecti tollit
contratietatem voluntatis. Objectum hic non est idem and eodem modo affectum;
versatur prior voluntas circa hominem qua talem, posterior circa illum qua
fidelem vel infidelem; potest deus ante fidei considerationem velle omnes
salvare, ea condition si oredant, and simul velle eos qui non credunt
damnare;] That is, the diversity of the object takes away the contrariety of
the will: the object in this case is not considered as the same manner
affected, so not the same; the first looks on man as man, c. 5. sect. 8. and
11.
the second as a believer or not believer. God may before he consider faith,
will to save all, and yet at the same time will to damn them that believe
not.] Which reply satisfi^th not upon this twofold ground.

1. Be it granted, that a diverse manner of considering the object may take
away the contrariety of his will, yet such various and diverse consideration of
the same man is not competible to God, nothing appears to God anew, every man
appears to God under the same notion from all eternity to all eternity: there
was no instant when God did not see, or not consider every man as he is; and
whereas he says, God might will to save all, [ante fidei considerationem,]
before he considered faith, that there was an instant before he considered the
faith of them that come to believe; but this is false. I shall only herein
insist upon the placita of Arminius himself, who is of some authority with
Corvinus; in his publ. disp. th. s. 4. he says thus, [Ab aeterno novit omnia,
nihil de novo; non nunc intelligit quod non intelligebat antea.] Sect. 33. That
is, he knows all things from eternity, nothing anew, nor that now which he
knew not before. Again, [Jmmense novit omnia sine scientiae vel augmentatione
vel decremento.] Ibid. That is, he knows all things immensly, without
increase or decrease of his knowledge. Again, [Jmmutabiliter novit omnia non
variata cognitime,] That is, he knows all things, immutably without variation
of his knowledge. Again, [Vno and individuo actu omnia cognoscit non
distractus in plurima.] He knows all things with one single and individual
act, not distracted into more. Again, [Voluntas dei est aeterna, quia nihil
potest de novo deo aut esse aut videri bonum,] That is, the will of God is
eternal, because nothing can either be, or seem to be good to God anew.
Again, [Jmmutabills, quia quod semel illi bonum fuit aut visum fuit, semper
illi tale est and videtur.] That is, it is also immutable, because that which
now is and seems good to him, ever did and shall seem so; now if these be
true, (as clear it is they are,) that all things are present to God from
eternity, and that he sees all things with one individual identicall act and
prescience; then must it follow that every respect or qualification in which he
foreseeth any man to be, is but one and the same: now in an identicall and
individual tuition or prescience, there can be no diverse respect or various
qualifications, that may produce such various volitions in God; if he do not
afterward see any man incredulous whom he did not for ever see so, why should
he under that notion will to damn him, whom before he had willed to save? in
this my reason reaches not the depth of his assertions, or why he should will
to save any man upon condition of faith, whom he at that time looks upon as
incredu'ous, yea pe^sisting in that incredulity, I cannot comprehend.

2. Let it be granted for argumentations sake, that such various respects are
incident to God, yet this wants proof, that such various respects tokes away
the contrariety of will, which makes his replication to labor with a second
dissatisfaction. And to make this good I shall urge him with the words of
Arminius himself, when the question was about Gods willing of sin, by his
will or decree, though he forbad it by his commands, which is (...), called
Signum voluntatis the sign of his will; this is pressed by Bellarmin and
others, with this absurdity, then God must will contraries, if he determine one
thing and command an other: to this Mr Perkins answers negatively, not
contrary, because it is (called) and (forbidden) under a diverse respect, to
which Arminius replyeth (though upon no fair occasion,) thus,

in Perkins. 128.
Responsio tua nodum non solvit; vella aliquid evenire and velle idem non
evenire, non differunt tantum respectibus sed (...) and integris essentils,
neque ullus est respectus five modum secundum quem deus dici potest velle ut
evenia^ aliquid and simul velle ut idem non eveniat; non enim potest circa unu^
idemque objectum, quibuscunque respectibus induatur, contrari^ actibus versari
divina voluntas.] That is, thy answer does not unty the knot; for to will a
thing to come to pass, and to will the same thing not to come to pass, does
not differ in respects only, but in their whole and entire essences; neither
is their any respect or manner according to which God may be said to will that
a thing should come to pass, and yet that it should not come to pass; the
will of God cannot be conversant in contrary acts about one and the same object
with whatsoever respects that object be clothed.

Thus he venteth himself against his adversary, and exspiateth himself as
much against that, as Corvinus does for it; now why may I not say, that the
replication of Corvinus does not unloose the knot? for this is clear, that for
God to will to save, and yet to damn the same man, does differ as much as for
God to will to save; and not to save; because in his will to damn, there is
contained a will not to save and his will to save and yet not to save, are as
different as his will that a thing should come to pass, and yet will that it
should not come to pass; and these in Arminius his divinity do differ in
their entire essences; then they are not to be reconciled by their various
diverse respects; and if there be no respect, nor can be according to which God
may will the same thing to come to pass, and not to come to pass; then there
neither is nor can be any such diverse respect, according to which he may will
to save, and yet not to save the same person at the same time; and herein we
may see how inconsistent the sentences of these two great Remonstrants are
(though one defend the other eagerly;) the one says, that a diverse respect
does take away the contrariety of will; the other says that the will of God
cannot be versed about any one object in contrary acts, with what circumstances
or respects soever it be clothed; the one grants that a diverse respect takes
away the contrariety; the other contendeth it does not; the one says, (that a
diverse respect makes it not to be one and the same object;) the other says,
that it is one and the same object, with what respect soever it be clothed;
and sure it is that if the expresses of Corvinus have weight in them, viz.
[various respects make it not to be the same object;] then the words of
Arminius, viz. [The same object what respects soever it is clothed with,] have
more emptynesse in them then Corvinus is willing to have them charged with.

3. Corvinus speaking of the diverse respect which God considers in man (as he
says) makes God not to will contraries, goes further and says, [Jmmo ne
quidem mutatur dei voluntas;] That is, it is so far from his willing
contraries, that it does keep his will from being subject to change. But this
is not consonant to reason; various respects does not take away a change, but
rather [ponere ratione^ ^tandi,] put a reason of a change; if the understanding
of God may be obnoxious to a diverse or various respect or consideration, why
not his will? and if diversity of respect should take away mutation of will,
then should man never be capable of changing his will; for it is against the
working of rational agents, having placed the will upon an object, ever to
change that will, without a variety of consideration or respect; they see
something which they saw not before; but that man may change his will, no man
yet ever has doubted. To instance, a man determines to give his estate to his
son, because he is his son; but afterward this son proves disobedient
and rebellious; now under this notion he determines again to disinherit him,
and not to give him his estate; now here is a diverse respect considered; but
we need not fear to say, that that father changes his mind toward that
son, but rather that diverse respects shows the cause why he changes his
mind.

1. He willed that which he knew should never come to pass.

2. He then must retain that will to eternity, and so will to save them when
they are actually damned, or else be mutable in ceasing to will that which he
once willed; both absurd to affirm.

3. He then must will contrary things, and such things as can in no wise (no
not by divine power) be concentred in an execution; happily from the Author we
may receive some new satisfaction. I shall expect it; surely if not, they will
make the doctrine of election as he sets it down, and universal redemption
to be inconsistent; and hereby I prove, that considering that will to give up
many to destruction, there could be no such will from eternity to send Christ
to save every man.

Secondly, there is no such execution in time.

Not by God, he sent not Christ for that end: upon Arminius his ground, God
does not any thing in time, but what he decreed before time.

Not by Christ, he came not for that end, viz. to save them whom his Father had
decreed to harden.

This would entrench upon,

1. His wisdom, in laying down his blood a price to ransom, that must of
necessity be destroyed; that blood is shed in vain, in regard of that end: for
when God has decreed to harden and destroy a man, that decree of God brings
a necessity upon his destruction, if Arminius be right. [Ex praescientia
concluditur insallibilitas, ex decreto necessitas.] In Perkins. 142.

2. His oneness in will with his Father, of which the Author speaks much,
page. 4. Section. 8. Now how is Christ's will and his Fathers one, and how could
he say, I come to do thy will O God, if he came to save them whom his Father
had decreed from eternity to harden and give up to destruction? How then do
Gods decrees and Christ's general purchase agree? But he has something more to
repose.

However all Gods councels stand, yet those that have known the same have not
such use of it as to put any impossibility on God to do his creatures good.
John knew stones were not elected, yet he said (not of his will but power,) God
is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.]

This being his last hold, if this be beat down, where he will be next I know
not: Now it is to be considered, that the question does not proceed upon Gods
absolute power, but his limited; as he has limited it by his decree, we deny
not but God could so have willed, but he did not; and willing to barden, cannot
now will to save. It is no inconsistent thing with his omnipotency, to say that
he cannot now [S^ante aeterna electione,] show the top of his mercy to every
man. It is true, all things are possible to him; yet this is also true, he
cannot sin, lie, deny himself, repent, change: so he cannot but proceed
according to the council of his own will, else he should be impotent not
omnipotent.

Let men understand the councels of God as they please, I shall not be afraid
to affirm that as God has set down his decrees from eternity, he cannot now
show the top of his mercy to every man.

But to his instances, whereby he refelleth this.

Math. 3.9. God is able to raise children of these stones,] And says the
Author these were not elected; true, but John did not know but that God might
not have willed to raise up children out of them; and he there speaks of his
absolute power: but had John known that God had determined not to raise up to
Abraham children out of them, it is questionable whether he would have so
expressed it. Romans 11.23. God is able to graft them in again: true, and he
decreed so to do; we daily expect it from the promise: what is this to the
opening a way for Gods doing of that, which he has decreed not to do?

Mat. 26.33. I could obtain more then twelve Legions,] True, God could send so
many by his absolute power; but considering his decree, he had tied himself;
besides I dispute not about Gods power, but will; not whether he can save them
whom he resolved to harden, but whether he ever wills so to do; and for this
that example confirms me, because his father would nor grant, or he beg,
because they had determined he should suffer. His hour was come.

Then to conclude, let the Author bend himself to reconcile Christ's will to
his Fathers, if he procure life for any man, either absolutely, or upon any
condition; so that the Argument stands firm, that seeing Christ's will is one
with his Fathers: and his actions in time, do perfect his Fathers decrees
before time, his redemption but subservient to his Fathers election, seeing his
Father elected not every man to grace and glory, he purchased not grace and
glory for every man, either absolutely, or on condition.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the sixth Objection.
THe sixth Argument is this.

[The ransom is no larger then his Priestly Regal Prophetique offices.

But those offices appertain only to his Church and chosen.

Ergo, The ransom and mediation appertains to no more.]

This argument I find not any where urged; certainly it is of his own
framing, which is too great a privilege for him to assume, to form argument
for himself to answer, and which he might improve so far as to give more
satisfactory answers then he does to this argument; I shall not undertake to
defend it, yet I shall observe how absurd answers he gives to a weak
argument. He says,

[This sober objection denies not his death for all, but only his ransom and
mediation.]

But this is hardly a sober solution to that sober argument; for if the Author
had been as sober as the objector, he might have seen that in denying his
ransom for all, he denies his death for all, because his ransom is by dying,
and whom he ransomed he died for; and so for whom he died not, he did not
ransom.

2. If he said no more, the conclusion opposes the authors doctrine strongly,
which in every leaf is for universal ransom and mediation, as appears by
his after words.

[He could not be Lord of all nor challenge submission, etc. if he had not
ransomed them.]

The emptiness of which has been often discovered; his being Lord of all,
challenging submission, does no way infer a a ransom; the Father is and does
all those things mentioned, yet he never ransomed them, o^ died for them; the
Father was Lord, and challenged submission of man in innocence, when no need of
ransom; and so for all the rest I have shown that they do not necessarily
infer a ransom.

But he afterward says,

[The answer to that objection is easy.]

But what need an answer if the objection be so sober as not to oppose him? and
easy it is to give an answer; but to give such an one as satisfies, that is
not so easy; as appears by his whole discourse; but let us see his facile
and obvious answers; it is this.

[As the mediation of Christ is both more generally and more special; the
first as he is Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2.5. the second as he is
Mediator of the New Testament, Heb. 9.14. so in all his offices there is that
which is more general, and that which is more special.]

Now this labors with a double error; for neither is his mediation twofold,
neither are his offices twofold, that is general and special; as for the
first, viz. his distinction betwixt his mediation of the New Testament, and his
mediation between God and man, is ridiculous and not consonant to Scripture;
for, when he was said to be a mediator betwixt God and man, 1 Timothy 2 5. was he
not in that mediation a mediator of the New Testament? is there any mediation
that is not by a New Testament, even for transgressors that were under the
former Testament? as Heb. 9.15. and was not his mediation, Heb. 9.15. a
mediation between God man? is there any mediation that is not between God and
man? was not that mediation in Heb. 9.14.15. for the redemption of
transgressors, and by death? and was not that in 1 Timothy 2.5. the like? and is
there any mediation for transgressors, and by death, but such as is between God
and man? no marvel if such answers be easy and ready at hand.

Again he urges thus,

[as a Priest he offered sacrifice in respect of one end, (viz.) propitiation
for all men, Heb. 9.26. and 2.9. John. 1.29. 1 John. 2.2. but in respect of all
ends, propitiation, sealing the New Testament, testification of truth, and for
the uttermost end in all, for his called and chosen ones, Heb. 9.14.15.]

As for his distinction of ends, dividing some to all, others for his chosen,
is without ground, as I have showen in the former part of my treatise; and
clear it is, because his propitiation is nowhere said to be for every man,
therefore all the ends of his death are for the same persons. Yea that Text
Heb, 9.14.15. hinteth of no other end but propitiation or redemption of
transgressions as ver. 15. yet the Author himself confesses that it is for
his called and chosen ones, and that those Texts Heb. 2.9. 1 John, 29. 1 John.
2.2. do not hold such a general popitiation, I have showen at large; this is
but [petitio principij.] And why he should produce a double oblation from 1 Timothy 2.5. and Heb. 9.14.15. I see not, seeing he cannot produce any differing
circumstance; both by Christ, both by death, both for transgressions, both that
those that are called might receive the promise; now if he shall say the one is
for all, the other for his chosen, this is not against us, but gives us the
question, and grants that the all in 1 Timothy 2.5. is no more then the chosen
ones in Heb. 9.14.15. Hereby we may have a taste, that let the argument be as
weak as it can, yet his answers are as weak and come far short of
discovering any weakness in it.

CHAP. XIX. Of the seventh Objection.
A seventh argument produced by him is this.

[If God intended life for all men by Christ death, he would certainly have
used some means to bring all men to the knowledge of Christ, and so to
repentance and faith.

But to many he gives no means at all; to others denied means when his
servants would have carried the same. Therefore.]

This argument was the fifth argument in the conference, and in its right
formation runs thus.

[If Christ have procured reconciliation and remission by his death for every
man, none excepted, then the word of reconciliation would and should have been
preached to every man, none excepted.]

But the word of reconciliation is not etc.

Ergo, Christ did not procure remission for all and every man.]

But to take his argument as it runs, I shall first show the force of the
argument; it is but consonant to the wisdom of God, to have made such a
purchase by his Son, or Christ by himself at so dear a rate as his blood,
and that for the good of men, that he should make a discovery of this, that so
men might come to partake of it and the benefits of it; for no man can partake
of this remission but by faith, Romans 3.25. and faith is not ordinarily begotten
but by the word, Romans 10.14. hence the Apostle puts both together, 2 Cor.
5.15.18.19. with dying and reconciling, he committed the Gospel of
reconciliation to the Apostles; but that many millions die without any
knowledge of Jesus Christ, Scripture shows and experience witnesses. Now to
perpend his answer; hereto he says.

[This objection denies neither the death or ransom of Christ to be for all
men, but only any intendment of life and saving grace thereby.]

And does this clear him from the force of this argument? he is sufficiently
confounded hereby; because he holds that his purchase, and ransom, and
death, was with an intendment of life to every man, as he says, page 15. [He
has wrought for all men that they might be eternally saved;] does not this
sufficiently discover the folly of the Author in answering the objection with
that which confirms it and overthrows himself? He further says.

[Nor for any but where the Gospel is not granted.]

And enough too; because if Christ died not for all those where the Gospel
never comes, he died not for every man without exception. Yet he can manfully
say the force of the objection is weak, and his grounds follow.

[The Scripture has expressly affirmed Gods intention to be that they all
might be saved, and repent, and believe, and be further saved. Ezeck. 33.11.
John. 3.17. John. 1.4.7. Romans 2.4. 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9.]

But what does this help him? certainly nothing; because that to deny Gods
intendment of life to all, was nothing against him, as even now he professed.

2. If he mean every son of Adam, no place cited by him clears it; it is
not suitable to reason, that God should intend those men might or should
believe and be further saved, whom he decreed from eternity should be damned:
this I have at large proud.

3. If the Author so confidently can say, that it is Gods intention that all
men should believe, he need not be so squeemish at the affirming that it is his
intention that all men should be eternally saved, which I find him sometimes
and others of his opinion so loath to affirm. But he further says.

[If we cannot in the works of God see the fulfilling of the sayings of God,
it becomes us to admire his wisdom and holiness, and bewail our ignorance,
etc. and not by rash judging deny the truth of his words, Romans 11.33.]

True, if we be sure such a thing is the work of God, if we cannot fathom it,
to admire the wisdom of God is good, as Romans 11.33. but we may admire our own
folly and bewail it, to put such a sense on Scripture, as that we cannot make
it and the wisdom of God to meet; we deny not the truth of Gods words but the
Authors gloss; and if he can prove it to be truly the work of God, or that it
is a truth, I shall admire, though I cannot fathom it. Hitherto I conceive he
has been oppugning the major; afterward he comes to the minor, and thus
says.

[The Scripture testifies that God has and does use some means toward all
men, not only in his works of creation and providence, which gives some
testimony of his goodness, etc. but with some further light, yea it may be
some rumor of the Gospel, as much as drew Rahab to believe, etc.]

Hereby attempting to prove, that some discovery of the purchase is made known
to every man. But very confidently he says God affords some means to all
men, but shows not to what end, whether to manifest his power and Godhead, and
mere goodness; or further to show his mercy in our repairing; but this latter
is most suiteable to his purpose and the argument; but what means does he use?
he says, [not only by his works of creation and providence,] to intimate
that those are means to discover something of Christ; but without ground; for
the creation can no more alone discover a Savior, then they could in the
creature; goodness we may see in the creature, but not mercy: indeed if we
have a word with them, it can tell us we have sinned and so forfeited all, then
we may see mercy, not else, and all that the creation discovers is power and
Godhead; but this there was before any mercy, and may be without it; but he
says, [With further light,] but speaks not what that is, therefore I cannot
answer; but he adds, [It may be some rumor of the Gospel,] but no Scripture
says it; if it do, why does he darken truth with [May be?] if it do not, why
does he oppugn truth with (may be?) he must not think to overthrow arguments
with [May be^s;] as for the rumor that was made to Adam, Noah, Shem, Abraham,
Jacob, Rahab, etc. unless he learn better skill in probation, Apolog. c. 7.
s. 8. in resp. ad Art. 31. A 11.
it will not be very easy to prove that that those had knowledge of Christ, or
of a Savior; the Remonstrants will tell him that faith in Jesus was not
required of the fathers under the Old Testament, but only in God: and Arminius
will not only question but strongly argue, that the faithful in the Old
Testament, did not know that the Law typed out Christ and his benefits; but I
do not so satisfy the Author; but what if Adam, Noah, Shem, Abraham, etc. did
hear and know something? what is this to every individual man that ever was or
shall be? the strongest asserters of this general discovery of the gospel, have
yet been forced to confess the contrary; in Perk. 258. Corv. in M. c. 28. s.
8. Act. Synod. 327. 316. 285. Col. Hag. 179. Col. Hag. in Arg. 5.
Arminius himself says thus, Causa cur deus omnibus Christum non revelet est
quod parents repudiaverunt,] (that is) the cause why God does not reveal
Christ to all, is, because their parents have rejected: if he give a reason,
then certainly that must be a truth of which he gives a reason, that Christ
is not revealed to all; and the Remonstrants confess, [Ecce populos quosdam
etiam hujus temporis qui adhucdum nihil de hoc reconciliationis verbo sciunt;]
(that is) there is a people in this time, that never heard a word of that work
of reconciliation; and in this thing they miserably falter; sometimes they say,
[As much as in him lies he dispenses it;] sometimes [for his part he is ready
to take care that it be preached;] sometimes [he commands it to be preached;]
sometimes [it ought to be preached;] sometimes [it may be preached;] and if it
were possible, would say many more to salve it. And therefore though we will
not say that God does not use any means to know him and his Godhead, yet we
may say, he uses no means to every man to discover Christ and the redemption
by him. He further says.

[Gods denial of his servants to preach in some places for a time, as in Acts,
16.6, 7. proves not an utter denial of all means to them (and among many
reasons he gives this one, but he may deny it for one time, yet grant it for
an other.]

All this may be received, yet we not hurt; for we say not that he denies them
all means to know him, but means to know Christ he did; and what though he
granted the Gospel afterward to those places, yet in the intervall of time did
not many (thinks he,) die without knowledge of Christ? as for example, many
Gentiles perished in ignorance of Christ, during the time of the Gospels
confinement to the Jews, though afterward it was granted to the Gentiles: and
if so, our Minor is yet firm; nothing of moment does he else produce but what
confirms that assumption that he would overthrow.

Thus have I martialed up our arguments in their native force, and his answers
in their greatest strength; and herein have been as faithful as I am able; and
whether he has abated the force of any one argument, or given any thing but
cavills to darken the truth, I leave to any indifferent reader to judge; and
what faithfulness he has observed in laying down our arguments, I leave also
to judge; in the next Chapter we shall see if he have any more dexterity in
producing his own arguments, then he has manifested in reciting ours.

CHAP. XX. Of the Arguments confirming the Proposition.
WHerein I shall first touch his fair flourish in the entrance, viz.

[To satisfy such as would have reason satisfied, reasons are added]

So that now we may set up a general (siquis) if any would have his reason
satisfied, let him come hither: and he does well to satisfy reason, for he
has not yet confirmed our faith; but what persons are they that must be
satisfied? certainly none but such as are satisfied with any thing; yet thus
far my reason is satisfied, that the Author has not light upon forcible
arguments to prove this position. As for his arguments produced, no answer need
be given, muchlesse much pains to be spent in a solicitous answer; and this
any intelligent Reader will grant, if he consider these particulars concerning
them.

1. Observe that in all he produces Scriptures to back his conclusions,
providing himself against such (as having as little skill as himself in
ratiotination,) may deny the conclusion, which is against the rule of
argumentation, in which if good, the conclusion has strength enough from the
premises, and let them be right, I will warrant his conclusion; now what
strength of Argument can we expect from such as is so weakly versed in that
way?

2. His arguments are many, six in number, to call the eyes of men upon that
truth that is backed by multitude of arguments, when he deceives them utterly;
for his mediums are all coincident in one; let us veiw them. His [1. Says,
That which the Scripture plainly affirms in plain words, is true. 2. Says,
T^^^ for whom Christ and his Apostles in plain terms affirm Christ to come
to save, them he did come to save. 3. Says, That which Scripture lays down
as one end of his death etc. is to be believed. 4. Says, That which the
Scripture sets forth in general for the world, it a truth. 5: Says, That
which may be proved in and by Scripture in plain sentences, etc. is a truth.]


Now let any divine Chymnist extract a difference betwixt any of these; do
they nor deserve by the variety of matter to be ranged as distinct arguments?
should I have distinct answers, I should run into the Authors folly.

3. Let us view the conclusions in all, and so see what he proves in all his
plain Scriptures. His [1. Thus, That he gave himself a ransom for all, and
tasted death for every man. 2. He came to save sinners, world, unjust, ungodly.
3. That by his death he is Lord of all. 4. That he was sent to be the Savior
of the world, that whoever believes should not perish. 5. That he has in
dying lordship over all. 6. That he gave himself a ransom for all, and tasted
death for every man.]


Now not to insist on that peccancy, in having such various conclusions about
one and the same question, wherein he cannot satisfy that requisite in
reasoning to conclude with the question; this I say, none of these conclusions
are against us, which may be reduced to that peccancy in reasoning which is
called (ignoratio elenchi;) none of his arguments are in right form, they have
more in the conclusion then his premises contribute to them, all have some or
other obliquity; but seeing all of them are but one medium, and so in effect
but one argument, I shall give this one answer, (conceditur totum,) and he can
desire no more of us then to grant all he says; now in the issue either his
weakness appears in producing that against us which we may grant, or ours in
granting that which makes against us; let him put it to the trial.

CHAP. XXI. Of removing some doubts hindering some from believing that which
they confess.
WHerein he personateth some that cannot deny but confess that [Christ gave
himself a ransom for all, and tasted death for every man;] but they cannot
believe that Christ died for all men; I shall not insist on the Authors
dexterity in framing such arguments and doubts that he may easily answer, and
render the objectors ridiculous; his forgery lies in two particulars.

1. He knows none that cannot believe that which they confess Scripture
speaks; some may not confess that which they believe; but that any should
not believe that which they confess, I believe not.

2. He knows none that believe that Christ gave himself a ransom for all,
and yet do doubt whether he died for all or no; this would be to exceed the
Author in folly; but here lies the doubt, though the Text say He gave himself
a ransom for all men; yet they cannot believe that it means every
individual man without exception, upon a threefold ground arising from
several Scriptures. as first,

Ephesians. 2.8. [By grace are ye saved through faith, and this not of our selves, it
is the gift of God;] from this Text I do not affirm, that faith is said to be
the gift of God, though it be so, and other Scriptures hold it forth, yet I say
not that this text says so; for having said [ye are saved by grace through
faith:] it says [(...),] which is not of our selves; it does not well agree
with (...), it being of the new^er gender, but rather with the whole sentence
going before, (...), that salvation by grace through faith is the gift of God,
as Rom 6.33. the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
But to take it as as he propounds it, and from this that faith is the gift of
God which is a truth, hence the doubt is this. Seeing faith is the gift of God,
and he has determined not to give to every man that faith; therefore it is not
probable that Christ would lay down his life for them, upon the condition of
faith, whom he sees cannot believe without God, and to them God will not give
it; to the salving of which he speaks many things; but little to satisfaction,
he seems to distinguish of salvation.

1. A salvation, without man in Christ, for men.

2. A salvation in men inabling men to believe.

3. A salvation upon men both in soul and body complete in heaven. Now he says
that this phrase, [Yee are saved by grace through faith,] in Ephesians. 28. is meant
of the second salvation; but first that is not clear; for then the sense must
be this, ye are brought in to believe through faith: so that faith is by him
the means conducing to faith; this is absurd; I think it plainly appears to
be meant of complete salvation in heaven, and it says ye are saved, because
they were certainly to be saved through faith. But be it so as he says; yet
the doubt is where it was; yet that being saved by faith is the gift of God,
and he not giving that grace to all, he would not give his Son to merit life
for all upon the condition of believing; if I can in his next be informed of
his strength in his expresses to this purpose, I shall say more.

His second Text produced,

[ John, 6.37. All that my Father gives me shall come unto me, and him that
comes I will not cast out.]

Now from this Text here lies the doubt; it is not consonant to reason or
Scripture, that Christ would lay down his blood to purchase life for them whom
his Father had not given to him; seeing his Fathers giving is the measure of
coming to him, and so being within the compass of the benefit of his
impetration, his will being one with his Fathers, his impetration would be
equal with his Fathers giving to him; this he undertaketh to remove, by
showing a fouretold giving of men to Christ.

[1. Giving by election to sonship and inheritance. 2. Giving men to him to
undertake for them and to ransom them. 3. Giving men to Christ, they to be
his, and he to be their Lord. 4. Giving men to Christ in the heavenly call, so
they are given up to him.]
But what need so many words to darken a clear Text? and what need so many
acceptations, when it is clear that all of them cannot be the sense of this
place, or give any light to it? The second giving cannot be meant, because all
for whom he undertook and ransomed, in the Authors judgment, do not come to
him, that is believe on him, so contrary to the text, all that my Father gives
me shall come to me.

Neither can the third be the sense here meant, upon the same ground; many who
are Christ's at his dispose, so as to be their Lord, they yet come not to him,
that is believe on him; and those that by his judiciary power come to be
judged, or come to sue for mercy, many of them are cast out: as is seem in the
wedding, and the five foolish virgins; therefore little need be said of these,
because they do not expound the Text by any one of these; all the contestation
betwixt the Remonstrants and their adversaries, and me and my Antagonist, is
betwixt the first and the fourth; he affirms the fourth to be the genuine
sense of this place; but against not only reason but common sense; for by
coming to Christ is certainly meant believing in him, coming by faith as is
clear by many Scriptures, Mat. 11.28. [come unto me ye that are heavy laden,]
that is believe in me, John, 6.64.65. compare them together, [yee believe not,
no man can come unto me except my Father draw him, and ver. 35. both are put
together, [He that believes shall not hunger, he that comes shall not
thirst;] so according to him the sense must be this, they that have come shall
come, or they that have believed shall believe; but this is very improbable;
the gloss of the Remonstrants solveth it not, Act. Syn. in locum.
[veniet] for [venite debet] that is [shall come] by it is meant [ought to
come] for it is still under the same absurdity to say they that have come ought
to come, as to say they shall come.

The next thing is to consider whether the first interpretation be the right or
no; it seems to be the right, because the giving is antecedaneous to coming
or believing, therefore most probable to be the giving by election; now of this
sense he says.

[So they may be [though not in Scripture] truly said to be given him.]

But whence does he deduce this liberty, to say that it is truly said of Christ
which is not said in Scripture? it seems the Scripture is not the adequate
subject of truth.

[But these are not the only number that are given to him; for as they are
given to him to be heirs with him, so were all the rest given to him to serve
him and his people.]

Which is very impertinent to the case in hand; for we question not whether
none be any way given to Christ, but such as are given by election: but whether
in this Text the giving by election is meant or no; let all be given to Christ
to be his servants, yet here those that come to him are given to him to be
heirs with him; and this giving is before coming, therefore by election.
Again,

[Where election is set forth under this term of giving to Christ, is hard to
find in Scripture.]

But herein he did not compare his no^es well, and consider what he says in
the next page, 149. there he says, [In all these three senses giving
comprehends Adam and all that come of him, all men being given to Christ in all
these three senses, as Scripture testifies.] Now we must consider that the
first of these three, is giving to Christ to be heirs and that by election, as
he says page 148. and this in one page he says the Scripture testifies that
this election to sonship is understood by giving to Christ; but in page 148. he
says it is hard to find where it is so taken; this is an egregious
contradiction, besides the extreme falsity, because we never find it testified
that all are given by election to Christ to be heirs with him. And then he
groundlesly concludes

[In this place it neither is nor can be so taken.]

But we have no reason nor Scripture to prove, but his bare word only to
affirm it, but it is not of weight to carry it. 2. If it be not a giving by
election, and yet antecedaneous to believing, I hope he will in his next make
it appear what it is; and thus notwithstanding his groundless evasion, the
doubt is still unsatisfied, from that Text John, 6.37. The third Text produced
is, Acts, 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed;] the doubt
hence is this, that seeing the reason why men believed, was because they were
ordained to eternal life, and so the number of believers and the ordained to
life are equal and run in an equipage, it is not probable that Christ would
shed his blood for those to procure life upon faith whom he knew were not
ordained to eternal life, This he would remove thus.

[The words ordained to eternal life [it is to be feared] are mistaken, as if
they signified only the prime election to sonship, whereas it is not found
where that only sense is set forth in the words (ordained to life).]

The clearest truth may be eclipsed by the interposition of humane glosses and
suspicions; but to any unprejudiced man these three things may appear.

1. That it was God that did ordain them, for so of his act it speaks, ver.
47. and of setting Paul to be for salvation, he did also ordain them to life
that were to believe; indeed the Remonstrants are pleased to say, Act. Synod.
in locum.
[non dicuntur ordinati a deo,] (that is) they are not said to be ordained of
God; but what then? is it a hard thing to prove it so to be meant? why are we
not to think it to be Gods act in ordaining to life, as well as in appointment
to life and salvation? as 1 These. 5.10. (...) etc. He has appointed us, viz.
God, to obtain salvation; but if it be not Gods act, let us be informed who it
is that ordains men to life.

2. We may see it is an appointment to eternal life, and that in plain terms;
so that it must be an ordaining to sonship and inheritance.

3. It is an act that was precedaneous to says, as is clear; as many as were
ordained to life then believed: therefore it could not be that temporary
election, of which the Author speaks, therefore it must meant of the prime
election; now seeing that it means the prime election to inheritance, and he
cannot produce any place of Scripture where this phrase signifies any thing
else, we may conclude that this phrase here signifies only such prime
ordaining to inheritance, and therefore the place is not abused. But I hope if
he remove that sense, he will furnish us with some better, and not leave words
without a sense, let us therefore see how it is taken in his judgment.

He urges thus,

[The word ordaining being found in Scripture to have a further sense, even of
ordaining the elected; constitution, preparation, furniture, consecration for
the business to which they are elected, 1 Pet. 1.20. Act. 10.42. Heb. 10.5.
Ephesians. 2.10.]

Wherein there is a learned discovery, but little to the purpose. For

1. What matters it how the word be taken in it self; the question is how it
is taken in this phrase, Ordained to life.

2. He intimates that to be ordained, constituted, consecrated to eternal
life, is a further sense then to be elected to eternal life; let any
intelligent man extract the difference.

3. He cannot produce any Scripture, wherein the word in this Text signifies
preparation or furniture, to that thing which they were before elected to; if
he can, I demand it.

4. He produces four several Texts (as he does thousands to no purpose) to
prove the words in Acts, 13.48. to have such a signification, when the word in
that Text is not found in any of these four places; no nor the word ordained
in our translation, in all of them. 1 Pet. 1.20. says (...), in Acts, 10.42.
(...), Heb. 10.5. (...), Ephesians. 2.10. (...); here is in every place a several
word; and the word (...), Acts, 13.48. nor any word of that root to be found in
any of those Texts; and yet these Texts are produced to show the meaning of
that word, testifying his insufferable impudence to darken a clear Text upon
such grounds, whereof he is altogether ignorant.

5. Admit all he says, yet does the word (ordain) or the words in the
original text, in 1 Pet. 1.20. Acts, 10.42. Ephesians. 2.10. comprehend any more
then Gods instituting, appointing, consecrating Christ to his office and us to
holiness, and not differing from his election to such things; what ordination
of Christ to be the Lamb shine before the foundation of the world, but only in
Gods purpose? and was not this his prime election to that office? what vain
flourishes he br^ngs to make us expect the explanation of that phrase (ordained
to life,) when he does not produce any place whereby it may be explaned? He
further adds

[So the word is used when spoke of the Church, Acts, 14.23. or of Gods
ordaining, Romans 13.1. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 2.7. Joh. 15.15.]

Here is more forgery and falsehood still, no one place here mentioned, except
Romans 13.7. has the same word as in Acts, 13.48. let any consult with the Text,
and yet he dare aver that the word in Acts, 13.48. is used as he speaks in
those Texts; how the man would boast of plenty of places to back his forgery
upon (...); when he labors with a great penury? the word in Romans 13.1. is the
same, and signifies appointment, not furniture, it is spoken of offices not
officers which are appointed not furnished. He further adds

[And this word to be thus taken for an actual ordaining here, is evident by
the like use of it in other places, speaking of the like blessing, 1 Col.
12.13. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Ioh. 5.11.12. Ioh. 6.36.]

And because an actual ordaining, therefore not for ordaining by election, as
if Gods ordaining by prime election was not actual ordaining; a senseless
evasion.

2. His Texts that he produces are abused; for 1 Col 12.13. he vainly says
that they are of like use; is ordaining of men to life, and making them meet to
partake of light, one and the same act? let reason determine; and for 1 Pet.
2.9. it is clear that they were called a chosen generation, in relation to
prime election, as appears by the opposition, to them that were disobedient,
to which they were appointed; as also from the entire sentence in the like
case, 1 These. 5.10. He has appointed us to obtain salvation; yet he abuses,
not satisfies the Text: but what means he by actual ordaining? by comparing
his words, I gather this meaning, page 151.152. whereby he gives this
interpretation of the Text; [Those that were ordained to life, that is, had
unfeined and effectual faith wrought in them, and so did cleave to Christ, and
give themselves up to him, etc. they believed;] Something allied to the gloss
of the Remonstrants; but he I believe considered not what a monstrous
interpretation this will invite; for then this must be the meaning: they that
had faith in them believed; excellent interpreter! inferring that men may have
faith, cleave to Christ, give themselves up to him before they believe; for
clear it is that they were so ordained to life before they believed; but he
has an argument to prove that by (ordained to life) cannot be meant the prime
election as he calls, and it follows in page 152.

[It means not so many as were elected in Gods council to life; for then
what becomes of all believers since? nor yet as many in that place or of that
society; many such might be that were afterward called.]

Wherein he has plowed with the Arminian heife^; else this objection would not
have been so ready at hand; Act. Synod. in locum.
[Si de electione absoluta haec verba accipienda essent, tum necessario
sequeretur reliquos omnes etc. a deo reprobatos esse:] but to this we may
answer diverse ways. For

1. Let it be as he would have it, that by ordaining to life, is to have faith
wrought in them; will he say that all that had faith wrought in them, and so
cleaved to Christ, did then believe? Scripture shows the contrary; for then
it must follow that all that did not at that time come in to believe, did not
cleave to Christ, or give themselves to him, or in the Remonstrants phrase,
were not fit to receive the Gospel; but this is false.

2. Our Author suggests an answer: As many in that place or in that society as
were ordained to life believed; and all that he produces against this, is this
only; [Many there might be that were afterward called,] but this is poor
probation.

3. The word (...) is not always rendered As many, but (those) or (which;) the
argument is not deduced from the quantity, but the quality of them that
believed; in Acts, 9.39. it says, (...); yet we read it not they showed him as
many coats as Dorcas made, but those coats which Dorcas made, that is, those
coats that they showed him were of Dorcas her making; so here those which were
ordained to life believed, that is, those that were believers were such as were
ordained to eternal life; so that let the Author of these, be who it will, yet
they are free from his responsary cavills.

CHAP. XXII. Of the benefit of this Doctrine.
IN which Chapter he attempts to lay lay down the utility of this doctrine,
and that not without ground; that so it might appear that it is not without
cause, that he compasses sea and land to make Proselytes, runs and tides
from Dan to Beersh^ba, as if the care of all Churches were laid upon his
shoulders; leaves his honest calling in which providence had placed him, to
attend the preaching of that new gospel, neglects many gospel truths that may
help to make the man of God wise to salvation; such being swallowed up by
general atonement, as if the whole gospel was clasped up in this: now their
evidence that it is not only profitable, but it intimates some transcendent
utility, either to God, or his Church, or himself; sure I am if it be a truth,
it has been the most profitable truth to him of all truths in the Bible.

Now to this Chapter I shall only answer, first with Corvinus to his
adversary, speaking of the utility of absolute predestination or election, he
thus answers, Corv. in Molin. c. 2. Sect. 1.
[Si doctrina esset evangeliu^ aut ejus pars, tum ad salutem esset necessario,]
the sum of it is this, if it be true it is profitable, and then I answer with
the scripture, (...); everry scripture is of divine inspiration, and profitable
for doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction, that the man of God may be
perfect; let the Author first prove his doctrine to be true and Scripture, then
we shall consider the utility of it, else herein we shall but beat the air at
the best; for that which is not according to truth and sound words, as 1 Timothy
1.13. is at the best but (...) vain bablings; 2 Timothy 2.16. profits nothing:
and not only so, but increases to more ungodliness, and frets like a canker, 2 Timothy 2.17.

In the following part of his discouse I find application made; but that I
wave, because that which I undertake is the polemicall part of his treatise; in
which I have dealt as faithfully as my talent enableth me, and as heartily as
the Author and the nature of his discourse does admit, which I refer to
himself or any unpraejudiced Reader. And when he shall prove that his doctrine
is consonant to the words or true consequence of Scripture, I shall embrace it,
press it, and magnify the utility of it.

The Lord give us understanding in all things.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

James Cranford.

ERRATA.
JN Frontisp. for repudiant, read repudiat. In Epist. page 12. line 35. read
protestation which tied him. p. 7. l. 11. for first, r. fifth. p. 13. l. 16.
for (...), r. (...). p. 19. l. 23. for business, r. Basis. p. 20. l. 19. r.
relating to the agent only is terminated. p. 28. l. 28. dele why. p. 29. l. 23.
r. of it was intended. l. 34. for express, r. epsy. l. 46. for he came out.
r. he came not out. p. 34. l. 31. dele for. p. 40. l. 34. for obnoxious, r.
obvious. p. 44. l. 33. 41. 43. for opposite, r. apposite. p. 60. l. 38. dele so.

Page 141. l. 20. for approve. r. disprove. l. 35. for would them, r, would
have. p. 148. l. 35. r. if the all men. p. 149. l. 35. r. the word (...). p.
151. l. 6. dele not. l. 33. for God working, r. God was working. ibid. for as
r. is. p. 153 l. 3. r. I know not what. l. 8. for unbeleving, r. believing. p.
154. l. 41. for branding, r. branded with. p. 156. l. 23. 30. for nature, r.
native. p. 161: l. 28. r. expressed not generally. p. 170. l. 23. for some, r.
sum. p. 181. l. 32. dele that. l. 40. dele he. p. 182. l. 20. r. ungodly
which be justified. p. 183. l. 10. r. does he not justify. p. 18. r. would not
be so clear. p. 184. l. 9. for advantage, r. adversary. p. 192. l. 16. for
obligation. r. oblation. p. 204: l. 36. for infallible. r. fallible. p. 202.
for he had, r. if he had.


