DARKNESS AND IGNORANCE.

Expelled by the Light shining forth, and the appearance of the Day.

In answer to a Book called, Innocents no SAINTS.

Published by one Edward Dodd, wherein he has labored to prove Tithes
lawful, and Tithing Priests and Hirelings to be the Ministers of the Word, and
the Masse-house the Church, and calls Idolatry Civility, and Heathenish
complements courtesy, and has perverted many Scriptures.

His Deceit laid open, his Vindication made void, and his Argument confounded,
and Truth laid open in all these particulars* for the sake of the upright in
heart, who rejoices in Truths prosperity.

By one of the Lambs followers, who makes war against the head of the Dragon,
and against the rear of the Beast. F. H.

And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no man
buyeth her merchandise, any more, Revel. 18. 11. And cried when they saw the
smoke of her burning, saying, what City is like unto this City, Rev. 18. 18.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

THE man-child which was caught up unto the throne of God, when the red Dragon
sought to devour and destroy him, has appeared again in power and great glory,
after the long and cruel tyranny of the Dragon, wherein she has killed the
Saints, and prevailed against them, and has made great war, spoil and havoc
of the remnant of the woman's seed, this 13. or 14 hundred years, and has
compelled all both small and great (whose names have not been written in the
Lambs book of life) to worship him, and the Beast, unto whom he has given
great authority to kill, and to destroy whosoever worshipped the God of heaven,
that so they might be worn out, and all the earth might worship him, and fear
him, and extol him, and his authority. Now the time, times, and a half being
near an end, that John saw the woman should be retired in the Wilderness, she
appearing again in her beautiful garments, and her heir and her seed appearing
again after the long night of darkness.

Now when the Lord in this the day of his power is appearing again, and the
man-child that is to rule the Nations with a rod of iron. Now the Dragon,
Beast, Whore, and false Prophet, and all the mystery of Iniquity, Gog and
Magog, and all Apostates, Deceivers, and Merchants of Babylon that have traded
upon the waters upon which the whore sits, they are all up in arms, every one
with his weapons which he has formed in the bottomless pit, is now set in
array against the Lamb who is risen; the Priests, hirelings, and Babylons
Merchants, who have got so great gain by Sea, they have given the first onset
in the front, of the black army of the Dragon, and this six or seven years
has made a great noise, and has raised so much smoke out of the pit, that
they have darkened the air, and made it cloudy, and has filled the earth with
a great noise, that many have admired what the issue would be, and what the
event might prove; but now many who have waited in patience, have seen the Lamb
appear, and have seen his rising in majesty, and has prevailed; And many of
them who gave the first onset grows weary, seeing the battle goes too hard
against them, and the Lamb and his followers prevail. And now comes on the tail
of the Dragon as the reserve, and the rear of the Beast, among whom Edward Dod
appears, and he thinks to prevail, and get himself a name, and to do exploits;
but alas, all his weapons are but the old broken bows and the spear is that
are strewed up and down the field of confusion, which we have run over and
over, and trampled upon, and esteems them no more then rotten wood: He has
raked up those things which have been answered over and over, and that which
the rest of the Dragons army has vomited up, before in the beginning, he has
licked up, and now vomits it out again, and casts out floods of poisoned words,
false accusations, and arrogant reproaches, and proud disdainful speeches, as
though his tongue were his own; And like one of Ishmaels brood, scorning and
deriding at innocence, and says, he has laid down some of our Tenets, and
named them, and shamed them. All sober people who know any thing of God, will
see thou have shamed thy self, and not us, in uttering forth thy folly: And
thy title of thy Book demonstrates what is within it, the beginning is scorn
and derision, the end is folly and madness, and many ignorant words uttered
forth from a corrupt heart and unbridled tongue, which is bent to do mischief,
and to speak falsehood; but lest thou should glory in the old rotten broken
weapons which thou have taken up, which were formed by thy leaders, and not by
thee, which we have answered again and again, and have overrun them as
stubble; which answers have cleared the truth to all sober people, that they
see all your weapons are but carnal, and not spiritual, and they have no
might in them at all to stand against the truth, nor them who are made free by
it, whose weapons are spiritual and mighty through God to beat down strong
holds of darkness, and the towers of ignorance. Many are beat down already,
and the Lamb is risen, and upon the white horse, and a numberless number is
following him, who rides on after him, who shall subdue the Nations to
himself, and break the yoke of the ungodly, and deliver the oppressed, and no
weapon that is formed against him shall prosper. I say, lest thou should
boast, I shall return these lines in answer to thy book.

Thy book thou titles, A pair of Spectacles for a dark-sighted Quaker.

I say thy Spectacles are more like to make ones sight dimmer, then through
them to be made to see, they are such wooden ones; but the Quakers sees before
thee, and beyond thee, and comprehends thee, and have received eye salve,
whereby their eyes are opened to see thy deceit, and the deceit of the
treacherous generation with whom thou art joined, and thy rejoinder and
vindication of Samuel Smith, whom thou calls Minister of the Word at Cressage
in the County of Satop; thy vindication of him, and thy pleading for him, will
not bring much honor to neither him nor thee; and though thou and he both
join hand in hand in deceit, yet you shall not go unpunished.

Thou tells the Reader of wandering Planets who have left their station, who
have stepped upon the Stage in the County of Salop, who are come forth in this
apostatizing time.

All who have a good understanding, may clearly see not only in the County of
Salop, but also in every corner of the Land, many wandering Stars that have no
habitation in the Firmament of Gods power, but are tossed up and down, and are
as waters, unstable, tossed too and fro with every wind; and the change of one
Magistrate, or head Governor will make them all change their form; and as
thou calls it, metamorphize them into another shape, witness the many public
Teachers, and Parish-masters, and tithing Priests in the days of Edward the
sixth, Henry the 8. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth's days, and now of late in
the Bishops days, when the Magistrates voted down the Bishops, all or most of
the Priests denied their Fathers, and their institution; and though they
ordained them Ministers, yet they denied them, and now are got into their seats
and Benefices, and there thy Reader may see the metamorphosed changelings, and
the apostates; and I do believe the County of Salop abounds with such like; and
they have been on the Stage long, and have acted such a part in every
generation, as would please the present Authority, or power, whether they were
Papists or Protestants, Prelaticall or whatsoever; but F. D the Exit will come,
and when the day appears, the beasts must go into their dens again: and thou
confesses you live in apostatizing times; thou that art among the Apostates,
and in the apostatizing age and time, would accuse others: Nay, thou must hold
thy peace, and leave pleading for Apostates, and for the fashions of the
heathen which has got up since the days of the apostasy, which the whole
scope of thy Book is full of nothing else; and we cannot permit or allow them
who are in the time of apostasy, and who are one with the Apostates, which have
wandered after the Beast since the days of the Apostles. I say, we cannot
allow such as you to be Judges; for we are come out of the apostasy, and to
before the Apostates, and to before the wandering Stars, and thou have mist it
much that tells the Quakers are they. Edward, I tell thee, we are come to the
everlasting Gospel again, and have received it, and it is the power of God,
which was to be, and is to be preached again to the Nations after the apostasy.

And as for the Book called Malice stripped and whipped I have seen it; and the
spirit of thy Mr. Smith, whom thou calls Reverend, thou have elevated him as
high as the Pope; but E. D. what is the reason thou reverencest him so much as
thou does to thy Reader? And in the tenth page thou say, many souls depend
upon his Ministry; and thou blessest God, for the work of God you enjoy in
that Congregation. Thou have extolled him too highly, or else he has wronged
thee grievously; for thou say thou have profited much by him: Thou may
call to mind a certain time, when he preached (as you call it) out of the 13
of Luke, and when he spoke of the parable of the man that planted a Vineyard,
and 3 years looked for fruit; and Sam: Smith, whom thou so adores, said, he had
sought for fruit from your Congregation this 7 years at Cressage, and had
found none, he shall be an evidence for me against thee, that thy glorying of
him is vain; and it is manifest he is one the Lord sent his Prophet to declare
against, who has run, and the Lord never sent him, therefore he has not
profited you at Cressage at all; lean souls are they like to be that depends on
him.

In the first observation, as thou calls it, thou have extracted the heads of
Samuel Smiths Book into five particulars, which thou say we are ashamed to
answer, or else know not what to say for our defense. I say unto thee, boast
not, when thou putst on thy Armor, but when thou putst it off; for the victory
may be doubtful.
THe first particular, That the National Ministers does maintain the true
worship of God, and the Doctrine of Christ according to the revealed will of
God.

Answ. So saying, and so doing were something; the true worship of God is in
spirit and in truth, which is not lo here, and lo there, nor in outward
observations, but in life, in power, and in truth: But to be brief, both the
doctrine and practice of the National Ministry in general, is contrary to
the Scripture, which thou calls the Word of God; (as for instance) their
sprinkling of Infants, their teaching men to swear, and calling it part of the
worship of God, which is contrary to the doctrine of Christ, who said, swear
not at all. Their singing David's Psalms put into meeter, by Poets and
Ballad-mongers, singing them in their invented tunes, which pleases the
carnal mind; Their studied discourses, which you call Sermons, invented from
the strength of natural wit, and not speaking as they are moved by the holy
Ghost, which the Ministers of Christ in all ages did.

In these, and many other things which I could instance, they are out of the
Doctrine of Christ; And in a word, your whole worship differs both in matter
and manner, from the Saints worship in the primitive times.

But seeing we have denied the National Ministers diverse years ago, and have
laid down our grounds and reasons to the world, wherein we have charged them,
that their practice is contrary to Scripture; unto which grounds and reasons,
not one Parish-master in England has yet vindicated themselves these six
years. And unto that Book called The Grounds and Reasons why we deny the
Priests, if the Reader be not satisfied concerning them, there he may see how
they err, both in Doctrine, and practice, contrary to Scriptures.

To the second and third Particular.
That the present government of the Nation is the Ordinance of God; and that
the Ministers bringing offenders before the Magistate is not persecution.

As for the present government of the Nation, the lawfulness thereof is not in
question by us; but many who are governors, and should be Executors of the
Law, have acted contrary to Law, (being stirred up by the Priests, who bite
with their teeth, if one put not into their mouths) and has caused the just to
suffer by giving judgment against them, in their wills, contrary to Law, or
else according to those Laws which has been made in the will of man, in the
transgression, under which we have suffered for the truths sake, and therein
have peace.

And as for Ministers bringing offenders before Magistrates, that is an usurped
authority, to make a Minister a Magistrate; but Edward, what was the offense?
because a company of people came to Cressage, and declared the word of truth in
your Streets; and what if it had been in your Assembly, this was no offense in
the Church of Corinth, where all might speak one by one, although its become an
offense in your Masse-house at Cressage; but the Reader may judge in whose
steps thou and thy Priest walks; you have done the offense, and then accuses
others to the Magistrates as offenders; Let shame cover your lips, you impudent
men. Has not Samuel Smith in his own Narration in his book, said, that William
Parrat Constable, and Humphrey Dale Churchwarden, according to the Ministers
direction did pull down the Quakers Speaker, charging some to secure him? And
others also of your own County secured by the instigation of the Priest, by his
own confession, in the fourth page of his book.

And here he and the rest of the society at Cressage, who had a hand in this
thing, are manifest to be in the steps of the Pharisees, whom Christ cried woe
against, which cast out of their Assemblies, and haled the Disciples before the
Magistrates; and like the envious Jews that cried, Help men of Israel; for
these men turn the world up-side down; but you are worse then they. The Priest
was the first fomenter of the breach of peace, the Constable and Churchwarden
his Executioners, and yet thou tells of the Quakers being offenders.

Now all sober people will see your envy and deceit, and that you are in Cains
way, and by your false flattery and deceit, would justify the Magistrate for
your own ends, and cause them to turn the sword against the guiltless, which
should be against the transgressor. And who was in the transgression on the
Reader may easily judge by that which is forementioned, and yet the Priest,
and you of his Congregation would make people believe that you did not
persecute; the Priest did give order to pull down the Speaker, the Constable
and Churchwarden they acted, and secured your own Neighbors as prisoners,
your own Congregation swearing against them the breach of peace, and getting
them shut up into prison, and sentence given against them, and yet thou would
have this called equal proceedings; but to that of God in all consciences, I
leave to be Judge in this things.

In the fourth and fifth Particular thou says, We have charged to be envious
and bitter, and malicious against the most eminent Ministers of the Land.

Them whom thou calls eminent Ministers, has charged us with many false
things, and have written many false things against us, for which thou and they
in the dreadful day of the Lord shall give an account. Envy, bitterness, and
malice is put away from us, and we envy no man, but speak the truth in
soberness; and yet to say a liar is a liar, or a deceiver a deceiver, or an
hypocrite, an hypocrite, when they are so, is neither railing nor malice:
Christ, in whom no guile was found, he said, they were a generation of vipers,
and they were of their Father the Devil, who were in envy, and went about to
kill him. And the Apostle was not envious when he said, O full of all subtlety,
thou child of the Devil, to one who was doing the work of the Devil; and
many such workers we find, and many venomous spirits who shoot out poisoned
arrows, even bitter words, and these we must reprove sharply.

And those things which thou layst to our charge, take to thy self; for the
ground of iniquity is in thy heart, from whence thou have uttered forth all
these disdainful, proud, and scornful words, of which thou shall be convinced,
and also reproved when the Lord searches thy heart, when he brings anguish and
perplexity upon thee, then shall thou confess to his righteous judgment; and
so thy five Principles I have answered, which thou say thou have brought
into thy Book to fill up the blancks; they had better have been blancks still,
then have spoiled so much paper with thy lylying disdainful scribbles, which
is not worth the answering.

In the third page thou say, Thou will restate the reputation of the
Ministry of England to be Ministers of Christ; And for proof, thou have
brought Col. 1. 7. and Romans 15. Those words proves that Epaphtas was a
faithful Minister, and that Paul was a Minister of Christ to the Gentiles; but
what has this proved as to the National Priests? nothing at all; and if thou
have no better proof then this to bring them into reputation, in stead thereof
thou will bring defamation upon them; and when thou should prove them
Ministers, thou proves that Paul and Epaphas were Ministers, will not the least
in the truth see thee to be a busie-body; but fools will be meddling. Then thou
art offended that we call them Priests for receiving of Tithes, I say it is the
most proper; for none but Priests and Levites did receive Tithes, and how long
since is it, since they generally called themselves the Tribe of Levi? For
never Minister of the Gospel, nor of the word of reconciliation, either
received tithes, or commanded that they should be paid, neither reproved any
for not paying; but said, the Priesthood was changed and the Law was changed
by which tithes were due; but thou goes on, and makes a sound argument as thou
judge, and says, Abraham paid tithe to Melchisedeck before the Law; And thou
ask how he did give it, either by the law of nature, which is called the law
of Reason, or by the light within, or by revelation.

Thou speakst thou know not what; where read thou of the Law of Nature,
called the law of Reason, except it be in the devised Fables and Stories of the
Priests? But what does this prove? Genesis 14. Abraham gave the tenth part of the
spoil which he had taken from his enemies, but Melchisedeck first brought forth
bread and wine to Abrabam and his company, and greeted Abraham and his company
kindly, and blessed him, and Abraham freely gave unto him the tenth part,
Melchisedeck desired none; But do thou judge, that if Abraham had given him
none, that he would have taken by force the tenth part of the spoil from him?

Now what does this prove for the tything Priests of this Nation? they must
first do as Melchisedeck did, if they will have Melchisedeck for an example, he
blessed Abraham, and brought forth bread and wine unto him and his Army; but
which of the Priests have done so, which have received tithes; which is not a
gift of the people, but a forced thing from them? If this must be thy proof for
tithes by the gift of Abraham, then let the Priests cease forcing and taking
them till people be freely willing to give them, and then there will be no
complaint: But let us reason a little further of this matter; Would
Melchisedeck have taken the tenth, if Abraham had not given it him? Or when did
Melchisedeck, or any before the Law take away the peoples Oxen, Cowes, Horses,
Sheep, pots and pans, and bedding upon which poor people lies, threefold,
fourfold, and sometime ten-fold; that they claim, or sue people to Courts,
throw them into prison till death, as many evidences we have in this Nation?
Either give us a precept, or an example before the Law, or under the Gospel,
or else stop your lying mouths and clamorous tongues for ever. Do thou and
the rest of the Priests think that we are so ignorant, that we know not the
original of the tithes in these Nations? a thing invented to fill the Popes
coffers, and the rest of the Clergies budgets, seven or eight hundred years
after the Ascension of Christ? All which Tithes and Oblations, and Obventions
were invented in the Apostasy, since the days of the Apostles, and since the
woman fled into the Wilderness: And the man-child was caught up to God, when
all the world wondered after the Beast, them they had their rise* And when the
Kings and Rulers of these Nations did drink of the Whores cup, then they made
Laws to compel the Nations and the people therein to pay the whores
Merchants; and the Popes locusts, which he sent over the Nations, to fill the
earth with their deceit, which Laws stands yet in force as though they were
some divine institution; but both the tithes and the Law by which they are
compelled to be paid, we deny, and bear our witness against, as to be things
which holds up the Devils Kingdom; and the Gospel which the National
Ministry holds up and preaches, has no more ability in it to procure a
maintenance for them, then the Papists Gospel did for them: So to be brief,
the Priests has the Popes wages forced by a compulsory Law, made and ratified
by them who owned the Popes supremacy.

Furthermore we assert, that tithes were never due by divine ordination, but
only to the Priests and Levites in the first Covenant, nor never were
commanded to be paid but in the Land of anaan; and who so upholds the
Ordinances of the first Priesthood, denies the ordinances of the second: So
this commandment to pay tithes now to them, who are neither of Aarons, nor
Levies Tribe, and by us who are not in Canaan temporal, nor of Israel
according to the flesh, the Commandment by which tithes were due in the first
Priesthood, reaches not unto us. And after Christ's ascension, nor one of the
Apostles either commanded or required any such practice of the Saints, either
to Colossia, Corinth, Antioch, Philippi, Pergamos, or the rest of the Churches
of Asia. So that it is evident to all judicious men, that this is quite another
thing got up in the Apostasy, which no Minister or believer ever did own who
were witnesses of the second Covenant; but any who are not satisfied in this
thing by what I have said, which much more I could say concerning this thing;
but I refer them that are not satisfied, to a Book called, The great case of
Tithes stated, published by A. P.

In thy fourth and fifth page thou art pleading for mastership for thy
Ministers, and so by thy own argument thou have proved them out of the doctrine
of Christ, who said to his Ministers, Call no man Master, neither be ye called
Masters; but to oppose this, thou brings John 3. 10. how Christ said to
Nichodemus, art thou a Master in Israel? And then thou vaporest, and say,
these are not the words of Mr. Baxter and Mr. Smith, but Christ's. In some
translation it is Ruler in Israel. In another, Teacher in Israel: But it may
be, some who coveted after mastership as thou do, has put in Master for
Ruler and Teacher; but grant the word Master, Christ testified that the Jews
and Pharisees that they were called of men Master, and reprehended them for it:
And if he did say to Nichodemas, art thou a master? he spoke but in their
language, not with approbation of their being so called; for it is manifest he
gave a contrary command to his Disciples, and the commands of Christ did not
contradict one another. And as for Richard Baxter and Samuel Smith, whose works
thou says does witness for them beyond thy testimony.

As for R. B. his works are manifest to be works of darkness, many false lies
and reproaches he has cast upon the living truth of God, and has been a great
opposer of the strait way of the Lord, for which the Lord will plead with him
and you all in the day of his righteous judgment. And as for S. S. let his
own testimony evidence what his work is, who said in the Congregation at
Cressage, he had looked for fruit seven years among them, but found none: So
it is manifest he is such a workman as may be ashamed of his work.

In thy sixth and seventh page thou say, the Pharisaical Quakers makes void
the fifth Commandment, because they do not put off their hats to political
and spiritual Fathers, as thou calls them; and thou heapst up a great deal of
Scripture to no purpose, not one word in them all does prove any such thing, as
putting off hats either to Fathers spiritual or temporal, and so thou art a
perverter and a wrester of it to thy own destruction; and thou cites Romans 13.
7. to prove putting off hats, render to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute; and this is the tribute of the Nation, thou says. And the 1 Pet. 2.
13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, this thou bringst. Ignorant
block, show us either in plain Scripture or example from the Saints, where it
is commanded or commended, or from any ordinance of man, or else cease thy
foolish clamor, and learn a bridle for thy tongue, and cease thy foolish
inferences. If the Magistrates had no better tribute then putting off the hat,
they would soon be poor Rulers: And whereas thou call it Civil worship,
doffing the hat, and bowing the knee, I know no more civility in it, then if
thou should put off thy Coat or thy Doublet to every one thou meetest with; And
most of this which thou calls civility, is the most practiced by them who are
the rudest, vainest, and the phantastickst proud Anticks in the Nations, who
are full of flattery and deceit, and vain complements; and to a proud fellow
which has a gay cloak, or powdered hayr, and a (...) silver lace dawbed upon
his clothes, then off goes the hat, and the knee bows, and your servant Sir,
and your servant my Lord, or your most humble servant, or thrice humble
servant; when if he were commanded to do service to such a one, would not do
any thing material, but disdain him; And meet then with a plain man, who will
not complement, and then sirrah, and unmannerly Clown, and be ready to fight;
and this spirit rules the most in those men, who are so full of their
Complements, that begets one another into pride and deceit, and provoke one
another by their bad example into deceit, like drunkards, drinking one to
another to make one another drunk, it is like thou will call this civility too:
And if thou will plead, it is the custom of the Nation, doffing hats, and
bowing.

The customs of the Heathen are vain, and many In Israel who feared the Lord
were not to walk after the customs of the Nations; for this deceit was not
from the beginning, and who ever comes to be a follower of Christ, who received
no honor of men, neither respected persons, will deny this deceit. Take him
for thy example, rather then a company of Fiddlers, and Roysters, and Ruffins,
who are without the fear of God; and Christ who is the Saints example, he
said, how can you believe, that seek and receive houour one of another: So
then, they were unbelievers who sought and received honor one of another; and
would thou and the rest who live in deceit, brin^ the custom of unbelievers,
and the practice of unbelievers among the Saints, who are believers, and
follows Christ their example? I say we have no such custom, nor the Churches
of Christ,

The next piece of deceit thou art pleading for, is bowing to one another the
knee, and titles of honor, wherein the Devil has a great hold among people.
Genesis 44. 14. This thou bringst to prove bowing; Jadah and his brethren came to
Joseph's house, and they fell on the ground; This is an example indeed. Will thou take another; the same brethren of Joseph sold him when he was a boy, was
that a good act? If thou say nay, I say one is as much commanded and commended
as the other; for that same that does violence, it is the same that respects
persons; but Abtaham bowed to the children of Heth; what of that? So did Joseph
swear by the life of Pharaoh, and both Joseph and Abraham were good men; but
they were never the better for these actions, neither the one nor the other:
But then thou brings a Scripture, and thou says, it must stop our mouths, Gen
49. 8. 10. And thou says, this may teach us, if we be of Jacobs seed and
household, to bow to the God of Jacob our King, and why should this stop our
mouths? But the scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet till Shilo come: So he was to rule, to wit Judah, till Shilo
came; why should this stop our mouths? Shilo is come, and has opened our
mouths, and the scepter is departed from Judah long since; both them that bowed
to Judah, and Judah that was once bowed unto, they are both bowed under, and
Shilo is set above, and now he must be bowed unto, go learn what that means.
It was answered against bowing, the second Commandment prohibits it, Thou
shall not bow down to them; but the answer satisfies thee not.

Thou says, Does this forbid civil respects, or idolatrous worship?

That which thou calls civil respect is idolatrous worship, putting off the
hat, and bowing the knee to a man with a gay Cloak, or a gold Ring, or a
company of Ribbons, or a long Gown: To bow down to such, because of the
attire, is respecting of persons, and idolatry; but you are fallen into a far
worse state then respecting of persons; for you respect clothes, and doffs your
hats, and bow your knees to them with fine raiment; And let the man in vile
raiment or poor attire go by without either cap or knee, and for all thy
civility thou so greatly pleadest for, and courtesy, if he put not off his hat
to thee, it may be thou will call him Sirrah, Rogue, or Clown, for all thy
civility.

Again, put on the poor man good attire, and a fine Cloak, and a gold Ring,
then you change your note, and say, If it please your Worship, or like your
Honor, your humble servant Sir.

Now here is not only respecting of persons, which is commission of sin, but
respecting the creatures, and worshipping the array which is upon a man's back,
which is idolatry, and not civility, which is to be condemned; Yet civility and
courtesy I own, which is so in deed, and in truth; but that which the world
calls civility and courtesy is hypocrisy and idolatry; And for Salutations,
thou says, we seldom use: and thou bringst Scripture to prove, that Christ
and the Saints saluted one another.

Their salutations are owned, and such salutations are practiced by us in
uprightness of heart, and true love without feignednesse; but we cannot do as
you do, bid a man God-speed, when he is not doing the work of God, nor say
Farewell to them who are in their evil deeds; nor as the world does, with
their Good-evens, and Good-morrows, and takes Gods name in vain; and if one do
not answer them according to their light vain minds, they will fall a railing
and beating; all such spirits we deny, and their salutations.

In thy second Observation.
Thou says, Do not we prove, that places of Christian Assemblies to be a
Church, and thou brings many Scriptures to no purpose. Thou bringst the 1 of
Kings, verse. 8. and 1 Cor. 11. For the glory of the Lord shall fill the house
of the Lord. And thou answerest, and say, not the Steeple-house, but the
Church. There thou have added to the Scripture, and diverse other Scriptures
thou bring, wherein the Temple was called the house of God, and the
storehouses were called the house of God, Mal. 3. 10. All which Scriptures I
own; but they are nothing to thy purpose; that the Temple was called the house
of God, and the Tabernacle the house of God, and the Storehouses the house of
God, this is granted. These were made and builded according to the command of
God, wherein the Lords treasure was which fed the poor, the fatherless, and
the widow, and the Priests and Levites that ministered unto him; which Temple,
Priests, Storehouses and Tithes, were figures and shadows of good thing to
come; which when the good things did come, the figures ended.

But when did God command your Idols Temples to be built? and what are they a
figure of? That which thou should have proved is, that your Steeple Houses
where you meet, any where in Scripture is called the Church of God.

Thou and thy Master Smith art offended that we call the place you meet in a
Steeple-house, and says, take heed that no such Language be spoken again as
Steeple house. Why not? Huth not these houses Steeples? But we shall call it
truly and properly as it is, the Masse-house, which has the Crosses standing
upon them yet, or an Idols Temple, which was dedicated for the idolatrous
worship, and for the Idol Mass, and other superstitious ceremonies; your
windows full of pictures, your walls full of images, and Monks faces, and bears
yet the Popish names, as St. Anthony, St. Clement, St. Dunstans, and St.
Patrick, and St. Mary's, and the like.

You blind men, full of ignorance, perverters of the Scriptures, which would
bring the Scripture to prove your idolatrous Masse-house to be a Church, and
calls it the house of God, and Temple of God, when the first Founder was an
Apostate; and you who hold it up, and calls it a Church, are of his brood, and
are dead stones, which worhips in the dead house, and knows not what the Church
of God is; and yet you say, to what end should we bring Scripture to prove any
thing by to these men; take it not into your mouths, except you bring it for a
better end, to make people believe that the Prophets and Apostles when they
spoke of the house of God, and the Church of God, spoke of your Idoll-temple,
or ever intended or meant your Steeple-house, or old Masse-house.

And thou says, Few of the Ministers in England thou believes henceforth will
have any thing to do with us, for we are blind leaders of the blind.

I believe they see sufficiently they have come to great loss, and sees their
weapons have not prevailed, but are become all like broken bows, in which
there is no strength, which they may all lay down in the field of confusion
where they set their battle; but the Lamb has prevailed, and his weapons are
spiritual, and they who follow him are skillful to handle the sword, and are
able to make War with the Beast and all his followers; and many are overcome,
and the rest shall be subdued, and the day hastneth greatly, that they shall
melt away that hate the Lord.

And as for Christ's saying, let them alone, they are blind leaders of the
blind. This he spoke of thy generation the Pharisees, who were called of men
Master, and loved greeting in the Streets and Marketplaces, and stood praying
in the Synagogue, in whose footsteps the Priests of England are, which Christ
cried woe against, and now they are seen to be blind guides, and leaders of the
blind; for they whose eyes Christ has opened, has ceased from such, and now
bears their testimony against such.

In the eleventh page thou goes on in thy blindness and ignorance, pleading
for your public place of worship, the old Masse-house, set up by the
injunction of the Pope; And you have taken their houses into your hands, and
scoulds against them in it, when you are in the same nature: And thou bidst us
read what conspirators and enemies of God use to do, in Pslam 83. 3, 4. They
said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession. This was
spoken of the Heathen, of Gebal, Ammon, and Amaleck, and the men of Tire; who
devoured, and destroyed, and sought to destroy the Storehouses and Synagogues
that were used in the first Covenant. And thou may take the application home
to thy self, and to the generation thou art pleading for: Have not the Papists
good ground to plead with you in this behalf? Was not the Abbeys, Monasteries,
Masse-houses, Tithes, Oblations, and Obventions, Easter reckonings,
Peter Pence, the Papists and Jesuits maintenance? And did not Henry the
eighth, who was the first establisher of your Religion in this Nation, Did not
he take them away from the Papists? and then the Priests who denied their holy
Father the Pope, got their tithes and the maintenance, and took the
Masse-houses into their hands, and the tithes and Easter reckonings: And if
thou call these Gods houses, and this Gods maintenance for his Ministers which
maintained Popery, Then thou have brought all these Scriptures against thy
self, and thou art in a great transgression; and your Schools and Colleges
which thou ignorantly call the Schools of the Prophets, like an unlearned
man, and Schools of piety, then the Papists were Prophets, and they were pious;
For these Schools and Colleges were invented by them, and you have gotten
these from them, to wit, the Masse-house, Schools, Colleges, Tithes,
Oblations, the Papists maintenance, and their hire, and this is lawful in your
eyes, and yet you will call them impious and idolators: Are not the things the
same in your hands as they were in theirs? but these things are quite another
thing then was in the first Covenant. These things are not to be paralleld with
the Synagogues, Temples, Storehouses, Tithes under the Law, for these were
invented since the Apostles days; and the Apostates, who went from the life
invented them, when all wondered after the Beast, and never mention a word of
the Scripture, as to think to prove these invented trumperies; for the
Scripture never intends, nor them that spoke it forth, to patronize your deceit
in these things.

Object. But it may be thou may say, Though these things forementioned were
set up by Idolaters, and the places were made for an Idolatrous service, and
the maintenance and hire were to maintain Idolatrous Priests; but now they are
converted to a better use, and they are convenient to meet in, and convenient
for our Ministers maintenance.

Answ. Did ever any of the Ministers or Apostles of Christ go into the Jews
Temple or Synagogues to worship after Christ was ascended, except it was to
declare against them, and to bring people off them; or did they take the Jewish
Priests maintenance, which was commanded to be paid of God? or did the
Ministers of Christ exhort the Jews that believed, to build a Temple or a
Synagogue to worship in? Or did any of the Ministers of Christ go into the
Temples of the Gentiles to worship, or into the high places of the Jews? Or did
they receive the Idol Priests maintenance, or the Jewish tithes, or eat that
which was sacrificed to Idols? If nay, where is your example; I know you dare
not plead commandment from the Lord for these things. Might not the Jews,
when they had broken down the Altars of Baal, and destroyed the Images and high
places, and the beauty of them, have said, these are convenient places for
worship, let us now worship here for convenience; and that maintenance of
offerings that was offered to Idols, let us take them, and give them to our
Priests and Levites, and let us offer them unto God? If these things had been
justifiable, then yours are justifiable now; but if condemnable then, yours
condemnable now; and so let your mouths be stopped and speak no more so
proudly, nor bring no more such impertinent proofs and arguments for your
deceit; for that is enjoyed that weighes you all, and can judge all your deceit.

And for Barbarism, and Heathenisme, and Heresy thou speaks on, which lays
the Lords vineyard waste, it is brought in, and dwells among you, and the fruits
are manifest in most of your Steeple Houses or Masse-house as witness your
ringing of Pans, Candlesticks, Frying-pans, throwing water, and rude behavior,
which has been used by your Church Members, as fighting, beating, punching,
tearing of clothes, haling out of your Assemblies them that come in the Name of
the Lord; and these be the fruits of barbarous Heathens, which are not brought
forth any where but among you; but it may be thou will call this civility and
courtesy, and the tribute of the Nation: And for heresy both in Doctrine and
Worship, none are to be compared unto you for unsoundnesse and ignorance; for I
look upon you as the tail of all the people in the Nation: And the Vineyard
of God that thou speaks on, is no where laid waste so much as among you
masse-house worshippers; for you are like briars and thorns, scratching,
rending, tearing and haling, and are as a field untilled, and as a waste
howling Wilderness, that knows not when good comes; and that your Ministers
are those proud fantastic sprits that have taken upon them to preach, who
denies an immediate call. Neither are they approved of his Church which is in
God, the pillar and ground of truth; but only they are approved by man, and by
the Colleges, which were invented by the Pope, where more deceit and foolish
fopperies are practiced, then in any society in the Nation besides; for them
that denies an immediate call, and an infallible spirit, I deny them to be any
Ministers of Christ, and so does the Church of Christ who meet in his Name; but
such are your Ministers, therefore we have turned from them many years ago.

And the next thing that thou art offended at is, that a woman spoke in a
meeting near (...); what if ten had spoke, if they had spoke by the Spirit of
the Lord, what offense had it been? Did not God promise by Joel, that he would
pour forth his spirit upon his Daughters, and they should prophecy? and
would thou stop them? And Priscilla instructed a Minister, better then any
of your Parish tything Priests, to wit, Apollo. And had not Philip three
daughters did prophecy? And was there not women with Clement that were
fellow laborers in the Gospel? (And what though she that was in the
transgression was to keep silence in the Church?) Does it therefore follow that
they that are come out of the transgression, are to be silent in the Church? Is
this good Logic Edward? If Christ be in the male, and in the female, may he
speak in the male, but not in the female? Does not the Apostle say; the man is
not without the woman, nor the woman without the man, but both in the Lord? And
if the woman be in the Lord as well as the man, may not the Lord speak in her?
Art thou one of them that wilt limit the Holy one? What if he speak in a dumb
Ass, and reprove the madness of the Prophet Balaam? And if he should do so
now, to reprove the mad Prophets that are in Balaams way, loving the wages of
unrighteousness now, as he did then? will you reprove God? He that reproves
him shall answer it; and he that gainsayes either Son or Daughter, shall perish
in the gainsaying. And now I come to thy third Observation.

The third Observation.
THy eye being evil, thou can not see when good comes; and thou art one of
them who watches for iniquity, that thereby thou may blaspheme the Name of
God and his Truth, which thou art out of. And as for our Tenets, which thou
says thou have named and shamed; thou no more knows us, nor our Tenets, then
thou know from whence the wind comes, and whither it goes: For all our
words are as a parable to thee, and thou know not what we say, although thou
have catched and snatched up some of our words brokenly to quarrel with; yet
we are hidden from thee, and a gulf is between thee and us, that as thou can
not apprehend nor comprehend; but first a terrible day must come upon thee, and
those things which thou have laid down to be our Tenets, thou doubtest whether
they be or no, manifest by thy own words. If we say so, and if we hold so,
thou had better have been certain before thou had showed thy self too
imperious and arrogant, of sham^ng them, when thou know not whether we hold
them, as thou have laid them down in thy own words, the shame at last will
come upon thy self; and that rash, hasty, raging spirit, by which thou
utterest forth all this mudd and dirt, every one may see in this observation
thy deceit manifest.

And the first thing that thy dark mind stumbles at is, that some have said,
That they that have the spirit of God are equal with God.

He that has the Spirit of God, is in that which is equal, as God is equal,
and his ways equal; And he that is joined to the Lord is one sprit, there is
unity, and the unity stands in equality it self.

He that is borne from above is the Son of God, and he said, I and my Father
are one. And when the Son is revealed, and speaks, the Father speaks in him,
and dwells in him, and he in the Father. In that which is equal in equality it
self; there is equality in nature, though not in stature. Go learn what these
things mean, the understanding and learned will know what I say, and this is
neither damnable nor blasphemous; but on the contrary, it is saving and
precious to them that believe.

And thou concludes, Though they be glorified in heaven, yet are not equal
with God.

Here thou blasphemes; the Son is glorified with the Father in the same glory
he had with him before the world began; the glory is in purity, equality,
immortality, and eternity; but for thy proof thou bringst Psalm. 86 8. For who
among the gods is like unto our God And again, There is none like unto thee, O
Lord. Here thou have gone about to prove more Gods then one in heaven: Were the
gods glorified in heaven, which were not like the living God? Or were they in
heaven, which were not like the Lord? What blasphemy is this? They that are in
heaven are like him in his image, and not like any other; but in the world
there are gods many, and Lords many, but that is not in heaven: There are no
Gods nor Lords in the World, nor in the Earth, that is like the living God and
living Lord of Heaven and Earth; And many such nonsensicall phrases have thou
uttered, and foolish impertinencies; and thou have scarce cited one Scripture,
but thou have either misapplyed, or wrested, and perverted, being very ignorant
and unlearned; and thy Masters for whom thou contendst, will never receive much
honor nor credit by thy writing, or vindication of them.

But to the second Particular, which thou calls our Tenet, is, That Christ
Jesus is not glorified in his humane nature, and that he has no real body,
but his mystical body, and this thou say is contrary to Scripture, Luke 24.
3. 9. and Acts 3. 20. John. 17. And in this thou say, we are shamed.

I say thou have shamed thy self, and has cited these Scriptures to no
purpose at all, none of all these speaks of humane nature, or mystical body;
but this I say, he is glorified with the Father in a spiritual body, in the
same glory he had with the Father before the world began. And the same Jesus
which was of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, and the Son of God
according to the spirit, is glorified with the Father, the man Christ Jesus, he
is set down at the right hand of God; But if thou mean by humane, a carnal
body, or the same flesh that thou have on; deal plainly with us, and nakedly,
the next time thou or any of thy Teachers writes, and prove us by Scripture
where the Church is called his mystical body; or where have thou got these new
coined words, as Humane nature, and mystical body? Correct thy pen, and let no
such Popish phrases come in print again, least thou shame thy self more,
instead of shaming of us: And thou concludes, If any say here he is, or there
he is on earth, believe them not. Where learned thou this Article of Faith, I
pray thee show me? Is he not both in heaven and earth? How should he restore
the earth and all things into their purity, if he must not be manifest in the
earth? What, will thou confine him to, or in a place? Does not his presence
fill heaven and earth? Is he divided from his presence?

But may be thou will say as thy generation does, that ^e is in the Earth by
his spirit, and in Heaven in his body or person, distinct from his spirit. If
so, then you divide Christ, and a person without a spirit, and not Christ. I
will ask thee a question; No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came
down from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven. Where was the Son of
man, or the man Christ when this was spoken?

If thou can see this, thou may be ashamed to shut Christ out of the Earth,
or from among his Saints, where his presence, his arm, his hand and his power
is, which is not divided from his body; but I know thou art deaf, and can
not hear what I say, and thou bringst Heb. 10. 12. After he had offered one
sacrifice, sat down at the right hand of God; that is say thou, In his
humane nature. The shame is come upon thy self, who have added thy own
imagination; and let all see whether the Scripture speak of humane nature; but
thy folly must be manifest to all.

Thy third Particular that thou names, and as thou say shames, is, If we
say we are without sin, we deceive our selves. Thou had better have
enquired perfectly whether we said so or no, before thou had undertook to
reprove upon so doubtful terms, and thou bringst Prove. 20. 9. For who can say
my heart is clean. He can say so, and speaks truth, whose heart God has
cleansed by the blood of Christ from all sin: And then thou bringst Job 9.
20. If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me. That Is true, we
justify not our selves, neither self; but denies self, and self is
condemned, and Christ, Gods righteousness is become our Justification. And
then thou bring Paul, Phil. 3. Not as though I had already attained, but
follow after, that I may apprehend. What of that, he was in his growth, and was
come to that which was perfect, and did believe to attain to the stature of a
perfect man.

And then thou says, I tell you, you are not perfect, your contempt of the
Ministers of Christ, and perverting the Doctrine of Christ are Characters of
sin.

That shall stand for thy self, and thy Masters whom thou art joined with, who
sets up Popish trumpery in stead of the Ordinance of Christ; and sets up the
precepts of men, introduced in the apostasy, for the doctrine of Christ: And
then thou concludes, the Scripture has concluded all under sin, all in the
first Adam; but I hope the Scripture does not conclude all under sin in the
second Adam: Neither does conclude him under sin that is borne of God, who
sins not. And if thou make any such conclusion, thou gives thy verdict for the
Devil, and not for God: then thou says, I am not pleading for sin. Thou art
pleading for nothing else but for sin and imperfection, in which the Devils
kingdom stands; and thou says, thou have cause to cry out, O wretched man
that I am! So thou have indeed; have thou repented of thy drunkenness? How
long is it since thou fell off a bridge, being drunk, and broke thy leg; but
it is like, for thy good service done to thy Master, in writing this lying
scrole, he will give thee an absolution for that transgression.

The fourth Particular which thou calls our Tenet, is, That we deny the
Scripture to be the Word of God; And thou have brought many Scriptures to prove
that they are; but they are as impertinent to the thing as thy former about the
Steeple-house, or Masse-house. Thou have brought many Scriptures, Jer. 37. 8.
how they are called the words of the Lord, who ever denied that? but the Word
spoke the words, and the Word is greater. 2 Timothy 3. 16 All Scripture is given
by divine inspiration. I deny that, some was spoken by the Devil, and some by
wicked men, and I hope thou will not call that divine inspiration. Then thou
may be wilt conclude, I deny the words of Paul to Timothy. I deny the word Is,
it is an addition of the Translator, which word alters and varies the true
sense of that Scripture; but all Scripture given by inspiration of God is
profitable for doctrine, etc. But know thou no distinction between
inspiration and tradition? You have it by tradition, the Saints by Inspiration.
It Is a dead letter in it self, and as it is spoken from your mouths, who
speak of it by tradition; but from them that were inspired, the living Spirit
uttered forth living words; But what is all this to prove the Scripture or
writings to be the Word of God. And then thou cites 2 Cor. 4. 7. Not handling
the Word deceitfully. What does this prove? nothing at all; and all the rest
that thou have cited is nothing at all but what we have answered over and over
many times, wherein all that have any understanding in the knowledge of God are
satisfied: That which thou should have proved by the Scripture, is, where the
Scripture, or writings, or Letter does title it self the Word of God. It is
granted, they are the words of God, and the words of holy men inspired: So in
thy own words, I say, take thou notice, though thou art confident and
presumptuous, in this thou have shamed thy self, and not us. The Word was
before either Scripture, Writings, or Bible was; which Word is greater, and
gave them a being: And thou that would set that which is brought forth by the
Father, above the Father, art out of the Apostles wisdom, speaking a
similitude; He that builds a house, receives more honor then the house. Now to
call the Scripture the Word, is to give as much honor to the house, as to him
that builded it; but in a word, this I say, what ever the Scripture does
testify of it self, or call it self, that I own it to be: And if any man
call it another thing, it shall testify against him; and so thou that have
gone about to set up the words which were spoken in time, above or equal with
the Word, that was before all time, art ignorant, and unskilful in the
knowledge of GOD, and silence would better become thee.

^n thy last page thou says, How often have we been called upon to make
known to the world what we hold, and what we would have: Are you the men raised
for this work alone, to cry down Tithes, and speak against Lace, Ribbons,
and Cuffs? Is there nothing for us to do? Then this declare, that this is
enough to salvatior.

I say, we have declared more in the world then they do receive or believe, and
we have published the will of God to the earth in many things, and shall
further proceed as the Spirit of the Lord shall direct us: And that which we
would have, is, the old Dragon chayned, and the Whore burnt with fire, and her
Merchants cease trading, and the Sea dried up upon which she sits, and upon
which the Merchants trade, and the Beast and all the false Prophets, Deceivers
and Antichrists, which have all had their rise since the Ascension of Christ,
we would have these be all shut in the pit again; and we would have the Lamb to
reign, and the everlasting Gospel to be preached again, the power of God; and
we would have the Earth restored, and we would have everlasting righteousness
to reign in the hearts of people, and Laws, as at the first, and Counselors
as in the beginning, who judge not for rewards; and Ministers, such as were in
the Primitive times, who will preach without tithes, hire, and set wages, and
without the Popes maintenance. If thou can receive these things, I will show
thee further it may be hereafter, if I hear any more from thee. And we are the
men that are raised up for the work, to declare against pride in the ground,
and also in appearance, as against Lace, Cuffs and Ribbons; And thou asks, if
there be nothing else: Have thou denied these, and the spirit that leads to the
abuse of Gods creatures? when thou have, I will show unto thee there is
something else to be done; but if thou do not obey that which is manifest, why
would thou know more to add to thy condemnation: And we do not say, that
casting off these things is all that is required to salvation, thou bids us
declare if there be any thing else; so I shall, so that thou hearken to it, and
receive it, else thy condemnation shall be greater then if I had written
nothing. Thou must repent of all thy sin, and turn from it, and know the
judgment of God for it, and deny thy self in every thing, and lay down thy
life also, and take up his Cross daily, and be crucified to the world, and
cease from all thy own words, actions and thoughts, and come to taste of death
before thou come to know him to live in thee to be thy salvation; can thou do
this? when thou witnesses this done, then thou shall know further what God
requires; but a terrible day will come upon thee before these things be
fulfilled in thee; though thou be more stout then thy fellows, I know him who
is able to break thy horn which thou have exalted against the Lamb of God and
his followers.

And for thy exhortation, Not to seed on husks, take it home to thy self, for
thou have nothing else to feed upon; the words of the Saints at best, without
the life, or else some innovated invented trumpery of the Whore, of whose Cup
thou have drunk, makes thee speak forth all these venomous words against the
life and power of God in his people.

And thou concludes, What thou have written is as much for our Conversion as
Refutation.

Both alike indeed, for thou have done neither; but have conceived and brought
forth wind, and spent thy time for naught. Alas poor man, tellst thou of
converting, who art not come out of the gross pollutions of the world? who art
not ceased from drunkenness? and art pleading for Masse-houses, Tithes,
Hirelings, and Popish inventions, and art offended; we should declare against
Ribbons, Cuffs, and Lace; what should thou convert any too, except to make
them twofold more children of the Devil? And what should thou refute or
confute? Will thou say one shall not steal, and do thou? Will thou say one
should not be drunk, and art thou? And will thou say one should forsake all
sin, and yet say none must be cleansed from it, but be always miserable men,
and wretched men? Be first convinced in thy self and turn from thy evil
deeds, before (...) more of converting or refuting any; For (...) when all
shall be set in order before thee what thou have done, and thou shall receive
according to thy work; and thou shall then see this work to be for
condemnation, which thou have published against the truth, which shall and must
abide for ever; and they that are in it, and walk in it shall be everlastingly
happy, and shall reign as Kings and Priests unto God for ever; and over all
deceit, and shall live to confound all the children of falsehood in all their
devices.

THE END.

