

S. P Q. V. A SURVAY OF THE SIGNORIE OF VENICE, Of Her admired policy, and
method of GOVERNMENT, etc. WITH A Cohortation to all Christian Princes to resent
Her dangerous Condition at present.

By JAMES HOVVELL Esquire.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard,
near the West end.

M. DC. LI.

TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF THE NATION, THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.
Most Noble Senators,
LEngth of Age argues strength of Constitution; and as in Natural bodies, so
this Rule holds good likewise in Political: Whence it may be inferrd, that the
Signorie of Venice from Her Infancy was of a strong Symmetry, well nursd, and
swadled with wholesome Laws, which are no other than the ligaments of a State,
or the Arteries whereby the blood is directed and strengthened to run through
all the veins in due proportion, though Nature allows some to have a greter
quantity than others. To this may be attributed Her so long duration, for
having bin born a Christian, and Free from the beginning, She has continued a
pure Virgin, and an Independent (but only upon Her-self) near upon 13 Ages; She
has shind in Her Watery Orb among all other Republiques upon Earth, as the
Moon does in the Heavens among the rest of the Planets, Though She has cop'd
with the gretest Potentats of the World, and particularly with the huge Ottoman
Emperor Her Neighbor; having not only scratchd his face, and oftentimes cut
off those tuffs of hair wherein his strength lay for the time, but peeld his
beard, and sometimes pluckd him by the Mustachos; She is now in actual
luctation, and has bin any time these six years at handy-gripes with that
monstrous Giant, who this year intends to bend, and bandy all his Forces both
by Land and Sea, to ravish and ruin Her; Therefore it imports all Christian
Princes to resent Her condition, She being both the Key, and Bulwark of Europe
that way; And, with humble leave I speak it, it may well become England (now
that she is more formidable at Sea than ever) to be sensible of Her case, That
Republic having bin her ancient Confederat ever since the association of the
Holy War, and having, for this last Centurie, mingled interests, and run the
same course of state with Her; Nor is it a Quaere altogether impertinent, but
may very well admit of a debate, whether a war against the Turk might not
prove more advantageous to England than his wares. Moreover, if likeness may
beget love, England has reason to affect Venice more than any other, for in
point of security there is much resemblance between them, being both seated in
the Sea, who is their best Protector; The one preserves Her-self by her
Galleys, the other by her Galeons; The fairest flower of England is the
Dominion of the Narrow Seas, the gretest glory of Venice is the Dominion of the
Adriatic Gulf 700 miles in extent; Venice had the chiefest hand in framing the
Rhodian Laws for Sea cases, by which all the Levant parts are guided; and
England was the busiest in constituting the Maritim Laws of Oleron, whereby
the Western World is governd.

This following Survay (which is like a Frame indented with sundry pieces)
will, I believe, make the Reder both outwardly and inwardly acquainted with
this Maiden Republic, for it shows Her policy and power, Her wars, exploits,
and confederacies, Her interests of State, together with Her advantages and
defects, and how far She has trodd in the stepps of old Rome; Therefore, most
humbly under favor, the Author deemd it a piece of industry not altogether
unworthy to be presented unto that Noble Assembly by

Their daily Orator, HOWELL.

The famous Hexastic which Sannazarius made upon the City of Venice, for which
he receavd 100 Zecchins for evry verse (amounting near to 300* sterling) in
lieu of reward by decree of the Senate.
VIderat Adriacis Venetam Neptunus in Undis
Stare Urbem, and toti ponere jura Mari,
Nunc mihi Tarpeias quantumvis, Jupiter, Arces
Objice and illa tui maenia Martis, ait;
Sic Pelago Tibrim praefers; Urbem aspice utramque,
Illam Homines dices, Hanc posuisse Deos.
WHen Neptun among his billows Venice saw,
And to the Adrian Surges giving law,
He said, now Jove boast of thy Capitol,
And Mars his Walls; This were for to extol
Tiber above the Main: Both Cities Face,
You Will say, Rome men, Venice the Gods did trace.
A short Analysis of the whole Piece.
A VENICE LOOKING-GLASS, Wherein that rare and renowned City and Signory is
represented in Her true Colors, with Reflexes,

I. UPon Her Constitutions, and Government, wherein there may be diverse things
useful for this Meridian. II. Of the extent and distance of Her Dominions.
III. Of Her Interests of State, with the rest of the Princes of Italy, and
others. IV. Of Her imitation of old Rome in most things. V. Of Her advantages
and defects. VI. Of Her power by Sea and Land. VII. Of Her 98 Dukes, Doges, or
Souverain Princes.
In whose Life's is involvd the Historical part which looks upon the Greek
Empire, and Turkey as well as upon most Countries in Europe; in whose Counsels,
tending either to Peace or War, the Republic of Venice has had as great a
share as any other Christian Prince.

THe Author desires to prepossesse the Reder with this advertisement, That he
would not have adventurd upon this remote Out landish subject, had he not bin
himself upon the place; had he not had practical conversation with the peeple
of whom he writes: As little had he presumd upon the Life of the last French
King (and Richelieu his Cardinal) in the Story called LUSTRA LUDOVICI, unless
he had bin Spectator of most of his actions.

And herin the Author desires to be distinguishd from those who venture to
write of Foreign affairs, and Countries by an implicit faith only, taking all
things upon trust, having Themselfs never trodd any part of the Continent.

Upon the City and Signorie of VENICE.
COuld any State on Earth Immortal be,
Venice by Her rare Government is She;
Venice Great Neptunes Minion, still a Maid,
Though by the warrlikst Potentats assayd;
Yet She retains Her Virgin-waters pure,
Nor any Foreign mixtures can endure;
Though, Syren-like on Shore and Sea, Her Face
Enchants all those whom once She does embrace;
Nor is there any can Her bewty prize
But he who has beheld Her with his Eyes:
These following Leaves display, if well observd,
How She so long Her Maydenhead preservd,
How for sound prudence She still bore the Bell;
Whence may be drawn this high-fetchd parallel,
Venus and Venice are Great Queens in their degree,
Venus is Queen of Love, Venice of Policy.
I. H.

OF THE REPUBLIC OR SIGNORIE OF VENICE.
The PROEME.
WEre it within the reach of humane brain to prescribe Rules for fixing a
Society and Succession of peeple under the same Species of Government as long as
the World lasts, the Republic of Venice were the fittest pattern on Earth both
for direction and imitation: This Maiden City, which denominats the whole
Commonwealth, had the Prerogative to be born a Christian, and Independent,
whereof She glories, and that not undeservedly, above all other States or
Kingdoms; It seems some propitious Star was predominant at Her Nativity, and
that Nature brought Her forth with her limms well knit, and apt to grow up to a
strong constitution, which is the cause that She is so long lived, and has
continued above a thousand hot Summers an intemerat Virgin under the same face,
and form of Government; It is the cause that She looks still fresh and
flourishing, without the least furrow of age in her forehead, or any visible
symptom of decay, whereunto Civil Bodies as well as Natural, by those
distempers and common accidents which attend Time, use to be subject. This
beauteous Maid has bin often attempted to be deflowrd, some have courted Her,
some would have bribd Her, and diverse would have forcd Her, yet she still
preserved her chastity entire; She has wrestled with the greatest powers upon
Earth, East, West, North and South, both by Land and Sea; The Emperor, the
Kings of France, Spain, and Hungary, with most of the other Princes of
Christendom in that famous League at Cambray, at which time she had a shrewd
fit of the green sickness which threatened a consumption, would have quite sunk
Her, but She bore up still above water, and broke that League to flitters,
though, I must confess, she was forced then to piece her Lion's skin with a
Foxe's tail, and to destroy that by wit which she could not do with her weapon.

The Eastern Emperors have diverse times set upon her skirts, The Gran Turk
has bin often at Her, (and She is now tugging hard with him) but he could
never have his will of Her, for though She has often closed with him, yet She
came still off with her mayden-head clear; She has had sundry Thunderbolts
darted at Her from the Vatican, yet She kept her self still free from all
inward combustions, and all popular tumults both in her Church and State,
notwithstanding that She expeld from her Territories, the greatest supporters
of the Popes Chair, when She gave the Jesuits this cold farewell, Andate,
niente pigliate, and may retornate, Go your ways, take nothing, and never
return; As also that She long since made her Ecclesiastics incapable to inherit
Stable possessions, or sit in the Senate, in regard they have a dependence and
juramentall obligation, in diverse things, to another Prince, viz. the Pope;
therefore before any suffrage pass in the Council, the common cry is, fuora I
preti, Out Presbyters; This curbing of the Clergy has caused diverse clashes
twixt her and Rome; so that once the Pope began to question Her right to the
Dominion of the Gulf, and asking her Ambassador what warrant She had for it,
He answered, If your Holiness please to produce the Instrument whereby the
Emperor Constantine passed over the City of Rome to your predecessors, upon
the back of that Grant your Holiness will find the Venetian Charter to the
Dominion of the Adriatic Gulf; Another time Gregory the 13. threatening to
excommunicat the Doge and the Senate about a controversy that had arisen
touching the bounds of their Territories, Nicholas Pontanus answered, Censuram
Pontificiam esse gladium vagina inclusum, qui temere distringi non deberet, ne
discerent homines contemnere ejusmodi Tel^m, etc. The Pontificiall censure,
viz. Excommunication, is like a sword sheathed up in a scabbard, which ought
not to be rashly drawn out, lest men might learn to slight that kind of weapon.

Yet these traverses twixt Saint Peter and Saint Mark could never shake Venice
in the main of the Roman Religion wherein She was born, baptized and bred, but
She still reverenced the Church in her own Sphere and function; and suffers her
to enjoy above 2. millions of yearly revenue to this day. And indeed 'twas one
of her primitive principles of policy, at the first erection of her Republique,
to bear a singular veneration to the Church, imitating herein, as in many other
particulars, the Commonwealth of Rome her Mother, who raised her self a
notable repute among other Nations, for her extraordinary reverence to the
Gods. Nor are there many Christian Princes who deserve better of Rome than
Venice, for She has often supported the Popes Chair when it was tottering,
nay, being once quite thrust out She riggd her galleys and resettled Him in it
as will appeer: And of later years She resented it extremely when Bourbon
scaled the walls of Rome; Besides, She would not admit Henry the fourth's
Ambassador from France to Her Chapel till his Master was reconciled to the
Church of Rome.

Nor did She keep Saint Peter's bark only from sinking, but She spread her
sails, and displayed her banners also for preserving the Eastern Emperor
(when Christian) from the fury of the Saracens and other barbarous peeple. SHE
had so great a share in the conquest of the Holy Land, that She had one part of
Jerusalem allotted her for her quarter; and had not the state of Genoa (a
potent Republic in those times) bin so perverse, and repined at the glory of
Venice her elder sister, Venice had bin the Glory of Europe, and the Christians
might in all probability have kept footing in Palestine to this very day; for
the clashings betwixt these two were the cause that the conquests which the
Cross had got in those Eastern parts were of so small continuance.

We read how Rome became a prostitut to several Nations, and sorts of
governments, and one only war made as it were an end of her quite, but Venice,
Virtue like

-- repulsae nescia sordidae
Intaminatis fulget honoribus:
I say Venice to this day, though all her neighbors round about, far and
nere, have tuggd with her by Land and Sea, yet like the constellation of Virgo
among the celestial bodies, she shines still among the Kingdoms on earth like
a bright unravish'd Virgin: And may do so to the Worlds end, if she be still
true to her self, as Thuanus says, who undertakes to be her prophet in these
words,

Venetiae non nisi cum Rerum ^atura,
Et Mundi machina periturae.
Till Nature and the Univers decline,
Venice within her Watery Orb shall shine.
Some Reasons why Venice has lasted so long in the same condition of Liberty.
NOw, how this longliv'd Republic came to do those notable atchievments abroad,
and conserve her self from all popular tumults and revolutions at home so many
Ages, may be imputed, (besides the politic frame of her government in general,
which shall be treated of hereafter) to these particular reasons following.

1. SHE has bin always constant to her self, and to her first fundamentalls
and principles, for She has bin always an enemy to change, holding it to be
a wholesome caveat that Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis magis perturbat novitate quam
adjuvat utilitate, viz. The change of custom uses to perturb a State more by
it is noveltie, than advantage it by it is utilitie; She has a rule also that
male positum saepius mutatur in pejus, This makes her decrees irrevocable; As
one of her Ambassadors answered Henry the fourth of France when he interceded
for the abrogation of a Decree of Hers, Serenissime Rex, Senatus Venetus diu
deliberat, antequam decernat, sed quod serio decrevit revocat nunquam; Most
gracious King, the Venetian Senate does deliberat a long time before it decrees
any thing, but when it is once seriously decreed it is never revoked. Whereunto
he added further, gli Decreti di Venetia non sono comme ligridi di Parigi, The
Decrees of Venice are not like the cries of Paris (meaning the French edicts)
proclaimed to day, and repealed to morrow. To this maturity of deliberation, may
be added, the gravity of her Senators, and the exact reverence the younger sort
bear, not only to the persons, but opinions of their Elders; It is not there as
in other places, where young men make laws for old men to observe, they
abhor that inversion of the Law of Nature, but gray heads sway, and green
heads obey; so provident they are of the future, when they consult of a business
to day, they think what may befall 100* years after. Nor is there any admitted
to their superior Counsels till he be somewhat stricken in years, until he
has passed employments of public trust within her own Territories, or
Embassies abroad. Touching this second service they have certain degrees which
they observe in the removal of their Ambassadors, for commonly one passes
from the Cantons of Swisserland to be Ambassador in Holland, thence he is
transmitted to England, thence to France, so to Spain, and thence either to the
Emperor or to be ^ailio of Constantinople, where he lives in great height, and
is not accountable for his expenses as all other Ambassadors are, nor ever
after employed in any Legation.

But though She be so constant to her self at home in Her primitive
constitutions, and intrinsique government, yet in her correspondency, leagues
and confederacies abroad She often varies, and casts her course of policy into
new moulds, as the Fortune of other Princes or States do rise or decline; her
principal aim being to keep not only the State of Italy, but also Spain and
France, which are the two poles whereon Europe may be said to move, in
Aequilibrio, To keep them in a counterpoize.

2. Another cause of the longaevity of this Republic may be allegd to be, that
She has always bin more inclind to peace than war, and chosen rather to be a
Spectatrix or Umpresse, than a Gamestresse, Her chief motto being, Pax tibi
Marce; Insomuch that no Christian Prince or State, except the Popedom, has
labourd more by costly Legations to reconcile the quarrels of Europe, and
quench the fire that issued out of them to the disturbance of the public peace,
as also for preventing the advantages which the Common Enemy the Turk (one of
her next neighbors) might take thereby: which has bin the cause that for the
sagacity of her men, and maturenes of her Counsels, She has bin oftentimes
desird to be Mediatrix of differences 'twixt the greatest Potentates, which She
has don with that address and diligence as is admirable, so that Thuanus
gives her this character, to be Civilis prudentiae officina, the shop of civil
prudence.

3. A third reason for the continuance of this Republic in such a prosperous
condition may be said to be the rare temper of her peeple, who with exact
obedience and promptitud execut what is enjoynd them by their Superiors; so
that it may be said of Venice what a grave Historian speaks of Sparta, when he
passed his judgment of Her, Sparta diu stetit, non quod Rex been imperabat, sed
quia populus been parebat, Sparta lasted so long, not as much that the Prince
did command well, as that the peeple did obey well. Nor, is the Venetian of so
volatile an humor; and so greedy of change as other Italians, he is not so
fickle as the Florentine, Milaneze, or they of Naples, who, as the History
relates, has had eight and twenty revolutions (with this last) in less then
300. years, in which time the Napolitan Courser threw off his Rider five times.

4. Add herunto that the Venetians are mighty good Patriotts, and love their
Country in an intense degree, every Gallie that goes in course thinks she has
Venice her self aboard of her; as if the print of that old Roman rule were still
fresh in their hearts, Dulce and decorum pro patria mori: And as in this
particular, so in many qualities besides, the soul of Rome seems to have
transmigrated into Venice, as shall be shown herafter. They are equally
studious and eager to conserve the glory and greatness of the Republic, for
which they have bin ever ready to part with their blood and fortunes; There are
many examples how the women have bin ready to part with their braceletts,
earings and necklaces in time of extremity, nay they have offered their very
hair to make ropes for their galleys, etc. But though they continue still such
great Zelotts to their own Country, and government thereof, they are not so to
the Church of late years, as it is observed; and were it not for those
confusions that ensued thereby in other Countries, and the hatred they should
heap upon themselfs from their neighbors, some think the Republic by this time
would have drawn her neck from the Roman yoke, which made Cardinal Ossat say,
that Venice has now no more devotion to Rome than needs.

5. A fi^t reason that Venice has continued a maid so many Centuries of years,
is, her advantageous site and position, being seated in an arm or Estuary of
the Adriatic Sea upon an Assembly of small Islands to the number of above
threescore consociated and leagud together by 800. and odd bridges; so that
sitting thus securely on Thetis lapp, She need not fear any invasion by land,
or any approaches to her from sea without knowing Pilotts: She has as it were
cut the Ocean into so many aqueducts through her streets, as we read Cyrus
causd the River Pindes to be draind into 360. channels, which he did out of a
revenge because she had drowned one of his horses, but Venice clean contrary
does this out of affection to Neptun, that thereby She might embosom her self
the more easily between his arms. This rare situation of the City of Venice
induced diverse to be of opinion That some superior power to man, That some
heavenly Intelligence had a hand in founding and tracing Her out.

6. Sixthly, This rare perpetuity of the Republic of Venice may be ascribed
also to her Tresure, and Arsenal, whereof the one is grown to be a proverb for
riches, the other for strength, being stord with such huge Magazins of both:
The first could never be yet exhausted or estimated; The other can, in case of
necessity, put so many Galleys to the sea as there be days in the year, having
3000. persons perpetually at work, with other advantages, as will appeer when
we com to describe it, with the Tresury, for these are but prolegomena, and
general Ideas of things.

7. Seventhly, The counterpoise of rewards and punishments may be said to have
bin the plummetts which have made the great clock of this Commonwealth to go
true so many ages: In this government whosoever is detected to have the least
attempt or thought of conspiring any thing against the Republic, dies without
mercy; On the other side, whosoever finds out or invents any thing that may
tend either to her advantage or honor, shall be as sure of his reward, as the
other of punishment.

8. Another reason why Venice has lasted so long at such a constant stand, is
her wonderful sagacity in discovering any private conspiracy against Her self,
her cautions to prevent it, and ready means to suppress it; for there is
always a private Armory (besides the great Arsenall) wherein there are choice
arms ready for 1500. men, the musketts, and arquibuzes chargd, match ready,
and every thing fitted for a present execution in case of a sudden surprise or
uprore. This Armory is very secretly kept nere the Dukes Palace, and not to be
shown without 3. Gentlemen of the great Council, being reserved merely for the
use and safety of the Senate, in case they should be assaulted by any
ill-favored commotion, or private outrage while they are consulting about the
affairs of the Republic: It is closely and curiously kept, and has many new
divises of arms, as steel-bowes which shoot needles or small darts, and hitt
unseen, there be musketts and pistolls that will go off 6. times together,
halbards with pistolls in them one at each end, strange kinds of polaxes, with
other sorts of defensive and destructive arms, if occasion should require.
Besides this means of suppressing all violence, she has many cautions besides
to prevent them: It is death without mercy for any of her Senators, Officers or
Gentlemen to receave pensions from any other Prince or State; nor is it
permitted that they have any private conversation with their Ambassadors or
public Agents; Her own Ambassadors must not conceal the presents and gifts they
received from other Princes where they are employed, but at their return they
must present them to Saint Mark's Tresury, which has much multiplied the
wealth of it.

9. Another reason of her so constant subsistence may be the sundry restraints
She putts to the power of the Prince, which are such, that it is impossible for
Him to be a Tyrant, or able to attempt any thing against her liberty and
government; He may be said to be but a Colleague to the rest of the Senators,
diffring from them only in the hinmost part of his Capp, which rises up like a
Cornet. Besides, though Maidens commonly love young Men, yet she never chooses
any to be her Prince or Duke till he be stricken in years, and seasoned with
the experience of the world, until he be half mortified, having shaken hands
with those extravagant humors, appetits and passions that attend humane Nature.

Hereunto may be added the limitations She putts to the wealth of the Nobles,
that none of them grow over rich, but to such a proportion, in regard that it
is a quality ever inhaerent and hereditary in the nature of man, that excess
of riches puffs up the mind, and incites it to ambitious and high attempts, nor
is there a more catching bayt for one to take vulgar affections, and draw them
after him, than Wealth: therefore one of her prime principles of State is to
keep any man, though having deserved never so well by good success or service,
from being too popular; Therefore when foreign Ambassadors are employed to Her,
they have it among their private instructions not to magnify any of her
subjects in particular, for She cannot endure to hear of it, though She can be
allways very well contented to hear Her self extolled, and tickled with
complements in the general.

10. Add herunto, that one of her policies is to exempt her Citizens from
going to the wars, but She hires others in their places, by whose death she
sustaineth the less loss, for She has bin always observed to be
parsimonious of her own blood: Moreover, She entertaines some foreign Prince for
Her General, whom, the wars being ended, and the game played, She presently
discards; by which course She avoyds not only superfluous expense, but likewise
all matters of faction, and apprehensions of danger, which might well happen if
She should employ any of her own peeple in so high an employment, which might
elevat his spiritts to too great an altitud. She has also another politic law
that permitts not the younger sons of the Nobility and Gentry to marry, lest
the number increasing so exceedingly it should diminish the dignity, and her
great Council should be too much pestered, and this may be one reason why she
connives at so many Courtisans for the use of the Cadett-gentlemen.

11. Eleventhly, the rare secrecy She injoynes in her chiefest Counsels, may
be a reason that no foreign Prince could come nere her privy parts all this
while; for it is there an irremissible crime, and such a mortal sin that
draws upon it death without mercy, to reveal the private transactions, and
secretts of her Council of State; In so much that the designs of this close
Maid may be said to be mysteries till they be put in execution.

12. Lastly, the cause of her continuance may be imputed to another reach of
policy She has, not to admit Churchmen to any of her secular Counsels (nor
was She ever subject to the authority of Women) And the reason why the Clergy
is made incapable to sit in the Senate is, because (as it was touched before)
they have relation to another government, viz. the Pontificiall. Moreover, She
has had a special care of the Pulpit (and Press) that no Churchman from the
meanest Priest to the Patriarch dare tamper in their Sermons with temporal and
State Affairs, or the transactions and designs os the Senate; It being too well
known that Churchmen are the most perilous and pernicious Instruments in a
State, if they misapply their talent, and employ it to poison the hearts of the
peeple, to intoxicat their brains, and suscitat them to sedition, and a mislike
of the government; and now Churchmen have more power to do this in regard they
have the sway on the noblest part of the rational Creature, over the soul and
the intellectualls; Therefore if any intermeddle with matters of State in the
Pulpitt, they are punished in an extraordinary severe manner. Yet they bear a
very high respect unto the Church (as long as she keeps within her own sphere,
and breaks not out into ceccentricall and irregular motions.) They suffer Her
to this day to enjoy above 2. millions of crowns in yearly revenue, holding it
for a maxim, that reverence, riches, decency and splendour are the greatest
pillars that support Religion. She has also two very eminent men, the one a
sound Divine, the other a learned Casuist, that have a pension from the
Republic, who are always ready in case She have any contestation with Rome,
to defend and vindicat Her by public writing, and to satisfy the world of her
proceeding, as Paolo Servita did.

Thus have you in part some reasons (which will be enforced in the following
description of her Government) how Venice came to last so many centuries a pure
unspotted Virgin, and free not only from all foreign ravishments and assaults,
but also from all intestin commotions and tumults. It Is true that some short
combustions have happened in Her, but by Her wisdom and providence they proved
but as fyres of flax or stubble, which no sooner flashed out but they suddenly
extinguished of themselfs. And this is the more to be wondered at, because it is
observed, that as rank excuberant grounds use to be more subject to bear weeds
of all sorts, than other soyles, so rich luxurious Cities are more exposed to
corrupt superfluous humors, which use to break out into strange distempers, and
high fevers. It Is well known that Venice has bin always such a City, yet
by Her extraordinary prudence She has and does still preserve her self from
such distempers, notwithstanding that She swimms in wealth and wantones as well
as she does in the waters, notwithstanding that She melts in softnes and
sensuality as much as any other whatsoever; for, it is too well known, there is
no place where there is less Religion from the girdle downward: yet She suffers
not those frayl vessels of pleasure to mingle with her other Daughters in
Church Communion.

But now we will proceed to the Original of her Republic, and the frame of her
Government, whereby She has endured so many hundreds of hard winters, and hott
summers.

Of the Original of the Signorie of Venice, and of her Government.
Italy has bin always accounted the Eye of Europe, the Mirror of policy,
and once, Mistress of the World; Although, putting all dimensions together,
and taking her length to piece out her latitude, She be scarce as big as
England, yet has She a Kingdom 450. miles long, and 112. in breadth, (for
Naples and Calabria are so) which contains 2700. Towns, 20. Archbishopricks,
sixcore and seven Bishops, 13. Princes, 24. Dukes, 25. Marquises, and 800.
Barons: She has a Popedom which extends its Territories 300. miles long, and
is situated 'twixt two Seas, viz. the Adriatic, and Tyrrhene Seas, and so runs
through the midst of Her; which makes the Pope to be more proper ct capable to
be an Umpire or Enemy upon any occasion of difference that side the Alps; For
besides his navall strength he can put into the field an Army of 50000. well
armed men in case of necessity, being a mixed Prince 'twixt spiritual and
temporal.

She has also diverse other Principalities; The Duchy of Milan is little
inferior to the Popedom in point of strength; The gran Duke of Toscany has
20000. armed men enrolled, trained up and in perpetual pay, with 400. light
horse, and 100. gendarmes, all which are quartered in so narrow a compass that
he can command them all to his Court at Florence in four and twenty hours;
The Duke of Savoy, who is accounted also one of her Princes, is far beyond the
Florentine in power; There be also in Her the Dukes of Parma, of Urbin and
Mantoua, who are Soverain Princes. Besides all these, Italy has three
Republiques, viz. that of Venice, that of Genoa, and that of Luca, which may be
said to differ one from the other as the three degrees of comparison, whereof
Venice is the superlatif; and indeed she may be termed so, being compared to
any Republic on earth, take her power by sea and land together. It is well
known that Kingdoms take their denomination diversely; some take their names
from the whole bulk of Earth and Country it self which they possess, as the
Kingdom of Spain, the Kingdom of Denmark, etc. Some are denominated ab
eminentiori, from the chief Metropolis, as Rome in times passed had the glory
to denominat the whole Empire, and after her Constantinople, and as now Morocco
names that Kingdom, and Naples christneth Hers, though I must confess the King
of Spain now adays terms not himself King of Naples, but Utriusque Siciliae,
of both Siciles, and it may be thought he does this to displease the Pope the
less, who still claymes title to it. Thus is it with Kingdoms, but touching
Commonwealths, They for the most part take allways their denomination from the
principal City, as Athens of old, with diverse others, and now Venice, Genoa,
etc. But I find that Venice takes the state upon Her to be named still in the
plural number Venetiae; which strain of statelines, doubtless with other things
she borrowed from the Greeks, who named sundry of their Cities only in the
plural, as Thebae, Athenae, etc. but more of this hereafter: Now to her
government.

Of the Government, constitution, and frame of the Signorie of Venice.
THere is not any thing that discovers the prudence of a peeple more than the
manner and method of their Government; Government is that great hinge whereon
all Kingdoms and Commonwealths do move: But in this Aequorean Republic, for she
may not improperly be called so, in regard She commands, secures, and scowres
all the year long above 700. miles of Sea, for that is the extent of the
Adriatic Gulf from the City of Venice, to Otranto in Calabria, I say
Government in Her may be called the r^dder that steers the great vessel of
State; Her constitutions and laws are the ligaments and cables; felicity,
wealth and glory are the sayls, and the breath of her Senators the wind that
blows them: The common good is the pole whereat the needle or lilly of the
compass allways points; Religion the main mast which bears the colors of her
Saint, though the chief Pilot or Master of this vessel (the Doge) be of
himself but as a head of wood, a Testa di legno (set up in the forecastle of
the stern) without the coadvice of some of the Masters mates, whereof there are
many, because she would not be subject to the infirmities and faylings of one,
who might happily err, and be mistaken in the use of the compass, or
transported with irregular passions.

Now, there is nothing so uncertain and difficult as the Art of Government,
Hominem homini imperare difficillimum, and those who from Apprentices have bin
bredd up Iourneymen, and Masters in this art, and have spent their youth,
manhood, and a long time of old age therein, yet when they left the world they
professed themselfs still but Novices therein; And this may be imputed to those
various events and contingencies which attend humane negotiations, together
with the discrepant fancies of men, specially of the common multitud, who in
lightness match the winds, and outgoe the waves of the Sea in fury oftentimes.
There is a certain way to break, guide, and keep in aw all other Animalls,
though never so savage and strong; but there is no such certain way to govern a
swarm of men, in regard of such frequent turbulencys of spirit, and variety of
opinions proceeding from the Rational faculty, which other cretures, that are
contented only with sense are not subject unto: and this may be said to be one
of the inconveniences that attend Reason.

But if ever any has brought humane government and policy to a science which
consists of certitudes, the Venetian Republic is She, who is as dextrous in
ruling men as in rowing of a gallie or gondola, otherwise She could never have
lasted so long, and kept in such an exact obedience 3. millions of men, for
therabouts by frequent censes that have bin made is the number of her subjects.

We are going now to describe the method this Republic has always used in
Her government, which is the most material thing in point of knowledge: For to
stand raking the ashes of times passed to find out the pedigree of a Peeple,
Country or City; or to know their power and wealth, their exploits and
extent of territory, affoords only matter of discourse; but to pry into the
policy and soul of a State, whereon her government and whole incolumity depends,
is a knowledge far more advantageous and useful, for therein there may be things
for imitation: Therefore in treating of this Republic, I will begin with the
most necessary part, viz. the form of her Government.

THe Venetian Government is a compounded thing, for it is a mixture of all kinds
of goverments, if the division of the Philosopher into Monarchy, Aristocracy
and Democracy be allowed to be perfect: This government may be said to have a
grain of Monarchy, a dose of Democracy, and a dramm if not an ounce of Optimacy.

The Duke, Doge or Prince has something of a Monarch in him, as will further
appeer.

The Senate which consists of 120. Counselors, of Decemvirs whose College
consists of 17. Senators, and of Sages or Praeconsultors, which make a number
of 16. choice men.

The great Council which is composd of a general convention of Citizens, and
this has much of Democracy in it.

Of the Duke or Prince of Venice.
ALL things to whom the God of Nature has given an entity, prop^nd to unity;
wherein Earth comes to the nearest resemblance with Heaven; for nothing
conduces more to regularity and order, no strength is so operative as the
united: therefore the Venetian peeple having tried for some hundred years the
government of Consulls, and afterward of Tribunes, they found it an
inconvenience, or deformity rather, to have two heads upon one body, and so
thought it at last a better policy to set upp one head: but the miscarriage
and exorbitancies of the Tribunes were the cause that they fell upon this
alteration. Whereupon a General Assembly being convokd, wherein the Bishop of
Grada presided, diverse Speeches were made, That there was no more hope of the
Venetian Commonwealth and public liberty, which had bin preservd and purchasd
by their noble Progenitors with such heroic resolution, unless the tyranny of
the Tribunes might be suppressd; otherwise they might be said to have left the
firm land, to find out slavery among the waters, etc.

Many high acrimoniall Orations were pronouncd at this Convention of that
nature; whereof there was one more notable than the rest, which is inserted
before the legend of Paulutio Anafesto, the first Duke or Prince of Venice, as
will appeer herafter in the Historical part of this Work.

Upon the pronouncing of these Speeches, they gave an unanimous shout and
suffrage, that a Duke or Prince should be elected, who might represent the
whole honor and Majesty of the State, but with such cauteles and reservations
that might consist with the public Liberty. And this mutation happend,
according to the approvedst Authors, in the year after the incarnation 697.

This Duke ever since has had the prime place in the Republic; He has a kind
of Regal, though dependent, power; He has the representation and gravity of a
Soverain Governor; He is allwaies stild, Serenissime Princeps, and reverence is
don to him accordingly; He goes always cladd in silk and purple, sometimes he
shows himself to the public in a robe of cloth of gold, and a white mantle; He
has his head coverd with a thinn coyf, and on his forhead upward he wears a
crimson kind of mitre with a gold border, and behind, it turns up in form of a
horn; On his sholders he carries Ermin skinns to the middle, which is still a
badg of the Consulls habit; On his feet he wears embroderd Sandalls tied with
gold buttons, and about his middle a most rich Belt embroderd with costly
jewels; In so much that the habit of the Duke, when at festivalls he shows
himself in the highest state, is valued at above 100000. crowns: He has a
place elevated like a Throne in the Senate. Besides public, he has peculiar
Officers and Ministers of his own, dignified with sundry titles, who have their
salary from the Republic: He has a Chancellor, a Knight Major, who is by
particular appellation called the Dukes Knight; He has diverse Chaplains and
Churchmen to attend him, commonly called Donzelli, who wayt on him when he goes
abroad; All Magistrates and Citizens whatsoever speak to him standing, and
bareheaded, but he does not rise up to any; All public Letters go forth in his
name being sealed with lead, a particular privilege which Pope Alexander the
third gave him, for the high favors that Venice did the said Pope when he was
forcd to fly thither for Sanctuary against the rage of the Emperor Frederic
Barbarossa; All Decrees, Laws, and public instruments are promulgd in his
name; All coins, as well gold as sylver, bear his stamp; All Letters from
foreign Princes are addressd to him, and answers returned under his hand, and
whether he be present or no yet all Speeches are directed to him, being stild
always by Ambassadors and others, Serenissimo Principe, Most gracious Prince,
in the concret, and Serenita, in the abstract.

The office of the Duke was of larger extent at first, but now the principal
duties of it are, That he preside in all Counsels, as well the great Council,
as other Colleges of Senators; That he have care that every Magistrate acquit
himself of his duty; That every Wensday he visit all the Courts, and put every
one in remembrance of his office, that private causes be not neglected, or
public delayed: He is not capable of any other inferior office; if he find that
any one neglects his duty, he is to convent him before the whole College, and
give him sharp reprehensions, but he never uses to do so in private, and if the
offense require it he transmitts him over to the Judges; He is often to grace
with his presence the Courts of Justice, where he has a suffrage; but He can
pass no public Instrument, nor dispatch any business of himself without the
adjunction of other Senators; nor can he leave the City, or marry any
forrener without the knowledge and consent of the Senate; Insomuch that we read
of Duke Falerio that was putt to death for marrying a Stranger without the
suffrage of the Senate: In fine, this high political Magistrate has only the
presence of a Soverain Prince, but nothing of the power.

In the old records of Venice the reasons are yet extant which inducd the
Republic to elect this formal Prince for her Head, whereof these are the
remarkablest, We have observd that in this vast Universitie of the World bodies
according to their several natures have multiplicity of motions, yet they
receave virtue and vigor but from one, which is the Sun; All causes derive their
originalls from one supreme cause; We see that in one Creture there are many
differing members, and faculties who have various functions, yet they are all
guided by one soul, etc.

The Duke for his Salary has 100. Zecchins (which coin wants above twelvepence
of ten shillings English) brought him every Wensday to his Palace.

Among all these restraints which keep him from trenching upon the Common
Liberty, and doing injustice, there is another, and that a shrewd one; which is
that Lex repetundarum may be executed upon his Heir after his death, for there
is a Iunta appointed to make a scrutiny of the actions of the deceased Duke,
and if any can prove he was wronged by him, he shall have reparation out of the
Heirs estate.

Of the Venetian Senate.
THe Senate consists of 120. grave men, whereof there are threescore called
Ordinary Senators, and threescore of the Junta; they are called all together the
Pregadi, because being taken for wise men they are prayed to be assisting the
Commonwealth with their Counsels.

The sixty ordinary are created yearly by the suffrages of the great Council
in the months of August and September, observing this order, that at every
meeting six be chosen of the said Senators, until the whole number be
completed.

The other sixty Senators of the Junta are ascribd unto these other sixty; but
there is one caution observd, that there may be but two of a kindred chosen among
these sixty; but the other allow three of a kindred.

To these 120. Senators are adjoind the Duke and Decemvirs, with other Orders,
the 40. Judges of Capital Causes, the Provosts of Salt and Corn, the Sages of
health, the Prefect of the Arsenal, and Proctors of Saint Mark, with other
Magistrates; and these in effect have the management of the whole Republic: They
treat of peace and war, their power extends to lay taxes, to make
extraordinary levies and erogations of moneys: They make choice of Ambassadors
to be employed to foreign Princes; they have power also to summon the Sages of
Land and Sea, with all the chief Magistrates.

Of the Decemvirs and their College.
THe College of Decemvirs is composd of 17. Senators, ten of these are chosen
by the great Council, and are in Ordinary, having this privilege, that he who
is in that Magistracy may not procure in two years that any mention be made of
him in other meetings and conventions.

Of these evry month three Senators are chosen to be of the quorum, these are
the chief of the College, and are commonly called Capi di dieci, the Heads of
ten, and have power to summon the Decemvirall College, and referr matters unto
it; They have a private Conclave where they daily meet, having O^icers of
sundry sorts to attend them. They read the Letters addressd to the Decemvirat
College, and make relation unto them of the substance thereof, and there must be
two of them which must do it.

To these Decemvirs is adjoind the Duke in chief and six Counselors, whose
peculiar privilege is to be chosen out of the six Precincts or Sextaries of the
City, this order observd, that three be chosen this side of the Rialto, and
three on the other; They are to be assistant to the Duke eight months, with Him
they are to take care of all things that concern the Welfare of the Republic
and City; It is sufficient that four of them subscribe all public Orders.
Touching matters of moment they are to make relation to the great Council.

The Prince therefore, with the Decemvirs and six said Counselors do constitut
the Decemvirat College, which is the supremest authority, and has a kind of
Dictatorian power. They are to take care that no discord or any public
quarrels happen which may disturb the peace of the City, and draw after them
any insurrection. They are to have an eye that no factious or fantastic
Citizen introduce any dangerous innovation.

That no counterfeit coin be stamped or brought in.

That Sodomy, and all other flagitious crimes be enquird after, which they have
inappealable power to punish.

Of the College of Sages or Preconsultors.
THis College consists of 16. Senators which are of the chiefest Citizens, and
they are called Savii, or Sages, because they are presumd to antecell others
both in dignity and experience: These use to preconsult of general matters
tending to the administration of the Commonwealth, as also of peace and war,
with other the most important affairs, and make relation thereof to the Senate.

This College is divided to three Orders; the first contains 6. Senators,
which are called Savii grandi, the great Sages, who consult of all things
touching the honor of the Republic in general, specially of Sea matters, and
other requisitts reflecting upon peace or war, and make reports of their
Consultations to the Senate.

The second Order consists of 5. Citizens or Gentlemen of Venice, commonly
called Savii de terra firma, the Sages of the Continent, who allthough they have
the like authority to make report of matters to the Senate, yet are they much
inferior to the former in dignity and trust: Their chiefest duty is to have
care of the Militia by Land, and of salaries of such soldiers that are
entertaind by the Republic, whether Forreners or Natives.

The third degree consists of 5. Citizens or Gentlemen of Venice, who are
commonly young men, and primae l^nuginis, of the first shaving of the razor as
they say, but learned, and well versd in the Sciences, which are inferior to
the other two, and make report of all Sea businesses to the Senate; and these
are called Savii de gli ordini, and they are culld out of the choicest Wits to
be made capable for future employments.

To this College of Sages or Preconsultors are adjoind the Prince, the six
Counselors, the Triumvirs of the forty who preside over Criminal Causes* So
that the whole College may be said to consist of 26. Senators or Citizens of
the Patrician Order.

The manner of the convention of this College is thus, the Prince sitts in the
middle mounted upon a high Seat, and about him those Counselors who were
chosen out of the six Precincts of the City, three on the right, and three on
the left hand, and after that rule the other Preconsultors sit: But the young
men of the third degree use to sit lower.

Their office is, that evry Sunday and Festival day they meet in the Ducall
Palace to hear private complaints at such an hour, and to releeve them
presently, or else to referr them to Delegats, or make a report to the Senate,
according to the merit of the cause.

They hear all Letters read by the Secretary of State that were sent to the
Senate.

They are also to hear foreign Ambassadors and Agents. It is to be observd that
these Preconsultors continue in authority but 6. months.

Foreign Agents affairs, and private complaints being heard, they retire to
another room to consult of public business, observing this Order:

There is a President chosen evry week, who proposes to the rest what is to be
agitated, and he asks their opinion severally: The eldest delivers his
opinion, and so evry one according to seniority, but the young are silent
unless it be about some naval business; The last of all having collected the
opinion of the rest, delivers his suffrage; The matter being thus canvasd and
discussd pro and con with much deliberation, they make an address to the
Prince and Counselors, who join again in the debate; That opinion to which the
Prince and the Counselors shall adhere unto is couchd in writing; Then the
whole Senate convenes, before whom that which was debated by the Preconsultors
is first handled, with their opinions; and if more then one half of the Senate
give their suffrage thereunto, passes for a Decree.

Of the public Scribes, and of the great Chancellor.
IN evry College of Senators there be public Scribes which are of the Senats
Council, and are held to be of the best rank of men* and of highest integrity;
they are elected by the public suffrage of the Decemvirs, and sit always in
the Council, their duty is,

To be ever present at the consultations of the College and Senate, in passing
all Decrees.

The registring of all transactions, and the engrossing of all instruments
whether for public or private respect is committed to their care and trust, to
which purpose they have large Salaries allowd them.

Some of these are Ministers only to the Decemvirs, to register all their Acts,
being privy to all things that are transacted in that College; in which honor
they remain during life.

Of these one is chosen by the solemn suffrage of the great Council, who is
chiefest of all, and is called by the title of il Gran Cancellier, which Officer
is held in singular esteem and honor; He is dignified with the Order of
Knighthood; evry Patrician and Senator gives him the place, except the Proctors
of Saint Mark; no secrecy of State must he conceald from him; He has a great
revenu out of the public stock; And at his Exequies there is always a funeral
Oration, which honor is don to no other but to the Prince.

Of the Great Council.
THe great Council consists of an universal meeting of all the Citizens, and
the whole Republic may be said to depend upon it; but it is composd of such
Citizens that are of the Patrician Order only, whereof some being passd twenty
years of age are admitted to sit in Council by extraordinary favor, provided
that the Advocat Magistrate give testimony that they are descended of a Noble or
Patrician family:, Besides, there must attestation be made that they are
legitimat and no bastards, three must be proof also made by oath that they are
passd twenty years of age, but they are chosen by lotts: and though
peradventure fortune favor them not then, yet after they are passd 25. they
are capable by birth of this public honor, and to sit in Council, with the
provisos pointed at before.

The office of the Great Council is to ordain and ratify all Laws and
Constitutions appertaining to the Republic; they also make choice of all
Magistrates, as well in Towns as Countries, and of any other Officer to whom
any public trust or civil incumbency is committed.

Of Officers or Magistrates in general.
ALL Magistrates are either Urban or Foreign, viz. of Town or Country; to them
of the Towns belongs the cognizance of all causes as well criminal as civil;
to them belongs the administration and erogation of all public sommes that
arise into the Tresury either out of public tolls and imposts, or other
extraordinary taxes and leavies of moneys; To them it belongs to consult what
may be added to the welfare, honor or beauty of the City.

Foreign Magistrates, as they call them, are those that obey and put in execution
all the Decrees of the Senate in the Countries up and down, as also all comands
by Sea in Fleets and Armies: All these Magistrates are but temporary, and have a
time limited them; the Urbane or City Magistrates some of them continue in
office 6. months, others 8. months, others are annual; But the Foreign or
Country Officers are commonly twice so long in an office; but the Maritime
Officers some are bienniall, some trienniall, and some quinquenniall of 5. years
continuance.

Of Judges.
AMong the Urbane or City Magistrates the Judges are rankd, and they have the
cognizance of all capital or civil causes, and they are called either Judges
of the first Instance, or, Judges of appeal: The Judges primae instantiae are
divided into many Tribunalls.

On the first Tribunal sit the Iudices proprietatum, Judges of Proprieties,
who determine all suits touching Lands or Houses within the precincts of the
City, to them also belongs all Widows cases.

On the second Tribunal sit the Iudices procuratorum; These if any
controversy arise touching Lands on the Continent, or Minors and Pupills right,
have power to determine it.

On the third Tribunal sit the Iudices Mercatorum, the Judges or Consulls of
Merchants, who determine all controversies belonging to trafic and
marchandizing, who must be formerly well versd in the practical part and
mystery of comerce.

On the fourth Tribunal sit the Iudices Advenarum, the Judges of Strangers,
before whom all matters and differences touching forreners are brought and
decided.

On the fifth Tribunal sit the Iudices Petitionum, Judges of Petitions, who
determine all controversies touching private bargains, stipulations, and
contracts.

On the sixth Tribunal sit Iudices Mobilium, the Judges of Movables, before
whom causes of lesser importance are pleaded.

On the seventh Tribunal sit the Judges whom in the vulgar language they call
Cattaveri, which is a much as to say, Inquisition of truth: These if any thing
be found hid or lost, and if any controversy arise about it, have power to
determine it.

On the eighth Tribunal sit Iudices publici, commonly called Piovegi, who if
any man raise a building that may impede the common passage, or the channells
of the City, are to prevent it, and punish the Offender.

On the ninth Tribunal sit certain Judges called Sopragastaldi; These sell the
goods of condemnd persons under a Spear, and decide all matters belonging to
the Lombards, as pawnings and lendings.

On the tenth Tribunal sit Iudices Examinatores, the Judges Examiners, who
determine all causes touching depositions and oaths.

On the eleventh Tribunal sit Iudices praefectorum noctis, the Provosts of
the night, that hear all brabbles or misdemenures committed in the night, and
punish them: To them also it belongs to adjudg all controversies twixt men and
maid servants, etc.

The highest Council for criminal causes, except the Decemvirat, is a
Council called the Council of forty, for so many meet there upon life and
death, and they are very choice men.

In the City of Venice there are also Officers who are Supervisers of all
Manufactures, and other things of moment: The first are Signori di panni d'oro,
the Superintendents of cloth of gold; these do warily look that no fraud be
usd in any cloths of tissue, or other cloths of gold, sylver or silk, and
severely punish the transgressors herin.

There are other Officers called Proveditori della Zeccha, their charge is to
look to all sorts of bullions and coins, that they be not embasd and
adulterated, and that the par of the Standard be kept even.

There be other Officers called Signori alla farina, who are to look to all sorts
of grain that they be well conditiond; they are also to look to the corn that
is stord up in the public Magazins, that if any grow musty, they are to putt
good into the place.

There be other Officers called Signori al Sale, and this is a great office, for
all the Salt which is brought into the City out of Salt pitts round about is
to be brought to them, who store it up in Magazins, and no private man can sell
Salt unless he buys it of these Magistrates, who are strictly accountable to
the Senate; these Salt Officers have power to decide all controversies that may
arise touching this commodity.

There be other Officers called Signori delle biaui, whose care is that the
City be always provided with a sufficient proportion of wheat, and other
grain.

There is no City that is more careful of her health than Venice, therefore
there be Officers, and they are qualified persons, whose charge is to have a
special care that the Plague creep not into the City, and if any infection
com, they are to suppress it with their utmost endeavors; they are to see
that the Pesthouse be at least three miles distant from the City; if any has
conversd with an infected body he must for 40. days to the Pesthouse before he
can return to his own dwelling.

There is no Shipp whatsoever that comes thither from another Country can have
pratique or be permitted to com ashoare and sell his mar, chandise unless he
produce a Certificat that he comes from a place not infected, otherwise he is
to stay aboard 40. days.

There are other Officers called Proveditori di comun, and they are three; they
supervise the minor fraternities, among others they look to Printers and
Stationers, and set prizes upon all new Books; They have the Superintendency
of Bridges, Wells, Conduits, Ways, Cawses and such public things which they
must see repaird; They are also to see that Ships be not over laden, and they
have power to punish such who transgress herin.

There are other Officers called Proveditori all' Arsenale, Provisors of the
Arsenal; they have care to furnish that huge Magazin of strength (one of the
greatest on Earth, as shall be declard herafter) with all things that shall be
necessary, as Carpenters, Smiths and all other Opificers, but to have special
care that they be choice able Artists, and of the most ingenuous sort, unto
whom they pay their wages evry eighth day.

There be other Officers of great trust called Signori all' acque; these are to
have special care that no man whatsoever do any thing that may impair the
Banks, Dikes and Stronds about the City, that no Carrion be thrown into the
Channells running through the Streets of the City, that no place be choakd up
with Sands to stopp Navigation; These Officers have power to punish severely
all such that transgress in this kind, and they may be said to be
Conservators of the Walls of the City which are the Waters; These Officers
are also to appoint the Stations where Ships shall ride at anchor; and
lastly, that the Channels be cleansed once a year.

There are other Officers called Signori sopra il ben vivere, which are no other
than Censors, but because that word is too rigid for such a free City they
modifie it by another title: These are to take care that the Laws and Customs
of the City be observd, and if any one offend they have power to punish by
pecuniary fines, they take cognizance of the wages of Servants, and punish such
that have embezeld any things from their Masters.

There are other Officers called Syndicks, who supervise the acts of public
Notaries that serve the City and the Magistrates thereof, taking care that they
exact no unlawful reward, and they have power so set rates upon all
commodities.

There be other Officers called Sopra Consoli; they take cognizance of Merchants
and Creditors affairs, and compose differences between them; they preserve the
Debtor from Prison, and allow him two months time to pay his Creditor, and in
the interim he has liberty to go abroad to negotiat and compound with his
Creditors; but if the Creditors be so refractory and perverse that they will
not hearken to any composition, they may by authority compel them thereunto:
These Officers have power to sell the goods of Bankrupts and Fugitives under
the Spear, as they call it; They have power also to keep moneys depositated.

There be other Officers called Signori alla mercantia; these have power to
appoint wages for Mechaniques, and to end all controversies twixt Man and
Master; they supervise the prises of all marchandises, and moderat them; they
take care that no Mechanic use any fraud in his work, and if it be found they
punish him severely.

There are other Officers called Signori della*grassa; they supervise all Sellers
of Cheese, Butter, Oil, Salt flesh, as Bacon and Lard, and set moderat prizes
upon them, which if not obeyed they have power to punish by pecuniary amercement.

There be other Officers called Ragion vecchia; their charge is to register in
Books the expenses made upon the coming of any Prince or Ambassador into the
City by decree of the Senate, and to take care that while a foreign Prince be
in the City he be honorably entreated, and not overreachd in the prizes of
things.

There be other Officers called Giustitia vecchia; their charge is to supervise
all weights and mesures, and that whatsoever is sold or bought be according to
the Standard; they have power to impose rates upon all sorts of fruits and
roots, and punish such that obey them not; they preside also over Shoppkeepers
and Mechaniques, that none take down an old sign and set up a new without their
leave: If any hire a Boy or Servant, he must make his address to these
Officers and acquaint them with the conditions, otherwise there is no bargain in
that kind of any validity, nor is either party bound to stand to it.

There be other Officers called Giustitia nuova, these Officers supervise
Taverns, and taphouses of all sorts, with all victualing houses and hostries,
they overlook that they pay all duties, they take care that no musty or ill
conditiond wine be sold, they have power to punish and decide controversies.

There be other Officers called Signori sopra le pomp, and they are a
triumvirat; they supervise that no extraordinary exces or luxury be usd in
food, in apparel or housholdstuffe, and in other things which appertain to
food and raiment; they have power to restrain all immoderat expenses, lest the
wealth of the Citizens be exhausted by too much profusenes and riot, having
authority to punish the Transgressors of their Orders by pecuniary mulcts, and
to determine themselfs* all controversies in that kind; and these Officers are
of high respect and authority.

Of the Procurators of Saint Mark.
THese high Officers, and they are the highest of all next the Prince, enjoy
perpetually during life the privileges and dignity of Senators, and have right
of suffrage in evry Council; Their authority is coetaneous with the Duke
himself and expires not till death, the office of the Great Chancellor has the
like prerogative; And those Citizens soly are delegated to this Magistracy,
who having passd all other offices of honor, are reputed to be men of most
eminent and singular probity, and ability, so that they become the principal
pillars of the Republic ever after; All degrees of peeple do show them a
special reverence, and whersoever they chance to com they have priority of
place given them; They have the tutele of Pupills and Orphans when there is no
Guardian nominated in the Will of the Testator; They are divided into three
classes which they term Procuratorias, and in evry one there are three which
preside.

The Procurators of the first classis are the chiefest and of most ample
authority and trust; They supervise the Temple of Saint Mark, and together with
the Duke they have the government thereof; They have the administration of all
the revenues that appertain to that Church, which are very great; and once evry
month they assemble, after their solemn devotions, to receave the rents thereof,
and they are careful to provide all things that are necessary to continue the
splendour of that Sanctuary, and keep it in repair.

The Procurators of the second classis, who obtain their name from the first
(allthough they be not civil incumbents of the Church) are Administrators of
the old procuracie as they call it, and to their charge is committed the care
of all the Pupills on this side the Rialto, which is about half the City.

The Procurators of the third classis are also called by the same title
Procurators of Saint Mark, these preside in the new procuracie as they term it,
and to their office belongs to have care of all the Pupills the other side of
the Rialto: Evry one of these three classes have in his charge to provide for
the poor and indigent, and having mighty proportions of money with other wealth
committed unto their trust, they raise great sommes to that use, as also for
the relief and enlargement of Prisoners, and for the redemption of Captives,
whereof there are multitudes that live in miserable servitud among the Turks.

Of Extern Officers and Magistrates which are employed abroad out of the City
of Venice.
IN the greatest Cities which are under the Dominion of the Republic, there are
commonly sower Magistrates, a Praetor or Podesta, a Prefect, a Questor, and the
Governor of the Castle, whereof in some places there are two or three; In the
lesser Towns there is commonly but one Magistrate who is the Praetor or Podesta.

The Praetor administers the Law to all the Inhabitants of the place whereof he
is Magistrate, and determines all suits, and punishes Delinquents; He has the
most knowing Civil Lawyers for his Assessors, provided they be not born in the
place but some where else under the Signorie to avoid partiality toward Kindred.

The Prefect or Captain has the care of the Militia, and governs the Soldiery
that are within that Precinct, he decides all suits between them, and punishes
Offenders; He has the care of the Castle or Forts, of the Walls and Ramparts,
together with the Gates of the City, and of all the Tributs, Gabells and
Demeanes which belong to the Republic both in Town and the circumjacent
Country: but there is an appeal permitted from Praetor and Prefect to the Senate
in some cases, according to clauses of reservation.

The Questor is but one, or two at most; these have the administration of
public receipts and erogations of money, who have power to exact it, and employ
it, and they keep the Books of public accounts, yet they seldom do any thing
without the command of the Prefect, and sometimes without the concurrence and
order of Praetor and Prefect they cannot expend any sum; In the Islands they
have the title of Counselors, and they are assistant to the Prefect in matters
of Law, but they have no suffrage at all.

The Governors of Castles are sometimes one, sometimes many; these have the
authority over the Soldiers, and care of the Arms and Ammunition, and all
things conducing thereunto; yet there is none chosen to be Governor of any Castle
but is subject to the Prefect or Podesta, having no jurisdiction of himself:
But in the lesser Towns the Praetor executs the office both of Prefect and
Questor, and administers the Law to the Inhabitants; He chastises Offenders,
and has the management of the public receipts, but matters are appealable from
him to the Senate, and most commonly to the Council of forty.

Of Extern Magistrates in Fleets and Armies.
THese Magistrates are of two kinds; the General in war upon the Continent is
commonly some foreign Prince; He is not chosen either of the Senatorian or
Patrician order; he has an ample Salarie, viz. ten Captains pay, and 4000.
crowns a year; there goes along with him two Legates or Proveditors, who are
Gentlemen of Venice, and of the Senatorian order; and without the concurrence
of their advice he neither acts nor decrees any thing, nor can he attempt any
thing himself without their intervention: These Proveditors are perpetually
Assistants to the General, they pay the Soldiers Salaries, and their main care
is that nothing be don rashly to the detriment or dishonor of the Republic. In
Sea service every Gallie has a Prefect or Captain who comands both men and
Vessel, he may inflict punishments but he has no power of life and death; he
has absolut command ore the Mariners and Rowers, and of all things within the
Gallie. There are also Officers called Presidents of Galleys, and they command
four or five Galleys. In time of peace there are commonly four of them, their
charge is that the Sea be kept secure for Merchants and Navigators; that they
suppress Pirates, and scowre the Gulf of Corsaries.

There is another Officer or Admiral called Classis Legatus, and he has command
ore the whole Fleet, and over the Prefects or Captains of evry Gallie. There is
seldom any General of a Fleet but in time of war, and then he has absolut
command ore the whole Fleet, and a kind of Dictatorian power in all the maritime
Provinces, yet has he no implicit Commission, but before he attempt any thing
considerable he must receave directions and commands from the Senate.

Of other Extern Magistrates which use to be created upon extraordinary
occasions.
THese are called Syndiques, who are created evry five years, and use to be
employed abroad both in the Continent and maritime Provinces which are subject
to the Republic: They take knowledge, and make Scrutinies into the carriage and
actions of all Pretors or Podesta's, and other Magistrates who are employed
abroad upon the Service of the Signorie; If they find any to have exceeded
their Commissions, and perpetrated any thing against the Laws, they give
information accordingly, which is unquestionable, and taken for certain truth.

There is an Officer who in time of exigence is appointed Proveditor general of
Candy, and he is chosen by the suffrages of the Senate; He during the time
comands the whole Island in a supreme way of authority, and has a kind of
Dictatorian power for the time: If he comes to any Town or Castle they
presently bring him the Keys; He administers the Law himself, if he please, and
disposes of all public levies of moneys; he superintends all kind of
Magistrates and Officers both by Land and Sea, and is subject to no controulment
but what comes from the Senate.

There is another great Officer called Proveditor General of the Continent, and
he also uses to be created upon extraordinary ocasions; He comands all the
firm Land in the highest way of authority; He has a transcendent power over
all Prefects or Captains, and all other Magistrates and Officers that are under
the Empire of the Republic, yet there is nothing of moment can occurr, or be
putt in execution, but he must receave directions and command from the Senate.

There are other Officers called the Proconsulls of Syria and Egypt, who are
created by the suffrage of the Senate, and they are trienniall Magistrates; They
have their residence either in Aleppo in Syria, or in the Gran Cayro in Egypt,
where they live in a decent and splendid equipage; All differences twixt any
Merchants that acknowledge obedience to the Signorie of Venice are brought
before them, and they have power to determine the controversy; These
Proconsulls do also good offices to all other Christians, whether Italians or
any other Nation, that resort thither either for curiosity or comerce, and they
are respected as if they were in quality of Ambassadors, or Soverain Agents.

The Republic of Venice employeth diverse Ambassadors abroad, and no State more,
and they are either Ordinary or Extraordinary; The Commission of the Ordinary
Ambassadors continues for three years; These are employed to the Pope, the
Emperor, the Kings of France, Spain, and England, to the Duke of Savoy, the
States of Holland, and they have commonly always one residing in all these
Courts in a magnificent manner; They have also an Ambassador in Constantinople
attending the motions of the great Turk, called the Bailio, residing there
perpetually, and the Republic allows him a greater Salarie than to any other;
nor indeed has he any set Salarie, but whatsoever he spends is allowd him
upon his own accounts without examination; all these are elected by the
suffrage of the Senate.

The Republic employs also abroad Ambassadors Extraordinary very often, who
have a greater latitud of power, and are soly for matter of State, or some
particular negotiation: The ordinary scope of their Legations is either to
congratulate or condole with Soverain Princes when occasion is offered. All
these Ambassadors have Secretaries whom the Senate takes notice of, and the
Republic allows them a Salarie, and they are persons of good extraction and
breeding; this is don because they may afterward be in a capacity, for their
knowledge and experience, to be Ministers of State themselfs: But touching
Ambassadors Extraordinary there are never any employed unless they have bin
Ambassadors formerly. And touching this kind of employment the Republic has
certain degrees, or Scalary ascents and rules of removal, which are never
transgressd. These kind of political and public Ministers are strictly examind
by a Junta expressly for the same end at their return touching their
comportment in the Legation, They are to discover what Presents they receavd
from the Prince or State to whom they were sent, and it is of dangerous
consequence for them to conceal any thing.

These are the Magistrates and Officers whereon the Republic of Venice has stood
firm, as upon so many pillars, so many centuries: Now, there are few or none who
are greater Patriotts than the Venetian Gentlemen, their prime study is the
public good and glory of their Country, and civil prudence is their principal
trade whereunto they arrive in a high mesure; Yet as it may be easily observd,
though these Gentlemen are extraordinary wise when they are conjunct, take them
single they are but as other Men.

Of the Dominions and Territories that belong to Venice, whereof She has
absolut and Soverain Command.
THis Maiden City has large fardingalls, and long sleeves which reach far
by Land, and they stretch by Sea farther than many Kingdoms: Upon the Continent
of Italy She does Signorize over three entire Provinces; The Mark of Treviso
(as they called it,) Friuli, and Istria; She has also a good part of
Lombardie, viz. the Territories of Brescia, of Bergamo, and Verona, then She
has Crema: Eastward She confines partly upon the Archdukes of Austria, partly
upon the Adriatic Sea: Northward She confines also upon the Austrian
territories, upon Trent, and Swisserland: Westward She has the Duchy of Milan
for her neighbor; the same Duchy is her contiguous neighbor Southward also,
together with the Duchy of Mantoua, and the Ecclesiastic Dominions.

The Mark of Treviso is a very plentiful and generous Country, full of
opulent Towns, and splendid Cities; the Natives are esteemed very dextrous
and apt to make Statesmen of, being a peeple much given to contemplation and
gaining of knowledge; they are also active when necessity requires in the
management of arms; the Country abounds with corn, wine, and all sorts of
fruit, and they have many pleasant spacious fields; there are hott and wholesome
fountains there, diverse sorts of mineralls, many noble rivers and lakes; the
air is temperat, healthy and delightful; in fine, She is endowed by benign
Nature with so many gifts, that She may well take place among the Noblest
Regions of Italy.

The Country of Friuli (in old times forum Iulii) is terminated Eastward by
the River Formio, Northward by the Julian Alps, and Westward also by other
parts of the Alps, where the river Liquentia separats her from the Mark of
Treviso; and Southward runns the Adriatic Sea: She is a region that has
pleasant fields, well waterd with rivers and fountains, there are great store of
vineyards, woods, mineralls, and quarries of stone: The noble river Hydra runns
there, nere which there is quicksylver diggd up; the Inhabitants are ingenious
enough for all humane Arts, and marchandizing; Friuli is commonly among the
Venetians called La Patria, whence some infer that they had their Original
thence.

Istria has for her Bounds Westward the river Timavas; Northward the Alps,
which separat Hungary and Carniola from Italy; Eastward She has the river
Arsias, the rest is compassd with the Adriatic Sea; She is a rough uneven
Country, yet She may be said to swell with hillocks rather than high hills;
but She has one which surpasses all the rest called Montemajor: She has woods
fit for Ships and all other uses; She has also good store of stone
quarreis, whence there is much marble diggd out for the service of Venice her
Mistress, and other places of Italy; The Inhabitants are poorer than in other
Countries, yet they have diverse Cities, Towns and Villages.

The Country of Brescia is of large extent, near upon one hundred miles, and
fifty miles broad; In this tract of Land there rise up mountains, hillocks,
plains and valleys inlayed with Towns, Villages, and pleasant Houses very
thick in most places; So that there is little of the earth left idle. In this
territory there are so many Castles, Towns and Villages, that they can hardly
be found thicker any where: The Soil abounds with wheat, millet and other
grains; there is plenty of wine and oil, with other fruits; Moreover, there is
great quantity of iron and copper diggd up and down in the mines, whereof the
Inhabitants make very great benefitt.

The Country of Bergamo is fertile enough except toward the North, where it
is mountanous, rough and barren: Yet there are valleys in great nombers, whereof
some produce wine and oil very pleasant, but some of them are steril and good for
nothing, only some iron mines are found here and there; In Bergamo is spoken one
of the coorsest dialects of all the Italian tongue.

Verona and her Territories are next; She is seated on a very pleasant and
comodious river the Athesis; She is cape City of the second rank through all
Italy; Some hold her name to be originally Brenona of Brennus the Britain, who
was General of an Army of Gauls for his extraordinary valor; In this name of
Verona is comprehended the three most renowned Cities of Italy, viz.
Ve-Venice, Ro-Rome, and Na-Naples; her territories are 65. miles in length, and
40. in breadth: This City has yet the ruins of one of the fairest
Amphitheaters that ever was, and Catullus the Poet makes her somewhat more
famous because he was born in her: The Country circumjacent abounds with
wheat, wine, oiles, sheep, and very good fleeces, with abundance of the
choicest and most delicat fruits; it has excellent quarreis of stone, with
rivers, lakes and pools, and rare fountains and sources of fresh waters, with
most choice medicinal Simples upon the mountain Baldus where all Physicians
resort.

Crema bordering upon Milan with her territory has an excellent soil,
fruitful and well cultivated, and extraordinarily well wooded; She has very
generous wines, and exquisit sorts of fruit; many brooks of clear water which
are well stord with fish, and abundance of Lampreys; They have one kind of fish
whom the Inhabitants call Marsoni, whose head is near twice as bigg as the
body, but of a most savoury taste. Crema was a long time under the Vicountship
of Milan until the year 1405. at which time, together with Brixia, it came
under the Dominion of the Signorie by conditions of peace twixt Francis Sforza
and them, since when She is mightily improvd in wealth and civilitie; Johannes
Cremensis was a Natif of this, he was employed Anno 1125. by Pope Honorius the
second in quality of Legate to England to dissuade the Clergy from marriage,
whereupon a Convocation was called, wherein the Legate made a very eloquent Speech
in comendation of Celibat, and how advantageous it was for Churchmen to live
single and sequestered from the cares of the world, and encombrances of humane
affairs.

Padua, a most reverend learned old City in Latin called Patavium; Antenor the
Trojan is recorded to be her Founder, whose Tomb is there still extant; She was
erected an Academy Anno 1222. Her fame spreads all the earth over for a
Seminary of the best Physicians, having a Garden of Simples accordingly; She is
famous for the birth of Livie the great Roman Annalist (whose picture is to be
seen fresh to this day) and of late years for Zabarell and Maginus; In former
times She was much cried up for the mansuetude of the men, and the pudicity of
her women; so that the Patavian chastity grew to be a proverb, whereunto alludes
the Roman Epigrammatist speaking of her in his wanton Poems,

Tu quoque nequitias nostri lususque libelli
Uda puella leges sis Patavina licet.
Pad^a was in times passd girt about with a treble wall, but a double contents
her now, which has very deep Ditches round about, for the River Brent with
infinite expense and labor was brought to this City, which has much
advantaged her both for strength and navigation: She is situated in a most
delightful and uberous plain, enjoying a sweet temperat clime, with a singular
good soil by reason of the neighborhood of the Euganean mountains which are
Westward of Her; The Inhabitants have high wits, and apt for pike or pen; The
circumference of the City is twofold, inward and outward, the first has but
three miles compass, the second near upon seven miles; about the City the
walks may be called a perpetual kind of gallerie; Her Temples and dwelling
Houses both public and private are more magnificent than elsewhere; She has six
stately Gates, five large Markett places; She has within the Walls 22. great
Churches, 23. Monasteries, and 29. Religious Houses for Nuns; She has the
most renowned Hall for public Justice of any Town in Italy, coverd all with
lead, and yet propd upon no pillars; the Council Court has Gates and Columns
of Marble; She has 28. Bridges archd over the Brent which runns through her;
She has very spacious Piazzas; She has 6. Hospitalls, three for the poor, and
three for Pilgrims; She has a place called the Monte de pieta, which was set up
of purpose to root out the lucre and exorbitant feneration of the Jews, who
were usd to demand twenty in the hundred for brocage; She has two Hospitalls
besides for Orphans, and other poor Children: There are 38000. Crowns
depositated in the hands of several persons of quality, where the poorer sort
may make their address with their pawns, and if it be under thirty shillings
they pay no use for the money, if it be above they pay five in the hundred for
maintaining certain Officers, and releeving of the poor; The Bishopric of
Padua is rankd among the best of Italy; The Citizens are great Artists now as
in former times, and make much merchandise of Wool: But to give a short
description of Padua and her territories, this of Leander is the best;
Southward of her runns the river Athesis; Northward the Peuso, a little river;
Eastward the Venetian lakes, and Westward the Enganean hills, and the Country
of Vicenza, all this circuit about 180. miles, wherein there are in number 647.
Villages and Hamletts, with a world of Country Houses whither the Italian
Gentlemen and Citizens use to retire with their families in the Summer time.
The City of Padua remaind under the Roman Empire until She was taken and
burnt by Attila; then was She repaird by Narsetes, and afterward She was burnt
by the Longobards, but under Charles the Great and other Kings of Italy She
did not only revive, but flourish again; Under Otho, as the rest of the Cities
of Italy, She began to govern by her own Laws, and She remaind in form of a
Republic till Frederic the second, then by the persuasion of Actiolinus She
yielded her self again to the protection of the Empire, and receavd a German
garrison with Actiolinus yoke, Anno 1237. He presently turned lawful power into
tyranny, therefore they shook him of: A little after Marsilius Carrariensis
under the name of Governor drew the Town unto him, but the Scaligers thrust him
out, who ruld there some Successions, yet afterward Marsilius re-enjoyed it and
left Ubertinus heir, who was thrust out by Mactinus Scaliger, but was restord
again; Then Marsilius the second succeeded, who was slain four days after by
Iacobinus his Oncle, and that Iacobinus was slain afterward of Gulielmus the
Bastard the fourth year of his Principality; Him succeeded Franciscus, who very
fortunately governd, but attempting to free Vicount Barnabas his Son in law he
also was cast into Prison by Johannes Galeacius, but a little after Franciscus
secundus receavd the command of the City from Galeacius, and livd in the
principality 15. years, but with continual apprehensions of fear till the
death of Galeacius, at which time the Scaligers being nefariously assassinated,
he came to be Master also of Verona, and lost it a little after with his life;
His Sons Ubertinus and Marsilius went into the fields of Florence where they
made a Head, and there the noble family of the Carrarienses utterly expird;
then the City remaind under the Venetians Dominion a few years when
Maximilian the Emperor got it, but the Republic recoverd it Anno 1409. which
they have fortified to good purpose, that being since often assalted and
beseigd by the Confederat Princes in that mighty League of Cambray, She was
able to resist them all.

Vicenza is a City excellently built and beutified with fair Structures,
among which the Praetorium is most magnificent; She is situated at the foot of
a Hill, and divided by two navigable rivers Bacchillione and Rerone, which
tumbling down from the neighboring Mountains meets with Bacchillione in the
very City, which Aelianus reports to have the best Yeeles of all Italy: This
City abounds with all things conducing to necessity or pleasure, in regard of
the unusual fertility of the circumjacent soil, which affoords plenty of
grain, wine, and oil, with all manner of fruit; There is such a number of
Mulberry trees both in Town and Country up and down whereon Silkwormes do feed
that it is admirable, but they bear white fruit, therefore the silk is not so
well conditiond as is woven by those worms that feed upon black Mulberry
trees, yet the Inhabitants make mighty benefitt herby: The Vicentins are a
spiritfull peeple, much given to Letters, as also Arms and Marchandizing, and
they are of extraordinary trust; She has an Episcopal See annexed to Her, as
her neighbor Verona; She continued under the Dominion of Rome until Attila's
incursions, and being destroyed by him She came afterward under the yoke of the
Goths, then of the Longobards, and afterward under the Kings of Italy; upon
their banishment She enjoyd her Liberty under the Empire till Frederic the
second, by whom She was ravagd and burnt; In this vicissitude of things She had
diverse Masters, the Carrarienses, the Patavins, the Scaligers of Verona, the
Galeacii of Milan, and the Venetian; Then being infested by the arms of
Maximilian the first, and reducd to his obedience, She yielded her self at last
to the Republic of Venice, under whom She has livd in prosperity and security
ever since: Not far from the City there are two noble Stone-quarreis in the
Mountain Cornolius, vulgarly called Covelo.

Brixia is a City seated at the foot of a Hill among the Cenomans, and was in
times passd the head of that peeple. She has rich Peasans up and down, and
more gentile than ordinary; She was under the Roman Emperors as long as the
Majesty of them continued, which declining, and the Goths comitting such
devastations in Italy, She came under Radagaso, who as he made his way to Rome
did spoil and burn her 412. She was afterward re-edified by Martianus, then
came She under the dition of Alboinus King of the Longobards, and She remaind
under their yoke till Desiderius was taken Prisoner by Charlemain; The Kingdom
of the Longobards expiring, She came under the Dominion of the French, who had
then the Empire, wherefore there are some fields about her to this day called
Francia corta: Under Charlemain Nacmon Duke of Bavaria governd her, by whom She
receavd much instauration and benefitt; After Charlemains death She had diverse
Masters; at last under Oth^ She petitiond to govern her self, promising to be
feudetarie and faithful to the Empire, which granted her; Afterward She livd
free as sundry other Towns in Italy* but She was dismantled and deprivd of
many immunities by the Emperor Henry the fourth, but recovering her self a
little after She gave ocasion to Mactinus Scaliger to invade her in that most
pernicious fewd twixt the Gibelins and Guelphins, under whom She passd* all
kinds of calamities; Scaliger being at last thrust out, Azo Vicount of Milan
occupied her; This Azo had Luchinus for his Successor, and he had John
Archbishop of Milan, whom Barnabas and Galeacius succeeded, who were afterward
thrown into Prison by Galeacius, who assumd to himself the whole Government,
and was created Duke of Milan 1402. who left for his Successor John Maria:
Afterward Pandulphus Malatesta got to himself the dominion of the Town, but
he quickly made a cession of her to Philip Maria Duke of Milan; five years
after when John Maria had kept the Brixians under a hard servitud, nor could
not by any petition make him slacken the reins of his rigid government, the
City being heated with indignation by the persuasions of some Guelphian
Agents, She had recours to Venice, who shelterd her, freed her from that
tyranny, and afterward She florishd a good while under the Dominion of the
Republic, till the year 1509. at which time She made a dedition of her self to
Lewis the 12. of France, who passd her over to the Emperor Maximilian, and he
to Charles his Nephew King of Spain; Then She was tumbled to Francis the first
King of France, till at last She returned under the Venetian 1517. There is a
gentle river runns through the City; She has many Towns and Villages whereof
She is Mistress, but the worst is that the Mountains are too near them, which
causes that they cannot be so fruitful.

Besides these places upon the Continent of Italy, the Republic has Dominions
over all the maritim Coasts of Dalmatia, and the Islands thereunto belonging:
Among others there be two celebrous Cities, Zara and Cathara; Zara is a place
wonderfully well fortified, and has a very convenient Port, but Cathara lies
in the bosom of a nook of the Adriatic Sea toward the East; All the Country
swells up and down with delightful hills and hillocks which are all manurable,
but in regard of the circumambient Mountains is so oreshadowed that they have
not that proportion of light which their Neighbors have.

Of the Islands which the Republic of Venice comands in the Ionian Sea.
THe first is Corcyra, now called Corfu, scarce a mile distant from Albania's
Continent; She is threescore miles long, 24. in breadth, and in compass 120.
She has the shape of a Bow bent toward the East; She is mountanous toward
the South, and flat toward the North; Her soil is craggy and destitut of
water, so that a South wind oftentimes spoils their Harvest, therefore do they
employ the Earth in planting Vineyards and Olives, with other fruit trees, and
what they produce is extraordinarily good in evry kind; In so much that She
abounds with Wine, Wax, Honey, Oil, Pomcitrons and diverse other fruits; On the
North side there is the Castle of Saint Angelo which is notably fortified, so
that it has frustrated the hopes of the Turk in sundry expeditions; Toward
the East there are diverse Creeks and Ports with two Peninsulas, where upon one
of them stands Pagiopolis, the other by a little straight is cut off from the
Great Island: Opposite to these stands Corfu at the foot of a hill, with two
Castles strongly built by rules of Enginry which in a manner hang over her;
whereunto there is another lately built of very great consequence: Upon the right
side of the City there lies a Promontorie where the famous Fountain
Card^cchio is; The Port of this Town is a very safe Harbor, and has shelter
sufficient against the fury of any tempest, let the wind blow which way it
will.

The Captains of these Castles upon pain of death without mercy, are neither to
meet or converse one with another, or send any Letters, Tickets or any
Messages, but the Governor of the Town must be present; and these cautions are
usd because those Castles being as it were the Keys of Venice and the Gulf,
and consequently of infinite consequence and trust, the Senate would prevent all
ocasions that may be imagind to betray them: In this Island of old the Poets do
sing that King Alcinous raignd, whose plentiful Orchards were so memorizd by
them, insomuch that ever since they are grown to be a proverb for their
fertility; this Alcinous preservd Ulysses from Shipwreck, so that the Poets
make often mention of him, one instance shall be,

Quid bifera Alcinoi referam Pomaria? Vosque
Qui nunquam vacui prodistis in aethera rami?
Of Cephalonia.
CEphalonia is of a triangular form, and has in circumference 160. miles; She
has many Stations for Ships, among whom Argostolica is the chiefest, and
capable to hold any Fleet within her Bosom: There is another that lies behind a
Promontory called Guiscardo, where there yet remain many ruins of Castles,
Palaces and other Edifices; and there are daily diggd out of the Earth many old
Coins, with other Monuments of Antiquity. This Island produces a good
proportion of Wheat and Oil, and She is well stord with Sheep; She has also
plenty of Honey, of Manna and Raysins of the Sun, but She wants a sufficient
competency of Water; There is a white Muscadel Grape that grows which perfumes
the breath after it is eaten, and that Wine which is made thereof is accounted
the delicatst sort of Greek Wines, though it make the brain clowdy if one
drinks above two cupps; but by reason of the over delicatnes thereof it cannot
brook the Sea any long time, but it will prick, and lose both taste and color.
This Island may have about 20000. Souls men and women in her; This Island is
computed to have 200. Towns of all sorts, besides those two before mentiond,
Nollo is the chiefest. She was first called Melena, then Telebous, whose King
Prerelaus was killd in battle by Amphytrion a Theban Captain, whereby the I Will
came to be subject to Thebes: During the stay of Amphytrion two accidents
happend in Greece, the first was, that Jupiter got his Wife Alcmena with child
of Hercules; the second was, that Cephalonia a Nobleman of Athens being a
hunting killd his Wife Procris with an Arrow instead of his prey, whereupon he
fledd to Amphytrion, who was newly victorious ore the Teleboans, who resenting
his case made him Governor of this Island, called ever since Cephalonia after his
name.

Of Zucinthus or the I Will of Zant.
ZAnt comes next to be surveyd, which has about 60. miles in circumgyration;
toward the East She is mountanous and rough, but smooth and even toward the
North; She is more subject to Earthquakes than other places; Her wealth
consists in Oil, Wine and Raysins, whereby the Inhabitants subsist; but She
wants Corn because all the Earth is turned to Vineyards; She has a Town which
bears the same name with the Island, with a strong Castle, and about 47.
Villages. The English Nation has much improvd the wealth of this Island since
they traded for Currants thither, whereof the English spend more than all other
peeple; At first the peeple of the I Will seeing the English buy so much Currants,
askd them Whether they usd to dye Clothes, or fatten Hoggs with them, for those
two uses they only make there of them.

Of Crete or Candie.
CRete, now called Candie, is one of the most noble Islands of the Mediterranean
Sea; She has 270. in length, and 50. in latitud; Her situation is so oportune,
that Aristotle affirmed She was so situated that Nature her self intended her to
be Mistress of the Sea; She is but a few days sail, not 100. distant both
from Syria and Egypt, being equally remote from both; from Caramania, Cyprus
and Albania She is 300. miles distant; Her Coasts are fretted out into diverse
Creeks and Promontories, the principal whereof are Capo Spada, and Capo
Salmone, whereof the one looks Westward, the other Eastward, but in the midst
betwixt both Drepano rayseth up himself which is now called Capo Melecca, and
the Promontory Zephyrium which is now called Alcelico; That part of the I Will
which beholds the Sun rising lies high and is not so fruitful. Among the rest
of the Hills wherewith this gentle Island swells up and down, Mount Ida stands.
This Island was called in old time Hecatompolis or Cent oppidum, having 100.
Cities in her, but now She has not three of any moment, and they are toward
the North. The chiefest is Candia (formerly called Candida or Candace) which
has about 100000. Souls; Canea is the second (formerly called Cydona or Gnasos)
which has 7000. Souls in her, and Rhetino which has so many more; Besides
these there is another called Scythia, a Town of 600. fyres; the rest are
Villages and Dorps to the number of 90. wherein by the last cense that was made
there are 200000. Souls or therabouts; But up and down evry where there are
Ruins Marks and Monuments of Antiquity, and of other old Towns; That part
which looks toward the South is infested ever and anon with Northern blasts.
The secundity of the Island consists in pasturage, and Valleys wherein there are
great nombers of Cattle feeding, and on her Plains there is good store of Corn
grows, but not a competent quantity for the whole Island; She abounds with rare
Wines famous all the Earth over; There is great store of Honey had there, which
is carried most commonly to Alexandria; There is no place in the World where there
be such high and goodly Cypresses; She has but small Rivers; This Island
sympathiseth in one quality with Ireland, for She produces no venomous Beast;
She abounds with a luscious Wine called Muskadell, whereof the English Merchants
have brought some years into England above 12000. Butts, together with
Sugar-Candie, Gumms, Honey, Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples, Oranges, Lemmons,
Cittrons, Pomgranatts. It is a little wanton luxurious Island, which it seems
has corrupted the nature of the Inhabitants, insomuch that the old Poet
Epimenides, whose Verse is cited by Saint Paul, gives this ill-favourd
Character of them,

(...) which comes very happily into Latin verbatim,

Cres semper mendax, mala bestia, venture obesus. The Candiotts are allways
liars, ill beasts and slow bellies.

By reason of the situation of the Island, being seated in the midst of the
Mediterranean Sea, the Inhabitants came to be excellent Seamen, so that it grew
to be a proverb, when one would thwart an improbable thing, he would say you
will make me believe as soon that Cretensis nescit pelagus, the Candiot is no
Seaman. Though there be no venomous Cretures in this Island, yet they say Women's
teeth are more poisonous there than elsewhere, for if a woman bite a man any
thing deep he will never recover: Besides they write that in this I Will an herb
grows called Allimos, which if one chaw in his mouth, he shall feel no hunger;
The Republic came to this Island by her money, for She bought her of the Prince
of Monferrat Anno 1194. But of late years, though the Spaniard offered as much
for the Haven of Sada it self as She paid at first for the whole Island, the
Republic would not listen unto the motion.

Of the City of Venice Her-self.
WE are com now to the Maiden City her-self, to that Miracle of Nature, to
Neptune's Minion, to that Impossible nel impossible, for it was the Character
which that famous Mariano Sozzino gave of Her, when at his return from Venice
to Rome he gave an account of his Embassy to the Pope, when he went back dalle
scale del Senato, alla sede Apostolica, from the Scales of Venice to the Seat
of Rome, for those are the styles of distinction betwixt both the Courts; as
Constantinople is called the Port, the King of Spains Court the Palace, the
Emperors la Corte the Court simply and (...), or per Eminentiam.

This Wonder of Cities is seated in the bosom or betwixt the arms and
aestuaries of the Adriatic Sea, who spreading himself gently along toward the
Continent of Italy, leaves some green tuffs or tombs of Earth uncoverd, upon
which the City is built, and as it were chaind together by I know not how
many hundred Bridges; Insomuch that Venice is no other than a Convention of
little Islands peeping up above the Waters, which may be an excuse for her
salacity, having such a salt tail steepd and brind perpetually in the Sea: In
so much that it may be well thought that the Goddess Venus and the City of
Venice had one kind of procreation being both engendered of the Sea; It is also
very likely Aphrodite that wanton Lady had her Original out of that white Spume
which Neptune casts upon those little gentle Islands whereon Venice makes her bed.

The ocasion that made these watery Isles a mansion for men, was, when that
Northern deluge of Goths, Vandalls, Hunns and Longobards did overflow all
Italy, which made peeple of all sorts fly to these Lakes to avoid the Land
torrent that was like to swallow them up; and finding the air to be gentle and
fit for habitation and propagation, and the clime more temperat than in other
places, though sited under the same latitud, by reason of the fresh breezes and
eventilations of the circumjacent Sea, which makes it lyeope to all winds, and
evry point of the Compass; They pitchd their Tents upon these Isles, and
associated them by conjoyning Bridges; Inviting all peeple to com and cohabitt
with them, In so much that some derive the name of Venetiae from the word
Venite, Venite, (or Veni etiam, com again) by which they invited them of the
Continent to dwell with them, and fix their Commoration there. They are
therefore much deceavd who think that the Gentry of Venice are of a baser allay
than others, taking them to be no other than Fishermen at first; No, they were
of the best rank of peeple, that to avoid the inundation of those barbarous
peeple fledd thither from Rome, Aquileia, Padua, Heraclea and all other places
for a secure rendevous, being frindly invited thereunto, which makes the City
of Venice to be the most hospitable place upon Earth to this day for all
Comers.

Now, the first Venetians had not their beginning from Italy, but were issued
of an ancient race of peeple in Asia called the Hevetians of Paphlagonia, who
after the destruction of Troy came under the conduct of Antenor to Italy,
whose Tomb is to be seen standing in Padua to this day.

Now the Original of the City of Venice, according to the opinion of the most
judicious Historians, happened in this manner. As the fear of the Hunnes had
possessd most of the Inhabitants of Italy, and that the Venetians as foremost
in the danger were more apprehensive thereof than any other, therefore for their
own incolumity and freedom, and being nearest than any other, they retird from
about those pleasant places which borderd upon the Adriatic Sea into these small
Isles or Lakes whither the Enemy could not pursue them; And those who were the
first Leaders were rich and honorable Persons, full of Piety and Religion,
specially those of Aquileia, Padua, and Heraclea, who with their substance and
families came first to Grada, and thence to the Rialto; Those places whereon at
this day the City of Venice is seated being then but bare Isles and Mansions
for Fish, as many parts of Holland was: Now, those of Padua were they that
began to build at the Rialto where the first foundation was laid, and is now
as it were the Center of the City; How religiously the same was don may be
conjecturd, because by how much the more one did affect Christianity, so much
more he shunnd the conversation of the barbarous peeple. The Temple of God was
the first House that was in intention, though not in execution, because it was
a work of time, whereof the first Stone was laid in Saint Marks Place the 25.
of March, about the Vernall Equinoctial in the beginning of the Spring, which
may be said to be a good cause why the City florishd so wonderfully ever
sinee, for about the same time the first Man receavd his Creation, and the
Redeemer of Mankind his Conception.

Now allbeit for populating this new City all the most experienced Mariners
were called from all parts, with promise of reward to such as could build
Ships, yet as the old Records have it, they were careful not to admit any
man of a servile condition, or any Murderer or Fugitifs for offenses; with
such sorts of men we find that Rome was first populated.

The new City did daily increase in Inhabitants and building, when a fire
kindled upon a sudden and burnt 24. Houses; and because the matter which fedd
the fire was scatterd here and there, and so could not be quenchd by humane
strength, all the peeple betook themselfs to their prayers, and, as the Record
has it, so soon as they had made a vow to erect a Church to the honor of God,
called Saint James Church, the fury of the fire ceased; This Church is to be
seen standing to this day in good repair in the midst of the Rialto, and this
was about the year 400. At first they were governd by Consulls, then came they
under a Tribunary power, then under a Prince or Duke because there is a greater
energie of love and power in unity; yet this Duke is but a kind of Colleague
with some others of the Senators, and differs only from them in the rising
corner of his Capp; When he goes abroad in State the Sword is carried behind
him, but before the Senate who com after him, and he is so restraind that it is
impossible for him to be a Tyrant.

There have bin since the beginning of this Principality near upon 100. Dukes,
whereof 12. have bin either slain or sentencd; There is choice and chance that
concur in his creation; Now as Senatus ex Populo, so Princeps e Senatu oritur,
and commonly one of the Procurators of Saint Mark is chosen; As the Popes, so
the Princes of Venice are made of ancient men, who have passd through diverse
Offices, and so have bin long bredd up in the School of Experience, which is
that great Looking-glass of Wisdom; Persons that have their humors daunted,
and their passions mortified in them. Contarenus describes the election of the
Duke in this manner; Presently upon the vacancy, all the Gentry above 30. do
assemble. So many as meet cast their names into a Pott, and in another are just
so many Balls, whereof 30. only are gilt, then a Child draws for each, till
the 30. gilt ones be drawn, for which 30. the Child draws again a second time
out of another Pott that has only 9. gilt Balls; The 9. so drawn nominat 40.
out of which 40, 12. are again selected by the same kind of lot; These 12.
nominat 25. out of whom 9. are by lot set again apart; These 9. nominat 45.
who are by lot reducd again to 11. These 11. choose 41. of the Senate of the
best and principal rank; These 41. after evry one has tied himself by solemn
Oath to choose whom they shall think most worthy, write in Scrolls whom they
think most worthy; the Scrolls are mingled together and then drawn, the fittnes
of the Persons thus drawn is discussd, and he who has most voices above 25. is
the Man whom they pronounce to be elected, and adjudg him to be created Duke
with all Solemnities; by lot also they choose Gentlemen to sit in the Senate,
and creat public Officers, so that this Republic has much of the model of
Platoes platform.

Some derive the Etimologie of this rare City from Venetia, which in old Latin
signifies the frothing or seething of the Sea, for as Varro has it, Venetia
est maris exaestuatio quae ad littus pellitur: There are 72. Isles that support
Venice, and the nearest part of the Continent is 5. miles distant; There be
Banks and Dikes cast up to preserve her from the impetuousnes of the waves
extending in length above 6. miles, through which there are 7. places broken out
for passages of Boats, but no way for Vessels of bigger burden saving at
Malamocca, which is 3. miles distant from the main City, and at the Castles
of Lio, which are fortified according to the utmost art of Enginry; So that it is
impossible to surprise Venice, or to take Her, unless it be by an Army of 150.
miles compass; She is above 8. miles in circuit, and has of all sorts near
upon 1000. Bridges; Besides, there be above 20000. Gondolaes which ply up and
down perpetually, some whereof have two rowers, some more; so that in case of
necessity the City could make an Army of above 50000. Gondoliers.

Her Fabriques public and private are extraordinary specious and sumptuous, and
Her Streets so neat and eevenly pavd, that in the dead of Winter one may walk
up and down in a pair of Satin Pantables and Crimson Silk Stockins and not be
dirtied: There are above 200. Palaces fit to receave any Prince with his
ordinary retinue; In fine, Her situation is so rare, evry street almost having
an arm of the Sea running through it, and Her Structures so magnificent and
neat, that this Virgin City uses to ravish at first sight all Strangers that
come to visit Her, specially if they com from Sea, and not passd through others
of the dainty Towns of Italy.

Venice besides Her 150 Churches and Monasteries, has three things worthy of
sight, viz. Saint Marks Church and Steeple, the Tresury, and the Arsenal.

The Church is built throughout with rare Mosaique work, and the furniture of
the Church surpasses the Fabrique in richnes; Her Walls are inlayed in many
places with precious Stones of diverse colors, and in such a manner that they
seem to be the work of Nature rather than of Art; but the full description of
this Temple shall be reservd for another place, viz. for that time that Saint
Marks body was first transported from Alexandria to Venice, which will appeer
in the Historical part as I shall run over the Life's of the Dukes.

The Arsenal of Venice is one of the greatest Magazins of arms in all the
World; It is 3. miles in compass, of which circuit the Turks Seraglio is thought
to be; there are above 300. Artificers perpetually at work, who make or repair
all things belonging thereunto; when these grow impotent through age, yet have
they a Salary from Saint Mark as long as they live. This Arsenal has arms to
furnish 200000. men and upwards, and has constantly belonging to it 200.
Galleys in dock or abroad in course, besides Her Galeasses and Galeons, with
all provisions necessary for them: When Henry the third passd from Poland to
France by Venice, he went to see this Arsenal, and in less than two hours
there was a new Gallie made in his presence, and launchd; He so admired the
place, that he said he would be willing to exchange three of his best Towns in
France, except Paris, for the Arsenal of Venice; Here is commonly kept that
ancient and admired Vessel called the Bucentoro, built above 500. years since,
yet is she fresh and bewtifull; in this the Prince is rowed evry Ascension-day
in wonderful great State to the Sea, being accompanied by the Senate and
Ambassadors, and throwing a gold Ring into the water he espouseth the Sea to
the City once evry year: which rare privilege Pope Alexander endowed the
City withal, as an argument of his gratitud to Her for preserving him from
the fury of the Emperor Frederic Barbarossa, for taking Otho his Son Prisoner
in his quarrel, and for restoring him to Saint Peter's Chair again when he was
fledd from Rome to Venice for shelter; He also gave the Republic a privilege
to seal with lead the same time, and made Her Lady of all the Adriatic Gulf
which extends above 700. miles. This Bucentoro is the self-same Vessel wherein
Pope Alexander performd this Ceremony of marrying Venice to the Sea many
hundred years ago, and She is still usd to fetch in Ambassadors and Foreign
Princes when they come to visitt the City; but though She be still taken for
the same Shipp, yet I believe there is little of the first Materials remaining
in Her, She has bin so often trimmd, putt upon the Carine, and metamorphosd.
The sight of this Shipp when I was there, made me think on Theseus famous Shipp
(as I have it elsewhere) Nay, it made me fall upon an abstracted notion of
Philosophy, and a speculation touching the body of man, which being in a
continual flux, and succession of decay, and consequently requiring ever and
anon a restoration of what it loses of the virtue of the former nutriment, and
of what was digested after the third concoction into blood and fleshy
substance, which, as in all other sublunary bodies that have internal
principles of heat in them, uses to transpire, breath out and wast away
through invisible pores by exercise, motion and sleep, to make room still for a
supply of new nouriture; I fell, I say, to consider whether our bodies may be
said to be of the like condition with this Bucentoro, which though it be still
reputed the same Vessel, yet I believe there is very little of the first Timber
remaining in Her which She had in Her first dock, having bin, as they told me,
so often plankd, and ribd, caukd, peecd and gilt: In like manner I considerd our
bodies may be said to be daily repaird by fresh sustenance which begetts new
blood, and consequently new spiritts, new humors, and I may well say new flesh,
the old by continual deperdition and insensible transpirations evaporating
still out of us, and giving way to fresh; so that I made a question whether by
reason of these perpetual reparations and accretions the body of man may be
said to be the same numericall body in his old age that he had in his manhood,
or the same in his manhood that he had in his youth, the same in his youth that
he carried about him in his childhood, or the same in his childhood which he
woare in his mothers womb; this was the theory which the sight of that
amphibious old yet fresh Venetian piece of wood infusd into me at that time.
This rare Vessel is called Bucentoro as some think of his centum, because She
holds 200. persons in Her besides the Rowers, who are more* She is richly gilt
over from Stemm to Stern having but one room in all, which is archwise; The
Arches on both sides are supported with golden Pillars, except where the Duke
sitts at the upper end, and hard by Him lies Venice Her-self mounted upon a
winged Lion, rowed by 21. Oars on both sides, and 5. men to evry Oar.

Besides the Church and Steeple of Saint Mark there is the Piazza of Saint Mark,
which is the fairest, and the most spacious Markett place of all the Towns of
Italy, and bears the form of a Greek G. Here one shall see daily walking and
negotiating all sorts of Nations, not only Europaeans, but Arabians, Moors,
Turks, Egyptians, Indians, Tabrobanes, Tartars, Americans, Asians, Brasilians,
etc. of which place these ingenious Verses were composd by one who was
astonishd with the beauty of it:

Si placeat varios hominum cognoscere vultus,
Area longa patet Sancto contermi^a Marco,
Celsus ubi Adriacas Venetus Leo despicit undas,
Hic circum Gentes cunctis e partibus Orbis,
Aethiopes, Turcos, Slavos, Arabesque, Syrosque,
Inveniesque Cypri, Cretae, Macedumque Colonos,
Innumerosque alios varia Regione profectos;
Saepe etiam nec visa prius, nec cognita cerne^,
Quae si cuncta velim tenui describere versu,
Heic omnes citius nautas, celeresque phaselos,
Et simul Adriaci pisces numerabo profundi.
Now, we will enter into the Tresury of Saint Mark, which is so much cried up
throughout the world, that it is com to be a proverb when one would make a
comparison of riches: In this Tresury they say there is enough to pay 6. Kings
ransoms, there are Jewels of all sorts of incredible greatness and value,
Diamonds, Rubies, Sapphires, Emerauds, Cupps of Agat of a huge bigness, the great
Diamond which Henry the third gave the Republic when he was made Gentleman of
Venice; There you may see an Armor all of massy Gold, and besett all over with
large pearl, Turkies, Rubies, and all manner of precious Stones in such a
quantity and bigness as they alone would be enough to make a Tresure; There are
also 12. Corsletts of Gold besett with precious Stones; There is a huge Gold
Chain that reaches from pillar to pillar; diverse Chests of Gold, among others
there is one great Iron Chest with this Motto engraven upon it, Quando questo
scrinio s'aprira, tutto'l mundo tremera, When this Chest shall open, the whole
Earth shall tremble: There are also there to be seen two large Horns which are
Unicorns; a great Bottle made of a Chalcedonian Stone transparent and clear,
and so bigg that it will hold above a quart; There is also a Garnett of a vast
greatness, formd into the shape of a Kettle that will hold near upon a Gallon;
There are diverse Crosses and Crucifixes of pure massy Gold, besett with Jewels
of all sorts; There are also to be seen there the Crowns of Cyprus and Candie,
as also that of the Dukes of Venice, all inlayed with such choice rich
Diamonds, great Rubies, Emerauds, Sapphires and other Stones that would begett an
astonishment in the Beholders eye; In that of the Dukes there is one great Ruby
that bears 100000. Crowns value; There are Cupps of sundry forms cut out of
rich Stones, with Dishes of sundry kinds* There are also to be seen there
diverse Presses of Plate, huge and massy, with Statues of Sylver, and large
Chalices of Gold, with variety of other rich objects that no eye is capable to
judge thereof; There are also 12. Crowns more of massy Gold which were taken at
the sacking of Constantinople when the French and the Venetian divided the
spoils. There was a bold and cuning Candiot attempted the robbing of this
Tresury, And

-- quid non mortalia pectora cogit
Auri sacra fames?
This Candiot lay skulking in Saint Marks Church diverse nights, until he had
wrought a mine under the wall behind an Altar, and so got in to the Tresury,
whence he had embezeld diverse rich Jewels to the value of about 200000.
Crowns, but he was detected, and hanged twixt the two Columns; This Tresury
may be called the great Artery of the Republic; The Chests have bin often
exhausted, and supplied again; In the Wars with Lewis the twelfth of France
there were 5. millions spent in a short time; In tugging with Genoa, who was
then a large potent Republic, She spent from time to time above 100. millions,
and against the great Turk incredible sommes; The Duke of Ossuna when he was
Viceroy of Naples, pickd a quarrel of purpose with Her to make Her spend Her
self; He causd a Book to be publishd in disparagement of this Tresury, calling
it, Tesoro de duendes, the Tresury of Fayries or Hobgoblins; And evry one
knows the tale of Pacheco the Spanish Ambassador, who coming out of curiosity
to see this Tresury, fell a groping whether it had any bottom, and being askd
why? he answered, In this among other things my great Masters Tresures differs
from yours, that his has no bottom as yours I find has, alluding thereby to
the Mines of Mexico and Potosi.

Among other little gentile Islands which attend the City of Venice, there is
one called Murano, about the distance of a little mile, where Crystal Glasses
are made; and it is a rare sight to see a whole Street where on the one side there
are above twenty Furnaces at work perpetually both day and night; It has bin
observd and tried, that if one should remove a Furnace from Murano to Venice Her
self, nay to the other side of the Street, and use the same men, materials and
fuel, and the same kind of Furnace evry way, yet one cannot be able to make
Cristall Glass in the same perfection for bewty and luster as they do at
Murano; And the cause they alledg is the quality and cleernes of the
circumambient air which hangs ore the place, and favors the manufacture,
which air is purified and attenuated by the concurrent heats of so many
furnaces together which never extinguish, but are like the Vestall fyres that
always burn; Now it is well known in other places, what qualifying and
extraordinary impressions the air uses to make, as particularly it is observd in
the Air of Egypt where they use to have so many common Furnaces to hatch Eggs
in Camells dung, if, during the time of hatching the air happen to be orecast
and obnubilated, not one Egg in twenty will take; but if the Sky continue
still serene and clear, not one in a hundred will miscarry. The art of
Glassmaking is very highly valued in Venice, for whosoever comes to be a Master
of that profession is reputed a Gentleman ipsa art, for the art sake; and it
is not without reason, it being a rare kind of knowledge and Chemistry to
transmute the dull bodies of dust and sand, for they are the only main
ingredients, to such a diaphanous pellucid dainty body, as we see Cristall
Glass is, which has this property above Gold and Silver, or any other
Mineral, to endure no poison; Glass also has this rare quality, that it
never loses any thing of its first substance and weight, though usd never so
frequently, and so long: It is wonderful to see what diversity of shapes and
strange forms those curious Artists will make in Glass, as I saw a complete
Gallie, with all her Masts, Sails, Cables, Tackling, Prore, Poope, Forecastle,
Anchors, with her long Boat, all made out in Cristall Glass, as also a Man
complete in armor.

When I saw so many sorts of curious Glasses blown at Murano, I thought upon
the complement which a Gentleman put upon a Lady, who having five or six comely
Daughters, said by way of complacency, that he never saw such a dainty
Cupboard of Cristall Glasses in all his life. As I stood prying into the
materials, and observed the frame of their Furnaces, the transubstantiations,
the calcinings and liquefactions that are incident to this fyerie art, my
thoughts were raised up to a higher speculation, viz. That if such a small
Furnace fire had virtue to convert lumps of dust and sand crumbled together into
such a transparent body as Cristall, surely that great Universal Fyrewhich
shall happen at the Day of Judgment, may by its fervor and violent ardor
vi^rifie and turn to one mass of Cristall the whole body of the Earth. They
have a saying there, that the first hansom Woman was made of Venice Glass,
which implies beuty, but brittlenes withal, and Venice is not unfurnishd with
Cretures of that mould; Her Courtisans love variety, and this makes them so
fond of Strangers; They go always vayld in black, whereas Wifes and Women of
honor go in colors and unvayld; They are low and of small statures for the
most part, which makes them to raise their bodies upon high shoes called
Chapins, which gave one occasion to say that the Venetian Ladies were made of
three things, one part of them was Wood, meaning their Chapins, another part
was their Apparel, and the third part was a Woman; The Senate has often
endeavored to take away the wearing of those high Shoes, but all women are so
passionately delighted with this kind of state that no Law can weane them from
it: A Story runns of a strange Gentleman, who being extremely enamord with one
of them bargaind for a nights lodging for so many Crowns, but in the morning
finding her so low and little from what she had appeerd the day before he would
pay her but the one half of what he had contracted, in regard she was but half
the Woman that had bargaind with him formerly. Among other peculiar Laws in
Venice there is one that limitts the Dowries of Women, for lest the Patricians
or Gentlemen should exhaust their estate, and not be able to live like
themselfs, they restrain the Dowry to 16000. Crowns, so that no Senator or
Nobleman may give more with his Daughter; but a Plebean marrying his Daughter
to a Gentleman may give 20000. Crowns.

The Trade of the City of Venice has bin somewhat declining since the
Portuguais found out the carreer to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope,
for this City was usd to fetch all those Spices, and other Indian Commodities
from the Gran Cayro in Egypt, whither they usd to be carried upon Camells
backs, and convoyes of Dromedaries threescore days journey; And so Venice usd
to dispense all kind of Indian Marchandises through the Countries of
Christendom, which not only the Portuguais, but the English and Hollander use
now to transport, and may be said to be the chief Masters of the trade, yet
there is no outward appearance of poverty, or any kind of decay in this soft
effeminat City, but she is still fresh and flourishing, abounding with all kind
of comerce, and flowing with all bravery and delight, all which may be had at
cheap rates; which made those that could not tell how to use the plesures of
Venice aright, to give out this saying of Her

Venetia, Venetia chi non te vede non Te pregia,
Ma, chi' t'ha troppo veduto te despregia,
In English thus rendered:

Venice, Venice, none Thee unseen can prize,
Who has seen thee too much, will Thee despise.
They speak of an old prophecy, That Venice shall continue a Virgin until her
Husband forsakes her, meaning the Sea, to whom Pope Alexander married her long
since, and the Nuptials are confirmd and solemnly revivd evry year; Now some
observe that the Sea in some places does not love her so deeply as he did, for
he beginns to shrink and grow shallower in some places about her, nor are her
tides so high; Nor does the Pope who was the Father that gave her to the Sea
affect her as much as formerly he did, specially since the expulsion of the
Jesuitts, and that She fell a clipping the Temporal possessions of the
Clergy, as shall be shown, which make some of her Emulators bode her downfall,
since that Father and Husband begin to abandon Her.

In that notable League of Cambray Pope Julius incited all Christendom against
her, so that her Maydenhead was never more likely to be taken than at that
time, but by her extraordinary submission She charmd the Pope by her 6.
Senators whom She sent disguisd to Rome, and also by that humble Embassy She
sent to Maximilian the Emperor by Antonio Iustiniano, whose notable Oration
was this that follows, though it be not to be found among her Records.

VEteres Philosophos, atque summos illis temporibus Viros, Invictissime Caesar,
^um eam gloriam quae ex sui ipsius victoria comparatur, veram, firmam,
aeternam, immortalemque esse affirmarunt* eamque supra omnia regna, trophaea
atque triumphos extulerunt minime errasse manifestum, certumque est; Haec
Scipioni Majori tot victoriis claro majorem splendorem quam Africa devicta, and
Carthago domita dedit: Nonne haec eadem res magnum illum Macedonem
immortalitate donavit? cum Darius maximo praelio ab eo victus Deos immortales
ut regnum suum stabilirem precatus est, quod si secus statuissent se non alium
Successorem quam tam benignum hostem, tam mansuetum ab illis petere: Caesar
ille Dictator a quo Caesaris cognomentum habes, and ejus fortunam, libertatem,
magnificentiam aliasque virtutes obtines, nonne concedendo, remittendo,
condonando qui in Deorum numerum referretur dignus est judicatus? Denique
Senatus populusque Romanus ille mundi domitor cujus imperium in Te solo est,
cujusque amplitudo and Majestas in Te conspicitur, nonne plures populos ac
provincias clementia, aequitate and mansuetudine quam bello armisque imperio
suo subjecit? Quae cum ita sint minime inter postremas lauds id tibi
ascribetur, Caesar, si cum victoriam adversus Venetos in potestate tua habeas,
quam humanae res Caducae sint memor, ea moderate uti noveris, magis ad pacis
studia, quam incertos belli eventus propensus; Quanta enim rerum humanarum
inconstantia sit, quam incerti casus, quam dubious, fallax, varius periculisque
obnoxious sit mortalium status externus, priscisque exemplis ostendere non est
opus, satis superque Respublica Veneta docet, quae paulo ante florens,
splendens, clara, atque ita potens erat, ut ejus nomen and fama, non Europae
finibus terminaretur, sed egregia pompa Africam, Asiamque percurreret, atque in
extremis Orbis terrarum finibus magno cum plausu resonaret; Haec eadem nunc
unico eoque levi adverso praelio rerum gestarum gloria orbata, opibus spoliata,
lacerata, conculcata atque eversa, omnium rerum ac praesertim Consilii egens
ita corruit ut omnis pristinae virtutis imago consenuerit, omnisque armorum
ardor defferbuerit; Sed falluntur, falluntur proculdubio Galli si haec propriae
virtuti tribuunt; Antehac enim Veneti gravioribus incommodis agitati, maximis
detrimentis cladibusque perculsi atque attriti, nunquam animum abjecerunt, ne
tum quidem cum ingenti periculo cum saevissimo Turcarum Tyranno multos annos
bella gesserunt, imo semper ex victis Victores facti sunt; Idem and nunc
sperassent nisi Majestatis tuae tremendo nomine, copiarumque tuarum vivida
invictaque virtute audita, ita omnium animi concidissent, ut nulla non modo
vincendi, sed ne obsistendi quidem spes relicta sit; Quocirca armis abjectis in
Majestatis tuae incredibili clementia, vel potius divina pietate spem omnem
locavimus, quam nos nostris rebus perditis inventuros minime diffidimus: Itaque
Principis, Senatus, Populusque Veneti nomine humili devotione supplices oramus,
obtestamur, atque obsecramus, ut clementiae tuae oculis res nostras afflictas
aspicere digneris, iisque salutarem medicinam afferre, omnes pacis leges, quas
tu nobis imposueris amplectemur, omnes, justas, honestas and ab aequitate
rationeque minime alienas ducemus; Sed forsan qui nobis ipsis mulctam
imponamus, digni sumus: Ad te verum and legitimum Principem omnia quaecunque
Majores nostri Sacro Imperio and Austriae Ducatui ademerunt, rede^nt, quibus ut
decentius veniant omnia quaecunque in Continente possidemus adjungimus quarum
rerum juribus quocunque modo partis cedimus; Praeterea, quotannis tuae
Majestati and legitimis Imperii Sucessoribus in perpetuum quingenta auri pondo
tributi nomine pendemus, imperiis, decretis, legibus, praeceptisque tuis
libenter obtemperabimus. Defend nos quaeso ab illorum cum quibus paulo ante
arma nostra conjunximus insolentia, quos nunc saevissimos hosts experimur, qui
nihil aliud expetunt quam Veneti nominis interitum; Tua ista clementia
conservata Te Urbis nostrae Parentem, Genitorem, Conditoremque appellabimus*
Ingentia tua beneficia in Annals referemus, liberis nostris perpetuo
memorabimus; Nec vero parva haec erit ad lauds tuas accessio Te primum esse ad
cujus pedes Veneta Respublica supplex se humi prosternat, cui cervices
supponat, quem velut Deum coelo delapsum colat, revereatur, observet: Si Deus
optimus maximus eam mentem Majoribus nostris dedisset, ut Res aliorum non
attingere non studuissent, jam nostra Respublica gloriae plena reliquas Europae
civitates long superarat, quae nunc in squalore, sordibus and foetore
languescens, ignominia, probroque deformis ludibrio atque contumelia referta
unico momento omnium victoriarum laudem amisit; Sed ut unde incepit eo mea
revertatur Oration, in tua potestate est, Caesar, Venetis tuis ignoscendo and
condonando nomen laudemque comparare qua nemo unquam Vincendo majorem
splendidioremque adeptus est; Hoc monumentum nulla vetustas, nulla antiquitas,
nullus temporis cursus e memoria hominum delebit, sed omnia saecula Te pium,
clementem, omnium principum gloriosissimum praedicabunt, confitebuntur: Nos tui
Veniti quod vivimus, quod auras coelestes carpimus, quod hominum comercio
fruimur id omne tuae virtuti, faelicitati, clementiaeque tribuimus.

Though this pitiful Speech be not to be found among the Records of this
Republic, yet it is kept to this day in the Archives of the Empire, and because
it is so remarkable a one we hold it not amiss to render it in English.

MOst invincible Emperor, the ancient Philosophers, and the great Men of their
times did not err in their opinions when they esteemd that glory which one
gains by a Conquest over himself to be the truest, the most firm, and best of
victories, and to exceed all other acquests, achievements, trophyes and
triumphs; This pourchasd Scipio Major more honor, and made him more illustrious
than by debelling of Afric, and daunting the proud City of Carthage: Did not
the same kind of victory make that great Macedonian immortal, when King
Darius being discomfited by him prayed the Immortal Gods that they would
establish his Kingdom, which if they pleased to ordain otherwise he desird no
better Successor than so mild an Enemy, and gentle a Conqueror. That Caesar the
Dictator, from whom you have your surname, and whose fortune, liberality,
magnificence and other high virtues you inherit, was not he judgd worthy to be
placd among the Gods for his clemency, concessions, gentleness and mercy?
Lastly, the Senate and peeple of Rome who were the tamers of the World, whose
Empire is now soly in you, and whose amplitude and Majesty does so shine in
you, did not they reduce more Nations to their obedience by their justice,
equity and mansuetude than by war and arms? Since this is a know truth, O
Caesar, it will not be the least of your glories, since that you have the
victory ore the Venetians now in your hands and power, to call to mind how
frayl all humane things are, and consequently to use your victory with
moderation, and to incline more to the study of peace, than the doubtful
events of war; for how inconstant all mundane affairs are, how casual,
various, false and flattering, how obnoxious the state of Mortals is to hazard
and danger, I shall not need to illustrat either by new or old examples; The
Venetian Commonwealth shows it sufficiently, which being a little while ago
flourishing and splendid, illustrious and renowned, and so powerful that her
name and renown was not contented to be bounded within the precincts of Europe
only, but it passd over to Afric and Asia, and rebounded with no ordinary
applause in the extremest parts of the World: This, this Republic is now by one
and that but a slight battle deprivd of the glory of all her Tropheys, She is
bereft of her wealth, torn as it were in pieces and trampled upon, daunted and
overcom, being destitut of all things specially of Council, so that the image
of her former virtues are faded and almost utterly defacd, and her wonted heat
in arms quite allayed. For in former times the Venetians being oppressed with
greater calamities, and harassd with worse miseries, ill successes and
misfortunes, yet they never lost their spirits, no not then when with infinite
losses, dangers and hazards they bore up for many years against that most
cruel tyrant the Turk; nay from being overcom they became conquerors
afterward, They might hope the like now, but the redouted name of your
Majesty, and the invincible virtue of your military forces being understood,
their hearts are so dejected, that there is little left us to resist, much less
to overcom; But they are deceav'd, yea mightily deceav'd if the French
attribute any thing of this to their valor. Therefore all Arms being cast
away we place all our hopes in the rare clemency, or rather the Divine piety of
your imperial Majesty: And in the name of the Prince, the Senate and peeple of
Venice, with humble devotion and in most supplicant manner we pray, beseech and
implore that you would vouch safe to behold with the countenance of compassion
our most afflicted condition, and to apply some comfortable remedy unto them:
All the Laws of peace that you shall impose upon us, we will embrace, we shall
obey all just, honest and equitable comands not swarving from reason; But happily
we deserve that we lay a necessity upon our self, that all things may return to
you as true and lawful Prince that which our progenitors took from this sacred
Empire, and the Dukedom of Austria, which that it may be don more handsomely, we
add whatsoever we possess in the continent, we yield, notwithstanding any
rites we can claim unto them. Moreover we are willing to pray every year to
your Majesty, and the lawful successors of the Empire 500 weight of Gold in
lieu of tribut, and we are ready to obey all Decrees, Manats, Precepts or
Laws, that come from your Majesty. Defend us therefore from those, we beseech
you, with whom we lately joined our arms, who we find now to be most cruel
enemies, which study nothing more then the utter ruin of the Venetian name;
Being preserved by this: our clemency we shall call you our farther, and
parent, our protector and founder, and we shall digest these your mighty
benefits into our annalls, and our late Nephews, shall be ever mindful of
them: And truly this will be no small accession of glory to you, that you were
the first before whom the Republic of Venice did present her self, to whom she
laid down her neck, whom she adores, and reverenceth as some God decended from
Heaven. If Almighty God had given our Ancestros that mind that they had not
middled so much with other men's things, our republic had surpassed by this time
all the Cities of Europe, whereas she is now forlorn and squalid, coverd over
with ashes, ignominy and shame, having in a moment as it were had her beauty
blasted, and become a derision to all Nations, and lost the glory of all her
former victories; But that my speech may return where it began, it lies in
your power O Caesar, that pardoning and absolving your Venetians you pourchase
now to your self a name and glory then which never any got a greater by
conquest or victory. This Monument no age, no time, no antiquity or course of
mortal things shall ever deface out of our memories, but all Ages shall
confess, declare, and proclaim you to be the most pious, and most glorious of
all Princes, We your Venetians shall ascribe it to your goodness, that we live
and breath the celestial air, that we have the conversation of men, we impute
it all to your virtue, felicity, and clemency.

This was the lamentable speech, that the maiden Republic breathed out before
the Emperor Maximilian, by the mouth of her Ambassador Antonio Iustiniano; but
it is known that Mayds have tears at will, therefore most men thought these
words were not cordial but mere complements, and to temporize, yet they
produced a peace, and it is a cheap peace that is got by a complement; but this
submission the Republic made was partly recompencd, by a generous and pious act
she did in refusing the help, and Auxiliaries which the Turk offered her so
earnestly in those her extremities. About Addua she receavd the mortall'st blow
that ever she had, and it was like to have bin as fatal to her as Canna to the
Romans, or Pavia to the French King; The Genoways also brought her once to a
low ebb, so that she sent very low proposalls to him, which he refusing, she
made virtue of necessity, and reinforcing her self soundly bangd him.

Before I part with this Maiden City, I will make a parallel betwixt her and
old Rome, for of all the Cities of Italy there is none resemble her more in her
constitutions and policy, nay she is more like old Rome then Rome her self as
now she is, as if the soul of old Rome by a Pythagorean kind of
meterapluchosis, were transmigrated into her, she is obdurated with the same
kind of vigor and virtue as old Rome; but it seems that she is of a far stonger
constitution, and more constant in her way of policy; some do brand the one to
be a Shepherds Town at first, and Venice a Fisher Town; It Is true that Rome is
fabled to be so, so that it might be said, that when the Pope came to be her
head she was reduced to her first principles, for as a Shepherd was the
founder, so a Shepherd (spiritual) is still her preserver from utter ruin,
otherwise she had bin long since turned into a heap of rubbish which had become
her Tomb; So that Providence seems to have a care of her still, though present
Rome may be said to be but the monument of her self compard to times passd
when she was in that flourish wherein Saint Augustine did wish to see her; She was
then of 50. miles circumference as Vopiscus witnesses, and she had 500000.
free Citizens in a famous cense that was made in Claudius his time, which
allowing but six to evry family in Women, Children and Servants, came to 3.
millions of Souls, but She may be said to be now but a Wilderness in
comparison of that number, yet She is esteemd to have yet bout 14. miles
incircuit; Moreover She is much humbled since the Church came to be her Head,
for whereas She was before elevated upon seven Hills, She now spreads her-self
upon a flatt, having descended to the Plains of Campus Martius: So She who
tamd the World seemd to tame her-self at last, and falling under her own weight
grew to be a prey to Time, who with his iron teeth consumes all bodies at last,
making all things both animat and inanimat which have their being under that
changeling the Moon to be subject unto corruption and dissolution.

A Parallel twixt the Government of old Rome and Venice.
THe greatest thing wherein old Rome differs from Venice, is, that after Kings
or Souverain Princes Rome was governd by Consulls, but here clean contrary,
after Consulls a Doge or Princely Head came to govern, yet does he carry still
the badg of a Consul in the vest upon his back. Among the Romans Tribunus
Celerum he who had the command of the Cavalrie had the chiefest charge, just so,
the Venetians use to create a Captain General of the Armies in the Continent;
and as he at Rome defended the King, and City, and was the first that
assalted the Enemy, and the last that left the field, so does the Venetian
General, therefore he has the next place to the Prince himself.

Moreover, a good while passd when the Consulls could not levy the cense which
evry one according to his substance was bound to pay in regard of other more
important affairs wherein they were involvd, therefore the Censors were chosen,
so called because their first office was to gather the cense, which was to know
the number of Citizens, and putt an estimat upon their states, and so a tax;
afterward this Magistrate did grow to that esteem and use, that he came to have
authority also over the manners and customs of the Romans, and to have
Superintendency both of the Senate, the Cavalry and Gards. In conformity to this
office there are ten Censors in Venice which are called vulgarly Gli dieci Savii,
the ten Sages, who supervise not only the cense but the Customs also of the
City; But the City increasing, and peeple multiplying daily with business,
Venice did choose other Censors giving them authority over the pomp, the food
and raiment of the Citizens; which Magistrates are called la Giustitia nuova,
instituted in the time of Renier Zeno, who have authority over all Inns,
Hostries, and Lodgers of Strangers.

The Romans, peeple still increasing, and having Wars in diverse places,
created in tract of time a new Officer of greater authority whom they called
Dictator; from him there was no appeal to be made, and he had in the highest
way of authority power over the life's of men: The General of the Sea among the
Venetians has some resemblance with this Officer, only with this difference,
that he is chosen upon extraordinary ocasions, but as long as he is abroad he
has a Dictatorian power, for to what maritim place soever he arrives he has
the Keys of the Town brought him, with those of any Castle or Fortress. But
here it is to be observd, that this Officer cannot enter Venice with any armed
Gallie, but as soon as he comes to Istria, which is distant 100. miles from
Venice, he pays the Mariners and all other Officers their Salaries, and so
disbands them, and returns to Venice with a very few of his retinue: This
corresponds with the custom of the Romans, who usd to restrain their General
to pass over the river Rubicon by this peremptory command, Imperator, sive
Miles, sive Tyrannus armatus quisquis, sistito, vexillum armaque deponito nec
citra hunc amnem Rubiconem trajicito: Emperor, or Soldier, or Tyrant,
whosoever thou art, putt off thy armor, else cross not this River. This was
the reason that Julius Caesar was declard Enemy to Rome because he had passd
that River.

Afterward in Rome they added to the Dictator Officers called Magistri Equitum,
who should be present at all Counsels; and in case the Dictator should be sick
They were to execut his office, as being as it were his Compagnous, and
Witnesses of his virtues: Just so, the Venetians use to choose two Proveditori
in evry Army who have the next place to the General, and must be present at
all Counsels, and have a concurrence of their opinions before any enterprise.

Besides these the Venetians make choice of three of the Patrician Order, whom
they style Auvogadori de Communi, who resemble Tribunos plebis in Rome; these
three are rather Sollicitors then Judges for the peeple, they are their
Intercessors upon all ocasions.

Add herunto that the Romans thought it fitting to choose Officers that should
have care of the profitt, the ornament and provision of the City, therefore
did they constitut diverse persons of probitie, and known integrity, and they
went all under the name of Aediles; The first two they did choose, were to have
special care of the Temples and Fanes, as as also of other Fabriques and
Ornaments of the City, which Officers were styled Aediles ^dium: There were
others called Aediles Curules, whose charge it was to supervise all Weights and
Mesures: There were others called Aediles Cercales, who supervisd all sorts of
Grain, of Oil and such provision: In Venice there are sundry Officers that may
be compard to these Aediles. First, the Procurators of Saint Mark, who have the
Superintendence of the Church, and the Tresury thereof: Then com the Proveditori
alla Sanita, which have it in charge to see that no noisome and unwholsom things
be brought into the City, the general health and incolumity whereof they are
to study: Next them are the Proveditori all* Acque, who supervise the Waters,
Lakes and Channells within and without the City, which they are to see scowrd
and cleansd: Then follow Signori alla Giustitia Vecchia, the Lords of the old
Justice, who severely punish those that are discoverd to have false Weights,
and they set reasonable prizes upon fruits and other things: Then is there
another sort of Aediles called Proveditori alla farina, that supervise the
mesure and the wholsomnes of all kind of Grains, and that they be well
conditiond: Then is there another sort of Edills called Proveditori all sale, who
rent all the Salt pitts, provided that the City be servd at reasonable rates:
Then are there other sorts of Aediles called Gli Signori alla Ternaria Vecchia,
who were instituted in the time of Giovanni Dandalo, who supervise the Oil;
Then Gli Signori alla grassa, who supervise Cheese, Bacon, and all salt things:
Then Signori del vino, who look to the condition and rates of all kinds of
Wines; Then gli Signori di panni d'oro, who take a special care that no fraud
be used in the making and vending of any Gold, Silver, Tissue, or Silk stuffs;
Then you have the Signori della Dogana di mare, which were instituted in the
government of Tomaso Mocenigo, whose charge is to look to the freight of all
sorts of Ships and Galleys, if they go laden with any Merchandise, and overlook
that the Republic be not cosned in her imposts; Lastly, there be a sort of
Ediles called delle Ragion vecchie, who have it committed to their charge that in
case any Ambassador com, or any foreign Prince into the City, they are to see
that he be entertaind, and defrayd by the public expense of S. Mark.

The Romans had also Officers called Quaestores, who received and distributed
the public treasure, and they were called so ab inquirenda pecunia, from making
search after moneys; so in Venice there are such Officers called Camerlinghi, who
have the very same charge. And as the Questors in Rome were to accompany the
Emperor or General, to keep account of the public Salaries, and Treasures;
so the Venetians when War happens use to send their Camerlinghi to the Army,
who are always present with the General, and do not only administer the public
stock, but supervise all preyes and booties taken from the enemy. In Rome there
were Questors also in times of peace; so likewise in all the Cities belonging
to the Republic, there are such Questors who have power to recover, spend and
pay the Public deniers, whereof they use to send a particular account to the
Senate with the Treasure that remains unspent; In resemblance to these Roman
Questors, there are diverse other Officers in the Republic of Venice, as gli
Governatori dell' entrate they who receave the public Revenues of the Signorie,
with all sorts of Gabells and Impositions. There are also I Signori sopra I
conti, who are as it were the Auditors General, and look to all public
accounts that belong to the Republic. There is La Dogana da terra, and L'Vsata,
whereof the one looks to all commodities imported, the other to all exported.
There is an Office also called the Messetaria, who takes up two in the hundred in
sale of all stable goods, as well within as without the City.

But those Questors which are Paymasters, are only the three Chambers the tr^
camere de monti, the old, the new, and the subsidiary Mount, who daily disburse
and pay moneys.

Besides these there were among the Romans, other Questors called Quaestores
Candidati, so called because they went clad in white, whose Office was to read
in the Senate all kind of Letters that were of any moment. The Chancellor of
Venice resembles this Questor, who is of the rank of Citizens, and of mighty
repute among all men; because he only while he lives, can see, know and
understand all things that is agitated in the Senate, although the most secret
transactions; He goes in a Senatorian habit, and is held a most honorable
person, although he be not of the Patrician and noble Order.

It is time now to speak of the Decemvirs, who, all other Magistrates being
casheerd in the City of Rome, were created to have the sole and superintendent
power of all things; every one of these was used to sit upon the Tribunal ten
days, and determine all matters, and they were used to succeed one another; In
imitation hereof the Venetians have the same Magistrates who jump with those of
Rome both in number and authority, which is vulgarly called il Consiglio di
Dieci, the Council of ten; That in Rome dur'd for a year, and so does this,
both of them were without appeal unless it be in Venice to the College, and
then a business is said to go a l'altra mano. In this Rome and Venice differ,
that this kind of Magistrate in the one was of short continuance, and quickly
perished, but this in Venice has for many hundr'd years continued to the great
welfare and safety of the City; when the Decemviri in Rome were created all
other Officers ceasd, it is otherwise here; those governd only for ten days,
and of these three are chosen every month, which are called glitre Capi; one of
them alone has no power to judge or refer, but he must have another to join
with him, but in both Cities they were advancd to the Decemvirat who precelld
others in experience and age, in probity and known sufficiency.

There were also a long time after the foundation of Rome Officers elected
called Praetors, for the story relates the City stood 390 years before any was
created; The Wars were the cause of the election of this Magistrate, because in
the confusion of Arms the Consulls could not tend all businesses, therefore
there were other Judges created called Praetors; Of these Praetors there were
among the Ancients three sorts, Urbani, Forenses, or Provinciales, The first
determind controversies betwixt Citizens and Tounsmen; The second sort decided
Cases twixt Citizens and Countrymen, and the third went to the Government of
Provinces; so likewise in the Republic of Venice such Praetors are created, and
in the same degree of Order; The Praetores Vrbani are represented by those that
are of the Corti de petitione, and other Offices, which determine all
differences twixt Citizens; The Praetores Forenses are those that preside in
the Ufficio called del Forastiero, and the Provincial Praetors are represented
by those who go up and down the Dominions and Cities that are under the
obedience of the Republic, and they are called Praetors or Podesta. The first
Officers in this kind were del Petitione, and they were sufficient at first to
dispatch all sorts of differences, but afterward in process of time, businesses
augmenting with the Age and strength of the Signorie, there were diverse other
Magistrates of the same kind created. The Iudici de Petitione determind all
Suits as far as 1000 Ducketts, or any above 50. They cause all bargains to be
performed; They tax the allowance of Pupills for their sustenance, and
education, unless they be within the precincts of the Procurators of S. Mark.

There be other Officers stild Guidici all' officio del mobile, they determine
all Controversies and Causes 50 Ducketts upwards that happen about movables,
and personal Estates. There are also Judgesexaminers; There be other Officers
called Cataveri, which is much of the same nature though inferior in degree to
the Camerlinghi; There is another Officer called Il pio vego, who takes
Cognizance of all Contracts tending to Usury, this Officer has also care of
the public ways; There be other Officers called Syndicks, which supervize all
public expenses; There be others called Sopragastaldi, who put in execution the
sentences that are passed by other Judges, and sell the goods brought in by
sentence of the Court; And because some error may arise in the sale of such
goods, there is another Office called de Superiori, who are to censure the Acts of
the Sopragastaldi; To these may be added the Consulls and Sopra Consoli, who
are peculiar Officers touching Merchants affairs, and carry the business so
that a bankrupt cannot be utterly ruind. The last kind of Praetor is del
Forestiero, who determines differences twixt Venetians and Forener, or twixt
Forener and Forener. All controversies touching Rents of Houses go before these
Judges, as also touching the hyre of Ships and Barks.

The Romans had also certain Officers called Centumviri, in Analogy to whom
the Republic has Consilio di Quarentie, or the Council of 40. and hence it
may be said that the division sprung it being of three Orders, viz. two upon
civil Causes, and the third upon Criminal; Touching civil Causes the one is
called la vecchia, before whom all Causes com from the Auditori vecchi, whereof
former mention has bin made; the other is called la nuova created by the Pisan
Law, where all Causes that are introducd into the Court by the Auditori nuovi
are decided; But in tract of time controversies multiplying together with the
peeple, il Collegio de venti savii, the College of 20 Sages were adjoynd to it,
who take cognizance of differences as far as 300 Ducats; and lastly the
College of twelve was added, who should terminat all Suits as far as 100
Crowns: So the Centumviri in Rome were divided to ^ower Counsels, whence came
the saying Iudicium quadruplex, who usd to meet in foro Ducario, and in
ancient times in the Church of Saint Iulia, which places were so contiguous,
that they could overheare one another as Quintilian observes. These Counsels
of 40 have three heads or Presidents of their order, who for two months have
the precedence of the rest, and introduce the Causes which are to be handled;
they cast lotts in three Boxes, whereof one is in favor, the other clean
contrary, and the third nor one nor the other, which is called non Syncero.

The Romans had also four men who had care of the Streets, and the same
officers are in Venice, who are called Proveditori di Comun, whose care and
industry is to keep the Streets well repaird, with the Bridges, whereof there is
nere upon 1000 of all sorts, with other public places; but whereas there were
four officers in Rome of this nature, there are but three in Venice, yet they
have many for their substituts. Moreover there were in Rome three officers who
supervizd the Coins of Gold and Silver, there are the same number in Venice,
who are Proveditori alla Zeccha.

After all these com the Prefects or Captains that are appointed for the
government of Cities abroad, who may be (...) compard to the Prefects of places
among the Romans, and their office is the very same; They have care of the
Walls of the City, with the Gates thereof, and upon any insurrection they
have power to raise and assemble the Inhabitants of the place to suppress it;
they set the Gards, and look to all things that tend to conservation and
outward security of the City. There were also in Rome Officers called
Praefecti victuum, that had care to see the place well provided with Victuals,
and prevent famine by bringing in Corn and other necessaries from abroad; so in
Venice there are three chosen that have the like charge, which are called
Prodveditori all biade, and upon extraordinary ocasions there are other two
added to them called Sopra proveditori, but these kind of Officers may be rankd
more properly among the Aediles.

Lastly, the Romans had an Officer called the Praefectus Vigiliarum, who had
care to prevent all fyrings of Houses, and if any happend to suppress and
extinguish it, before it should spread further, as also to take cognizance of
burglaries, thefts and robberies don in the night time; So the Republic of
Venice, who has bin industrious to search into all Laws, holding it no
disparagment to imitat any that may tend to her better Welfare, have ten
Gentlemen elected, who are divided to two parts, but both called Signori di
notte; To the one five are brought all Civil causes, to the other all Criminal
that have relation to the night; The office of these is to secure evry one in
his own Precinct, and prevent that the obscurity of the night do not procure
dommage to any body, to prevent murders, and breaking into Houses.

Of the Precincts or Sextaries of the City of Venice.
NOw the whole City is divided to 6. Precincts, viz. Castello, S. Marco,
Canareio, S. Paolo, S. Croce and Dorsoduro: Under Castello there are S. Pietro,
S. Biasio, S. Martino, S. Gio: Baptista in Bragora, S. Antonino, S. Trinita, S.
Severo, S. Procolo, S. Gio: di nuovo, S. Maria Formosa, S. Marina, S. Leone,
and the Church of the Dominican Friars, S. Francesco della vigna, S. Antonio,
SS. Giovanni e Paolo, S. Francesco di Paola, and the Nuns of that Order; S.
Maria delle Virgin, S. Daniele, S. Anna, S. Gioseppe, S. Maria Celeste, S.
Sepolchro, S. Lorenzo, S. Giovanni Laterano, and S. Zaccheria, with other
Churches of S. Gio: di Forlani, di SS. Filippo, e Giacopo, and of S. Georgio of
Greece.

In S. Marks Precinct there is S. Marks Church her-self, S. Gemmiano, S. Moise,
S. Maria Sobenigo, S. Mauritio, S. Vitale, S. Samuele, S. Angelo, S. Benedetto,
S. Paterniano, S. Fantino, S. Luca, S. Salvatore, S. Bartelmeo, S. Iuliano, and
S. Basso: S. Stephano, S. Salvatore, with Nuns of that Order; S. Rocco, Santa
Margherita, S. Theodoro, S. Maria di Consolatione, S. Maria di Broglio, and the
School of Iustitia.

In Canareio there are S. Lucia, S. Gieremia, SS. Erma^orn, and Fortunato, S.
Maria Madalena, S. Marciale, S. Fosca, S. Felice, S. Sofia, SS. Apostoli, S.
Canciano, S. Maria nuova, S. Gio: Chrysostomo, and S. Leonardo; De frati S.
Iobbs, S. Maria de Servi, S. Maria del horto, S. Maria de Crocecchieri, with
the Nuns of S. Lucia, S. Catarina, Corpo di Christo, S. Luigi, S. Gyrolamo,
and S. Maria de miracoli.

In the Precincts of Saint Paul there are these Parishes, S. Paolo, S. Tomaso,
S. Stefano Confessore, S. Agostino, S. Ubaldo, S. Apollinare, S. Sylvestro, S.
Gio: Eleemosinario, S. Mateo, S. Giacopo, Frati di S. Maria, and Frati minori.

In Santa Croce there are these Parishes, S. Croce, S. Simeon profeta, SS.
Simon, S. Guida Apostolo, S. Gio: decollato, S. Giacopo del Orio, S. Eustasio,
S. Maria matter Domini, S. Cassano, S. Nicolo di Talentino, the Nuns of S.
Croce, S. Andrea, S. Chiara. But it is to be observd that in some Precincts some
Islands are included, with Churches belonging to Monasteries, as S. Helena, S.
Andrea della Certosa, S. Georgio Maggiore, S. Clemente, S. Maria delle gratie,
S. Spirito, S. Francesco dal diserto, S. Giacopo di paludo, S. Nicolo di Lito,
S. Christoforo della pace, S. Michaele, S. Georgio in Alga, S. Angelo di
concordia, S. Secondo, with the Nuns of S. Servolo, with other of S. Erasmo,
S. Lazaro, Lazaretto nuovo, Lazaretto vecchio.

Lastly, in Dorsoduro there are these Parishes, S. Nicolo, S. Rafaele, S.
Basilio, S. Margherita, S. Pantaleone, S. Barnaba, SS. Gervasa and Barnaba, S.
Portasio, S. Agnese, SS. Vito and Modesto, S. Gregorio, S. Eufemia della
Giudeca, Frati di S. Giacopo della Giudeca, Il Redentore, S. Gio: della
Giudeca, S. Sebastiano, I Carmeni, Maria della curita, the Nuns of S. Biasio
Catoldo, S. Croce della Giudeca, SS. Cosmo e Damiano, Le Convertite, S. Marta,
S. Maria Maggiore, lo Spirito Santo, Ogni Santi, la Trinita*, le Citelle,
Abbatie and Priorati, S. Georgio Maggiore, S. Nicolo di Lito, S. Gregorio, S.
Giovanni della Giudeca, S. Tomaso di Borgognoni, S. Andrea della Certosa, S.
Helena, S. Gio: del Templo, la Trinita, la Misericordia, S. Gio: Evangelista,
S. Gio: Laterano; In the Precinct of Dorsoduro the Jesuitts had nested
themselfs until they were thrust out.

There are diverse rich Hospitalls also in Venice, the first is di Giesu Christo
a S. Antonio, di S. Pietro e S. Paolo, della pieta, della casa di Dio, a S.
Martino a I Croceccheri, alla Misericordia, alla Carita, a S. Gio: Evangelista,
a S. Croce, a S. Andrea, a S. Vito, al volto Santo, a S. Ubaldo, a S. Rafaele,
a S. Gio: Paolo all' incurabili, S. Lazaro, lebocole, Lazaretto vecchio,
Lazaretto nuovo, ill Soccorso, and quello de Mendicanti. There Is no place on
Earth where there is greater provision for poor Maidens, in so much that evry
year there are great nombers married out of the common stock, and they the Mayds
of Saint Mark, or della Carita, della Misericordia, di S. Gio: Evangelista, di
San Rocco, or di San Teodoro, etc.

Herin also Venice does imitat her Mother Rome, whose principal endeavor was
to pourchase an opinion of piety and holiness among all peeple, that by that
bayt they might com under Her obedience the sooner; So that She has in
Churches, Monasteries, Nunneries, and Hospitalls near upon 160. Nor do I
believe that he is much wide of the mark who made an estimat of the revenue of
the Venetian Church both in the Continent, and Islands to be above two Millions
of Crowns.

Besides old Rome, Venice did likewise borrow something of the Greek
Comon-wealths her Neighbors also, as will appear to any that will be curious
to make re-searches into the Code and Digest of her Laws; But touching her
next Neighbor Athens, she by dabbling too much with the Sea, and forsaking her
interests in the Continent, undid her self; But the City of Venice had
contrary success, for the Sea made Her, and quickened Her industry, it made Her
turn necessity into industry, for, just as the Hollander, She having at first
no Land to manure, fell a plowing up the Sea, and by putting a bridle in
Neptunes mouth, She forcd by art a mansion for her self out of those places
which fish should naturally inhabit; so that in the midest of the salt Surges,
and Billows of the Hadriatic Sea She may be said to be Media immersabilis unda.

The main instruments that govern this Republic are the Gentry, for the
Venetians do call those Gentlemen that have a share in the Government of this
Commonwealth, viz. those that have authority to elect the public Magistrates,
and have a capacity themselfs to be elected. This prerogative is given unto
them by their birth, so as whosoever are born of noble Parents (now these words
Noble and Gentleman are synonimas amongst them) is accounted noble, and may at
a certain time and manner limited by the Laws, enter into the great Council,
where the ordinary election of Magistrates is made; Into this rank are receavd
either those, who having bin the chief Inhabitants of the City, and being
most famous for Virtue or Wealth, have from the beginning had the managing of
public affairs; or also those who for some notable exploits or worthy act don
in the service of the Republic are at sundry times, and upon special occasions
admitted thereunto, who for the most part have bin of the chief, and noblest
Familys, or some other place subject to the Signorie, or some others to whom by
special grace and favor this title of Nobility has bin given; wherein
nevertheless they have carried themselfs very sparingly, it being granted but
to Lords of great Estates, and in this manner were the Families of Este,
Gonzaga, and Farneses with some other of the chiefest of Italy admitted
thereunto. Henry King of Poland after the third of that Name of France, being at
Venice among other honors receavd the title of a Venetian Gentleman, and he
seemd to be highly pleased with the dignity as appeerd by his presents: Moreover
all those that descend from such as receave this degree, have the same
pre-eminence as their Parents in such a tract of time; But to the end it may be
continually maintaind in it is perfection, they do curiously search out the
Predigrees of those who are to enter into the great Council, not only the
Nobility of the Father, but likewise whether they be born of lawful Matrimony,
and of no Common Woman, but of some honorable degree and condition, whereof a
Register is kept by one of the chief Magistrates, termd the Avogario of the
Republic.

The chief orders of Knighthood in the Venetian Republic are first those of S.
Mark, begun in the year 1330. and revived Anno 1562. They are to be of the
noblest sort of Patricians; the second is of the glorious Virgin instituted by
Bartholomeo of Vicenza, and is more ancient then the other for it was
instituted Anno 1222. their charge is to protect Widows and Orphans, and to
defend the peace of Italy; It was approvd by Pope Urban the fourth Anno 1262.
The Arms are a purple Cross between certain Stars, a white Robe over a russet
Cloak, but the General Arms are Gules, two Keys in Saltier, or, stringed
Azure; The Motto which the Knights of S. Mark carry is Pax tibi Marce
Evangelista; There are under the Dominions of Venice two Patriarks, and thirty
four Archbishops, and Bishops.

Now it will not be amiss to speak something of the Military strength of this
Republic by Land and Sea; touching Navall power, she has more Galleys and
Galeasses than all Europe besides, and her security depends more upon the Sea
than shore; yet she entertaines in constant pay by Land 25000 Foot in Lombardy,
besides some of the Cantons of Swisserland and the Grisons, in Dalmatia and
Istria she has about 3000 more; She has also in perpetual pay 600 men of
Arms, whereof every one must keep two Horses a piece, for which they are
allowd 120 Ducats a year, and they are for the most part Gentlemen of
Lombardy; When she has any extraordinary expedition to make, she has a
Stranger for her General, and many Soverain Princes have thought it no
disparagement to serve her in this kind, but he is supervizd by two Proveditors
without whom he cannot attempt any thing.

Touching the annual Revenues of the Republic of Venice, they exceed any other
State in Christendom, and all Kings except Spain and France, for She has
above four Millions of constant incomes every year; she has out of Brescia
her self and her Precincts 100450 Crowns of annual Revenue; Out of Padua
140000. out of Verana 90000. Out of Vicenza 36000. Out of Bergamo. 60000. Out
of Friuli 30000. Out of Marca Trevisana 90000. Out of Dalmatia 10000. Out of
the City of Venice herself above 600000 Crowns of annual incomes; besides
what she has from the Greek Islands that are under her Dominions; In times of
pressing Emergences she has diverse ways to make Levies, for the security and
advantage of the Signorie, Among others she has bin forced to make sale of
Offices, and admit young Gentlemen into the great Council before their time;
By this way she has got many Millions from time to time, for preservation of
her Maydenhead, and supplies of urgent necessities; but this course is used with
a reservation always, that Merit must concur with Money, so that it is not the
highest bidder that carries it.

Oftentimes in case of danger she makes the Gentry, and Citizens that enjoy
any stable possessions under the Republic, to advance the Rents for so many
years; She makes also some of her Magistrates serve her gratis, and without
salary for a time; She also makes frequent use of Lotteries to serve her turn;
And the Church uses to contribut very largely, yet they never exact any thing
of the Ecclesiastics without acquainting the Pope, which is only pro forma:
But the War ceasing, these extraordinary Levies cease also with the cause, and
all things return exactly to be in statu quo prius, which has often happend,
and this makes the peeple contribute more cheerfully, because she is always
very careful to keep her Public Faith with her Subjects inviolable.

I will conclude this particular Description of the so much admired City of
Venice with one observation more, viz. That there are few places where there are
more curious and costly Books for the illiterat vulgar, for so the Romanists
term Church*Images and Sculptures, whereof there are great nombers a la Mosaica,
and made by the famous Titiano a Venetian born; one of the most remarquable is
that of the Virgin Mary's at Saint Marks Church, where those who desire to know
whether a friend absent be living or dead, use to set up a Wax Candle in the
open Air before the Picture, and if the party be living the Candle does
quietly burn out be the wind never so high; if he be dead, the least puff
blows it out according to their belief. There is also on Saint Marks Walls,
among diverse others, the Picture of two Cocks carring away a Wolf, which
represents Lodovico Sforza the Duke of Milan, and the Cocks denote Lewis the
twelf, and Charles the eighth Kings of France who outed him of his Duchy. There
are also two Emblematicall Lions, one meagre and lean lying on the Land; The
other plump and fat sporting in the Water; the last refers to S. Marks Lion the
Arms of Venice, who has both enrichd, and defended her self, more by the Sea
than by Land; for whereas some Cities of Italy are said to be walld with Fire
(meaning Flint) Venice may more truly be said to be walld with Water; It is the
Water, wherein she lies like a Swannes nest, that does both fence and feed Her;
to which purpose she has many thousands of Wooden Horses perpetually bringing
her provisions, and carrying her Inhabitants up and down within and about the
City; But a horse of flesh were as strange a thing to be seen there as an
Elephant upon London streets. Therefore it were as absurd an impertinency to
prefer a Farrier to Venice, as it was in him who would have preferred a Spurrier
to Queen Elizabeth.

To speak of the sundry sorts of Antiquities, Monuments, and ingenious
Epitaphs, which are in the Churches up and down Venice, would afford matter
enough to fill Volumes, I will only produce an instance of one extraordinary
odd kind of Epitaph, upon Peter Aretin in S. Lukes Church:

Qui giace l'Aretin Poeta Tosco,
Chi disse mal d'ognun fuor che di Dio,
Scusandosi, dicendo, n'ol conobbi.
Englished thus:

The Toscan Aretin lies in this Grave,
He who at all, excepting God, did rave;
And if the reason you desire to have,
He knew Him not.
Having thus endeavored to set forth this Maiden City in Her true colors,
and made the narrowest inspection into Her Water we could, the close of Her
Character shall be some peculiar Epithetts that are given to Her among the rest
of the fair Towns of Italy, as follows;

Fama tra noj; Roma, pomposa and santa;
Venetia riccha, saggia, signorile;
Napoli odorifera and Gentile;
Fiorenza bella, tutto il mondo canta;
Grande Milano in Italia si vanta;
Bologna grassa, and Ferrara civil;
Padona dotta, and Bergamo sottile;
Genoa di superbia altiera pianta;
Verona degna, and perugia sanguigna;
Brescia T'armata, and Mantoa gloriosa;
Rimini buona, and Pistoia ferrigna;
Cremona antica, and Luca industriosa;
Furli bizarro, and Ravenna benigna;
Et Singallia de l'aria noiosa;
Et Capo^a l'amorosa;
Pisa frendente, and Pesaro giardino;
Ancona bell Porto al Pellegrino;
Fidelissimo Urbino;
Ascoli tondo, and lungo Recanate;
Foligno delle strade inzuccarate,
Et par da'l cielo mandate
Le belle done di Fano si dice;
Ma Siena poj tra l'altre piu selice.
Among all these Cities we find that Venice is rankd next Rome, and has three
as it were proverbiall attributs given Her higher than any of the rest, viz. to
be Rich, Wise, and Ladylike or Stately; whereunto I shall add another saying,
Venegia, Venegia, chi non Ti vede non Ti pregia; the Eye is the best Judge of
Venice.

Having now don with the Topography, and local description of Venice, together
with Her method of Government and Magistracy both Urban and Rural; Having also
given some touches of her wealth, power and extent of Dominion, with other
singularities peculiar to Her, We will now make some reserches into Her Annalls,
and speak of Her Martial Exploits up and down the World; as also of the
transactions and traverses of State twixt other Princes and Her which are
various and very remarkable, She having always bin one of the most politic
and pragmaticall'st Republics on Earth; Therefore in Here Is the Story of many
parts of Christendom and other Regions may be said to be involvd* All which
shall be don in a regular way of succinctnes, and a special care had to avoid
trivialties and impertinencies, as well as that no material passage may be
omitted.

OF THE PRINCES, AND DUKES OF VENICE.

PAULUTIO ANAFESTO, THE FIRST DOGE, OR DUKE, OF VENICE.
Unity is as much requisite for the well-being of An. Dom. 697.
things, as Entity is for their being, the Philosophers (as formerly was said,)
call it the highest point of perfect on, all bodies incline and propend toward
it, by a secret instinct of nature as to their Center: The Republic of Venice
therefore finding some inconveniences, or half a kind of confusion, if not a
deformity, to have two heads upon one body, grew weary of the Tribunitial
Power, and so resolved to reduce the Soverain Authority under one; to which
purpose, a notable Speech was made to this effect:

That there was no more hope to be had of the Venetian Commonwealth, nor yet
of their Liberty, which had bin pourchased and maintained by their Progenitors
with such generosity, unless the fury of the Tribunes expired; that their
self-same Ancestors had in times past for the sweetness of Liberty abandoned
their most pleasant Country, their Houses, and all other matters which men
commonly esteem most dear, and were com into barren Islands, where there was
nothing that might invite them to dwell; That if they could have dispensed with
their Liberty, they might with all safety have remained in the City where they
were first born and brought up; and with this loss alone, might have lived
peaceably among the Barbarians; but being full of innated courage, they
supposed that they ought not to lose their Freedom, but with their lives;
wherefore diverse of those that were there present, following the example of
their Predecessors, came only into those places to live at Liberty; To what
purpose then was their designs? what profit had they by their dislodging? why
had they so many Churches, Buildings, and so many public and private Houses?
why did they forsake the firm land to eschew bondage, and yet meet it in the
midst of the waters by the insolency of a few, whither it was likely, that the
barbarous enemy who was so near them, would take any rest, till he had found some
means to ^uinat this new Domicile of Liberty, seeing that Tyrants hate nothing
so much as that Name, and undoubtedly 'twas his wish, to see the whole Venetian
State destroyed by civil discord, which he could not shake by any other means.

Hereupon they suddenly resolved to elect a new Duke who should represent the
Honor and Majesty of the whole State, and have power to Assemble the General
Council, to choose Annual Tribunes in the inferior Islands, from whence the
Appeals should come before him: and moreover, if any had obtained any dignity
o^ Prelatship by the su^rages of the Clergy, he should not enjoy the same,
without the ratification of the Duke.

Upon these Deliberations PAULUTIO of Heraclea, a man of integrity, evperience
and courage, was chosen Duke after the Cities foundation, about 276. He took an
Oath, well and faithfully to provide whatsoever should be fit for the honor of
the Commonwealth, and the Venetian Name; hereupon he was adorned with diverse
Noble Ensigns to make the Dignity the more illustrious: Being instal'd Duke,
his first care was to free the Republic of the War that was than afoot with
Luitprand, which he did; and he extended the limits of Heraclea, from the River
of Pi^vo, unto the little stream called Piaricolle, and brought the Equilines
under his Dominion: In his time, those of Tourcedes built a Magnificent Temple
to the honor of the Virgin Mary, which is yet standing, and in good repair to
this day.

MARCELLO TEGALIANO succeeded PAULUTIO, who 717
swayed over the Signory twenty years and upwards; this Duke MARCELLO, got more
repute by Peace then War, and governed nine years.

HOR^O called UR^US HYPATUS succeeded MARCELLO, 726
the Longobards at that time had taken Ravenna, and the Exarch flying to Venice
for refuge, by the intercession of the Pope, the Venetians raised a
considerable Army and took Ravenna again, and restored it to to the Exarch, in
which exploit PRODEUS of Vicenza, a person of renown was slain; this Duke was
of a spirit more haughty then ordinary, and making War out of a private
spleen against Heraclea, he was slain by the Citizens of Venice upon the
eleventh year of his Magistracy: URSUS being thus thrust out of the world,
there happened an intervall in the Ducall Government, and another kind of
Magistrate was chosen, called the Master, or Consul of the men at Arms,
Dominico Leo was the first, and Cornicula succeeded him; but the fifth year
after the Creation of this new Magistrate, the whole City was transported with a
marvailous desire to have a Duke again.

Hereupon THEADATO HYPATO Son to the slain Duke, was 742
chosen the fourth Doge of Venice in an Assembly at Malamocca; but there was a
powerful man in the Republic called Galla, who malign'd him, and having raised
a Party, surpised him the thirteenth year of his Government, and put out his
eyes, managing the business with so much Art, that he succeeded him in the
Dukedom.

GALLA in his second year of his Principality displeasing the people, 755
had his eyes also put out, and was banished.

DOMINICO MONEGARIO was forthwith appointed Duke, 756
but being of a furious nature, there were yearly Tribunes chosen to assist
him, and counterpoise the violence of his spirit, but the fifth year of his
Authority, his eyes were outed of his head, and his Person of his Office.

MAURITIO of Heraclea was chosen next, who did purchase so 764
much popular love, that he obtained that which none of his Predecessors could
compass, which was a Liberty to associat his Son Givanni as Colleague with him
in the Principality. In his time a bold Declaration was published, which
imported, that the Venetians were a free people, acknowledging neither of the
Empires East or West; This did so move Charles of France then Emperor, that he
commanded his Son Pepin, who then governed the affairs of Italy, to make
furious Wars upon the Venetian Coasts where Heraclea and Equ^ine stood, the
Inhabitants whereof being frighted thereat, fled to M^lamocca, and the Rialto.

GIOVANNI MAURITIO, Son, succeeded the Father in 769
the Dukedom, there happened a shrewd clash 'twixt him and the Bishop of
Grad^, a man eminent for Sanctity; GIOVANNI sent his Son MAURITIO with some
troops to assail the said Bishop, who being taken, he was thrown headlong down
from a high Tower: hereupon, Pepin by Order from Charlemain to expiat the
Bishops Blood, made a fierce war upon the Venetian Territory: hereupon
GIOVANNI and his Son were expelled the City, and Heraclea the place of their
Nativity was utterly demolished, and OBOLLERIO ANTHENORIO of Malamocca was
chosen Duke, Anno Dom. 801.

(...) associated his brother Beat^ for Colleague, and 804
an eager war happened 'twixt Pepin and the Republic, who infesting the Sea
Frontires up and down, came as far as Malamocca; and thinking to pass thence
to the Rial^o to find out the Duke; he was beaten back by a Tempest, wherein
he lost the greatest part of his Army: About this time the Lombards Kingdom was
extinguished by Pepin, 802. There was another battle fought among those Lakes,
'tvvixt the Venetians and King Pepin, where the Venetians had the better again:
hereupon a Peace was concluded, and French Ambassadors came to the Rialto,
where having being honorably entertained they departed; OBELLERIO who was
cried up to be the occasion of the former vvarres was cut to pieces by the fury
of the peeple, and his bowels gushing out, they were drawn at length like
ropes, and torn up and down the streets, his wife likewise who was of the Blood
Royal of France was slain with him.

ANGELO PARTITIATO succeeded next, and he was the 809
first that held the Seat at the Rialto, Heraclea was repaired in his time, and
called Villa Nuova, Anno Dom. 809. The Historians rank the (...) the Noblest
Family that came from Heraclea. There happened a hot war in this Dukes time,
'twixt Venice and the Bishop of Aquileia, who had bin declared Heretic by
Pope Alexander; the Venetian took him prisoner: but they gave him his liberty,
on condition that they should send yearly to Venice on the same day that the
Victory was got twelve wild Boars, which with a Bull should be killed before the
General Assembly by way of sacrifice; this custom, with other sports continues
annually to this day.

And now I may say, that the Republic of Venice did pass her Infancy, her
Youth may be said to follow hereafter, as by her actions will appear.

JUSTINIANO was chosen next, in whose time a Fleet was sent 827
to assist Michael the Eastern Emperor against the Saracens, who did good
service; but the remarkablest passage in this Dukes Government, was, that the
body of St. Mark was translated from Alexandria to Venice, where it is kept
with great devotion to this day, in a curious Church made of Mosaicall work.

GIOVANNI PARTITIATIO, brother to JUSTINIANO, 826
was declared the next Prince, but having many potent Adversaries, he was
surpised near to St. Peter's Church, whither he was going to his Devotions, and
being disrobed of the Ornaments of Sovereign Dignity, they shaved his beard and
head; and confined him to a Monastery in Grada.

PIETRO TRADONICO was chosen in his place, he was born 836
at Pola, a very ancient City built by the Colchians; there came Ambassadors
from Ver^na, to desire help of the Republic against some enemies they had,
which they obtained, and overcame their foes at the Lake of Benae, whereupon
they sent rich gifts to the Venetian for their succor: Theodosius the Greek
Emperor, sent his high Admiral to solicit the Republic for Auxiliaries
against the Moors, whereupon she armed sixty Galleys which did do notable
exploits, in rega^ whereof, TRADONICO the Duke of Venice, was called
Protospater ( viz. the first father) of the Grecian Empire by Theodosius: But
at the battle of Crot^na the Greeks not sticking close to their business, the
Venetian received a shrewd overthrow by the Moors under Saba their Captain, who
afterward grew so insolent, that he marched to Rome, and pitifully ransacked
S Peter's Church, with others. A little after Pope Benedict came to Venice, unto
whom, about the year 840* he promised the bodies of S. Pancratius and Sancta
Sabina; Lotharius* also the Emperor did confirm unto Venice many extraordinary
immunities: but in this Dukes time the Republic received diverse illfavor'd
successes abroad, and there were odd factions at home against the Duke, in so
much, that returning one day from St. Zacharies Church he was murdered, but
the actors and conspirators thereof were soundly punished for it: this Duke had
governed nineteen years.

URSO PARTITIATIO came next to the Ducall Dignity, 864
who had a magnanimous young man to his son, and did diverse exploits against
the Moors and Saracens in the behalf of the Greek Emperor, so that the Title,
of Protospater was confirmed again to the Duke of Venice; who, among other
Presents, sent twelve Bells to Constantinople, which was the first time that
the Greeks used Bells, Anno Dom. 864.

GIOVANNI PARTITIATIO brother to URSO was chosen 881
to govern, but he did voluntarily depose himself, and retire to his own house,
having escaped a dangerous disease.

PIETRO CANDIANO succeeded him, who fighting with great 887
courage against the Narentines (the ancient enemies of Venice) was slain,
having governed but six months.

PIETRO TRIBUNO was chosen next, who was also declared 888
Protospater of the Grecian Empire, he added many fortifications for the
securing of the City: in this Dukes Reign the Hunnes broke into Italy, and made
cruel havoc up and down, and at last resolved to besiege the Rialto; hereupon
a Noble Venetian made this hortatory speech unto the City,

That it was now time by their actions to show themselves valiant men, that a
mighty danger did not only threaten their Country, but their lives; that they
had to do with a people, who as little used to spare the bodies of the dead,
as their lives in battle, yet nerethelesse they were not made of iron, but
their bodies might easily be pierced; that they should call to memory, how the
ancient Venetians, with a fevv Inhabitants of the Latins, made no difficulty
in their Countries behalf, to expose their lives before the walls of Aquileia
against 300000. men, for Attila had so many in his Army; that the event of that
battle did manifest how virtue and courage is much better in war then
multitudes; that their Ancestors had in the same places where they were now to
fight, vanquished in times past King Pepin followed with his own Forces, and
those of the Emperor his Father, and that then they only fought for their
Liberty, but now they were to fight for their Faith, and Blood: hereupon the
Venetian gained a most signal Victory over the Hunnes, which much increased
the glory of the City, and was of such consequence, that they left Italy a
while after.

URSO BADOAIRIO succeeded TRIBUNO, he sent his Son 909
Pietro to visit the Greek Emperor at Constantinople, where being confi^m'd
Protospater, he received many rich presents; BADOAIRIO in in the eleventh year
of his Government, did voluntarily depose himself, and became a Monk.

PIETRO CANDIANO or SANUTO succeeded this Voluntary Resignation, in whose time
Iustinopoli came under the Venetian dition.

PIETRO BADOAIRIO followed next, who as he returned from Greece, was taken
prisoner in Slavonia, but ransomed.

PIETRO CANDIANO next succeeded, whose Government 920
was somewhat unquiet, yet he debell'd the Narentines, who infested the gulp
with pyraticall depredations.

CANDIANO the fourth Son to PIETRO succeeded, who for 941
some misdemeanors had bin banished, but waxing more wise by years, he was
recalled and created Duke; but herein the City of Venice received no small
reproach abroad, in regard she had formerly made a solemn Vow never to advance
this CANDIANO to the Government, and a Judgment fell upon her presently
upon it, for a fire happened, which besides the Dukes Palace, burnt down the
magnificent Cathedral Church of the City, and those of St. Theodore and Maria
Iubenica, with above 300. private houses more. This CANDIANO died most
tragically, for the peeple fell upon him as upon a Tyrant, and he flying into
that part of St. Marks Church which was left unburnt with his Son in his Arms,
they knocked him down, and cut both in pieces.

PIETRO URSEOLA with much entreaty of the people was 976
chosen next, who would not undergo the charge, unless the people would bind
themselfs by solemn Oath unto him, which was done; in his time St. Marks Church
was repaired, with the Ducall Palace; he overcame the Saracens at Barri, he
had but one Son, and as soon as he was born, both he and his wife Foelicia
vovv'd perpetual chastity: In his time Istria became Tributary to Venice; but
at last he voluntarily quitted the Government, and went disguised in a Pilgrims
habit to Aquitain by the persvvasion of a great holy man called Guerin.

VITALIS CANDIANO succeeded, who also deposed himself, 978
and cloistered himself in St. Hi^arie, Monastery.

TRIBUNO MEMIO a great wise man, but of fevv words, was 979
chosen in his steed, in whose time some civil discords happened, and a great
feud fell out 'tvvixt the Republic and O^ho the Emperor, who forebad all the
Cities of the Empire any trade with the Venetians, but he died not long after,
and this Duke also deposed himself voluntarily, and died a Monk.

PIETRO URSEOLO the second succeeded, in whose time the 991
Republic did wonderfully increase, for she obtained of Basilius and Alexis,
who at that time did jointly command the Grecian Empire, to be free from all
customs and taxes throughout all their Dominions: Moreover, he suppressed the
Narentines, and reduced Nola and diverse other Cities in Istria and Dalmatia
under the Empire of the Republic, Lesina also which was the chief rendevous of
the Narentine pirates was taken by her, and reduc^d to St. Mark, as Spalatro
also, with diverse other places: In this Dukes time sundry privileges were
granted by the Emperor Otho to the Venetians, and the Emperor himself came
disguised, and in nature of a Pilgrim to St. Marks Church to Venice, where he
sojournd diverse days with the Duke privately, and departed; before he went,
he remitted for ever the cloak of cloth of gold, which the Republic was bound
by solemn accord to give yearly to the Emperor, so being presented with diverse
rich gifts, he went back to Ravenna.

OTHO URSEOLO succeeded PISTRO'S son, a young man of 1009
great hope, insomuch that the King of Hungary married his daughter unto him;
He defeated the Hadrians in a furious conflict betwixt the river Po and Adice;
yet was he dismissed of his dignity, and banished to Greece.

PIETRO CENTRANICO succeeded, who being deposed by the peeple, 1028
was shorn, and turned to a Monastery.

DOMENICO FLABENICO was then chosen, who prevailed so far 1030
with the people, that he got the Family of the Urseoli to be made ever after
incapable of the Sovereign Dignity, or of any office in the Republic, and so
made the peeple to be Ministers of his hatred to that house; he abolished also
the custom of associating for the future any Colleague in the principality,
which is carefully observed to this day, Anno Dom. 1030.

DOMINICO CONTARENO was made the thirtieth Duke of Venice, he 1041
reduced Zara to obedience, Pope Leo came in his time to Venice upon a kind of
Pilgrimage to St. Mark, which he endowed with many new privileges.

DOMINICO SILVIO came after him, who was cried up Duke as he 1069
accompanied Contaveno to his grave; the Normans did about this time much
infest the Levant parts, and the Greek Emperor Nicephorus, whom the Venetian
assists and grows victorious, but afterward, both the Greeks and Venetians
received a notable overthrow at Durazzo by the Normans.

VITALIS PHALERIO succeeded, as soon as he was chosen, he propounded 1082
to the people, to send Ambassadors to Constantinople to the Emperor Alexis to
obtain that Dalmatia and Croatia which they had taken from the Usurpers with so
much expense of blood and tresure, might by right of war for ever remain to the
Venetians; all which was freely condescended unto, so that this PHALERIO was
the first Duke, who in his titles did bear these Provinces. The Western Emperor
Henry came to Venice to visit St. Mark, where the Annallists write of a great
miracle that happened. Anno Dom. 1082.

VITALIS MICHAELI was next after, in his time a mighty Army of 1094
Christians were sent to Syria for recovery of the holy Land; he that gave the
first hint to the expedition was Peter a French Hermit, who gave out, that he
had a Vision appeared to him to that purpose: hereupon Pope Urban came
expressly to the Council of Clermont, and made this hortative Oration.

That he was not departed from Rome, and come to that holy Assembly for the
affairs of the Church of Rome only, although it needed greatly to be reformed,
but was stirred up by another occasion which was more holy, and was likewise
more notable; that he did not doubt but those who were there assembled had
heard tell of what had befaln long since in Syria, and chiefly in the Confines
of that Region which is called the Holy Land, the injust usurpation of the holy
Sepulcher of our Sovereign Lord Jesus Christ (which he could not utter without
tears) by those cruel barbarous Saracens; that there was no Church, Altar, or
any other sacred place, but was either razed down to the ground by those
accursed Mahumetans, or converted to their profane uses; that the religious
peeple dwelling there at such time as the enemy made themselfs masters thereof,
were constrained some for fear of horrible punishment, to renounce the Faith of
Jesus Christ; others that woldpersever therein were destroyed by fire and
sword, and others by various sorts of torments were miserably consumed: That
devout Matrons going thither upon Pilgrimage from all parts of Europe, had not
bin only forced by them to satiat their brutish lust, but likewise in contempt
and derision of us were tormented by monstrous embracements, that if that which
he had related was not sufficient in their opinions to incite them to take
Arms, and to prosecut revenge, He besought them at least to consider, and call
to remembrance, how in a short time through the negligence of their Ancestors
the forces of Asia were increased, and besides^, how far the Mahumetans had in
length and breadth extended their Dominions; how many Countries they possessed,
who had in times past belonged to the Roman Empire; but would to God (said he)
that the affairs of Christendom were brought to that pass, that we were but to
complain of other men's miseries, we have, helas, in our days seen our Italy
wholly destroyed by their incursions and spoils, Castles, Cities, and Churches
beaten down, and burnt by those sacrilegious persons: But wherefore do I relate
the murders, captivities, rapes, and other tyrannies never heard of before,
which this Land has endured a long time, seeing that Spain likewise, and her
Neighbor Aquitain, and all the occidentall Provinces have not only felt the
like loss, but having at this day scarce dried up their tears, do stand in
fear of the like. And ye O Frenchmen, though this wound be not yet entered into
our bowels, no doubt but in regard of your Neighborhood, you have heard and
seen somewhat of that whereof I have now spoken; and the Germans, with other
Northwest Nations, who have not as yet felt those losses, ought often to
forethink what dangers menace them from the East, nay how near they are to
them already. I know not if the Venetians were not, who with strong Garrisons
defend the Sea Coasts, and who have often repulst this cruel enemy from
Dalmatia and Istria, whether this storm ere this would have blown into Hungary
and Germany: The power of the Grecian Empire, which whilst her strength and
vigor lasted, was wont to be the bulvvark of Europe on the East and West
side, is in such sort ruined, as the Emperor dreams on nothing but on means
and forces whereby he may conserve his City of Constantinople; which place if
we had lost, as God forbid, we may easily conjecture how great such a loss
would be, as well to all Europe as to him: I tremble with horror when I do
but think what will happen, if this fire be not quickly quenched, which does
daily more and more kindle: all the miseries which have befallen those whom
we bevvail hang over our heads, men and women shall be reserved to satisfy
the luxury of those barbarous peeple, and ye will afterward lament when
'tvvill be too late, that having had means, you have not opposed your selfs
against these miseries: it may be you think it is impossible this should com to
pass, so did they once who since have felt it, and would to God we did not feed
our selves so often with vain hopes, but 'twere better O courageous spirits
while we have strength, council, aid, power and money ready, and generally,
what may give hope of a victory to divert this evident peril, nor is our
enterprise above human strength, that Charles surnamed the great, in a manner
your Countryman: O ye Germans in regard of the descent of his Ancestors, and
your King O ye Frenchmen, and the glory of your name did drive the Saracens
forth of Spain and Aquitain, the same Charles constrained them to quit Italy;
the same Charles of whom ye so much vaunt did recover Jerusalem which ye term
Holy, and drove thence the enemy, and by how much glory and ^eputation is
great, by so much the more ought it to incite you which are descended from him,
to attempt some new exploit which may augment this your ancient renown; if ye do
not thus, but give your selfs to rest and idleness, ye shall not only hazard
what your Ancestors have left you, but you shall suffer the Native Country of
our Sovereign King to your great shame and contempt, with that of all
Christendom likewise, to be trodden down by these cruel enemies, and his
Sepulcher, Temple and other holy places to be polluted by murders, rapes, and
sacriledges* Arm your selfs therefore in time, and prevent this common infamy,
pourchase to your selfs and all Europe an assured safety, I think you may
easily do it, for by how much your forces surpass those of Charles, if ye all
jointly undertake this voyage, by so much more shall the victory be certain and
easy for you; the Victors profit shall be great and inestimable by the spoils
of so opulent a Nation, and such rich Kingdoms, but the celestial reward shall
be much greater, which in the Name of Almighty God, we promise to as many as
shall valiantly venture themselfs.

This flexanimous speech did so heighten and melt the hearts of all, that a
Croisada was presently resolved upon, whereunto the Republic of Venice did
contribut 200. vessels of all sorts, which sailed to Ionia under the conduct
of Hemico Contareno a Bishop, and MICHAELI VITALIS the Dukes son; this Fleet
did much advantage that mighty expedition, though some affirm that the Venetians
came not to Asia till Jerusalem was taken; but they being com to Rhodes, a
shrewd clash fell 'twixt them and the Pisans, of whom they took 18. Galleys;
afterward they took Smyrna, and scout'd the seas of Pamphilia, Silicia and
Syria, till they came to Ioppa, which they kept, afterward having left
sufficient gards for their vessels, they came from Ioppa, and marched in
battle array to Jerusalem, and returning thence they took Ascalon, Tyberias,
Caypha, with others. About this time Matilda a Noble Lady of the Sigefretti
being reinvested in the City of Ferrara by the help of Venice, she granted unto
her freedo^ for ever of all matters within that City, and a little Prince
VITALIS died.

ORDELAPHO PHALERIO was elected in his room, who in the second year of his
Government, sent a Fleet of 100. Galleys to Syria in poursuance of the
Croisada, where they took Ptolemais and Sydon, as also another Town called
Faronia by assault; this made the Emperor Henry the Fourth, to indulge Venice
with many privileges, but a fierce war fell out 'twixt the Venetians and
Padouans a little after, and the Padouans being orepowr'd by the Padouan, had
recourse to the Emperor, who thereupon sent to Venice, wishing them to
remember how they were sprung from the Padouans, therefore they should greatly
err, unless they honored the City from which they were descended, and respect
the Inhabitants thereof in the same manner, as well bred children do their
ancient parents; that the Padouans on the other side instead of envying the
Venetian glory, ought rather to rejoice to see those who were descended from
them, to have pourchased so great fame and repute by Land and Sea; so there was
a reconcilement made by the Emperors intercession. About this time, a great
part of Venice was consumed by fire, at which time Malamocca was almost burnt:
upon this dismal accident of fire, there came news, that Zara was revolted
from Venice to Calamon King of Hungary, but she quickly reduced her to
obedience, and this gave advantage to the Venetian to pierce further into
Croatia, and take other places, which they keep to this day; but they had ill
success the year following in Dalmatia, where the Duke came himself in person,
and being too forward in the battle, was killed.

DOMINICO MICHAELI succeeded, and Baldwin the Second 1117
King of Jerusalem being taken prisoner by Balochus King of the Parthians, there
were pitiful complaints sent to Rome, that the Holy Land was like to be
utterly lost, unless speedy supplies were sent: hereupon he moved Venice
thereunto by the intercession of her Patriarch of Grada her prime Churchman, who
being admitted to the Senate, spoke as follows:

I think, O peeple of Venice, that you are not ignorant, what our own Forces in
part, and partly those of the rest of Europe have don these precedent years for
the recovery of Palestine, which ye call the Holy Land, for this is the 26.
year which so many Princes taking up the Holy Cross, undertook for the same
purpose to invade Asia, where by the divine bounty and their valor, all that
which stretches from Bythinia to Syria was gained, and ye your selfs having
taken Smyrna, and done other exploits all along the Coasts of Syria, did not
only gain glory thereby, but you have had your share in the Cities; but now there
is news brought how Baldwin is carried prisoner to Cayro, whereupon his
Holiness thinking the Venetians to be most worthy of such an enterprise, has
written to your Prince accordingly: therefore go on ye Noble Venetians to
preserve that which is already got by you, even that Land where Christ our King
was born, did hide himself, wept, was betrayed, taken and crucified, and his
most holy body laid in the grave, and who shall com Sovereign Judge one day to
enquire of the deeds of all mankind, what Churches, what Monasteries, what
Altars do you think can be so agreeable to him as this holy voyage? but because
human affairs are of that nature, as there is almost no public charity free
from ambition, so that happily you demand within your selfs what glory, what
recompense may be gained by this expedition; certainly it is, and eve^ shall be
for our highest repute, that the Venetians only of all Europe, have bin able
and fit to oppose in a manner all Asia; the furthest part of the East shall
ring of the Venetian power, Afric shall admire it, and Europe shall magnify
and Cronicle it; that which we have don formerly in Asia, seems to be effected
rather by strangers then by us, but now the work shall be solely attributed to
you: Moreover, I doubt not but you are all willing to enlarge the Republic, but
how? by what means will you effect it? in living idly, or rowing up and down
these lakes in your little boats? he that thinks so does greatly deceave
himself: the ancient Romans of whom ye vaunt your self to be descended, and
whom ye desire to imitat, did not pourchase the Empire of the world, by living
idly and at ease, but by making one war grow out of another, those whom we
relieve, as they have already, so they will give us still a share in the
conquered Towns and Country, depart then in Gods Name, etc.

Upon this Speech, the Venetians resolve to succor the Holy Land, and arm 200.
bottomes of all sorts, and MICHAELI the Doge himself goes chief, who sailing to
Ioppa found it blocked up by the Barbarians, but the Venetians freed the Town
from the siege, and opened the passage of the Sea, with great slaughter of the
enemy, and prizall of many rich booties. Thence the Duke of Venice went to
Jerusalem, where he obtained many privileges for the Republic, as that the
Venetians should in all places of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and Principality of
Antioch have a particular street apart to plead before their Magistrate, that
they should be free from Taxes through all Syria, etc. After this, the most
ancient City of Tire was delivered up to the Christians by the help of the
Venetian, who had the third part of the City awarded him: Besides all these
Prerogatives some Historians mention, that it was agreed and confirmed while the
Duke of Venice should make his abode in Jerusalem, he should enjoy the same
honors as the King did. While the Venetian was thus busy in the Holy Land, the
Greeks being emulous of his glory, began to raise arms against him, but Prince
MICHAELI at his return, took in his passage most of the Greek Islands, as Samos,
Lesbos, Andros, etc. then coming to Dalmatia he recovered Zara, and Spalatro;
so he came back all glorious to Venice, where he finished his days a while
after. 1130.

PIETRO POLLANO succeeded his deceased Father in Law 1130
MICHAELI, a notable wise Prince, of that high esteem, that he was chosen
Arbiter 'twixt Conradus, and Emanuel, the two Emperors of the East and West:
add to this wisdom his valor, for he gave a famous defeat to the Padouans and
Pisans, and reduced Corfu first into subjection.

DOMINICO MOROSINI succeeded POLANI, who reduced 1148
to obedience the tumultuons Istrians in Pola; they of Ancona were admitted to
the Venetian Society; there was also a League struck with William King of
Sicilie, whereby the Venetian got diverse privileges in that Island in their
public marts.

VITALIS MICHAELI succeeded, the second of that Name, 1156
he sides strongly with the Pope against Barbarossa the Emperor; The Republic
receaves much detriment by the perfidiousnesse of Emanuel the Greek Emperor,
by seizing on all the Venetian Merchants up and down without warning given; a
great mortality happend in the Venetian Army, because the Greeks had poisoned
the waters, this Duke was murdered in a popular sedition. 1164


TE^ASTIANO CYANI succeeded, in his time there was a Greek Emperor Emanuel, who
perfectly hated the Venetians, and studied nothing more then to do them
mischief, and the chiefest grounds of this hatred was that lighting upon a book
of predictons, he was frighted with one verse, which says, that those of
Adria should one day command Constantinople, which was interpreted to be
Venice. This Emanuel drew from her confederacy Ancona, but she making a League
with Ariminium, brought Ancona to the former amity.

The Tresure of Venice being much exhausted, and melted by reason of so many
irons she had in the fire, it was decreed that the moneys of particular men
laid in deposite, should be brought to the Tresury of S. Mark, to be employed
and kept in the Name of the Commonwealth as need shall be, until the City had
recovered her self. There happened at that time a mortal feud 'twixt Pope
Alexander, and the Emperor Frederick, who favored Octavian the Antipope, The
Pope fled disguised to Venice, and continued so a good while in the Hospital
of Charity.

Being discovered at last, the Venetians sent an Ambassador to the Emperor for
an accommodation, the Pope being present when the Credentiall Letters to the
Emperor were to be sealed with wax, he commanded in favor of the Republic,
that ever after the Dukes Letters should be sealed with lead, which is observed
ever since. The Venetian Ambassadors being com before Fredrerick, were
courteously entreated at first, but so soon as the mention Pope Alexander, he
fell into a rage, and said;

Get you hence, and tell your Prince and peeple, that Frederick the Roman
Emperor demande^h his enemy, who is com to them for succor, whom if they send
not presently bound hand and foot with a sure guard, he will proclaim them
enemies to him and the whole Empire, and that there is neither alliance or Law
of Nations which shall be able to free them from his revenge for such an
injury: to prosecut which he is resolved to overturn all divine and human Laws,
that he will suddenly bring his Forces before their City, and contrary to their
expectation plant his victorious Eagles in the Market place of S. Mark.

The Ambassadors at their return to Venice having reported all this, they
decreed to arm a great number of Ships, and make themselfs ever masters of the
Sea; but while they were thus preparing, news was brought that Otho the
Emperors son was entered into the Gulf with 75. Galleys, CIANI the Duke
resolved to meet him with as many Galleys as were ready, before he launched
out, the Pope sang Mass himself, with special prayers for the prosperity of
the enterprise, and honored the Duke with the golden Sword, and other Ensig^s
of Knighthood: so he met with the Imperial Fleet upon the Coasts of Istria,
where he utterly defeated the Emperors Son, made him prisoner, and took 48.
Galleys besides; the Duke being com so triumphantly ashore, the Pope presented
him with a gold ring, saying, Take CIANI this ring, and by my advice give it to
the Sea, obliging him thereby unto thee, which both thou and thy Succ^ssors
likewise shall for ever hereafter yearly do on this same day, to the end
posterity may know, that ye have in times past by right of war pourchas'd the
entire Dominion over the Sea, making it subject unto you, as a woman is to her
husband.

The Venetians suffered Otho upon his parole to go to his Father; promising to
return howsoever, being com into the Emperors presence, he embraced him with
the more joy, because he had bin doubtful whether he had bin alive or no; Otho
began to discourse of the battle, referring the defeat to have happened by
Gods providence, saying further, that he had not omitted any thing that might
become a careful Captain, and that there wanted nothing to have obtained a
victory, but a just quarrel; it behooved his Majesty then, to believe that God
was powerful therein, not men, seeing so mighty an Army as theirs was, and not
being slow to fight, was defeated by a few who were not half their number; and
howsoever they might well overthrow and destroy human Forces, yet 'twas
impossible to surmount Divine: therefore he did most humbly beseech his
Caesarean Majesty no more to trouble Alexander for his place, whose quarrel he
might perceave by the success, to be maintained not only by men, but by God
himself, alleging further, that he had already disquieted him with the Forces
of the Empire, and sought to put him from his seat, but all in vain; that
therefore he should do a deed pleasing to all men, and worthy of a Christian, if
all hatred being forgotten, it would please him to change his mind, and after
assurance taken from the Venetians of his safe conduct, he would be pleased to
visit the Pope, and give open satisfaction.

Otho's advice proceeding so ingeniously from him did mightily prevail with
Frederick, whereupon he resolved to go to Venice, and PIETRO CIANI the Dukes
Son, was sent with six Galleys to attend him at Ravenna: being arrived at
Venice, the Emperor without more ado went to see the Pope, who tarried for
him at S. Marks Gate in the highest gravity of State: when the Emperor came
nere him, he threw off his purple robe, and crept on his knees to his Holiness
feet, which he humbly kissed; The Pope raised him up and embraced him, then
both going to the Church, went to the high Altar where that famous Table of
Massy gold, which uses to be in S. Marks Tresury, was taken out of purpose,
and so a perfect reconcilement was made. From Venice the Pope and Frederick
went to Ancona, attended by Prince CIANI; the City sent out two Canopies, one
for the Pope, the other for the Emperor, but the Pope commanded a third to be
brought for the Prince of Venice, allowing, that for ever after he and his
Successors should use one at all Solemnities; Alexander being com to Rome, among
other triumphs there were other silver Trumpets made to welcome him whereof he
took eight and gave the Prince of Venice, which the Republic should use ever
after in all solemnities. CIANI taking his leave of the Pope, and being
returned to Venice, Mariners were appointed to receave him in the Bucentoro,
being landed, he had a white burning Taper carried before him, which was given
him by the Pope for the first gift, besides the Canopy, the eight silver
Trumpets, the golden Sword, with other Ensigns.

CIANI now drooping with age, removed himself to S. George's Monastery, where
in a few days he died, making S. Marks Church his heir.

This Prince, as he was one of the stoutest, so was he the Saint-likest man of
all the Dukes that preceded him or followed him; by the rich Legacies he left,
S. Marks Church was wonderfully adorned, and because the said Church gives
occasion of wonderment to all strangers that behold her, I held this an apposit
place to bring her in, and make her appear to the curious Reader in her own
colors, according to the description I received from others, and my own
observation.

The Description of S. Marks Church.
THis Church, as diverse other, is not so much magnified for her largeness, as
for her riches; she is built in form of a cross, whose corners are highly
vaulted and covered with bright lead, as all the rest is which is discerned of
Seamen higher then all the buildings of the City above sixscore stades
distance: The whole Bulk is supported besides with most curious Arches,
contignated and joined together by marvailous Art; the inner part from the
middle to the highest part thereof glistereth with gold, and the concavity of
the vaults is enriched with diverse goodly and ancient pictures, made most of
them, after the Greek manner, which, with the labor to behold them in respect
of their height, do present unto the Spectator by their grave and venerable
aspect, a kind of awe intermingled with piety and Religion; that which is from
the gilding down to the pavement, is so well compassed and joined together with
goodly Tables of Marble, as by their pleasant veins in form of rays, the eyes
of the beholders are rather fed then satisfied; the seats below are of an
extraordinary red stone like to Porphyrie, the pavement all of Marble engraven
with diverse figures, wholly different and of varions colors: there are sundry
Columns and Tables of Parian, Spaitan, and Numidian work, that environ the
seats on both sides the Quire. The coming in to the Church on both sides, is in
a manner of the same trimming, while gilded Arches are sustein'd without, by
more then 300. exquisit Pillars, not so much for their greatness as their
diversity of colors: the space between those Pillars, being filled with choice
Tables of Marble: on the height of this entrance four great brazen horses all
gilded are to be seen, so lively, as if they seemed to neigh, and making
toward you, which are accounted rare pecces, but not of our time: All this
bears the highest top of the Church divided into six steeples, every of which
is reared up like a pyramid, and has on the sharpest point thereof a white
Marble Statue of a naked man standing up: Diverse other representations
delightful to the eye, and wrought with exceeding skill do beautisie the
spaces betwixt the Steeples; the whole work, as well on the right as the left
hand, is of the same substance and workmanship, and all that which is valuted
underneath is covered with gold. In sum, there is no place in the whole Church
either within or without, but is either decked with Marble, Gold, or precious
Stones, so that the two Columns of Alablaster which stand nere to the high
Altar, and the Chalcedony Stones, which are to be seen in the midst of the
pavement, with the Mosaicall works, we counted the least curiosities.

AURIA MARIPIETRO was surrogated in the room of SEBASTIAN 1329
CIANI, or Ziani, in whose time things prosper'd well with the Republic in the
affairs of Syria.

HENRICO DANDULO was then declared Prince, in whose time 1192
the Republic did mightily increase their bounds both of her renown and
Territories; the Pisans who had taken Pola were defeated: Baldwin Erl of
Flanders, with other Princes that went for the succor of the Holy Land arrived
all at Venice, where they found magnificent welcome, they had so much money
given them in presents as they would have borrowed, and 60. vessels were
provided them to transport their forces; but the Venetians had this benefit for
their money, that those forces helped them to recover Istria, which by the
raising of Zara was revolted from them; these Princes sail toward
Constantinople, where principally by the help of the Venetian the City was
taken, Baldwin Erl of Flanders declared Emperor of the East, and Tomaso
Morosino was made Patriarch of Constantinople by the Venetians: Moreover, they
had the I Will of Candie given them at that time, which they hold ever since; this
was about the year 1200.

PIETRO CIANI son to SEBASTIAN, was created Duke 1205
next, and was Erl of Arba at that time; in his time fell out the first
warr'twixt Venice and Genoa, who had many Ships in course that turned pirates;
Giovanni Trevisano was sent with nine Galleys well provided against them, who
took twelve of the Pirates Vessels and brought them prize: in this Dukes reign
there was a Colony sent to Corfu, and the possession of Candie was further
secured by a new Colony which suppressed diverse insurrections; this Duke being
struck in years, having ruled twenty two years, deposed himself voluntarily,
and retiring to S. Georges Monastery died soon after.

GIACOMO TEPULO was chosen in his place, the first thing 1228
he did was the suppression of the Candiots who had mutined; there was a great
Fleet employed also to Constantinople against the Greeks, in regard that it was
alleged the Venetians had a Right and Title to part of the Empire, and so was
bound to succor the chief seat thereof: The Republic assisted also in this
Dukes time the Genoveses against the Emperor Frederick and the Pisans, and
suppressed the fifth rebellion of Zara.

MARINO MOROSINI was afterward chosen Duke, but by a 1248
manner of Election, he took in Padoua Philippo Fontano Bishop of Ravenna,
being sent Legate from Pope Gregory to Venice, propounding everlasting life for
recompense to all those who should take arms with him against the Tyrant
Eccel^n an upstart, who did much mischief up and down Italy. The Venetians
presently levied Forces and assisted the Pope to quell this new monster, for
which service the Pope granted that the Dean of S. Marks should in high
solemnities use a mitre and carry a Pastoral staff, which none of their
Predecessors could ever obtain before.

RAINERI ZENO succeeded MOROSINI; in the beginning 1252
of whose government an ill favored clash happened 'twixt the Venetians and
Genoways about a Church which was allowed them both in P^olomais, commonly
called Acon, or Acoe; the Pope to decide the differences sent unto them, that
since divine Service was the same, and common to them both in that Church, the
Church likewise ought to be so; but this would not heal the wound, for the
Genoways had seized upon the Church, and made a kind of Fort of it. Hereupon
the Venetians rigged a Fleet of thirty Galleys under Lorenzo Tepulo, who coming
to the haven of Ptolemais, broak the chain and furiously charged the Genoa
ships, and two Galleys, being in the harbor, and having taken and despoiled
them of all their tackling, they burnt them in the Port. They went afterward to
the Church in question called sancta Laba, which the Genoways had fortified and
seized on it; after this there was another hot encounter 'twixt them where the
Genoways had the worst again. The Christians in Syria were much divided in
regard of this feud 'twixt Venice and Genoa, which the Pope endeavored to
reconcile, but could not. The Italians who were in Jerusalem favored Venice,
but those of Tire held to Genoa; at Trapani the Venetian gave the Genoway
another shrewd defeat, wherein were taken twenty four Galleys, and many
thousand prisoners carried away, and 1200 slain. Yet the Genoways made head
again, and sailing along the coasts of Candy they took Cydon now called Canea,
and pillaged it, but the Venetian met them a while after, and was soundly
revenged of them.

This War with Genoa put the Republic to extraordinary expense, whereupon a a
new impost was levied upon white meats, whereat there was a small insurrection,
which was quickly suppressed, and the Authors severely punished.

LORENZO TEPULO upon the death of ZENO succeeded, the 1268
Pope with the Kings of France and Sicilie did labor to reconcile matters
'twixt the Venetian and Genoway, in regard this quarrel betwixt them made
things go to wreck among the Christians in Syria, but nothing could prevail.
The Genoways scoured the Seas, so that no corn could be brought to Venice,
either from Apuleia, or Sicily, which pinched the City: a truce at last was
made between the two Republics, but a new war did happen 'twixt Venice and
Bologna about Trade, which lasted three years; at last under the conduct of
Maria Gradonico an army was sent, who utterly defeated the Bolonians, which
made themseek for peace.

GIACOMO CONTARENI succeeded TEPULO, at the 1274
beginning of whose Government there was a hot quarrel for the time 'twixt the
Republic and them of Ancona about imposts; the Pope sided with them, in regard
they were feodaries to the Church and slighted the Venetian Ambassador, yet
Venice would not make peace with Ancona till she had received satisfaction from
her, though it cost S. Mark very dear, in regard that the Republic had lost a
whole Fleet by a Tempest during this war.

GIOVANNI DANDULO came after CONTARENI, at which 1280
time the Sea did in such sort overflow the City, that it was held by some very
prodigious, and their augury proved true, for soon after ensued an Earthquake,
and a war with the Patriark of Aquileia, wherein the Republic had no great
success; she had worse luck in Syria, for the King of Babylon besieged Acre,
which the Venetian with the Popes soldiers defended a good while, but no aid
coming unto them from the rest of the Princes of Christendom, the City was
taken, and so the Christian name grew to be almost wholly extinct in Syria, the
year 1290.

PIETRO GRADONICO succeeded DANDULO, and the 1290
Truce being expired with the Genoways, there was a fiercer war renewed then
ever. In running over this history of the Venetians, diverse matters offer
themselfs so conformable to those of the ancient Romans that possibly may be,
as well in point of counsel, travail, success, accidents of fortune, and
sundry other traverses; but among all, the Venetian war with Genoa seems to
have great resemblance with those which the Romans had in times passed with
Carthage; for the near neighborhood, as it most often happens, did not beget
this Emulation betwixt them, or caused the war, because they are as far distant
one from the other, as are the Tyrrhene and Libian Seas 'twixt Italy and
Africa; to clear which point, it will not be amiss to give a little short
description of the situation of both their Countries.

Italy is a promontory stretching from the Alps, whose height on the one side
extending toward the South, serves her for a Rampart; she is besides watered
toward the West with the Ligustik and Tyrrhene Seas, and on the East with the
Adratic and Ionian, from thence the waves begin to mingle themselfs together,
and to make her the more strong, they would fain shut up the Alps the more
closely; in the Adrian Gulf stands Venice; on the other side, the Ligustik Sea
labors as it were to hold fast the feet of the Apennin Hills, and within
this turning lies the City of Genoa, emulous of the Venetian greatness, in
such sort as they are in a manner opposite one to the other; Prudent nature did
set betwixt Rome and Carthage a vast Sea, which might serve for abarr to keep
them from jusling one another, as also to cool their fury; but to Venice and
Genoa she has not only interposed the breadth of Italy, but the huge tops of
the Apennin, stretching from Liguria to Ancona, from whence being beaten by the
waves of the Sea, they soon turn toward the Mount Gargan; then on a sudden as
if they seared the Sea, they go on to the furthest parts of Italy, to subdue in
a manner those waves they had so often shunned; but neither distance of the sea
could restrain the wrath of Rome and Carthage one against the other, nor could
the difficult accesses of the Apennin H^l keep Venice and Genoa from bussling
one with the other. The Romans held themselfs descended of the Trojans, the
Venetians pretend the same original; the Libians mingled themselfs with the
Phaenicians, and the* Genoways say they were likewise derived from them;
emulation of great achievments did first stir up the former with desire of more
Dominion; On these two hinges the quarrel moved betwixt these two Republiques;
Rome and Carthage fell out first about Sicily; Venice and Genoa about Ptolemais
or Acre; The Romans notwithstanding they were victors, were often times in
greater danger then the Carthaginians whom they had vanquished; the Venetian
has been sometimes in the same condition; those two people fought above a
hundred years together, and though they had Truces sometimes, yet the hostility
still remained; these likewise have had sundry cessations of arms, though not
of enmity; In induciis semper manebat bellum; But as Carthage to Rome, so Genoa
vayl'd to Venice at last.

About this time Andrew King of Hungary came to Venice, his mother having bin
of the Family of the Morosini, a Venetian race.

There happened at this time a notable navall fight 'twixt Venice and Genoa nere
Corfu, where the Venetians lost almost their whole Fleet, and Andrew Dandolo
their Admiral was taken prisoner with five thousand more, and carried to
Genoa; this victory was got by a reserve of fifteen Galleys the Genoways had,
which at the fagg end of the fight came fresh out, as those reserve of five
hundred men which Don John of Austria kept fresh under hatches for the last
push. This defeat lay heavy upon Venice, for she lost then above sixty Galleys,
yet she appeared again shortly after, and about the straight of Gallipoli she
lost again sixteen Galleys, and the Genoway a little after took Canea in Candy;
but a peace was at last mediated 'twizt Venice and Genoa.

Upon these ill successes abroad, there were some treasons detected in Venice,
but quickly suppressed; Padoa also stirred, but to little purpose. The next
year, notwithstanding all the late losses, the Republic sends a considerable
Fleet against Paleologus the Greek Emperor, whereof Iustiniano was General,
because he refused to pay the Republic a great sum of money which he owed her,
this Fleet sailing into the Pontik Sea, quickly brought Paleologus to reason
and to repay the money. This victroy did much heighten the spirits of Venice,
which had somewhat languish'd for her great losses in the Ligustic war with
Genoa; she also made her self Mistress of Ferrara a little after, which being a
City fewdetary to the Church of Rome, the Pope excomunicated Venice,
interdicting her from the use of the Sacraments, which drew a great deal of
odium upon her, so that she thought it high time to restore Ferrara to the
Popes Legate, yet she would pause a little further upon it. About this time, the
famous conspiracy of Ba^amonti Tepulo was suppressed, who was killed by a
Venetian woman out of a zeal to her Country, who had an honorable Pension ever
after during life.

MARINI GEORGO was now created the fiftieth Duke of Venice; 1303
in his time Zara revolted the sixth time from the Republic, but was reduced.

GIOVANNI SOVRANZA succeeded GEORGIO, who had governed 1304
but ten months; the City which had bin a good while anathematized, sent
Francisco Dandulo to the Pope; this Nobleman being admitted to the presence of
Clement, who perfectly hated Venice because of Ferrara, by a wonderful example
of piety to his Country, and love to Religion, continued a long time on the
ground before the Popes Table; with an iron chain about his head like a dog,
until the Excommunication was taken off, which was don upon those acts of
penitence* Hereupon a little after Venice had a notable success against Genoa
in the Pontik Sea, where above thirty bottomes were sunk and taken by
JUSTINIANO the General.

FRANCISCO DANDULO who had bin Ambassador with the Pope, 1329
and by that penance formerly spoken of had got the Excommunication taken off,
was elected the next Duke, the Polani and the Valesians who had bin a long time
subject to the Patriark of Aquileia, did voluntarily yield themselfs under the
protection of Venice; About this time the Republic did diverse exploits upon the
Coasts of Syria against the Turks, for securing of Navigation upon those
Coasts; she likewise did many feats in Lombardy, her Army took Padoua and
Bergamo, Brescia also fell under her protection.

BARTILMEO GRADONICO was chosen next, and a little after there 1332
arose one night a most furious Tempest, which caused such an inundation three
foot deep above the streets of the City: In this Dukes time there came
Ambassadors from England, craving aid against Philip the French King, whom the
Genoways, who were mortal enemies to Venice, did favor, but nothing could be
obtained, and this was the first time that there was any acquaintance 'twixt
England and Venice, which was in the year 1332* there was another revolt in
Candie suppressed.

ANDREA DANDULO came next to the principality, a man of extraordinary parts of
learning as well as valor, for he compiled the 1336
Venetian story in two styles. The Republic sent a Fleet against the Turk,
which took Smyrna again. There was an Ambassador sent by the Senate to the King
of Babylon concerning the Venetians free Trade into Egypt, which though stood
upon by the Pope, in regard they were Infidells, was settled.

Zara had rebelled now the seventh time, but was reduced, and Lewis King of
Hungary repulsed. There happened a fearful earthquake in Venice about this
time, which overturned diverse steeples and palaces; This Earthquake ushered in
a fearful contagion which brought the City to a pitiful desolation for the
time, the said earthquake lasting fifteen days by intermissions.

This terible earthquake gives me occasion to desire leave of the Reader to
step a little aside out of the great Road of this History, and make a short
excursion to give a touch of the causes of these dreadful effects of nature,
of these tremblings and shiverings of the earth, or rather Aguish shaking fits,
whereunto we find her body is as subject as the body of men or lions, who are
observed to have their monthly paroxismes.

The Babylonian Philosophers think the cause of these impetuous motions happens
by the force of some Planet meeting with the Sun in the region of the earth:
others hold it to be a vapor a long time engendring in some concavities of the
earth, and restrained from sal^ying forth into the air; others affirm that
it is a wind pe^'d up in the entrails of the earth; Pliny says that the earth
never quaketh, but when the Sea is very calm and the air so still and clear, as
the birds can hardly bear themselves up, and that the winds are then shut up in
the bowels of the earth, their improper station. He adds further that an
earthquake is nothing else but as thunder in the air, or an overture and
crevice in the earth, or as lightning breaking forth violently and making
irruptions from the midst of the clouds, the wind enclosed therein, and
struggling to comforth by force. The Stoics speak of diverse sorts of
Earthquakes that cause the gapings of the earth, the swellings of the water,
and boiling of the same, a horrid confused sound commonly precedeth and
accompanies this quaking, sometimes like to the roaring of a Bull, sometimes to
the lamentable cry of some humane creature, or like the clattring of armor,
according to the quality of the matter which is enclosed, or according to the
form of the cave, and hole, or Spelunca, through which it passes, which
resounds in vaulty and hollow places: It waxes hot, in sharp and dry places,
and causes defluxions in those that are mo^st and humid. Now amongst all
Earthquakes, the agitation of the waters is most dangerous, for lightning is
not so hurtful, nor the shaking of buildings, or when the earth is puffed up,
or falls down by an interchangeable motion, because the one keeps back the
other. The safest buildings are those upon vaults, the corners of walls, and on
bridges leaning one against another; beside, brick buildings are less
dangerous in such accidents* your skillful Navigators can foretell these
earthquakes, at such time as they perceive the waves to swell on a sudden
without a wind; and likewise those on land may likewise foretell them when they
behold birds in a maze to stay their flight, or when waters in wells are
troubled more than ordinary, having a bad unsavory smell: all these are
presages of such hideous motions: Pherecydes the Syrian drawing water out of a
well, foretold an Earthquake, and so did Anaximander Milesius; and the truest
signs are, either when the wind blows not, or when the Sea and Region of the
Air are calm, for an Earthquake never happens, when the wind blows, or the Sea
swells.

This strange Earthquake in Venice, among other direful effects it produced,
caused that many hundreds of women miscarried in childbed, and a plague
followed, which reduced the City to such a he^ht of misery, that it was almost
depopulated; whereupon the Senate made a decree, that as many as would com to
dwell at Venice, should after that they had sojourned there two years be free
Citizens: Moreover, during this Contagion, diverse places on firm land revolted
from the Republic, which were reduced again.

The Genoway also went about to deprive the Venetians of all trafic in the
Pontic Seas, and thereupon took diverse Candiot Merchants: hereupon Marco
Marosino Admiral of the Adriatic Sea, went abroad in course with thirty five
Galleys to fish for some Genoways, and meeting with twelve in the Haven of
Carista, which lies toward Negrepont, they surpised them, being richly laden
with Merchandises, and carried them to Venice; this defeat was of that
consequence, that the Senate decreed that the same day the Genoways were
overthrown at Charista should be ever after celebrated for a holy day.

There happened the year after a terrible nocturnall fight 'twixt Venice and
Genoa at the Thracian Bosphorus, and though there were Auxiliaries both from the
King of Aragon, (with whom the Republic had made a League a little before) and
from the Greek Emperor also, yet the Venetian had the worst of it; But the
year after, about the Coasts of Sardinia she handsomely met the Genoways, and
linking her Galleys together, fought with that pertinacity and resolution that
she took thirty two Galleys, which so weakened the Genoways, that he was forced
to fly to the Viscont of Milan to implore help, and put her self as it were
under his protection; a little after the Venetian gained another victory of the
Genoways nere the Morea.

The Viscont of Milan appearing for Genoa, Venice made a counter-balancing
League with the King of Boheme, and that he should invade the Territories o^
Milan, with a Land Army to find him work to do.

MARINI PHALERIO was chosen the next Duke, who was 1354
Erl of Va^uarin; the first year of his government the Republic had a shrewd
loss in the I Will of Sapientia nere Morea, where Pagano Doria, who was the new
Admiral of Genoa, surpised Pisant the Venetian General, and* gave him an
overthrow*; this PHALERIO by a very bloody way thought to make himself King of
Venice; but it was detected, and he with his accomplices put to death.

GIOVANNI GRADONICO, surnamed Naso, succeeded Phalerio, in whose 1356
government a peace after five years cruentous war was concluded with the
Genoways and their Allies; but another Land war did rise 'twixt the King of
Hungary, and the Commonwealth in Dalmatia.

GIOVANNI DELPHINO succeeded Gradonico, who made a peace 1358
more necessary then honorable with the King of Hungary; for the Republic was
to renounce all right to Dalmatia, and that the King for his part should
redeliver whatsoever was taken from them in Istria.

LORENZO CELSO followed after, in whose time the Duke of Austria 1363
came to see Venice, and after him the King of Cyprus; the Candiots rebel and
continue so a good while, at last they were reduced by arms, the news whereof
being brought to Venice, prisoners were set at liberty, diverse maids were
married out of the Tresury of S. Mark, Tilts and Tournaments continued for
diverse days in S. Marks place, with diverse other exultations and triumph.

MARCO CORNARI succeeded Celso, with many triumphs, but before 1366
the years end some tumults arise in Candie which were suppressed with much
difficulty.

ANDREA CONTARENI followed Cornari, and refusing to accept the 1368
principality, he was threatened unto it: Tenedos did then yield to the
Venetian; but in this Dukes time there happened terrible wars 'twixt the
Venetians and the King of Hungary, as also with the Archduke of Austria, and
interchangeable overthrows were given on both sides, but by the mediation of
the Patriarch of Aquileia a peace was concluded; but the rancor of the Genoway
broak out again, and after some hostile encounters a peace was concluded by
the intercession of the Duke of Savoy; afterward the Republic leagues with the
King of Cyprus.

MICHAEL MOROSINI succeeded next, who lasted but four 1382
months in his principality.

ANTONIO VENIERI then sueceeds, in whose time there fell out a fierce war in
Lombardy, which was but collateral only to the Venetians, yet they were the
chiefest sticklers therein, and Accommodators at last.

MICHAELI STENO Procurator of S. Mark then succeeded, and 1400
presently the fire broak out 'twixt Venice and Genoa again, Bouciqualt a
notable resolut Frenchman was General of the Genoways, yet the Venetian still
put them to the worse: V^cenza came then under the protection of S. Mark, who
sent a Garrison thither. Verona also one of the most famous Cities in Lombardy,
put her self under the Venetians, which much heigtned the glory of the
Republic: add hereunto that Padoua also was brought by force of arms under her
subjection: All things being afterward settled in a firm peace, there came forty
gentlemen from Verona to Venice all clothed in white, whereupon the Senate
commanded a Theater to be erected of purpose in S. Marks place, where the Duke
with his Family clothed also all in white were ready to receave them. The
Veronois being all com to the Thea^et, after they had saluted the Prince and
the Senate, they laid down their public Ensigns, and the keys of their City
gate, at their feet, entreating them to accept thereof, beseeching God that the
proffer might be both to Venice and Verona as fortunate and profitable as that
was an assured pledge of their fidelity, as well public as particular toward
the Venetians, requesting them of their accustomed goodness to continue in the
preservation, defense and maintenance of them, their City, their means, and
fortunes, with all other, both divine and humane matters; and as for their
unfeigned love toward them, they durst freely say and affirm, that they would*
be* extremely sorry, if among so many peeple as did obey them, any should go
before them in love, duty and affection.

These Ambassadors being courteously entertained, were assured by the Duke,
that as long as they continued to be such as they promised, the Senate would e're
long let them know, that the greatest happiness which can befall those who
have not means to defend themselfs, is to be shrouded under a lawful
government, which they should find to be as pleasing (in regard they had
recourse to the only Fort of Liberty, and cast off a Tyrants yoke) as a safe
harbor uses to be to a man that has escaped a terrible tempest; they might
therefore depart when they pleased, and take with them the Venetian Ensigns
(and in so saying the Duke gave them to their Prolocutor) which they were to
erect in the midst of their City; he wished they might prove to themselfs and
to the Venetians ever happy; and being so erected to hold them in reverence:
then he willed them to execut justice, in regard they had in times passed
obeyed the commands of a Tyrant: so they were dismissed; those of Padoua
following their example, came soon after, only with this difference, that in
lieu of white the Padouans were clothed in purple, Anno Dom. 1405.

THOMASO MOCENIGO was next chosen, and there being great dissentions raiis'd
'twixt the Bishop of Aquilea, and them of Udine, the 1413
Venetians recover Feltre, Bellluna and other places. The Udinois did also
yield themselfs to the Republic, with the whole Country of the Patrians in
Friuli; But upon these notable successes by Land, there happened a most raging
fire in Venice, which burnt the Dukes Palace, and melted all the Lead upon S.
Marks Church, which was contiguous. The fire being quenched, the Senate decreed
that no man under pain of forfeiting a thousand ducats, should dare to propound
to pull down the old palace, and reedifie it more sumptuously; The Prince then
preferring the honor of the City to his own private profit, brought the same
sum to the Senate, requesting that they would permit the fore part of the Ducall
palace might be reedifi'd in a more magnificent manner, as was befitting the
majesty of the Republic, and so willingly forfeited his thousand Ducats: so the
work was done accordingly, but the Duke died before 'twas finished.

FRANCISCO FOSCARD was then elected Duke, the same year there 1423
was wars begun against Philip Duke of Milan, and the Republic concluded a
League with the Florentines against him, which League consisted of these heads,
that the Venetians and Florentines should arm at their own common charge one
thousand six hundred horse and eight thousand foot, they should furnish two
Navall armies, with the one the Venetians should sail up the River Po to resist
the Forces of Philip, the. Florentines along the River of Genoa, that none
should speak of peace till the Venetians should command it. That all the Cities,
Forts, and Towns taken on the confines of Flaminia, should belong to the
Florentine, the other should be joined to the Vetetian State, or given to whom
they pleased.

Lorenzo the Florentine Ambassador did herupon cast himself at the Dukes feet,
and with a loud voice said, that the Florentine peeple should be ever mindful
of such a signal benefit, and besought God that the glory of Venice might
increase, and if ever it happened that the Venetian peeple should have need, the
Florentines would be ever ready with their utmost means to aid the Republic:
diverse others, as Amadeo Duke of Savoy, King Alonso and Syena entered into this
League. This enforced the Duke of Milan to a peace, which imported that he
should quit to the Venetians Bressia with her confines, together with that part
of Cremona's Territories which is contiguous to the River Olio, as also that
part of Bergamo which stretches toward the River Adi^e. The Marquess of
Monferrat being oppressed fled to Venice for refuge, who restored him to his
Territories.

There arrived about this time John Paleologus the Grecian Emperor, Joseph
Patriarch of Constantinople, with the Prince of Morea, to confer with the Pope
about matters of Religion; They went to Ferrara to find out Eugenius the Pop^,
who was a Venetian born, and this conference produced good effects, and an
union for the time.

About this time there came to Venice the Bishop of Aquileia and Pietro Barbe
Cardinal, that was Pope afterward, that had splendid entertainment. But the
Emperor Frederick, with his wife Loenora, had more magnificent reception; for
besides the Buccentoro richly hung with cloth of gold, wherein the Prince and
Senators were, diverse great vessels were set forth besides, whose poopes were
all new gilded, in which were many hundreds of the Venetian Clarissimi, the
Ganzari and Patischerme that are lesser vessels which were numberless, were
as allantly decked, wherein were the common Citizens, who did strive who should
exceed one another in bravery; the whole City was hung up and down as they
passed with Cloth of gold and rich tapestry, in every corner musical
instruments, songs and melodious voices were heard. The Empress landed a little
while after in the same glory, attended by two hundred of the prime Venetian
Ladies, she was presented with an Imperial crown of gold set with rich stones,
and a coat for a little child, with a cradle cloth of purple, powdered with
pea^ls, in regard 'twas thought she was with child, etc.

The Emperor being gone, the Senate to furnish the wars of Lombardy, decreed
that all Officers, as well in the City as abroad, Judges, Registers, and others
of meaner quality under great Officers, who in any kind had pensions of the
Republic, should pay a certain sum, and that other sorts of Clarissimi should
serve the Signiory gratis for six months. In this Dukes time a cunning Candiot,
by sapping under the Church got into S. Marks Tresury, and stole thence jewels
and other things to a mighty value, but he was detected by his companion before
he could get away, and hanged betwixt the two columns in S. Marks place.

In this Dukes time also was Constantinople won by the Turk, in regard of the
sloth, supiness and stupidity of the rest of the Christian Princes, but
especially for the frowardness of the Constantinopolitans themselfs, who would
not give timely aid to the Emperor, out of a base kind of covetousness, and
with Constantinople the whole Greek Empire perished, which had stood above
eleven hundred years; this gave an alarm to all Italy, and caused a general
peace about Anno Dom. 1459. Mahomet at the taking of Constantinople did
endeavor to oblige the Venetians more then any other Christian Nation there,
wherefore in the general slaughter he sav^d them, knowing that none was more
powerful to do him hurt then Venice.

PASCHALIS MARIPIETRO succeeded Foscaro* who continued 1457
in the Principality longest of any of his sixty five Predecessors, for he
governed above thirty six years, and being stricken in age he made a voluntary
resignation to Paschalis, who preserved the Republic in peace all his life
time: in his government happened that universal Earthquake, which shook most
parts of Italy, Anno Dom. 1460.

CHISTOPHORO MAURO was next elected, the I Will of Lemnos 1462
was delivered to the Venetians in this Dukes time, and Oenos was taken, but
the Republic had very ill luck in the Morea, and before Corinth, moreover they
lost Negrepont.

MICOLAO TRONO succeeded Moro* whose short government 1471
was very fortu^at, because the Republic in his time made a League with the
King of Persia, and united the Island of Cyprus to their Dominions; the Pope at
his time sent a Fleet of Galleys to second the enterprises of the Venetians in
the Greek Seas, and being met, Mocenigo the General for the Republic, made
this Speech to the Popes Legate, who was Admiral for the Church.

I am sure most excellent and reverend Father, that you are not ignorant how
val^antly the Venetians have hitherto born themselves for the Christian Faith;
This is the ninth year we have fought by Sea and Land against this cruel
enemy, without the assistance of any Christian Prince but King Ferdinand only;
It is needless to rehearse the losses, travails and dangers which we have
sustained, for there is no place in all Morea, no shore in Greece, nor Island in
all the Ionian and Egean Seas which is not mingled with our blood, or with that
of our enemies; we have not spared any labor or expense, and we heartily wish
that whatsoever we do now, or shall hereafter execut, may be for the Weal of
Christendom; we have lately with fire and sword wasted Eolia and Caria, two
rich Provinces of the enemies, and now we hope by your happy conjunction to do
some nobler enterprise; It rests therefore on your part to teach us what you know
to be profitable for Christendom, and prescribe us what to execute, and we
hold it our parts to execute your commands.

The Legate answered, It is sufficiently known with what Zeal and affection the
Noble Venetians have till this present defended Christian Religion, and how by
their valor and industry they have preserved whole Commonwealths, Islands and
Cities, but for your own particular General Mocenigo, I must say, that
although other Commanders have done valiantly, yet you have not only comported
your self valiantly, but fortunatly, and if I may so say, divinely: This being
thus, I entreat you to go on as you have begun, and let not our conduct, or
that of any one else, interrupt the course of your happy proceedings; For my
self, as becomes a Churchman, I will pray unto God and his Saints, that all
your enterprises may succeed prosperously* and those troops which I have
brought with me, shall follow your commands.

Mocenigo had forty six ^allies of the Republic under his command, twenty of
the Popes, and fifteen of King Ferdinands, He infested the Turks up and down in
diverse places, taking sundry places and prizes; among others he took Sichin and
Seleucia, where the Turks being too confident of their strength, cried out from
over the walls to Mocenigo, get ye home O Venetians, and command the Sea and
fishes, but leave the Empire of the Land to Ottoman.

Mocenigo having taken Seleucia went after to Cyprus, where he understood that
James the King was sick of a Dissentery, and being come to visit him, he
entreated the King to be of good cheer, and with patience to undergo the force
of his malady, who made him answer:

I know very well most excellent Captain, and already feel, that by the violent
torment of my disease, I am in great danger of life; and not to ^atter my self,
I have no hope to escape; therefore I make my dearest wife with the child she
bears in her body, mine heirs, and she, as thou know, is daughter to Marco
Cornari, and being adopted by the Venetian Senate, was by them given me in
marriage: If I die, whereof I make no question, I recommend my Wife, Issue, and
Kingdom to Venice* therefore I heartily entreat thee, in regard of our
friendship, and for the greatness of the Venetian State (if it com to that)
that thou wo^'st defend and keep both her self, Issue and Kingdom from all
wrong and oppression. Mocenigo answered:

Thy body, most Royal King, is yet in a good estate, and thou in the prime of
thine Age, which may put thee in good hope of a speedy recovery, but if it
should fall out otherwise, which God forbid, I beseech thee be confident, that
neither my self nor the Venetian forces will be wanting to thee or thine.
Mocenigo parting from Cyprus, sailed toward the Islands nere Licia, where
making incursions into the firm land, he resolved to besiege Mi^, which he took
and plundered, thence he sailed to Flisca, where the King of Cyprus daughter,
the Lady Charlotta allied to the Duke of Sa^y, sent to crave assistance of him
against James her base brother; who was the son of a Concubin. Mocenigo's
answer was remarkable: He sent her word, that in the Republics name he would do
the Lady Charlotta all favor, yet he greatly wonders, that she did not
remember how that the right of Kingdoms is rather debated by the Sword, then by
Law, and that the Island of Cyprus had not bin only taken from her, but also
from the Genoways who then held part thereof: For his part he knew how that the
wife of the late King, the adoptif daughter of the Venetian Senate, being left
with child, had bin, together with the fruit of her womb, made heirs by the
deceased King before his death in his hearing* therefore he told them plainly,
he would espouse the quarrel of the pregnant Queen Dowager, who he hoped would
shortly bring forth a young King.

A while after the Popes Legate being revoked, and taking his leave of Mocenigo,
spoke unto him thus; I take my leave of thee O thou valiant man, and will be
the public witness and trumpet of thy heroic deeds* and if God shall send me
safe to Italy, not only the Pope and the most reverend College of Cardinals,
but all Europe, with the Princes and (...) Nations of Christendom, shall
understand what Venice under thy conduct, skill and counsel has done against
our common enemy the Turk, in Asia, Licia, and Pamphilia: go forward brave
Captain, as thou have begun, to enlarge the Venetian glory, and bear up the
banners of the Cross, thereby to imortalize thy own name: I beseech Almighty
God to favor all thy attempts, and I hope 'twil come so to pass, that all the
losses which Christendom has sustaind by this barbarous enemy, shall e're
long by thy own valor, and to their ruin, be fully compensated. After this,
Mocenigo was Godfather to the young Prince, and made Governor of Cyprus.
NICOLAO MARCELLO succeeded afterward, in whose principality 1473
diverse things prospered on the Republics side in Macedonia.

PIETRO MOCENIGO was chosen next, who being S. Marks Admiral, 1474
for many years did notable feats by Land and Sea, but in the compass of a
year and two months he gave up the Ghost and his Government.

ANDREA VENDRAMMO succeeded, the Turks besiege Croia and 1475
are worsted, but they ravaged and burnt the Country of Friuli, and the fire
was so violent, that it was seen from some of the turrets of Venice.

GIOVANNI MOCENIGO was next elected Duke, and shortly after 1477
there was a peace concluded with Ottoman the Turk upon these conditions, that
the Venetians stold have free and safe trafic into the Pontick Seas, and that
Ottoman should have Lemnos and Scutary given him up: He afterward took Otrauto
in Calabria whereby he filled all Italy with a terror of invasion; In this Dukes
time the Island Vegia in Dalmatia gave her self up to Venice; In this Dukes
time there was an eager war begun, and prosecuted with much heat 'twixt
Venice and Ferrara; Malateste was General to the Republic* who did many
notable exploits, and brought the Ferrarois to a very low ebb, at which time
Pope Sixtus enjoined the Venetians to lay down their arms by his Nuncio. But
the Senate answered somewhat roundly, that the Republic was so far from
entertaining this war without his Holiness consent, as they did it at first by
his instigation, that as then so now, they did prefer peace not only before
war, but before victory, so it were seasonably sought, and not on such
conditions as might make their lenity to be interpreted indiscretion: that they
were confident his Holiness actions had no private ends, but such as imported
the common good of Christendom, only in this it was notorious to the whole
world, that he dealt more subtly then sincerely, that for twenty years,
wherein both by Land and Sea they had bin singled out by dreadful Ottoman,
none of the Princes of Italy contributed one drop of blood toward the
quenching of this neighbor flame, but seemed deaf to all solicitations, and
same to all assistance: But in this private cause of Ferrara, those who shrank
back from the public quarrel could all bandy together, not as if they would
arbitrat, but enforce a peace; that they humbly desired his Holiness to ponder
this business temperatly, which others did passionatly, and to let his own
understanding advise him whither it more concerned him to favor the Venetians
or the Ferrarois; as for them they were resolved to prosecut that war, which by
his advice they had undertaken, hoping the success would prove as happy, as the
cause was just and honorable.

This was the substance of the Venetians Answer, whereat the Pope was so
incensed, that he excomunicated the Doge; and the Senate, having leagued himself
with Frederick, and Alfonso Duke of Calabria, who came with two thousand men
for succor of Ferrara, among whom were four hundred Turks, which he brought
from Otrauto; but they a while after ran away to the Venetians, which though it
was some advantage unto them* yet they had an ill-favored disaster in the City
at that time, for the Dukes Palace was half burnt down.

The Republic having many potent enemies banded against Her, by the instigation
of the Pope, employed Ambassadors to the French Army, and Germane Princes, with
others, to have a General Council called, wherein it might be lawful to
complain of the Pope or any other. Herupon a while after Pope Sixtus
apprehending some fears, a Treaty was set on foot for a peace, which was
quickly concluded; The Venetians a little before, had taken Gallipoli in
Calabria; and though they lost neither honor or territory during this war,
yet in less than two years it cost the Republic nere upon three millions.

MARCO BARBADICO succeeded next, in whose time a trade was 1485
begun with Portugal, to which purpose the Republic sent an Ambassador
expressly to Lisbon, Anno Dom. 1485.

When this Duke was upon his deathbed, there came a great Ambassador from
Bajazet the Turkish Emperor with rich presents unto him, but he enjoyed them
little; He was buried with greater solemnity than ordinary, and the ceremonies
which were used then continue constant to this day at the interment of Venetian
Doges, which is thus. After the Duke is dead, he is unbowell'd, his body
embalmed, and laid under a Canopie of gold, with his gilt sword and spurs
reversed; he is publicly kept in the palace for three whole days, then all
the Companies in the City, which are as many as there be Trades, do with their
banners in solemn order go before the body, after them follows the Clergy,
next to them the mourners, who are in great multitudes in sad funestous manner:
last of all come the Senate clothed in scarlet and purple, to demonstrat that
the City which is free, does never in mourning habit follow the Exequies of any
Prince, how virtuous soever: In this manner and habit so soon as the body is
brought into the Church they sit round about it, whilst the memory of the
deceased Prince is recommended to the peeple in a funeral Oration: from thence
the Senators returning to the Palace, do publish the first Assembly for the
creation of a new Duke.

AUGUSTINE BARBADICO, brother, to the defunct, and Procurator of 1486
S. Mark, succeeded; most of the Princes of Germany* bandy against Venice, who
met them about Trent, where Sanseverino her gallant General, the best soldier
of those times, was utterly routed and drowned. About this time there was a
Fleet sent for the garding of Cyprus, for diverse aimed at that dainty Island,
therefore Georaio Cornari was sent thither by the Senate to induce the widow
Queen his sister (and adopted daughter to Venice) to remit the government to
the Senate, and retire to Venice, to live among her kindred in contentment,
ease, and honor. The Queen wondered at her brothers Proposition, saying, that
she would not for a world part with so sweet a Kingdom, and that the Senate might
be satisfied to have it after her death: her brother replied with this charming
subtle Oration, Entreating her not to make more account of Cyprus, than of her
own dear Country, because that worldly affairs being variable and inconstant,
it might in short space com to pass that she might be expuls'd, it being so
thought on already by diverse potent Lords, and her self envied by many of her
Subjects, who disdained to be governed by a woman, therefore one only means was
left her to prevent all these mischiefs, which was, seeing she had no children
to transmit the Government of the Realm to the Venetian State now in her life
time; he added further that the Republic was well contented she should rule as
long as the times were quiet, and free ^from suspicions. But now when all her
Neighbors wait for an occasion, and lay snares to surprise Her, the Senate has
thought this only remedy most expedient; but if she feared not these dangers,
he be sought her to consider, what she was likely to have fallen into the year
before, for had not the Republic rescued her with their Galleys, she had bin in
danger to have bin carried Captive to Constantinople; It is good to foresee
that which some odd accident or small error may hurl us into, and to prevent
it, fortune is blind and volable, nor can we ever prevent our enemies designs,
nor can our friends be always ready to help us when we want them; there is a
great distance by Land, and a great Sea 'twixt the Adriatic Gulf and Cyprus;
This, Madam you ought to remember and timely consider, that though nothing
enforced you thereunto, yet what greater honor, or more lasting glory can you
leave behind you, then to have bequeath^d to your own Country so flourishing a
Kingdom, and that Venice was augmented by a child of her own; you shall still
be a Queen, and truly if the ^ase were mine, I should desire rather to see my
greatness with such safety in Cyprus out of the bosom of my own Country:
Never was Princess so welcome to Venice as you will be, you know you are to
thank the Senate for being Queen, but if you deny this motion, you will seem to
acknowledge it very little; In a word, I being your brother, and one who ought
to have some interest in you, if you dismiss me with a denial, the world will
judge it is not you have done it, but my council, whereby I shall incur a high
displeasure; therefore I pray Madam consider well of it, there is nothing more
worthy of praise then to know how to entertain Fortune modestly when she smiles
on us, and not to desire to be still on the wheels top, etc.

Cornari having thus discoursed to the Queen, he prevailed so far with her,
that m^lting into tears, she made him this answer: Brother, if this be your
opinion, I will conform to it, and will strive to overmaster my self, but Venice
shall thank you for Cyprus, not me. So she was conducted to Venice, and
received with all imaginable state after she had ruled Cyprus fifteen years.

A little after this, the King of Tremisen in Affrique sent to Venice his
Ambassador, to entrust some Venetian gentlemen to see Justice done to the
Venetian Subjects, who lived in three of his Cities, thereupon Lodovico Piramane
was sent, who had the hundredth penny upon all Merchandise for his salary.

Not long after the Patriarch of Aquileia died at Rome, and Hermolao Barbaro
being there Ambassador for the Republic, the Pope conferred that high
Ecclesiastic Dignity upon him, and made him Cardinal.

This being known at Venice, notwithstanding that Hermolao was a Minister of
great desert, and had acquainted the Senate hereof; yet because there was an
express Law, forbidding all Venetian gentlemen, being Ambassadors at Rome, to
receave any obliging Dignity of the Pope, during the time of his Legation, the
Senate took the audacious infringing of this Law in ill part; and though he were
rich, well allied, and had great friends, they sent express command, that he
should resign the Patriarkship again to the Pope, if not, they would take from
his Father the Procuratorship of S. Mark, and confiscat all his estate; the
Father died before the years end, of mere resentment, and the Son having
composed many excellent books, died a little after of a Squinancy.

Venice was now very quiet, when Charles the VIII. of France sent three
Ambassadors one after the other to the Duke, that their King being resolved to
com to Italy, to conquer the Kingdom of Naples, which by hereditary right
belonged to him, he desired to know the Venetians inclination toward him, and
whither they would continue the former League and Amity; The Senate answer d the
Ambassador, that the Signory did ever prefer peace before war, and did now
desire it more then ever, therefore they could wish, that their King being now
in a perfect peace, would suffer the Princes of Italy to be so too. Afterward
the French King being daily pushed on by LowtkSforZa the Duke of Milan, and the
Prince of Salerno then an Exile in France, send Philip of Comines again to
Venice, who proposed to the Senate, that if they would join with them in the
recovery of Naples, they should have a considerable share of the Kingdom, if
not, that they should persever in their former friendship.

The Senate answered, That the King was so potent and well provided with all
warlike necessaries, that he needed no help from them, therefore they
determined according to the laudable custom of their Ancestors, not to stir,
who never made war but upon constraint: Moreover, they desired not to have any
share in that Kingdom whereunto they had no claim; for the rest, they said,
they would still make high esteem of his friendship.

The Republic had at this time a great Fleet upon the Coasts of Slavonia,
because they understood Bajazet the great Turk began to arm; at which time
there came a solemn Embassy from Florence to crave their advice how they should
behave themselfs 'twixt the Kings of Naples and France, the latter of which had
sent to desire passage through their Country. The Senate answered:

That in so difficult a business, subject to such a world of accidents, they
knew not so suddenly what was best to be done, and though they loved the one
better then the other, they durst not deliver their Opinion, because that
fortune is commonly Mistress in war, and that it usually falls out, that
matters done by chance and adventure, do oftentimes prosper better then those
which are premeditated, and beaten upon the anvill of long premeditation;
therefore they ought to ask counsel of none but Almighty God, who only knew
what was best for men to embrace or avoid.

The French King rushing into Italy, found no resistance scarce, till he had
crowned himself King of Naples.

The Venetians were at this time put mightily to their plunges and reaches of
policy, because it was not wholesome for them or Italy, that the French should
grow so powerful, therefore the King of the Romans, the Spaniards, and the
Duke of Milan, who had fallen from the French, sending their Ambassadors unto
them, they strike a League to repress the French proceedings. The Venetian
takes Manapoli, Pulignano, and Mola, and partly by arms, partly policy, the
French are driven out of Italy; yet Charles the VIII. being dead, they make a
new League with King Lewis of France against the Duke of Milan upon these
conditions, that Lodowick SforZa being elected King, should have Milan, and the
Republic Cremona and Abdua, and it came so to pass.

The Republic had but sorry successes against the Turk in this Dukes time, for
at Cephaloma they received a terrible blow, yet she reduced at last that Island
to a perfect subjection.

LEONARDO LOREDANO succeeded Barbarico; in his time 1491
the French and Portugal assist the Signory against the Turk, so that a peace
ensued; The Republic received a mighty wound in her Comerce about this time, in
regard that the Portugalls had found a passage to the East Indies, by the cape
of good hope, and so brought home in their Carraks those spices which Venice
was used to fetch from Alexandria, and dispense up and down Europe. 1503.

But Pope Julius the II. gave her a worse blow, by drawing a most heavy war
upon the Republic, in regard she would not part with FaenZa and Rimini, for
which She offered to pay him any rent in quality of Tenant, alleging that it
was dangerous for the Signory in regard of their Situation, that they should be
in any other hands: Hereupon, that notable League at Cambray was privately
struck against Venice, wherein there were Confederates, the Pope himself, the
Emperor, the King of France, the Kings of Aragon, and Spain, with diverse
others: It was given out, that they met there to accommode the business of the
Duke of Gueldres, but that was only a pretext, which the Republic could not
smell out.

The Republic by this huge powerful League, had lost almost all the Towns she
had in the firm Land of Lombardy, as far as Padoua; The great Turk offered the
Republic aid in this exigent, but she modestly refused any: Besides other
places, she received a most fearful overthrow hard by Abdua; being thus
oppressed with the spiritual Arms of Rome, and most of the temporal Arms of
Europe, rather then break, she complemented with the Emperor, and bowed to the
Pope, by delivering him those places aforesayed in Flaminia: Among others, the
Cardinal of York in England did do her good Offices to the Pope, as her
Annals make mention: The French having taken Milan, and other places, grew
insolent in Italy; therefore there was a new confederacy made 'twixt the Pope,
the King of Spain, and the Venetians; at Ravenna the French became Victors in a
great battle, but a little after the Swisse coming in as Confederates against
them, they were totally routed and driven over the Hills again. The Venetians
recovered Crema, and the Spaniard having taken Bressia, and delaying to render
it to Venice, there was a new occasion offered for the Republic to make a
League with France again against the Spaniard, and Francis the first by their
help regained Milan.

The Republic was never so driven to her shifts as she was in the time of this
Duke, in diverse traverses of war, and confederacies against her, which she
dissolved by pure policy, more then any power.

She was afterward much persecuted by Pope and Emperor, in so much that
Maximilian sent to Selim the new great Turk an Ambassador, to invite him to a
war against the Venetians, and to invade their Sea Coasts, while he assaulted
them by Land.

Pope Leo sent Petro Bembo upon a solemn Embassy to the Republic, that they
should break with the French, and League with the Emperor and Spaniards against
them; whereunto the Senate made this grave answer:

That his Holiness Ambassador was greatly pleasing to the Senate, as well in
respect of himself, whose virtue and particular affection toward their
Country was sufficiently known to all men, as likewise in regard of the Prince
who sent him, seeing the Republic had ever born all reverence and honor to the
Sovereign Bishops of Rome; but they more particularly inclined to Pope Leo;
that the Senate had ever most highly esteemed his good and wholesome Counsel,
but the mischief was, that by how much they above all others had desired his
friendship and alliance in that incertainty of all things, by so much more were
they continually kept from it; and albeit, their love was never disjoined from
him, yet their forces were ever divided; as then they did humbly thank his
Holiness, and confessed themselfs much bound unto him, in that he had bin ever
ready by diverse good offices to embrace and favor their cause, even so
likewise they were extremely grieved, that they could not follow his Counsel,
it being their ancient custom not to leave an old friend for a new, specially
being not provoked thereunto by any wrong, their ancient Fathers thinking that
alone to be profitable, which was most honest; therefore they could not without
great blemish of their reputation break or abandon the alliance which they had
already contracted with the French; And if the Pope would call to mind the
ancient benefits of the French Kings, not only to the Venetian Commonwealth,
but likewise to the Church, and consider the wealth and power of that Kingdom,
he would not only excuse but commend the Venetian Council, and be desirous
himself to follow it because that being backed by the French Forces, with those
of the Venetian, there was likelihood, that he should be abler to lay surer
foundations, as well for the state of the Church, as for the greatness and
advancement of his own house. Hereupon the Republic sent Ambassadors, both to
Lewis of France, and Henry of England, to congratulat their alliance (for old
Lewis had married young Henry's Sister) and to streighten this League betwixt
them against the Emperor.

The Republic likewise employed two Ambassadors to confirm the peace with the
great Turk Selim, who had newly subdued the Mammalukes and Sultan, that had bin
Lords of the Gran Cayro and Egypt above three hundred years, Anno 1516.

The French King sent to borrow one hundred thousand Crowns of the Venetians
toward the end of this Dukes Government, which was done accordingly. Lewis
King of Hungary sent two Ambassadors unto them, who procured both men and money
against the Turk.

Prince Lor^dano having sat at the stern of the Republic twenty years in most
tempestuous times, paid nature her last debt and made way for

ANTONIO GRIMANI, who about the beginning of his Government 1521
was solicited, that the Republic of Venice might be Godmother to a daughter
of France. The face of affairs in Christendom being much changed at the coming
in of Charles the fifth the Emperor, the Venetians waved their league with
France (who was ready to invade Italy for the Duchy of Milan) and entered into
an alliance with the Emperor, cashiering Trivaltio, who was too much affected
to the French, and making the Duke of Vrbin their general, and this was done
principally by Pope Adrian the fourth his intercession, who was a low Dutchman
having bin a Brewers son in Vtrecht, and Schoolmaster to Charles the fifth: in
this Dukes time the Isle of Rhodes was taken by the Turk to the great detriment
of Christendom, and dishonor to her Princes, 1522.

ANDREA GRITTI succeeded GRIMANI, about the beginning of whose principality the
Venetians depart from the French, and for important 1523
reasons of State enter into league with the Pope and Emperor; the French King
makes himself again master of Milan, and of diverse other places in Italy. The
Venetians upon emergent reasons of State leave the Emperor, and renew their
confederacy with the French, but during this League, the French King was taken
prisoner at Pavia, and carried into Spain, and after four years captivity
dismissed: Rome is beleaguered by the Spaniards, the walls sealed by the Duke
of Bourbon, who in the action breathed his last, and Pope Clement besieged in
the Castle of S. Angelo; the King of England Hen. VIII. was one of the
principal instruments both of the French King and Popes enlargement.

The French rush again 'ore the hills to Italy, take Pavia and destroy it; The
Venetians seize Monopolis in the Kingdom of Naples. Doria Admiral for the
French o'recoms the Imperial Fleet, but he turned afterward to the Emperor.

The Vicount of Tureen coms upon a splendid Embassy to Venice in the Popes
behalf, to entreat them that they would satisfy the Pope by rendition of
Ravenna and Cervia: the Senate alleged their just Titles to them, having
received the one from Obizzo Polente Lord thereof more than four hundred years
passed; and that Cervia was fallen to the Republic by the Testament of Dominico
Malateste, for which she was to pay yearly some godly Legacies, which they
continued for performance of the Testators will: they representd further, how
that if they had bin desirous to possess Towns belonging to other men, they
would not have refused the offer of those of Furli, and of other Cities of
Romania, who sought much to be under their obedience; nor would they have
defended or maintained with such extraordinary cost and danger the City of
Bologna, with others belonging to his Holiness, nor have kept them from him,
and that those Cities had bin taken at such time as the Pope had quitted the
League, and that they might justly now detain them for the same occasion;
moreover they had spent a great mass of Tresure in that war which those
Cities were not able to recompense; they desired that the King would take it
into serious consideration how much it might import him, if those so commodious
Cities should be quitted by his friends and confederats to be given to the Pope,
who stood so coldly affected to the Crown of France, nay even into the hands of
the Imperialls, seeing that it was apparent how the Pope either by his own
proper motion, or through fear did wholly depend upon the Emperor, that he was
besides to consider of their interest, and the wrong which would be offered
their confederats, viZ. the Florentines and the Duke of Ferrara,
whoquestionlesse would be greatly distasted hereat, and would cool that heat
which pusheth them on to the affairs of the League: and moreover how that these
Towns did serve for a bridle to contain the Pope within his bounds, seeing that
without them he would already have showed himself an open friend to the Emperor.
A little after the Republic lends the King of France, and the Duke of Milan a
considerable sum of money; Chastillon coms Ambassador to Venice and Brundusium
in Apulia, is taken by her Admiral: Herup on a Treaty of peace was appointed
by all parties to be at Cambray, and the Republic employed Lodovico Falieri to
the King of England to entreat him, That since he had ever showed himself a
royal friend to the Republic, his Majesty would be pleased, as at all other
times, to take into his protection, and to procure that in those affairs which
were handled at Cambray, nothing might be concluded to the hurt and prejudice
of the Republic, nor to the liberty of Italy, whereof many years before he had
to his immortal praise taken upon him the defense, while preparations were
made on all fides to disturb her, if not destroy her.

About the fag end of this Dukes government Solomon makes war upon the
Hungary, and takes ^uda; he warred also with the Venetians, but against them he
had not so good success; for they took Scardona from him, and (...) in
Dalmatia: upon this a solemn League was struck 'twixt the Pope, the Emporor
and the Republic, against the common enemy.

In this Dukes time the Republic sent to the Pope that she might have the
nomination of her own Bishops, for which he had made diverse proposalls
formerly, but could get no definitive answer; herupon there was a seizure made
of the temporalities of diverse Bishoprics which the Pope had collated, whereat
his Holiness was much incensed. The Senate considering the importance and
difficulty of the business, did deliberat thereon in open Council, where
opinions were very different, but for the present it was decreed, that in
favor of the Pope the temporalities of those who had bin promoted by his
Holiness should be surrendered them in the Cities under their jurisdiction; yet
nevertheless they did not give over their demands, saying that what they had
then done was for the extraordinary respect and reverence they bare to Pope
Clement, hoping that herafter they would grant them more than they craved: The
Pope nevertheless, who at first made show that he demanded nothing else but
that, stood after upon greater difficulties.

Solomon having made peace with the Persian, intended to assail Christendom on
all sides by Sea and Land: hereupon he entertained Barbarossa the famous pyrat,
and sent word to the Venetians, that they should us^ him no more as a Pyrat, but
one of his own Port.

To bear up against Solomon, the Senate thought fit to levy the Tenths upon the
Clergy, but they could not obtain it of the Pope, who made answer, that he had
a purpose to levy two Tenths upon the goods of all the Italian Clergy, to
employ them for the relief of the Cantons of the Catholic Swissi, against the
other apostat Cantons, who threatened them with war.

A little after Venice made her self Mistress of a Town in Dalmatia called
Obrovatza, a place of considerable strength and advantage.

PIETRO LANDI succeeded Gritti, who had continued Prince 1539
nere upon sixteen years, Guy Vbaldo Duke of Vrbin, the old Duke being dead,
was chosen General of the Republic by Land; he was allowed ten Captains pay,
and four thousand Ducats yearly Salary besides: The Senate at that time decreed
that four hundred Artificers of the City should be enrolled, with whom four
times a year, the Galleys appointed for that purpose should be manned, that they
might all of them row together, which they commonly called Regater, and
pensions were appointed them who had served so thrice: This decree passed, to
the end they might be assured to have men always fit and ready to mann any
number of Galleys. There happened a mighty dearth of corn through all Italy in
this Dukes time, which lighted more heavy upon Venice then any place (among
other causes) which necessitated her to make peace with the Turk, but the
Marquis of Guasto Governor of Milan, and the Lord of Annebalt Marshall of
France, and her General in Piemont, came to Venice to divert her; they had
extraordinary magnificent entertainment, both for the quality of their own
persons, and of the great Princes that sent them.

The Marquis of Guasto coming to the Senate, told them that he was sent by his
Imperial Majesty to acquaint them, as his trusty and inward friends, with the
enterview that he intended to have with the French King, and in Flanders with
King Ferdinand his Brother, and the Queen his Sister, who governed there for
him, assuring them, that in the same Assembly of Princes affairs would be
handled concerning the universal good of Christendom, and the particulrr
advantage of that Republic, which the Emperor did as much desire as well as of
his own Estates; and that now they were ready to assail the Turks with very
great Forces; The Emperor therefore was desirous to know the Senats will and
intentions therein, what provision they would judge to be necessary, and what
they would have him to do for his part toward the better managing of this great
design.

Marshall Annebalt spoke to the same effect, protesting his Kings good will to
the common peace of Christendom, amd particularly of the Commonwealth of
Venice.

Answer was made by the Senate to the Marquis and the Marshall, that their
arrival was very pleasing and acceptable, as well in respect of the Princes
whom they represented, as for their own persons, for which, and for the honor
and friendship which they did profess to the Republic, they did infinitely
thank their Princes; The news of the good correspondence and certain hopes of
peace 'twixt two such mighty Kings had much rejoiced them* and so much the
more, by how much greater the profit was which all Christendom should receave
thereby: But as for the Declaration of their meaning and intendments toward
the present occasions, it might be sufficiently known by their actions, how for
their parts they had for three years born the brunt and burden of the war
against the common enemy, and being invited by those hopes, they were ready
again to embark and expose themselfs: yet nevertheless all might well
perceave, that they were not able alone to hold out long against the power of
so potent a Foe, therefore what could they say more? their necessity being
known to all men, how every one knew that Barbarossa was in the Gulf of
Lepanto, with a Fleet of eighty Galleys, and intended to winter there, whereby
the whole world might perceave, to what danger the State of the Commonwealth
was exposed, and by consequence all Christendom, unless the Navall Armies
might be ready by the month of February to divert his designs, all which things
were exactly to be thought upon, and speedily remedied.

This was an Answer without a resolution nor could those two great Ambassadors
get any other at all, for the sagacious Senate smelt out whereunto these
practices tended, and what the Emperors true designs were, namely to feed the
French with vain hopes of a restitution of the Duchy of Milan, and the
Venetians by propounding unto them to make preparation against the Turk, though
he cared not to perform either, but only thereby to win time, by being assured
of the quiet of the French Arms, and diverting that King from war.

But the Republic was constrained a little after to conclude a peace with the
Turk by surrendry of Naples in Peloponnesus, and Malvesia into his hands.

The Inhabitants of Napoli and Malvesia were exceedingly afflicted that the
Republic would give them up to the Turk, therefore General Mocenigo made unto
them this consolatory tender Oration.

The fatherly love wherewith Venice has always embraced and received you from
the beginning under her rule and protection, and then gently governed you for a
long time, may very easily persuade you, that the very same which I am enjoined
to deliver unto you, viz. that this City and Malvesia your Neighbor are to be
delivered to Solomon, has bin done rather upon extreme necessity, then by any
freedom of will: Diverse things may make you clea^ly perceave how dearly the
Republic ever loved you, specially these last wars, wherein for your relief, she
has oftentimes exposed her self to the greatest dangers; she has furnished
you with money, soldiers, and munition, for fear you should fall into the
enemies power, who with barbarous cruelty would have bathed his hands in your
blood: but what greater demonstration of love can the Republic make you in this
present exigent, then to promise all those who are willing to depart, another
fit dwelling place wherein they may safely live under her protection, and to
help, favor, and nourish them. The ancient Sages said, how that the same place
may be termed ones Country where he has his well being: Now what better thing
is there then to live under the moderat government of a good Princce. Diverse
Nations (their numbers growing ^ver great at home) have of their free wills
departed from their Native Country, and followed Fortune; In miseries to have
an assured refuge carries with it such a comfort, as a man does oftimes
remember things pass^d with greater contentation: we cannot remove hence, the
houses and walls of the City, but you may bear away what is d^arer unto you,
your goods and persons shall be preserved, your posterities shall propagat in
another place, and who knows but you may beget such generous children that may
revenge your wrongs some other day, so great is the change of mundane affairs,
whereunto the greatest Empires are as subject as the smallest villages, you may
be well assured; that the Republic will retain still a desire to take up arms
at all times when she sees that Christian Princes will seriously unite, that
there may be some probability to do good.

Whilst Mocenigo did thus comfort them, both men and women did shed warm tears,
being all melted into love as well as sorrow.

Not long after the French King finding that he could get nothing but promises
instead of performances, for the surrendry of Milan from the Emperor Charles;
he employed one Rincon Ambassador to Solomon for aid against Francis of France;
this Rincon was near Pavia in Italy slain by the Emperors Forces, as he was on
his way to Turkey; thereupon Polin was sent, whom the Republic did furnish with a
Gallie to carry him to Constantinople: He negotiated so well that Solomon sent
a Fleet of sixscore Galleys which took Reggio in Calabria, with the City of
Nice, and so arrives at Marseilles. The Republic was eagerly importuned both by
the Emperor and French King to enter into a League with them, but nothing could
put off from their Neutrality.

FRANCISCO DONATO was chosen after the death of Land, in 1545.
his time Cardinal Grimani, the peeple complaining of his oppressions, his
temporal dominion was taken from him, and restored to the Republic: in his
time also Friar George Bishop of Varadine, and Cardinal, suspected to hold
intelligence with the Turk, was massacred.

MARC ANTONIO TREVISANO was next elected, in whose time 1553
notwithstanding that all the Princes of Italy were engaged in some war or
other, yet the Republic was peaceful and quiet; This Duke being at Mass one
morning, died suddenly of a faintness in the head.

FRANCISCO VENIERI succeeded next, in whose time Charles the 1554
Emperor being tired with labor, and weary of the world, resigned the Empire
to his brother Ferdinand, and all the rest of his Dominions to his son Philip
the second, reserving to himself an annuity of a hundred thousand crowns, and
so retired to a Monastery: some write that he was sorry for it afterward, and
that his son should say, That the second day of his resignation was the first
day of his repentance, this happened in the year 1554.

LORENZO PRIULI then was created Duke, a great learned man, in 1556
whose time after a long funestous war, a peace was concluded 'twixt France
and Spain much by the endeavors of the Republic.

JEROMINO PRIULI succceeded next in the Principality: in 1567
his time the Council of Trent begun, Anno Dom. 1560. and broke off, Pius the
fourth being Pope, who though by his own natural inclination he was meek and
gentle, yet being importuned by the great complaints made unto him against his
Predecessors Nephews, who during their Oncles Papacy committed some extorsions,
he thereupon committed to prison Charles, and Alphonso Caraffi both Cardinals,
the Duke of Palliano their brother, and two others their near kinsmen, whose
processes being formed and considered by the Judges deputed to that end, they
were found guilty of sundry Crimes, in so much that Cardinal Charles was
strangled in the Castle of S. Angelo, the Duke of Palliano with the other
brother were beheaded in the Tower of Nona, and showed afterward publicly to
the peeple; Cardinal Alphonso was put only to a pecuniary amercement.

The Republic sent to the Council of Trent Miolo de Ponte, and Matteo Dandulo,
men much renowned, to represent the State, and above twenty Venetian Bishops
assisted there besides; but as the Counsel was newly opened, a strange thing
happened at Rome, for certain young men were incited by a Vision, which they
gave out they had received from Angels: It was, that another diviner man should
succeed the Pope now living, who should be the only Monarc of the world,
commanding both the spiritual and temporal Jurisdiction, and should bring all
men to an exact knowledge of the true God; they being desirous to have it
suddenly com to pass, not tarrying till the Pope should die a natural death,
resolved to massacre and dispatch him; one of their number called Benedetto
Accolto undertook to do it as he was reading of a Petition, but when it came to
the point of execution, he was daunted so, that he retired in a trembling
posture; whereupon one of the Conspirators fearing that they should be detected,
went to the Pope and opened the whole business; so that they were all
apprehended and executed.

The Gulf was mightily infected with Pirates in this Dukes time, but the
Republic did quickly remedy it, sending great Fleets abroad to scowre the
Adriatic, and secure trade.

The Pope sent to the Venetian Senate, that the Inquisition might be established
in their Dominions, to which end he employed a Nuncio of purpose, who urged it
very pressingly; but they waved the business, alleging what miserable effects
the pressing of the Inquisition had wrought both in Naples and Milan already;
and their Republic thanks be to God, needed not such extraordinary means, they
were generally such perfect Christians, but if any were convicted of any
notorious Heresy, if they did not abjure their errors, there were Laws
strict enough already to punish them.

The Republic sent a splendid Embassy to congratulat Selym the new Turk,
Martin Caballo was employed to that purpose, who made the following Speech unto
the Emperor.

As much grief (most gracious Emperor) as the Venetian Reipublic, so highly
affected to the Ottomans, has received by the death of Solomon that glorious
and wise Emperor, so much joy and contentment she has received, to understand
that divine power has raised you to such a dignity, and placed you in the
Throne belonging to the famous and most just family of the Ottomans; for it is
most certain that the soul of Solomon does at this present glory, not only for
that he does so much surpass all men in happiness, having been meek and
gentle to the humble, liberal to his friends, and faithful to his Allies, but
he rejoices to have left you his son behind him, far more excellent than
himself; for he having bin ever invincible, and never given place to any
mortal wight, is not only at this time joyful, but likewise accounts
himself more honored for being surmounted and overcom by his son in all virtues
belonging to an Emperor. The excellency of so many great Monarks, your noble
Ancestors, do invite us, or rather enforce us, most mighty Emperor, to expect
as much good from you, the glory of the Ottomans, the high attempt of your
Progenitors, every where so much renowned, does draw us thereunto, and the fame
of your forefathers, continued so many years without intermission, does confirm
it unto us: These things being thus, the Venetian Senate has sent me hither to
confirm and establish the same friendshid and alliance which has ever bin
betwixt the Ottoman Empire and our Republic, and this amity with your most
excellent Majesty ought to be the more pleasing unto you, by how much it is
more ancient, confirmed by sundry good offices on either part, and continued
for so many years; for indeed all worldly things do in tract of time corrupt
and grow feeble, and still new things are found best, but friendship being a
sacred and divine thing, and which cannot be but amongst good and just men, the
older it is, the more perfect and durable it is: Our Republic then being endued
by these reasons, does continually pray unto Almighty God for your health and
prosperity. This Ambassador was dismissed with extraordinary respect, having
rich garments, Terra sigillata and Balsamum, with diverse other precious things
bestowed upon him.

PIETRO LOREDANO was allotted and chosen to be the next Duke: 1567
the City of Venice, in the beginning of his government, was oppressed both
with fire and famine, for the Arsenal was burnt. The great Turk having notice
hereof by a Jew, John Miches by name, was advised by him to attempt the taking
of the Island of Cyprus, tho the gran Vizier with other of the Bassaes held it
a more glorious thing for him to relieve the afflicted Moors of Granada in
Spain; but in regard that no Gran Signor is respected as absolute Emperor, till
he has built a Mesquite, or performed some great exploit against the
Christians; Selym being transported with the counsel of the said Jew, broke
the League of peace with the Repubic, and invaded Cyprus.

The Venetian Republic having timely notice hereof, send an increase of Forces
to Cyprus, and solicit most of the Christian Princes, to enable her against
the brunt of the common enemy; she increases the number of the Procurators of
S. Mark, and admitted diverse young Gentlemen under age into the Senate, provided
they would supply the Republic in this extremity with certain sums of money.

PIETRO LOREDANO had the beginning of his Government ushered in by two
ilfavour'd disasters; for the Arsenal of Venice was set on fire, which falling
among the pitch and tar, with other combustible stuff, made a most hideous
noise far and near; after which followed an intolerable dearth, insomuch,
that for the peeples relief they were forced to employ the Magazin which was
reserved for the Fleets; The great Turk having intelligence hereof by John
Miches a pernicious Jew who was turned Turk, and incited also by his Council,
apprehended this opportunity to pick a quarrel with the Republic, and to
demand the Island of Cyprus, or else he denounced war against them; some
Cronicles report that Selym a little before sent to the Duke of Savoy to incite
him to recover that Island which did of right belong unto him, and he promised
to assist him in the enterprise, but the Savoyard would not hearken to it.

Herupon Selym himself resolved upon it, and armed accordingly; whereupon the
Venetian Bailio which was resident at Constantinople, not daring to send
advertisement by Land for fear his Letters should be intercepted, made his
address to Bassa Mahomet, who was ever averse to this design, hoping thereby to
obtain his desire: He told the Bassa how ill beseeming it would be for the
Majesty and generosity of so great a Prince to invade those on a sudden and
unexpected, who upon his word and oath thought themselves firm and safe; as
though when time and occasion would be offered he could want Forces to employ
against them for the recovery of that which might justly belong unto him,
against whom he ought first to proceed by way of Justice, and next by force,
using first gentle means before he did take arms. Herupon by the advice of
Mahomet Bassa the gran Vizier Selym sent a Chiaus to Venice, who being admitied
to a private audience, was brought to the Senate, and according to the usual
custom, being placed on the Dukes right hand, he kissed his gown, and after
diverse reverences, he presented a purse of gold tissue, wherein were the
Emperors Letters, saying, Most excellent Sir, this is a Letter from my Lord,
when you are acquainted with his demand I expect an answer; The Duke answered
it should be so. The Cwiaus being at a stand because he had no other answer,
addressed himself to the Senators, saying,

My Lords, Mahomet the Vizier Bassa has commanded me to tell you that he is
very sorry, that an occasion is offered that he must break with you, having
ever sought to continue your friend, but complaints coming so often to the
Port, and from so many places, of the unfriendly dealing of the Officers
belonging to this State, and specially of the kind entertainment and reception
given to the Western pirates at Cyprus, who this very year have done great hurt
to the Musulmans has taken such impressions in the mind of the great Lord, and
so often provoked him against this Commonwealth, finding that complaints made
hereof to your Baylio has taken little effect, that he could detain himself no
longer from denouncing war against you; and because you cannot hold out long
against the arms of so potent a Prince, he advises you as a friend to take some
course to shield you from so many dangers; and to this end he has procured my
coming hither, offering to do all he may, that ye may avoid this mighty stroke
offortune, and continue your ancient friendship with the great Lord.

The Prince replied, that the Senate had resolved on an Answer which should be
read unto him, that he might the better understand and know their intentions,
which was don by Antonio Milladonna Secretary to the Council, which was thus,
That the Senate did extremely marvail, that his Lord being no way by them
provoked, nor upon any just cause, would violat that oath whereby he had so
solemnly confirmed the peace, taking now for a pretense to make war upon them,
because they would not give away a Kingdom which they had so many years
lawfully and peaceably enjoyed, wherewith he might be well assured they would
never part; but seeing that he was determind to proceed against them in that
manner, the Republic would not fail to defend that which did belong unto her,
hoping by so much more to be the better able to do it, by how much the justice
of their cause would procure them all aid and succor, both divine and human,
and so the Chiaus was dismissed with an Answer to his Letter, which was as
follows.

That the Venetians had inviolably maintained the peace concluded with his
Imperial Majesty, and contemned all other respects whatsoever, by refusing
many fair oportunities, whereof they might have made good use to their
extraordinary advantage, because that above all worldly things, it befits a
Prince to keep his promise; and they being careful to avoid all suspicion of
so great an infamy, had dissembled and buried in silence diverse wrongs done
unto them, because they would not be the first disturbers of the peace; but now
perceaving that upon no occasion he denounced war against them at such a time
as they least expected it, they would not refuse it, for the defense of their
own, and in particular for defense of the Island of Cyprus, which as their
Ancestors had enjoyed by so just a title, they did likewise hope that God would
give them grace to maintain it valiantly against all those that would injustly
take it away from them.

The Chiaus being returned to Constantinople, Selym took it in high
indignation, that the usual Ceremonies used to Ambassadors were not performed
to his Chiaus Cubat, who coming before him, and relating what preparations the
Republic made, he seemed to repent himself of his determination, and fell into
a great heat of passion; thereupon there were gards put upon the Bailios Palace,
as also upon all the Venetian Consulls in Egypt, and Syria.

LODOVICO MOCENIGO was elected the next Duke, at the beginning 1570
of whose government the Turk sent mighty forces both by Land and Sea for the
conquest of Cyprus; the I Will of Rhodes was the first rendevous of the whole
Fleet, which came to more then two hundred armed Vessels, accounting one
hundred fifty Galleys, together with Fusts and Galeots, among which there were
certain Mahonnes, which are like to great Galleys, not altogether so big as a
Galeon, six Ships, and a great number of Vessels commonly called
Caramussolini, and some fifty Palandaries to transport horse.

This Fleet bended it is direct course toward Cyprus, was descryed nere Batto
the first of July, 1570. they dispatch eighty Galleys, and diverse flat battom'd
Vessels to Tripoli, and to the river of Caramania, there to raise more horse
and foot forces, all which arriving in Cyprus, made up the number of fifty
thousand foot, two thousand five hundred horse, three thousand Pioners, and
thirty pieces of Ordnances, with one hundred and fifty Falconets.

The ordinary Garrison of the Island was but two thousand Italian foot, and some
thousand recreuts sent from the firm Land with Martinengo, two thousand fresh
soldiers, many whereof perished by incommodious transportation, so that the
greatest hopes of being able to defend the Towns and Castles, consisted in the
fresh supplies, which the Island her self, being populous, had promised to levy,
and for Cavalrie, there were but five hundred Stradiots which were upon the pay
of the Republic.

Things being thus, and sufficient forces wanting to repel so huge an enemy,
the Cavalry was too weak to hinder his landing, and the Infantery too few,
therefore resolution was taken to defend the two main Cities, Famagosta and
Nicotia. The two chief Commanders of the Turkish Army was Mustapha and Piali,
whereof the first was of a fierce fiery spirit; these two differed in opinion
which to besiege, first Piali was for Famagosta, but Mustapha was for Nicotia,
saying, that the reputation of so great an Army as theirs, ought not to be
blemished by attempting any mean enterprise, thereby to increase the enemies
courage, and diminish their own; that the Genoways had for ninety years held
Famagosta at the same time as the Kings of the Family of Lusignan commanded the
Island, whereby might be gathered, that the taking of that City would be of no
great importance for the taking of the whole Island; that the Nobility, and the
better part of the peeple were retired to Nicotia, where all the wealth and
strength of the Kingdom was; so as that only exploit being performed, would
quickly put a period to all the rest, and their first atchievment give an end
to all their designs: so they invested Nicotia, a City seated in the midst of a
Campane in a wholesome temperat air; she has excellent water, and the soil is
very fruitful: In former times 'twas nine miles in compass, but the Venetian
the better to fortify it, reduced it to three; She is proportioned like a
Star, with eleven points; in every one of which there is a bulwark made only of
earth, which were not perfectly finished when the Ottoman Army arrived, but the
rules of fortification were so exactly observed, as the greatest Engines
accounted it the most absolute piece in the world: There were in the City ten
thousand foot, among whom were fifteen hundred Italians, and the rest were
Cypriots; some contestation happened in Nicotia among the chief Commanders, but
in Mustapha's Army there was a wonderful unanimity and obedience, who among
other choice men had six thousand Janissaries, and four hundred Spahies picked
out of purpose for that expedition. Mustapha gives a fierce assault to four
Bulwarks at once, and they of the City making a sally upon the enemy under
Andrea Cortese a Stradiot Captain, he was taken prisoner, and as soon as he was
brought before Mustapha his head was chopped off.

The Turks pursue their batteries with such a resolution, that they made
themselves masters of all the Bulwarks, and so quickly rushed into the Town,
where the Governor and Bishop, with the better sort, had retired into the
Palace; and having received Mustapha's word for the safety of their life's, so
soon as they had opened the gates, the rabble fell in upon them, and put them
all to the edge of the sword; which being done, they ran confusedly, and
without Ensigns up and down the City, seeking, spoiling and ruining all
things, (except Churches) dishonoring wifes, ravishing Virgins, and massacring
all as they went without distinction of sex or age, so that there was slain
that day above twenty thousand Christian souls they who were reserved were
chained together, and haled over the bodies of their dead friends (reaking with
hot blood) to prison. Thus was the famous City of Nicotia after fourteen days
siege taken and sacked, a place that had flourished in great pomp and pleasure
for many ages.

The Turks did afterward with much ease become Lords of Cyprus, Famagosta
excepted, whither Mustapha marched soon after, and encamped himself three miles
from the City, causing his horse to make daily incursions to the very gates,
bearing the head of the chiefest Nicotians upon their Lances points to daunt
the soldiers, who were rather the more encouraged for revenge; so that when he
made nearer approaches to the walls, they made many sallies out, and did
notable execution upon the enemy; with their Ordnance they demolished three
Forts which had bin raised by Mustapha, but it turned to their prejudice
afterward; for thereby they spent above fifty thousand pound weight of powder,
which they afterward wanted.

Winter now approaching, and Mustapha having intelligence of a great League
which was like to be between the Christian Princes, Mustapha did often, and by
diverse insinuating ways, solicit the City to hearken to some agreement
touching their rendition, but the Captains and inhabitants of Famagosta would
hearken to no parley at all; but sent to the Venetian Senate, entreating them not
to treat with the bloody barbarous enemy, but to send them more forces, for
they resolved to sell their life's as dearly as ever Christians did.

There was then at Suda in Candy, a great Fleet of Christian Galleys, both
Venetian, Spanish and Roman, united by a late League; there was a consultation
among the chief Commanders what to do, some held it was best to assault some
places belonging to the Turk, thereby to enforce the enemy to quit Cyprus, and
come to the rescue of their own: but Zanne the Venetian General was of another
opinion, persuading them to sail directly to Cyprus, alleging that the
principal design of that Fleet was to preserve that Island, which was in so
desperate a condition, that if they directed their course elsewhere, 'twas
impossible to keep her from utter ruin: That the probablest and most
magnanimous way was to find out the enemies Fleet, because that upon report of
their coming the Turks would be enforced to quit their Land enterprises, and
retire to their Navy, for the defense thereof; which if they should not do, they
were then sure to find their Galleys empty in the haven exposed to their mercy:
He added further, That though happily the enemy was more in number of vessels
and men, nevertheless they were without all doubt in goodness of shipping, as
also in courage and goodness of quarrel far superior unto them; moreover to
approach the enemies Fleet, though no other profit should ensue thereof, would
increase their own reputation, whereas on the contrary to turn away from them
would argue fear and cowardice; That it was no sound advice to lose his own
first, upon hope to get it of another man.

These reasons being well enforced, were approved by every one as agreeable to
the Senats Decree, whereupon the whole Fleet, consisting of an hundred eighty
light Galleys, namely one hundred twenty four of the Venetians, forty five of
the King of Spain's, and twelve of the Popes, besides twelve great Galleys, and
fourteen Venetian men of war, with great number of other vessels of burden,
which carried ammunition, with other necessaries, in which Fleet there were
fifteen thousand mercenary footmen, besides great numbers of volunteers, and
most of them Gentlemen; this Fleet I say hois'd sails, and sailed with a fair
wind toward Cyprus, and in three days came to Castelrosso, which is seated on
a rock, opposite to Carimania, some hundred and fifty miles from Famagosta;
there they received the heavy news of the taking of Nicotia, which did much
trouble them; thereupon a Council was called the next day, wherein Doria the
Spanish Admiral openly protested, That he would return home, saying, that he
came from Candy with a design to relieve Nicotia, which being lost, the cause
of his journey ceased, and that he knew no other reason to expose them to the
hazard of a battle; for the enemies being thereby grown more insolent, would
quickly embark themselves not only to repel, but to assail us; He added
further, the unfitness of the season, winter drawing on, and the special
charge he had for preserving his Fleet by the command of his Catholic Majesty:
so Doria took his leave of the rest, not a little to his dishonor, and directed
his course for Puglio, and so to Sycily.

Colonna the Popes Admiral, and Zanne desirous to do something* remained still
together, but having intelligence that Piali the Turks Admiral was with his
whole Fleet making toward them, they weighed anchors and made for Candy.

Though the Republic had ill luck at Sea, and in Cyprus this year, yet there
were some compensations made to her in Albania, for diverse Towns did rise up
there, who being desirous to shake off the Turkish yoke, they sent to Venice
for some auxiliary supplies, protesting unto them, That upon the first sight of
their ensigns they would run unto them, and become their subjects for security;
whereof they would give them their chiefest children for hostages: so the
Governors of Autivari, Dulcigna and Budua, did in the name of the Republic
receave the Oath of Allegiance of more then one hundred Towns and Villages.

While poor Cyprus and her chief City Famagosta was upon making her last will,
the renewing of the League was treated at Rome, which the hauty spirit of the
Spaniard did much retard. The Pope in his hortative offered to go upon the
Fleet; among other things, the Spaniard proposed that the Venetians should be
bound upon pain of Ecclesiastical censures, to observe in every point that
which should be resolved on in the League, as though they had suspected the
Republics integrity; whereunto the Venetian Ambassadors gave a round and stout
Answer; they did moreover contend about a Generalissimo, the Spaniard proposing
not only to nominat him but his Lieutenant also, who in his absence should have
the same authority: this did much distract the Treaty; there was another rub
besides in the business, which was a darkness that was like to be 'twixt the
Emperor and the Pope, for conferring a new Title upon the Duke of Florence,
which the Emperor would not allow of.

There was a motion of peace made about this time by the Turk to the Republic,
but as she was ready to send Ragasson instructions accordingly, General
Colonna the Popes General was sent from Rome to dissuade her from it; the
Spaniard also seeks unto her about the same purpose, and to desire her to
re-enter into the League which was now absolutely concluded: hereupon she gave
Colonna a pleasing answer, and after much canvasing the point in the Senate, a
resolution was taken to send new Commissions to her Ambassadors at Rome
accordingly.

So in Rome after most solemn Divine Service, and the procession ended, in S.
Peter's Church, the League was published, the particular Articles whereof were
as follows.

Betwixt Pope Pius Quintus, promising for the Sea Apostolic and his Successors,
with the consent of the whole College of Cardinals, Philip the Catholic King,
and the Duke and Senate of Venice, a League and perpetual confederacy has bin
made to abate and overthrow the Turks power, who of late has invaded with a
mighty Army the Realm of Cyprus, a Country very commodious for the conquest of
the Holy Land. That the Confederats forces shall consist of two hundred light
Galleys, one hundred Ships of war, fifty thousand footmen, Italians, Spaniards,
and Almains, four thousand five hundred horse, with Artillery and Ammunition
proportionable to such a force, all which shall be employed for the defense, as
well of the confederat States, as to assail the enemy, and particularly for the
enterprise of Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli; That all these forces shall be united
in the month of May next ensuing, or in the month of April at Otrauto, to pass
into the Levant against the enemies, as Times, and the Council of Captains
shall think fit; that th^se Forces nevertheless may be changed by increasing
or diminishing the provisions of war, as necessity and the quality of the
enterprise shall require; whereupon a yearly meeting shall be at Rome in Automn,
there to consult what is best to be done; and if it shall there be concluded not
to attempt anything that year in common, yet it might be lawful for every of
the Confeder^s to execute their particular enterprises, specially for the King
of Spain, to enterprise those of Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli; in which, so that
there be no mighty Turkish Army abroad, the Venetians shall be bound to aid the
King with fifty Galleys of purpose: That the said King shall be likewise bound
to aid the Venetians, whenever they shall enterprise any thing in their Gulf
against the common enemy; on this condition nevertheless, if he which shall
crave this aid have far greater forces ready. That all the Confederats shall be
obliged to defend the States of any one of them whom the Turk shall invade, and
in particular with other places that shall belong to the Church: that for the
expense of the war, his Catholic Majesty shall pay one half, and the other
moitie being divided into three parts, the Venetian shall pay two, and the Pope
the third: They shall be bound to give the Pope twelve Galleys ready rigged and
munition'd, which his Holiness shall mann for the service of the League; that
generally each of the Confederats shall be bound to contribut for the common
necessity, whatsoever he shall abundantly have, and others want, which
afterward shall be allowed upon account: that the Storehouses for corn shall
^e every where open for the common good, and that grain may be taken forth out
of commodious places, so that he of whom it is taken make first his own
provision: that at Counsels and Consultations the Commanders of the three
Consederat Princes shall be present, and what the most of them resolve upon
shall be concluded; nevertheless the execution of matters determined shall
remain to the General of the Army (who was presently named, to wit, Don John
of Austria) and in his absence Marc Antonio Colonna with the same authority,
though at the same time he retain the title and rank of the Churches General.

In this League, which was struck 1570. there was a place reserved for
Maximilian of Austria the elect Emperor, for the King of France, and the King
of Portugal to enter into the confederacy when they should think it fit, and to
all other Christian Princes, who had a desire to engage in it, and in case any
strife should arise *twixt the Confederats, the Pope as Umpire shall decide it.

These Articles were not to be put in execution till the year following: in the
mean time, because Famagosta was so much straightened, the Republic sent thither
Marc Antonio Quirini with four Ships, attended by twelve Galleys, to carry
supplies thither, who safely landed sixteen hundred foot, with great store of
victuals and munition in Famagosta, which did beyond expression encourage
them* and whilst he remained there, he took a Ship of the enemies, with other
smaller Vessels, and razed certain Forts which the Turks had raised upon the
rock of Gambella; there was another supply of eight hundred fresh men sent to
Baillone the Governor of Famagosta in other Ships a little after.

The Turk made some overtures of peace again to the Venetians, which they would
not hearken unto, in regard of the new League; hereupon there came another
formidable Fleet of two hundred and fifty Galleys again to perfect the conquest
of Cyprus, which arriving at Candy did ravage the Country; but beaten out with
loss, they rowed up and down, and pillaged diverse other places in Zant and
Cephalonia; at last Don John of Austria arrives at Genoa with his promised
supplies, whence he sent to Venice to acquaint them of his arrival, and thank
them for their good opinion of him.

The Turks after the taking of Nicotia had deferred the siege of Famagosta by
reason of Winter, but as soon as the next Spring approch'd, they replanted the
siege, and with sixty four great pieces of Ordnance, with four huge Basiliscos
they did batter the place night and day. The besieged did for ten days space
make so furious a counter-Battery, as they made fifteen of the enemies Canons
unserviceable, and ^lew thirty thousand of their men: At last their powder
failing them, they could not be so active; which the inhabitants understanding
they went in a hubub to the Governor, that he would propounda Treaty with the
cruel foe to save their wives and children; so there being Commissioners
employed on both sides, it was agreed upon, that the Christian Soldiers should
be conveyed to Candy in Turkish vessels, carrying with them their arms and
baggage, with five pieces of Ordnance, and three horses belonging to the three
chief Commanders. That the inhabitants who were desirous to depart, might do
the like, and those who would continue there should have assurance given them to
enjoy their goods, and to live in their Christian Religion still. These
Articles being signed by Mustapha, there were forty vessels appointed to
transport the Soldiers and inhabitants; but as soon as the Turks entered the
City, they began to offer violence: whereupon Bragadini sent Martinengo to
Mustapha, to complain of the Soldiers; Mustapha entertained him kindly,
desiring to know so valiant a Captain, and to confer with him: Bragadini giving
credit to these sugared words, being accompanied with Martinengo, and Quirini,
and attended on by sundry Captains all on horsback, with some four musketeers,
go to Mustapha's Tent: Bragadini rode foremost under a crimson umbrella clothed
in purple, wearing his usual robe of Magistrate, who being come to Mustapha's
pavilion* left their weapons at the door; and being entered were courteously
entertained by Mustapha; who cau'sd them to sit down, among other discourses he
craved caution for the vessels that were sent to Candy; Bragadini having made
answer that no such thing was mentioned in the Articles, and besides he had no
man there with him who he could leave for pledge behind him; Mustapha pointing
at Quirini said, let that man be pledge; Bragadini constantly maintained the
contrary, and told him he could not justly detain any of them, Mustapha waxing
impatient, and being no longer able to master his choler, did fiercely thunder
many injurious speeches against him, commanded them all to be manacled, then
thrusting them forth of his Tent, he caused his Soldier to murder before his
face, Baillone, Martinengo, Quirini and all the rest before Bragadini's face,
who was reserved for a greater torture, having before his death endured many
martyrdomes: they forced him twice or thrice to offer his neck, as though they
would have chopped off his head, which they did not do, but only cut off his nose
and ears. Count Hercules who had bin sent formerly for Hostage, being likewise
manacled, was likewise bound, but hid by Mustapha's Eunuch till his fury was
passed; all the rest of the Christian soldiers were also bound, and those which
were already shipped were made Gallie-slaves, and despoiled of their goods. Two
days Mustapha entered the City, where he commanded Tepulo to be pulled up, and
hanged at the Yards Arm of a Gally; then causing Bragadini, who was so
pitifully mangled and dismembered, to be brought before him, he was laden with
two baskets full of earth, the one before, the other behind, and was made to
carry them to the great Breach, making him to kiss the ground so often as he
passed by him; thence he was hurried away into a Gally of Rhodes, where he was
bound in a Chair, with a Crown at his feet, and so hoisted up to the Main-yard
of the Gally, that he might be the better discerned of the Slaves and Christian
soldiers that were in the Haven: being thence brought back to the City with
Drums and Trumpets into the Market place, he was there stripped of his clothes,
and most ignominiously laid upon a Scaffold, where they fell a flaying of him
alive; the Noble gentleman enduring all things with invincible patience and
magnanimity, without any murmuring, only taxing the perfidious Bassa with
perjury and Breach of Faith, at last expired, when the bloody executioners had
come with their knifes as far as his navill; then was his skin stuffed with
straw, and carried round about the City, 'twas afterward hung at the Yard Arm
of a Galleot all along the Coasts of Syria, as he returned to Constantinople.

Such was the immanity and barbarousnesse of Mustapha at the taking* of
Famagosta, where he had lost during the siege above thirty thousand men; and so
was the famous and delicat I Will of Cyprus, the parent of the Queen of Love,
ravished, and made a slave to the Mahumetan, to the great reproach of all
Christian Princes, who were consulting all the while upon a League, and
standing upon Puntillios.

But the triumvirat Admiralls of the League, Don John of Austria, Sebastian
Venieri, and Marc Antonio Colonna, met at last at Messina in Sicily, where there
was bandings of opinions on all sides, how to employ those Fleets upon such an
enterprise that might tend to advantage and honor, the main debate was whither
they should oppress the enemy by some actual invasion, or stand upon the
defensive part for the preservation of their own Territories; hereupon
Bernardino de Requiseus, Don John Oracle, with a clear voice, and grave gesture
and countenance spoke as follows, addressing his Speech to Don John.

Your Highness, most excellent Prince, in commanding my opinion before these
more sufficient Commanders, observes the rules of feasts, where the coursest
meats are tasted first; my Council may perhaps be less pleasing, yet as
wholesome as any others; The question is, Whether we must assault the Enemy by
Sea, or keep him from infesting us by Land? this will be best resolved of, when
we have made a true discovery and comparison of his forces with ours; if we be
stronger 'twill be more honorable to invade; if weaker, 'twill be more fitting
to repel; what the number of the enemies Galleys is we may see; how those
Galleys are armed we may conjecture; and how those men are fleshed and
heightened with late successes we need not doubt: Let us take heed, that while
we seek to revenge our harms, we do not aggravate them, nor lose in striving to
recover; it were a perpetual infamy that such a Fleet should return without
performance of any thing, but it were not only a shame, but an utter undoing
not to ^eturn at all: the Commonwealth were better to want the interest than
the principal; this Fleet is the surest anchor of hopes, and to lose it, would
endanger the wrack of all Italy; let us not therefore offer to fight, unless
some advantage of time and place be offered us, and counterpoise on our sides
the odds of strength on theirs; nothing can be to us of greater importance,
then the preservation of the Fleet it self: The storminess of Winter will
shortly calm the fury of the Turk, in the mean time it will be a degree of
victory to limit and stop the course of theirs: This, most excellent General,
is my opinion, whereunto I am not yet so wedded, but that clearer judgment may
divorce me. This by some cooler tempers was heard with a kind of applause, but
of the Noble (...) with disdain, which yet was modestly smoothed by Barbarico,
as follows.

I deny not, most excellent General, and you my Noble Lords, but that the last
Speech was enriched and fortified by strong Arguments, wherein if there be any
defect, it proceeds not from too little judgment, but from too much care and
tenderness of the Christian State, a zeal which not only excuses, but almost
justifies and endeares his error: I confess that to assault an enemy with a
weaker power were to betray it, but wherein appears it that we are the weaker?
if they exceed us in number of Galleys, we excel them in strength and
swiftness; if they exceed us in multitudes of men, we them in courage and
Discipline; he thinks their victories have added much to their courage, I think
it has drawn more from their strength; questionless our men in Cyprus, and
other places, held their Altars, Liberties, Wifes, Children, Wealth, Houses and
life's at too high a rate to deliver them up gratis; the^ have found the
Christian Markets dear; nay, their victories may happily beget ours, breeding in
them not as much animosity, as security and presumption, which uses to be
their own traitor: Was this Fleet built and united with such infinite care,
cost and difficulty, presently to dissolve and break up, as if we had met but
to salute one another, or went only to Sea to purge and return? or shall we
stay only to look on our enemies, as if we could destroy them like Basilisks?
but winter will cool their heat: were we not better quench it now, that it may
not break out again the next Spring: will not this Crocodile which devours us
both by Land and Sea, fatned with Christian blood and spoil, wax stronger by a
years growth? if we be too weak for him now, how shall we resist him then? how
shall we look our selves, nay heaven in the face, or lift up our eyes to it,
not daring to lift up our hands against its enemies? But I surfeit your ears
with persuasions, needless to such judgments and resolutions; your Fathers
imperial Majesty displayed in your brow, promises the same magnanimity in
your breast; there is (I know) too much Caesar in you to have the patience not to
fight: Make have then most illustrious Prince, to reap the fruit of a victory
with your sword. This was the sense of the Noble Venetian, which the Speakers
repute, and graceful delivery gave more life and strength unto; it was
afterward confirmed by Carnia a Spaniard, the sympathy between whose tongue and
the Genaralls ear furthered perhaps his resolution to fight, willing that so
Noble a Council might be rather attributed to one of the Nation, then to
Barbarico: Carnia's Speech in effect was this:

There are three Motives, most magnificent General, which without imputation of
fear or omission of duty, may induce a Commander to decline battle: First a
disproportion between the benefit of victory, and prejudice of overthrow on
either part; in this respect the Duke of Alva did politiquely abstain from
encountering the Guise in Naples when they could lose but their Army, but the
Spaniard his Army, and Kingdom of Naples: Secondly, if he foresee an easier and
cheaper means to dissolve the adverse Army then by battle; thus did your
highness Father, Charles the Emperor of sacred memory, break the neck of the
Lutheran Armies in Germany: Lastly, the inequality of strength, he being the
weaker, and likely to miscarry in the attempt, whereof there are so many
presidents, that I need allege none; but neither of these can be applied to
divert us from battle, where if we prevail we recover our own again, and happily
Greece her self for interest; if fighting valiantly we be overcome, yet shall
we in the conflict so far weaken and maim the enemy, that we shall sooner arm a
defensive Navy then he an offensive, and more easily secure our own, then he
make any further impression on it. Touching protraction, the winter will indeed
dissolve his Fleet, but so that it will bud forth again the next Spring
perhaps a greater, and get the start of our Navy, his being united by Nation,
ours by combination. Touching inequality of force, it is propable we exceed
them more in men, then they us in vessels, for he must needs consume many men,
in taking so many strong Towns and Forts, and employ many in keeping them;
neither are the scars of the late pestilence healed among them, therefore my
advice is, the Galleys of Candy being ^om, that you hasten to Corfu, by which
they must needs pass, least having intelligence of your resolution to fight,
they prevent the danger of incountring, and carry from you the fruits of their
own victory, and the opportunity of ours. Don John after this serious
consultation concluded to assail the Turkish Fleet, and attempt to intercept
their harvest of Cyprus, with other maritin parts of Christendom ere they should
house it; therefore departing from Messina, and being lanch'd out to open Sea,
he composed his Galleys to that form of battle which he intended to observe in
fight; so marshalling and exercising them before, that every Squadron might
know his place, and every Gally his Squadron, and be able to transform
themselfs to all figures without confusion, when occasion should require. Two
days after they arrived at the Cape of Colonnes, where they came to anchor by
reason of a contrary wind, as also because they were to take their fresh
supplies of men; in the mean time they dispatched three Venetian Galleys to
Corfu, to make discovery of the Turkish Fleet, who brought news that they had
passed along in view of Zant, and entered into the Gulf of Lepanto.

Herupon, though with some difficulty, by reason of contrary winds, they put to
Sea, and the seventeenth of September arrived at Corfu, where an ill-favor'd
accident happened, for Don John having sent Doria to survey the Army, and
finding some Venetian companies not complete, he distributed among them certain
nombers of Spaniards, whereof Mutius Tortona commanded one band, who being a man
of turbulent spirit, raised a mutiny, so that they fell from words to blows,
whereupon by Venieri the Venetian Generals command, Tortona and his Ensign
were hanged by Martial Law: Don John being a little too indulgent of his
Countrymen the Spaniards, complained, That his authority was more contemned by
Venieri, then Venieries by Tortona, for which if there were not honorable
satisfaction given, he would take it himself, and teach Venieri, that though he
respected the honor of the Republic, he would not neglect his own; Venieri
protested on the other side, that he did it not to derogat from the Authority
of the General any way, but to preserve his own, and prevent the sudden
confusion of the mutiny, looking upon the offender not as a Spaniard, but as a
mut^neer; he affirmed further, that if the General should take this necessary
piece of justice as an occasion to break the League, which was applied as a
means to keep it, it would be manifest that not devotion but ambition diverted
him from this honorable action; as for violence, he should find him as dangerous
an enemy, as otherwise a necessary friend.

Colonna the Popes Admiral fearing what this might grow unto, used his
intercession to atone the difference, conjuring Don John, in whom he found
great obstinacy of discontent and estrangement, and telling him the act was
just, though sudden like the occasion, and that suddenness is necessary in
dangers of so swift extension, which having once got the start, remedy could
hardly overtake them: That mutiny in an Army was of as instant conveyance as a
gangrene in the body; if the party infected were not presently cut off, it
endangered the whole; that this was no intrusion on the Generals authority, for
an under-Admiral in his own Squadron to execut a private offender: that indeed
he had no cause of offense, and if he had cause* he had no leisure to entertain
it: that the enemies strength could not so much endanger them, as their own
division weaken them; that as nothing could heap more honor upon him then the
suppressall of the enemy, so nothing could lay fouler aspersion then to lose
this opportunity of doing it; therefore if he could not casheer his passion, he
should employ it against the common enemy.

These persuasions, strong, though not bitter, moved Don John then to abstain
from the effects of choler, but not to extinguish it, so that by reason of this
distaste with Venieri, he communicated all things afterward to Barbar^co.

From Co^fu the whole Fleet held her course to Cephalonia, and thence to the
Gulf of Lepanto, and drawing nere to the place, and discovering the enemy, and
resolved to assail him, Don John commanded the decks to be cleared, chests
stowed, those Cabins which might be an impediment to the Combatant taken down,
the rest that might be receptacles to cowards locked up, leaving neither excuse
for his men, nor advantage for the enemy; and as he prepared all essentialls,
so he neglected no ^maginary or opinionat part of defense or offense; therefore
knowing that strength was the beauty of an Army, but bravery the Ensign of
that strength, his men were richly armed, and his Galleys suitable to his men,
both carrying the badge of triumph, and the face of victory, displaying
magnanimity and confidence, like a bright, though dreadful flame. And because
he might husband the small remainder of time to the utmost mi^t, he caused
victuals to be proportioned to his men mode^atly, not superfluously, far from
the swinish custom of some Northerly Nations, who ( as if wine were the nurse
of val^r, as oil to a lamp) against any fight, knock out the heads of their
barrells, and drink reason out of their own heads, and so reel aboard, sometimes
tumbling upon victory, but seldom upon honor, which ever derives her self from
virtue: This Noble temperat Captain then not taking intemperance to be the
Fountain of resolution, did therefore distribut as much to his soldiers as might
strengthen their bodies, not weaken their judgment, and breed co^age in them,
not rage, which being with more speed then ceremony ended, he with a
countenance and habit becoming such a place and person, descended into his
Barge, wherein he passed through the body of the Fleet, being ranged in form
following.

It consisted of four principal distinct parts, viz. two wings, the main
battalion, and the reserve of succors: In the right wing were contained fifty
three Galleys, whereof Doria was Admiral, bearing in his main top a green flag;
the left wing was composed of an equal number of Galleys commanded by
Augustino Barbarico, with a yellow flag on the starboard side of the top; In
the main battle were included sixty one Galleys, wherein Don John himself was
distinguished by a sky-colour'd flag: the two wings and the main battle were
167. Galleys strong; so placed, that the two wings carried forward the body in
equal part, the one not forsaking the other, yet twixt all three there was
sufficient distance to admit three or four Galleys a breast, without falling
foul either on themselfs, the wings, or the main battle; as well to give way
to those supplies of resc^es which should be needful in any part, as to
transform the whole battle it self into any figure without confusion: The
Marquis of Santa Cruz bearing a white flag in his Poop, conducted the reserve
for succors, consisting of thirty eight Galleys, out of which were deducted
eight, commanded by Don John de Cardona Prec^sor of the whole Fleet, who
running about twenty miles before the rest by swift Frigots, signified unto the
General whatsoever was necessary to be known in their discovery, with
commandment when they descryed the Turkish Navy, to retire and imp themselfs to
the two wings in equal division, Cardona to the right wing. The Gall^sses and
Argozies were half a mile before the Galleys, two before the right wing, two
before the left, and two before the middle battle, every Galleasse a mile
before each other; the first were commanded by Ambrosio and Antonio Bragadini,
the second by Iacomo G^ori, and Antonio Duodi, the third by Andrea Pisara, and
Pietro Pisano: the use of these greater vessels (being fortified with plenty
of Ordnance, and lined with multitude of small shot) was to receave the first
fury of the enemies Fleet passing by, that being weakened and disordred by them,
the next charge might be more safe and easy: and in respect they were huge and
unweldy Vessels unapt for oars, every Galeasse was rowed by two several
Galleys whenever they were becalmed, and had lost the use of their sails; the
Galeasse of Antonio Duodi was towed by the General and Colonna; the Galeasse
of Giacomo Guori was towed by Venieri, and Christophoro Lieni, the Galeasse of
Ambrosio Bragadini by Augustine Barberigo; the Galeasse of Antonio Bragadini by
Antonio Canali; the Galeasse of Andrea Prsano by the Prior of Messina; the
Galeasse of Pietro Pisano by Andrea Doria. The General, like the heart in the
body, was seated in the midst of the battle, guarded on the right side by Marc
Antonio Colonna the Popes Admiral, and on the left by Venieri: Colonna was
flanked by the Admiral of Genoa, whereof Hector Spinola was Captain, associated
by the Prince of Parma. Venieri was flanked by the Admiral of Savoy, commanded
by Lieni, accompanied by the Prince of Urbin: Ast^n the General, Colonna and
Venieri were backed by a Gally named the Prince of Spain, and another belonging
to the great Comendador of Castile; the right side of the main battle, opposite
to the wing, was strengthened by the Admiral Gally of Malta, commanded by the
Prior of Messina: the left side was commanded by a Gally called the Captain of
Pietro Lomelino, by Paulo Vrsino: in the right wing Cardona seconded Andrea
Doria: in the left wing Augustine Barbarico was supported on one hand by Marco
Quirini, and on the other by Canali. Yet was the whole Fleet, though distinct
in order, so intermixed in Nation, that neither the Spanish, Venetian or Papal
Galleys could respect their particular safety.

In regard that this was the most furious and greatest fight that ever was upon
salt water, and the most successful that ever Christians had against the
Turk, I shall be the more exact and punctual in the relation of it; therefore I
shall here set down a Catalog of the names of all Bottoms and chief Commanders
in both the Fleets.

The Galleys and Captains, who went before the Fleet, for dicsovery, were these,
Galleys. Captains. 1 The S. Magdalen of Venice, Marco Contarini. 2 The Sun of
Venice, Vincente Quirini. 3 The Admiral of Sicily, Juan de Cordona. 4 The
Vice Admiral of Sicily, 5 The Admiral, David Imperiali. 6 The Joannica of
Sicily, 7 S. Catheina of Venice, Marco Cicogna. 8 The Lady of Venice, Pietro
Francisco Maripietro. The Galleys and Captains of the left wing.
Galleys. Captains. The Admiral of Venice, Augustine Barbarico, Proveditor. The
Vice Admiral of Venice, Antonio Canali, Proveditor. The Fortune of Venice,
Andrea Barbarico. The Archer of Naples, Martino Pyrola. The Treble-hand of
Venice, Georgio Barbarico. The Double-Dolphin of Candie, Francisco Zeno. The
Lion and Phaenix of Canea, Francisco Mengano. S. Nichola of Cherso, Colanes
Drase. The Victory of Naples, Octavio Roccardi. The Lomelina, Augustine
Conevali. The Elengina of the Popes, Fabio Vulciati. The Lady of Canea,
Philippo Polani. The Seahorse of Candy, Antonio de Cubelli. The Double-Lion of
Candy. Nicholo Fratello. The Lion of Istria, Dominico de Tucco. The Cross of
Cephalonia, Marco Cimera. The S. Virginia of Cephalonia, Christophoro Crissa.
The Lion of Candy, Francisco Bonaccio. The Christ of Candy, Andrea Cornelio.
The Angel of Candy, Giovanni Angelo. The Pyramid of Candy, Francisco Buono.
The L. of Candy with armed horse, Antonio Eudominiano. The Christ raised of
Venice, Simone Gora. The Lesser Christ of Venice, Frederico Renieri. The Christ
of Corfu, Christophoro Condocollo. The Christ raised of Canea, Georgio Calerga.
The great Christ of Venice, Bart. Denato. The Christ raised of Vegia, The
Retimana, Nicholo Avonali. Galleys. Captains. The Christ of Candy, Giovanni
Cornelio. The Christ raised again of Rhodes Francisco Zancaruolo. The Rodus of
Canea, Francisco Molino. The S. Euphemia of Brescia, Horatio Fisogna. The La.
Marquis of Doria, Francisco Sphedra. The Fortune of Andrew, Lodovico Belui. The
Arm of Canea, Michael Visamano. The Seahorse of Venice, Antonio Canali. The
Christ of Canea, Daniel Calefattio. The Arm of Venice, Nicolo Lipamanno. Our
Lady of Zant, Nicolo Modono. The Christ raised again, Francisco Zancaruolo. Our
Lady of Venice, Marc Antonio Pisano. The Trinity, Gio. Contareni. The Flame of
Naples, Juan Cuetta. The S. John of Naples, Garcia Vargaro. The Envy of Naples,
Torribio Acaveso. The Valor of Naples, Michael Quixada. The S. Jocaba of
Naples, Monferrato Guardiola. The S. Nicolaico of Naples, Christophoro Monguia.
The Christ raised again of Venice Gio Bautista Quirini. The Angel of Venice,
Umphredo Justiniano. The S. Dorothy of Venice, Paolo Mani. The Admiral of
Venice, Antonio Quirini Proveditor. In the main Battle, were these Captains
and Galleys*
Galleys. Captains. The Admiral of Lomelina, Jordano Orsino. The Master
Lomelina. Pietro Lomelino. The Admiral Bandmella, Bandinello Saulo. The Master
of Genoa, Pollerano. The Toscuno of the Popes, Metello Caracciola. The Seaman
of Vicenza, Gia. Dressano. Our Lady of Venice, Gio. Zeno. The S. Jeronimo of
Lessina, Gio. Babzi. The Joannica of Venice, Antonio Collioneo. The Alexandrica
of Bergamo, Georgio D'este The Admiral Marina, Jeronimo Canali. The Logg of
Venice, Berticaio Contareni. The Mongabell of Venice, Francisco Dandulo. The
Virgin of Candy, Cypriano Marini. The Temperance of Doria, Vicenzo Paschali.
The good Fortune of Naples, The Castle of Spain, Baccia Pisano. Galleys.
Captains. The Victory of the Popes, The Pyramid, Antonio Uliana. The Christ of
Venice, Jeromino Contareni The S. Francesco of Spain, Christophoro Guasches.
The Peace of the Popes, Perpignano. The Pearl of Doria, Gio. Spinola. The Wheel
of Venice, Gabriel Canali. The Pyramid of Venice, Francisco Buono. The Palm of
Venice, Jeromnico Venieri. The Admiral of Gil Andruda, Cinoguerra. The Granado
of Spain, Puolo Botenio. The Admiral of Genoa, Hector Spinola. The Admiral of
Venice, Sebastian Venieri. The Gally Royal, Don John of Austria. The Admiral
of the great Comendador, The Popes Admiral, Anto. Colonna. The Admiral of
Savoy, Lieni. The Gri^onia of the Popes, Alexandri Negroni. The S. Theodora of
Venice, Theodoro Balbi. The Mendoza of Naples, Martino de Cayde. The Mount of
Canca, Vizamano. The Gio. Bautista of Venice, Gio. Mocenigo. The Victory of
Doria. Ph. Doria. The Pisana of the Popes, Hercole Lotta. The Figuera of Spain,
Diego Lopes. The Christ of Venice, Georgio Pisano. The S. John of Venice,
Daniele Moro. The Florence of the Popes, Tomaso de Medici. The George of
Naples, Eugenio de Vargus. The Master of Naples, Francisco Benavides. The Moon
of Spain, Emanuel Aguilar. The Passata of Venice, pietro Pisano. The Lion of
Venice, Ludovico Pasqualio. The S. Jerome of Venice, Gasparo Maripietro. The
Admiral of Grimaldi, Georgio Grimaldi. The Master of Da. Imperiali, Nicolo
Lucano. The S. Christopher of Venice, Alexandro Contareni. The Judith of Zant,
Marino Sicuro. The Larmelina of Candy, Pietro Gradonico. The middle Moon of
Venice, Valerio Valerosso. The Doria of John Doria, Gia. Casali. The Order of
S. Peter, Santabio. The Order of S. John, Lod. Tessera. The Admiral of Malta,
The Prior of Messina. The right Wing.
Galleys. Captains. The Admiral of Sicily, Don Juan de Cordona. The Piemontan
of Savoy, Octavio Moreto. The Admiral of Mic. Doria. Pandolpho Polydoro. The
Force of Venice, Reniere Zeno. The Queen of Candy, Gio. Barbarico. The Nino of
Venice, Polani. The Christ raised again of Venice, Benedict Soranza. The armed
man of Retima, Andrea Calergo. The Eagle of Retima, Andrea Calergo. The Palm of
Canea, Ja. Medio. The Angel of Corfu, Stellio Carciopula. The S. Joannica of
Arbera, Gio. de Domeni. The Lady of Fravica, Lod. Cipico. The Ship of Venice,
Antonio Pasqualio. The Lady of Candy, Foscarini. The Christ of Crema* Francisco
Forneri. The S. Vittoria of Crema, Zorlano. The Master of Grimaldi, Lorenzo
Treccia. The Master of Marini, Antonio Cornili. The Margaret of Savoy,
Battaglino. The Diana of Genoa, Georgio Lasagna. The Gnigana of Naples, Gabriel
Medino. The Moon of Naples, Julio Rubbi. The Fortune of Naples, Diego Madran.
The Hope of Naples, Pietro Busto. The Fury of Lomelina, Ja. Chiappo. The Master
of Lomelina, Georgio Greco. The Negrona, Nic. Constano. The Bastar'd Negrona,
Lorenzo de Tani. The Fire of Candy, Je. Contareni. The Eagle of Candy, Je.
Georgio. The S. Christopher of Venice, Andrea Trono. The Christ of Venice,
Antonio Lando. The Hope of Candy, Antonio Buono. The Royalty of Padoa,
Buzacarinor. The S. Josefica of Venice, Francisco Oseda. The Resolut of Naples,
Giovanni Caraffa. The Sicil a of Sicily, Francisco Amadea. The Master of Nic.
Doria, Jul. Centaurio. The Eagle of Corfu, Pietro Duono. The S. Trisonica of
Catarra, Basanteo. The Tower of Vicenza, Lod. de Portu. The S. Mary of the
Popes, Pandolfo Strozzi. Galleys. Captains. The S. Joannica of the Popes,
Angelo Bifalio. The Master of Nigroni, Lod. Gumba, The Admiral of Nigroni,
Amb. Nigroni. The Monark of Jo. Andrew, Garibaldo. The Handmaid of Jo. Andrew,
Mi. Imperiali. The Admiral of Gio. Doria, Gio. Andrea Doria. The reservation
for succor placed behind as a Guard.
Galleys. Captains. The S. Joannica of Sicily, The Buccana, Pietro Morilo. The
Leena of Naples, Pietro di Lagia. The Constancy of Naples, Pietro di Lagia. The
Marqueza of Naples, Juan Machado. The S. Barbara of Naples, Juan Ascaleo. The
S. Andrea of Naples, Rufio de Velasques. The S. Caterina of Naples, Rufio de
Velasques. The S. Ba^ilmeo of Naples, The S. Angelo of Naples, Juan de rupe
Melino. The Terrana of Naples, Marco Mo^no. The Christ of Venice, Gio.
Loredano. The Double-hand of Venice, The Marquess of Sancta Cruz. The Admiral
of Naples, The Faith of Venice, Contareni. The Pillar of Venice, Maripietro.
The Magdalen of Venice, Lod. Balbi. The Lady of Venice, Gio. Benito. The
Menidus of Venice, Filippo Leo. The Hope of Venice, Gio. Benedetto. S. Peter of
Venice, Pietro Badoario. S. George of Subenica, Chr. Lachico. The S. Michael of
Venice, Georgio Cochio. The Sibilla of Venice, Dani^li Trono. The Crane of
Spain, Luis de Hereda. The Admiral of Vaschido. Vaschedo Coronado. The Suprana
of the Popes, Antonio de A^coli. The Occasion of Spain, The Master of the
Popes, The Calm of the Popes,

The General descending, as has bin said, into his Barge, passed through the
whole Fleet, taking a short, but exact view of the form of the battle, and by
breef, but pathetique Speech, breathed courage into his men: his Oration was to
this purpose:

Brave invincible spirits; whom gracious heaven has held worthy to be his
Champions, to whom the Angels will not be idle spectators, but actors and
assistants in this sacred Tragedy: Nature I know has given you the strongest
temper of valor and devotion, set so keen an edge on that temper, as I need
not whet it by any further encouragement; only let me tell you, that you have
the fairest occasion that ever was to unsheath and use it; let victory set such
a glass upon it, as no rust of Oblivion may ever eat out. Now is the time to
bring that dark half Moon, which seeks to eclipse the bright Sun of Heaven, to
such a wane, as shall never fill again. Let her not any longer usurp domination
over the Sea: our enemies exceed us in nombers made up of ciphers and shadows
of men, but let us excel them in resolution* the essence of soldiers; they are
imprisoned and immured by shores and rocks, as much as I would say victory
cannot escape us; they must fight because they cannot fly, we because we must
overcom; we have a necessity of conquest, the danger mixed with it does but
season and ennoble it, who would triumph over women? we are to share the whole
wealth of Nature, the Earth to the Survivors, the Heaven to the Martyrs: the
scarrs of the wound will be beautiful, because honorable: who would ingratefully
refuse to bleed for that loving God, who refused not to die for him? Courage
therefore Divine Champions, forget not that some of you are Romans; and which
is more, all Christians. This Speech was answered with applauses and wonderful
conclamations on all sides, in which humor we will leave them a while to behold
the countenance of the enemy, and how the Moon appeared.

The Turks in the interim used more then ordinary circumspection and
providence; for having information by Spies, Fugitives, Greeks and prisoners,
not only of the conjunction of the Confederat Fleet of the Christians, but of
their nere approaches, being now engaged in the Gulf of Lepanto: Mehemet Bey
was dismissed with sixty Galleys to Asprospicio a Neighbor City, to bring from
thence some competent supplies of victual and men, in which business he used
such celerity, that in short time he returned, bringing with him plenty of
provision and ammunition, besides ten thousand Ianizaries, two thousand
ordinary soldiers, and two thousand Volunteers; with which multitude and false
supposition of our paucity, they were not so confirmed in their courage, but
stood possessed of a kind of ominous mistrusting the event. In which respect
Ali Bassa the high Admiral, though by his own inclination, and his masters
command he stood resolved to fight, called a general Council to deliberat on
so huge a design, most of them persuaded to give battle, but Partau Bassa
General of the Land Forces, earnestly opposed it: On the contrary side H^ssan
Bassa son to Barbarossa, sometimes Viceroy of Algier, a fiery young man, and
full of mettle, exhorted them as follows;

Most excelse and victorious Prince, the Turkish Nation has so Nobly behaved
it self, that it is a question whether their fortune or their valor has bred
their greatness, or whether the latter has commanded the former; once it may
be affirmed, that if our Stars have favored us, we have not forsaken our
selfs, nor shamed them, but magnified their influence by our actions: Our
Predecessors have left us ample Territories, wherein we have not bin such
unthrifts, but husbanded them, that if they have made little much, we have
extended that much almost to infinite; so that if we hold on this course of
victory, Alexander never stood more then we in need of new worlds; which of
these prying inquisitive Christians had not discovered unto us, our valor e're
long would want work; yet let us not seem so glutted and cloyed with conquest,
as to refuse to accept of this one triumph more; this by Sea will serve to
counterbalance that glorious Land victory lately pourchas'd; let us fill both
the hands of our Emperor, one with spoils of Land, the other of Sea; these
feeble tired Christians have bin but our Porters, they are now ready to deliver
them, let us not disdain to take it of them, least they cozen us now, as they
did my Father thirty years ago, when they ran away with their burden; we have
Galleys enough, not only to stow their wealth, but if need were to take in
their Galleys; therefore most invincible Admiral, let us prevent their flight
by a speedy assault. This Speech uttered by a man, whose performance heretofore
had ever bin correspondent to so confident expressions, not only encouraged,
but inflamed many of the hearers, whereof Vluzzali General of the forces of
Barbary could not contain himself, but with many earnest and pregnant arguments
averred the same with Hassan; alleging besides the opportunity, the necessity
of obeying the gran Signors command, Ca^abeg the Sanzak of Smyrna ecchoed the
same.

Yet many of the graver, and more advised sort of Captains dissented from this
more hot then deliberat resolution, specially Mehemet Bey the Sanzak of
Negropont, who though not so eloquently, yet more truly demonstrated the danger
of fighting, as follows.

I am sorry magnificent Ali, that at this time the Counsel of illustrious
Hassan, is rather to be admired and applauded for greatness of courage then
followed for soundness, fitter to set our toungs then hands on work, I mean to
be answered, then executed; It is most true in raising the Ottoman Empire, that
the Turkish valor has ever guided their fortune, but it is as true, that their
wisdom has always directed their valor, else they had never created this
world of their greatness out of nothing, or made it out of atoms and such
slender principles; they have not by posting to the end of their desires lamed
or tired the means that carried them, but by going softlier have gone further;
greatness is steep and high, not to be climbed but leasurely, those that
strive to mount up violently use to fall precipitatly; such was the sudden
flood and ebb of the Goths, such the inundation of Tamberlain; one Kingdom is
a sufficient crop for one year, after that rate we may soon beggar Christendom,
and perfect the Turkish Monarchy; as we have won Cyprus and may keep it, so we
may lose that and our selfs too in seeking to get more: If you conceave the
Christians have come so far but with resolution to fight, or to fight but with
probability of prevailing, you must think them either fools or madmen; but if
after so familiar and long hostility, overvaluing our selfs, they hinder us not
to know them, we must needs think their swords and wits to be as sharp as ours:
It is not their pusillanimity but their division has ruined them, and our
multitudes have rather wearied then conquered them. From Preveza they departed
themselfs, we did not drive them, at least the shame of flying then will incite
them to fight now; our odds of strength is uncertain, if they be the weaker,
supplies may strengthen them, if we the stronger, many accidents may weaken us,
but none strengthen us: therefore my counsel is, that we go home while our way
is open, and we have our welcome in our hands, and let not hope defraud us of
certainty, yet is my Opinion ever subject to your correction. This Speech was
highly applauded of Partau Bassa, Siroch and Calabey, yet fate and their
Emperors express command urged publicly by Vluzzali, transported them so
far against their own judgment, that they resolved not only to hazard battle,
but to seek it: To which end having distributed those 4000. soldiers where they
found most need, they weighed Anchor and came to Galanga about the evening the
seventh of Octber, and there stayed to supply themselfs and their Galleys with
whatsoever was requisite for the encounter. Now drawing nere, the Admiral
neglected nothing that might tend to the augmentation of strength, or for the
ostentation of his vessels and men: one principal care was the fastening of his
slaves, least their bodies as well as their minds instead of necessary
instruments, might prove dangerous revoltedengins against them, knowing that
desire of liberty and revenge, two violent appetits, would make them apt to
snatch at any opportunity: he caused their allowance of diet to be augmented to
cherish their bodies, that they might be more strenuous for labor, mixing hopes
of future lenity with fear of present punishment, that stubbornness, a thing
invincible, which obdurats the minds of slaves might not hinder the utmost
extent of strength: He likewise keeping good intelligence at Sea to prevent a
sudden invasion, drew forth his Fleet in order of battle, that both his men
and Galleys when need required might not be to learn their duty or Order, which
he neglected not to practice continually as he approached the Christian Fleet,
till he had brought them to perfection therein.

The eight of October very early in the morning, hoping inexpectedly to have
com upon the Christian Fleet as they were at anchor, they hoisted their sails
half mast high, so to hinder their discovery, and with a gentle gale sailed
toward Cephalonia; both Fleets were within twelve miles one of another, yet
undescried, by reason of certain capes and headlands dividing and shadowing
them. They first ken'd the Christian Navy clear of the Cruzalares which had
somewhat disordred them; and seeing Andrea Doria stand to Sea-ward vainly,
imagined that he had fled, as upon the like reason the Christians were deluded
with the like conceit of them, which opinion as it begat contempt of the
adverse part, so it bred confidence in themselfs; the place where both the
Fleets met served aptly to fight, and not to fly.

The Gulf being in circuit not above two hundred and fifty miles, immu^'d with
rocks, shores and Islands, so thick, that to fly threatened well nigh as much
danger as to stay; on the North they were shut with part of Alban^a; extending
from S. Mauro to Lepanto eighty miles; on the East they were embarr'd by Morea,
stretching seventy miles from the mouth of the Gulf to Cape Tornezzo; on the
South the I Will of Zant opposed her self twenty five miles in length, the West
was closed up by Cephalonia and S. Maura, the one being forty, the other
fifteen miles long on that Coast; on the coasts of Albania, scarce a mile from
the main, were the rocks Cruzulares of an inequal bigness, but the lesser the
more dangerous: here again the Christian Fleet before concealed by
interposition of headlands bewrayed truly her own greatness, which though
inferior to the Turks, yet exceeding their expectation, did somewhat shake their
former resolution, yet hope, shame, and which was more then both, necessity
spurring them forwards, they approached in form following.

They divided their Fleet which consisted of two hundred seventy Vessels,
Galleys, and Foists, into four battaillons correspondent to that of the
Christians. In the middle battle was the High Admiral Ali Bassa, and therein
were contained ninety Galleys, in the midst of whom in a rich and a well
appointed Gally was he himself flanked on the right side with Partau Bassa, and
on the left with the Tresurer of the Navy, who were assisted each of them by
three Admiralls: The right wing consisted of fifty Galleys, whereof Mehemet
S^roch had the charge; the left wing included nine Galleys conducted by
Vluzzali; the reserve for supplies was a mixture of ten Galleys and twenty
Foists, commanded by Amurat Dragutra^s: he himself in a beautiful and well
fortified Gally, sometimes Admiral of Constantinople; Their main battle was
opposed to ours; their right wing to our left, and their left to our right;
every battle distinguished by different flags, very curiously and richly
wrought; every private Gally adorned with Pendants and Ensigns of great worth,
which served to breed an appetit in the courageous Christian rather then fear;
the Galeasses they rather wondered at for hugeness of Bulk, then redoubted for
offense or danger in service, thinking them fitter for burden then fight;
neither could they yet entertain an assurance that their adverse Fleet would
offer to assail them; yet did not this distraction make them neglect all
possible means for their own safety, and damage of the enemy; all unnecessary
things they stowed in hold, all needful they brought upon the hatches, as
powder, shot, pikes, arrows, and all offensive or defensive provision; every
Captain encouraged his soldiers, every soldier his fellow, and custom of
victory took away all conceits of discomfiture, every one cherishing in
himself the remembrance of the Christians flight at Preveza, the vicinity of
place bringing it fresh to their apprehensions; the very winds seemed to
whisper into their ears secret arguments of prevailing, to which their
credulity listened; but soon were those arguments confuted, when the wind which
till now had bin still partial unto them, became a neutral to both, and a flat
calm, giving attention (as it were) to the voice of the Cannon; and not only
the wind, but the Sun seemed now to bandy against them, who having with too
much light dazzled the Christian Navy at the instant of joining ba^tail, removed
that prejudice: Moreover, the winds, as if awakened, and come to do service to
the God who made them, breathed a gentle gale from the West, which aptly served
to carry away the mists of the waters, and smoke of the Ordnance upon the
Turks, whose battails contained these principal Commanders and Galleys.

The Turks divided their Fleet into four Bataillons.
The right VVing.
1. The first was the Admiral, Mehemet Siroch Governor of Alexandria.

2. The second Gally of Alexandria was commanded by 3. Carus Tubat. Bagly
Saraf. Giafer Chiagey. Osman Celebin. Perusio Reis. Bink Cusapoli. Osman Occan.
Drivis Aga. Bajazet Siman. Osman Ali. Deli Aga. Dardagan Bardan Belly. Casli
Cuian. Insuf Aga. Insuf Magar. Calafat Chedar. Mustafa Genovel. Darinigy Pery.
Mat Assan.


All these had Galleys of Alexandria.

Cheder Aga. Solomon Bey. Hibraim. Saban. Caia Celebin. Cheder Siman. Ali Cara.
Mustafa.


Their Galleys were of Constantinople.

Juran Saba. David Jusuf. Solac Raise. Arnaut Ferrat. Juzel Memy. Shender Selim.
Lumag Jnsuf. Ba^dach Celebin. Bagdat Asau. Guzel Allibi. Brusali Piri. Rodle
Ali.


These Galleys were of Tripoly in Barbary.

Aga Bassa with the Admiral of Constantinople. Sinaman Mustapha Gregiore Ali.
Amurates Reis. Calepy Memy. Marul Mustapha. Heder Lumet.


These commanded over the Galleys of Etolia.

Sinaman Dervis. Memen^y Durmis. Algagias Sinan. Adagi Rustan. Chingevey
Musata. Jusuf Celebin. Tufer Mustapha.


These also commanded over the Galleys of Despotado, or Etolia.

Ali a Genowayes, and Pyrat, Captain of a small Gally.

Megil Reis with a small Galeasse.

Mehemet Bey with the small Admiral Gally of Negropont.

The Battle had these Captains and Galleys following.
Assam Bey Governor of Rhodes.

Deli Chafer the Warden of Rhodes.

Occi Raise. Postunag Ogli. Gazizy Reis. ^alefact Ogli. Dromus Reis, with an
Admiral of Constantinpole. Herberey. Caragias Raise. Ocean Raise. Deli Piry.


These commanded the Galleys of Rhodes.

Giafer Aga. Bastian Raise. Coz Ali. Olach Raise. Oluz Raise. Assan Bassa,
Barbarossa's son.


These commanded some Galleys of Constantinople.

Caruf Raise. Jungli Ogli. Arnaut Celebi^. Magar Ali. Giafer Celebin. Deli
Assan. Carapeti Aga. Sinan Raise. Carua Mustapha. Sali Aravar. Previl Aga.


Their Galleys were of Naples in Romagnia.

The two sons of Ali in a Gally of Constantinople.

Osman Raise in an Admiral of Constantinople.

Deli Jusuf. Ferat Baly. Cuia Celebin. Bagdar Raise. Halvagi Mustapha.


Their Galleys were of Mitilene.

Giaut Ali Mustapha Admiral of small Gallios.

Caracoza with Galleys of Valona.

Mamatris Saderbey Governor os Mitilene.

Ali Bassa high Admiral of the Fleet in a Gally Royal.

Portau Bassa General by Land, with an Admiral Gally.

Mustapha Esdey Tresurer. Marmati Raise. Alicicgbli. Tramontan Raise with an
Admiral of Constantinople. Sulimum Celebin. Deli Ibrain. Murat Corossua. Denur
Bali. Caby Heit. Murat Trasy Scribe of the Arcenal. Caras Deli. Ferat Ceragli.
Pervis Sinam. Dardagan Bali. Giafe^ Caran. Dervis Sach. Curbaly.


All these had Galleys of Constantinople.

Giafer Aga Captain of Tripoly. Carau Hamat. Rustan Chialmagi. Dunnis Ogli.
Shender Dernigi. Maumet Alis.


They commanded over the Galleys of Tripoly.

Afis Cluega Governor of Callipolis. Selim Siach. Heder Baschi. Sicun Mustapha.
Salu Rius. Deli Ischender.


These Galleys were of Calipolis.

The Lord of Marus with an Admiral Gally of Constantinople. Pericis la humagi.
Hasuf Bali. Siran Bardachi. Jusuf Cinigi.


These Galleys were also of Callipolis.

Piri Begogli with an Admiral Gally of Constantinople. Deli Osmun. Piri Sinan.
Demir Celebin. Dervis Hidir. Sinan Mustapha. Hasirgy Raise. Asey Ogli. Caias
Saraf. Agadi Ahameth. Osman Sehet. Dervis Celebin. Giafer Raise. Dardagan the
Governor of the Arcenall.


All these were Galleys of Constantinople.

The left Wing.
Carau Hozias Admiral. Catalus a Pyrat. Chiazel Sinan. Chior Mehemet. Hignau
Mustapha. Cademly Mustapha. Vsechiaffy Memy. Carau Morat. Passa Dervis. Jagli
Osman. Pisman Raise. Tascivis Sisman. Jesil Hogli.


These commanded over the Galleys of Natolia.

Cara Cialibina Captain of small Galleys. Suizi Memy. Magli Raise. Osey Assan.
Curnigi Hasuf.


They had small Galleys, and obeyed Chialibin.

Cadeh Sidir. Osman Raise.


These two had Galleys of Constantinople.

Caraperi a Pyrat, Captain of a small Gally. Julio Pervis. Calobodan Solomon.
Jachali Mamar. Sayr Giafer. Chior Memy.


These had small Galleys, and were commanded by Carape^i.

Chiusel Giafer with an Admiral of Constantinople. Ramazzan. Calemy Memy.
Giesman Ferat. H^ipris Assan. Zambal Murat. Sa^msach Raise. Tunis Soliman.
Calepi Jusuf. Tech^del Assan. Cyan Memis. Osman Bagli.


All Constantinopolitans.

Caragial with the Admiral Gally of Algier. Caraman Ali. Alman. Sinam Celebin.
Agdagi Mustapha. Daglias Ali. Seith. Pervis Selim. Murat Dervis. Hes Ogli.
Machazer Ali. Joias* Osman. Sali Deli.


These had small, and some common Galleys of Algier.

Nasut Fachir with a Gally of Constantinople. Gymongi Mustapha. Rustau Cringi.
Bali. David Ali. Sitinau Raise. Carum Hidir. Magar Ferat. Arnaut Alis. Natis
Raise. Curmur Rhodo. Cos Cluagin. Cusly Memy.


All these commanded the Galleys of Negropont.

Caram Bey with the Admiral of the Son of Uluzzali. Deli Murat. Abazar Raise.
Scin Sciander. Alman Balli. Assan Sumbar. Seir Aga. Assan Sinam. Cumy Falagan.
Osman Gynder*


These had small Galleys of Valona.

Dermat Bey. Jusuf Alis. Caran Alman. Murat Biassan. Carabiney the Governor.


Their Galleys were of Sunasara.

Calau Bastagi. Carabi. Giafer Hedi. Ferat. Memy Beogli. Osman Piry. Piry Raise.
Casam Raise. Talaragi Raise. Rus Celebin. Tutur Ali.


Constantinopolitans.

Uluzzali King of Algier with an Admiral Gally.

The Battle of Succors.
Amurat Bragat in an Admiral of Constantinople.

Caram Casli. Hassam Raise.
These were Captains of Foists also.

Abdula Raise. Aligau Assan. Cus Ali. Ginzel Ali. Curtat Celebin. Deli Bey.
Saudagi Memy.


These were Foists also.

Dardagno Reis had an Admiral of Constantinople.

Deli Dorni he had a Gally.

Cuidar Memy Governor of Sio.

Shetagi Osman. Haeder. Delius Heder. Armat Merney. Susan Reis. Giafer Bey.
Cabil Sinam. Amurat Reis. Sariogi Grafer. Mor Ali.


All Foists.

Piali Murat he had a small Gally.

Caragiali Raise. Murat Alias. Jumez Alias. Bostagi Murat.


Foists.

Assan Sinan a Gally of Constantinople.

Deli Sulmian was in an Admiral of Constantinople.

So that the number of all Bottomes came to 270. Vessels.

All things thus disposed of, Ali Bassa richly clothed andarm'd after the
Turkish manner, thus spoke in the Poop of his Gally to the Captains and
Commanders there assembled to receave direction.

Most heroic Captains and invincible Ianizars, the scourge of the Christian,
and right hand of the Ottoman Empire; we have hertofore taken pains to fetch
ourslaves, but now our enemies have brought them us; despairing of their
success by Land, they are come to try the same fate in another Element, as if
there were any important difference to burn on shore, and drown at Sea* they
have changed place, but not spirit; the same effeminacy which they had in other
parts they have transported hither, constant only in their vices and vanities;
magnanimity and the effect thereof, brave honor are not more hereditary and
inherent in us, then cowardice and servility in them; we much exceed them in
number, but more in weight of ability, We were soldiers when children, they
children now they are men: what are their soldiers but Players, Minstrells and
Tumblers, a multitude of unghelt Eunuchs? what is their General but a youth,
fitter to lead a Mask then an Army? what are both but the remainder of this
years victory, whereof Cyprus was the late rich earnest? neither can they so
soon forget to yield as we to overcom: therefore be confident brave fellows in
arms, that not resolution, but their destiny has brought them bither; Italy is
the Gate of Christendom, and Venice the key of Italy: this Fleet is that Bar,
which if you can either break or put back, all flies open before you, and we
shall go beyond Caesar in the West, or Alexander in the East, making the rising
and setting Sun the confines of the Turkish Empire. Go on then, let us fill the
Sea with their bodies, our Galleys with their Wealth, our selfs with the honor
and glory of both. The Christians having in all respects provided for so great
an attempt as far as human wisdom and strength could extend, (considering this
Fleet to be their Ark, and God himself interested in the controversy) ceased
not with importunat, but most humble invocations, to implore the aid of heaven,
which by their Confessors was confidently promised them: Their devotions
concluded, and each battle facing each other, the charge was given by a Canon
from Ali the Turkish Admiral, and answered by one from each wing, with
obstreperous clamours after their custom, which they think awakens the courage
of the soldier, with amazement and terror to the enemy; they quickly make
toward the Christian Fleet, who in a differing manner made Trumpets, Drums,
Fifes, and other such Martial music, the delightful Prolog to a more
dreadful Scene: Venieri backed his Gally with two other of Giovanni L^redano,
and Catarin^ Malipietro; Colonna did the like with two other; and now being
within distance of their Ordnance, the Turks passing by the Galeasses, were
inexpectedly torn by their great shot, which brake forth on all sides like
thunder and lightning out of some black cloud: they being high and close,
fearfully spoiled the naked Turks and Rowers, making that breach at which the
Christian Fleet entered, for it disordred them so, that they had no time to
recollect themselfs; in which confusion desperately passing the Galeasses, they
ran upon a sharper point of danger, for the wind resisting the swiftness of
their approach, stayed and set them up as dead marks to the Christian Ordnance,
which had more certain aim at them lying still, then in motion and course:
besides it did benight them with smoke, augmenting the terror of those
invibcile mischiefs which they felt, but could not see either to shun or
revenge: the hideous noise of some commanding, others answering, the cracks of
Galleys, falling foul of each other, terrified both the Turk who suffered, and
the Christian which heard it, victory appearing to them in a dreadful
countenance; in some Galleys the Officers slain, the Slaves brake loose, and
like Lions slaughtered their Keepers; in others the powder taking fire
casually, seemed to rebel against them besides, shooting them up for
Sacrifices to that Christ whom they blasphemed; here men falling over board
wanted Galleys; here Galleys emptied of their companions wanted men, and
floated like dead bodies without souls, which Mehemet Syrock, now finding
himself a truer Prophet then he desired, observing, withdrew himself from the
body of the Fleet, thinking to circumvent the Christian left wing, betwixt whom
and Siroch, Augustine Barbarico opposed his Squadron, wherewith he shut up the
passage the easier, because of a promontory called Michangali, which extended
it self that way: Ma^no C^tarint resolved to be a sharer with his Oncle
Barbarico, both in honor and danger, and so followed and united himself to that
Squadron* betwixt whom a most cruentous fight passed on both sides: the Tu^h
left wing commanded by Vluzzali, and confronting our right, was very nere to
have joined with Doria, who considering himself inferior in number of Galleys,
he having but fifty, his enemy ninety, (...) it not: Vluzzali balancing with
the Christian his own odds of strength, was contented likewise to abstain:
Doria* after some suspense stood out to Seaward with certain of his Galleys a
mile from the remainder; in the mean time Don John, Colonna and Venieri, the
the confederat Admiralls, in exact order incountred the middle battle of the
enemy, exchanging at the approach diverse volleys of great shot, with much
disadvantage to the Turks; the Christian Vessels being snug and stooping from
the Ordnance of the Turks higher Galleys, and many of their pieces choked with
Christians bullets casually shot into their mouths, and there sticking, which
difficulties bred rather fury then despair in them, and induced them by
violence of oars to make have to grapple that there fighting hand to hand, the
difference might be decided by pure Manhood: therefore now being nearer swarms
of arrows and small shot interchangeably stung both sides, with artificial
fires, reciprocally lightning every where: at last death and wounds dressed
variously, were the entertainment of that visitation, whence sprung such a
deluge of blood, that the Gulf of Lepanto might have bin called the Red Sea
for the time. Now Stroch perceaving himself not only frustrated the
interposition of Barbaricos Squadron, but distressed by the irresistible force
of it, yet he persisted still in fight to save his honor, though not his life,
using all the powerful Rhetoric he could for the encouragement of his
languishing men, wherein by speech, as well as by example, he so prevailed, that
desperation whetting resolution, they had recovered now not only hopes of
resistance, but of victory: For after diverse unequal and doubtful conflicts
in many parts, here number oppressing valor, there valor making amends for the
odds of number, specially in the Galleys of the two Barbaricos, while with
discreet courage they ran still to the weakest part, like the vital spirits in
the body: one of them was mortally wounded by a fatal Turkish arrow in the
left eye, himself being indeed not only the eye, but the very heart of his
Squadron; he falling down, confirmed that the Life-bloud of an Army runs
commonly in the veins of the chief Commander: his own men shrunk back, the
Turks intruded and pressed into his Gally, which had bin taken, but that
Frederico Nani, and Silvio Porcia came into her rescue. These heroic gentlemen
growing up like Hydras heads in the room of Barbarico, repelled the Turks, and
recovered the former hopes of victory: Porcia received a wound in his thigh,
the honorable badge of valor.

In another part Cicogna Barbarico oppressed with multitudes of Turkish
Galleys, was (as one might say) refined with wild fire, and his face beautified
with an eminent scar, but was at last preserved by speedy supplies, being so
far from yielding either to weariness or pain, that after this he boarded and
took a principal Gally, and one of their Imperial Ensigns, which to this
day*serves in the Venetian Armory to display the invincible courage of the
taker: But Siroch surrounded with danger and mischiefs on both sides, having no
means to satisfy his revenge on all, desperately rushed upon Giovanni
Contarini, whose kinsman was before not cheaply slain, and that such an
impetuous violence, that he had almost stem'd his Gally, which he obstinatly
persevering to board, was there mortally wounded, as before in judgment, so now
in valor, having manifested himself a complete and absolut soldier: his fall
bred such an amazement in the Turk, as the fate of Barbarico in the Christian;
his men slain and wounded, left their decks to their thronging enemies, who
rushing in, were like to have made the Gallie a common sepulcher to both; for
she being shot between wind and water, was upon point of sinking: the Turks
leaped over board, hoping by swimming to find the land more merciful unto them
then the water; Siroch was taken not quite dead, but his wounds were searched
and found incurable, in pity rather then cruelty he was dispatched out of his
pain. His death though it was dearly bought, was a mortal wound to the Turks
whole Navy; for those that were before busied with his encounter, this right
Wing or Arm being cut off, converted their forces, though much enfeebled,
against the other members of the Fleet, assisting where they saw need and had
opportunity; besides the battle of succors continually supplied and releev'd
impartially all parts distressed.

Now the two Generals, Don John, and Ali Bassa, meeting like two furious
currents, began so terrible a fight in midst of both the Fleets, that the rest
seemed to be but Spectators to them two* the Galleys that incircled them were
(as it were) the Scaffold, and they two the Stage; contrariety of Religion,
emulation of honor, anger, hope and fear produced admirable effects in both:
while Ali made violent impression on Don John's Gally on the Prow, she was by
others likely to have bin entered at the Poop, which being perceav'd, was
prevented by those that backed her, who boording those boorders, took their
Galleys, but with great slaughter and difficulty. The Turkish General knowing
the fortune of the day to depend upon his success, desperately contended to
enforce Don John; wherein he prevailed so far, that he compelled him to bring
out of hold his fresh reserves that he had under deck, to exchange place with
his wounded and wearied men upon the hatches, which strange and inexpected
supply, sprung as it were out of the womb of the Gallie to defend her mother,
bred an amazement, and by amazement hastened the destruction of the fainting
Turks: Ali* being shot in the head, his Gally soon yielded, himself being yet
alive and presented to Don John, his head was struck off, which being mounted
on the point of a pike, was held up for a public demonstration of victory; a
grateful object to the Christians, but dreadful to the Turks; the same cause
bringing forth at once two contrary effects, viz. hope and fear, which yet
less dismayed them, not discerning it afar off; but the advancement of the
Cross Royal on the top of their Admiral Gally, danted them more then all the
rest, for that was visible throughout the Fleet, and the fatal signification
of it easily interpreted, so that now they began to fly, but in such a
confusion, that while they shun the poursute of one Gally, they fall foul upon
another: besides Marco Quirini, and Antonio Canali, two Venetian Commanders,
intercepted many of the Galleys flying, and men swimming to the shore.

In this most memorable fight, many Commanders on either side were taken or
slain, whose distinct Catalog shall be inserted at the end of the battle, not
yet absolutely concluded: For Vluzzali foreseeing now too late this general
overthrow, studied how he might in some measure revenge what he could not
prevent: therefore hovering aloof from the Fleet to expect some straglers of the
Christians, at last found opportunity to cut off certain Venetian Galleys, who
at first had followed Dorta, but now desirous to have bin sharers in so Noble a
Victory, were retiring to the main battle; them he chased, fetched up and
boarded; but they bravely repelling him, and Dorta wheeling about to assail
him, knowing it dangerous for him to persever in fight, when his own force would
continually decrease, and his enemies be augmenmented by confluence of rescu
from all parts of the Army, executing most of his mischief upon those
Venetians, he with sail down stood off to Sea, towing after him the Galleys of
Pietro Bua, of Corfu, of the Prior of Messina, and Lodovico Tipico of Tra^u,
Benedetto Soranza mortally wounded and oppressed by multitudes, fighting to the
very last, was slain and his Gally taken, but so that the getting (in
conclusion) proved their loss, for many of the enemies thronging into the
Gally, either by casualty or desperate malice of some Captain, she fired and they
perished in a wretched mixture of death 'twixt burning and drowning: it seems
that the fury of the slaughtered Turks revived in Vluzzali, who alone gave all
the three battails some taste of his devilish rage; notwithstanding all those
Galleys which he had taken were recovered, except that of Pietro Bua of Corfu,
in whose pourchase he had a very hard bargain; the night was his best
protectresse in shadowing him from the poursuing Conqueror, who now despairing
to fetch him up, whom they could not see to follow, gave over the chase, and
stood back to the Fleet; so that Vluzzali escaped with about thirty Galleys;
many of which could not swim, being alive, as if death had taught them that
skill, floated being dead, and the Sea glutted with multitudes spued up their
carcases; many laboring in the water for life, found now more safety in their
wracks, then before in their Galleys, and sometimes a Turk and Christian taking
hold of one plank began a private fight, while a third took benefit of what they
strove for, the Sea in the mean time becoming victor of both; here a tired
Christian calls to a friend for help there a Turk implores it of his enemy: Most
lamentable and confused cries com from both, when now the billows begin to
roar louder then all; for the Navy was yet scarce collected and reduced to a
safe Haven, when toward night there arose so sudden and violent a storm, as (if
the battle had not now bin ended) would have bin a stickler in it.

To conclude, the insolent enemy being thus overthrown, and their spoil
gathered, the next care was to cure the wounded men, and repair the bruised and
torn Vessels, wherein the Commanders showed no less industry, then in
preparation for the fight, and their admired valor in it. It is hard to
decide, which of these three Admiralls, Don John, Venieri, or Colonna, merited
most applause: they all did what could not be exceeded by any other, nor
equaled but by themselfs: the former distaste 'twixt* Don John and Venieri, as
it had bin providently pacified by mediation of Colonna, so was it in the
conquest nobly forgotten of themselfs. Don John toward the beginning of the
battle, being endangered by inequality of number, Venieri with his own danger
bravely rescued him, like two metled Mastiffs jarring among themselfs, when the
Bear comes, forbear private strife to join against the common enemy; which Noble
courtesy, the General nobly and gratefully acknowledged, honoring him with
the Title of Author, and which is more, the Father of the Victory.

The whole Army in united voice gratified the Divine Mercy for so great a
preservation, and elevating their victorious hands to heaven, acknowledged to
be taught to fight by it; every man congratulated the safety of his living
friend, yet moderately lamented the fate of the dead, the sorrow of their death
being dried by the merit of the cause; those bodies that were recovered were
honorably buried, the rest detained by the Sea, were yet eternized on the
shore. To repeat the Noble action of every particular man were a Plutarks
labor, every life would be a story; and we know that Plutark gave life's to
many, though the longest to himself; but among the most eminent, shines the
Noble indifferency of the Marquis of Santa Cruz, who disposing of the reserve
of succors, distributed them not according to his own affections, but other
men's necessities, bewraying at once excellency of judgment, courage and
celerity.

Many circumstances gave luster to this victory, but nothing more then the
flight of the Christian Fleet, not many years before from about the same place,
the infamy of the one glorifying the other, and serving as a foil to it, as
shadows set forth and enlighten pictures. It was a pleasing consideration to
those who had bin forced to be fugitives, to think they should find their honor
where they lost it: To this may be added the remembrance of the like battle
fought 'twixt Augustus Caesar, and Marc Anthony, above a thousand years past in
the same place, as if destiny had made it a Stage for great actions, and that
this Heroic Battle had bin but the second part of the first.

The total number of the dead were 7656. The chief of the Venetians were
Augustine Barbarico Proveditor General of the Venetian Fleet, Benedetto
Soranza, Marin and Ieronimo Contareni, Marc Antonio Land, Francesco Bicono,
Iacomo de Messa, Caterin Maripietro, Giovanni Loredano, Vincenzo Quirini,
Andrea and Georgio Barbarici, all Senators; Of Romans Horatio Caraffa,
Ferrante Bisball, Virginio and Horatio Vrsini. Of the Spaniards, John and
Bernardin^ de Cardona: Of the Knights of Malta diverse were slain, among others
these three Germans, Ioakin Spart Comendador of Moguncia, To. of Hamburg
Comendador of Hemm^ndorf, and Francis Drost; the chief men wounded were Don
John the General, Venieri the Venetian Admiral, Paolo Iordano, Marco Molino,
and Troylo Savello, and well nigh seven thousand private men.

This great loss was lessened by that of the Turks, who are reported by some
Authors to have lost nere upon thirty thousand: but the multitude of their
Galleys taken, wracked, and dead bodies floting on the Sea, carrying with it a
resemblance of the general deluge, must needs acknowledge it to be great.

Among the slain was the General Ali, Mehemet Bey, alias Siroch, Governor of
Alexandria, Hassan Bassa Barbarossa the great Pirates Son; the greatest
prisoners were Achmat and Mahomet, sons of the General Ali, Mehemet Bey
Governor of Eubaea, with thirty thousand vulgar soldiers. There escaped Partau
Bassa, who since others would not follow his counsel in abstaining from fight,
made use of it himself: Vluzzali a desperate Renegado, who fought, but so
always that he might fly: there were taken one hundred thirty Vessels,
whereof one hundred seventeen were Galleys, thirteen Galeots, some report one
hundred sixty.

There was much tresure found in the Gally Cleopatra, which the General
distributed among the best deserving: among others a Macedonian, by whose
fortunat hand Ali Bassa fell, had a Noble reward, but a far Nobler by the
magnificent Venetian Republic, who did confer three hundred ducats of yearly
pension upon him. But the most esteemed spoil had from the Turkish Fleet, was
the redemption of so many Christians, in number twelve hundred; words are but
mute expressions of the pitiful slavery they were in, being compelled both
actively and passively, to suffer for, and act against their own Religion;
nothing could equal it, but the joy of this enlargement, nor was this joy
peculiar and solely to themselfs, but multiplied by portions among their
friends and kinsmen.

The n^neteenth of the same Month, Humphredo Iustiniano arrived at Venice with
advertisement of this Victory to the Senate: never any music so feasted their
ears as that news: The congratulating Ambassadors flock to S. Mark from all
Christian Princes, acknowledging him their prime Protector, and Champion.

I will conclude this Relation with the division of the spoils of the Enemies
betwixt the three Generals.

The Popes share was
21. Galleys, whereof 19. ordinary, 2. Galeots. 54. Canons, whereof 12. great,
42. of the smaller sort. 881. Prisoners, among whom were Achmat, and Mahomet,
sons of the General Ali Bassa.
The Venetians share was
44. Galleys, whereof 39. ordinary, 4. Galeots and a half. 131. Pieces of
Ordnance. 1162. Prisoners.
The Spanish share was
58. Galleys. 214. Pieces if Ordnance. 1713. Prisoners.
The division was thus concluded, though not in a proportionable rate of
equality, yet to the satisfaction of all, the Venetians thinking they had the
more honor, though the Spaniards the greatest luggage, and the reason might be,
that the Spaniard contributed more money, though the Venetian more Galleys.

Venieri highly extolled the magnanimity of the General, propo singunto him the
rescue of Greece, an exploit which should immortalize him more then the conquest
of Tunis did his Father, whose Genius would not envy, said he, to see it self
exceeded by him, which was not equaled by his Predecessors. This much inflamed
the hot aspiring mind of the youthful Conqueror, insomuch that they proceeded
to consultation, how this Trophy might be perfected, whose hardest work, to
wit, the foundation, was already so happily laid; therefore making April the
time, and Corfu the rendevous of their next years convention, the Navies were
dissolved, Don John returning to Messina. Venieri expecting that Don John would
by his example have poursu'd the point of this victory, was much heightened in
his spirits, but somewhat discontented, and the Spaniard exposed himself to some
reproaches abroad hereby, so that Don John's departure was interpreted no less
then a kind of running away: For in the opinion of all the world, had this
opportunity bin well improved, there might have bin made far greater use of it:
For though that high spirited Turk, to express the inequality of the taking of
Cyprus, with the defeat of this Fleet, said, That Selym had cut off an Arm of
the Christians, and they had but shaved his Beard. Intimating thereby: that
Timber would grow again, but not Kingdoms, that Ships might be built, but not
Islands; yet was it manifest, that the chief strength of that Samson lay at the
same time in that tuff of hair, and if he had bin re-essail'd e're it had grown
out again, the razor which took off his beard, might have cut his throat. Here
it will not be improper to add an Answer of an old Chious, who being com
Ambassador to England in King James's time, and being asked among other things
by the King, whether he had bin at the battle of Lepanto, Yes, said he, and
at the taking of Cyprus also.

Colonna departed also with Don John, and returned to Rome, where his fame had
arrived long before him: This success raised the spirits of that ancient City
in a shape of rriumph, to see her aged glory give such a fresh luster in this
glass of victory, to entertain her new Champion; the whole City seemed to be
turned inside outward, the rich Tapistries now beautifying the walls without,
the streets were strewn with flowers as at a marrage: It is reported that a
little before this battle, the Pope Pius Quintus had performed many rigid and
austere Penances in his own person, and having bin a whole night contending
with God in prayer, in his own private Oratory; he came at last suddenly out
with a cheerful countenance, and in a kind of ravishment or ecstasy, saying,
alegramente la Vittoria e nostra, be of good cheer the Victory is ours, and as
the Manuscript has it, this was the very morning before the battle began.

No less were the triumphs at the Court of Spain, when tidings were brought to
Philip the second of this Signal and glorious Victory; yet when the very
first, and long expected news thereof was brought and related unto him, he never
changed countenance, or gave as much as a smile, or least outward show of
alteration, he was a man of such a rare constancy of temper, only he said
after a long speculative pause, Mucho ha aventurado mi hermano Don Iuan, my
brother Don John has ventured very far; but it was the first time that ever he
was heard to call him Brother, which style he continued ever after.

The Republic hoping that the rest of the Christian confederat Princes would be
constant in the League, rigged up their Galleys again, and made great
preparations against the following Spring, but Pius Quintus deceasing, who gave
the greatest vigor to the League, matters began to languish; yet there was a
conjunction of some forces the Summer after against Vluzzali, a great Pyrat, and
Admiral to the Turk; and there were considerable Fleets on both sides, the
Turk had two hundred Sails, the Christians not so many, and about the Mona they
twice faced one another, but encountered not; so all dissolved without
performance of any thing, though Venieri made fair Propositions unto them for
some attempts* both by Land and Sea, and to be the first in the Van himself, but
the Spaniard was too cold and cautious; besides Don John of Austria himself
had promised to come in person, but did not.

Hereupon it was high time for the Republic to hearken to a peace with her
potent Neighbor, specially there having bin diverse Overtures made by the Gran
Vizier to that purpose: among other inducements which might move her thereunto
was, that the Spaniard was not able as formerly to continue the League, in
re^ard he had so much new work cut him out in Flanders, by the revolt of some of
the seventeen Provinces: Moreover the Senate had notice that an Ambassador was
come from Constantinople to the Emperors Court, to desire safe passage for the
Turkish Army to pass through some of his Territories to invade Friuli; besides
the Bishop of A^x, who was Ambassador at the Port, for the King of France,
advised her in his Masters name to a peace, for which purpose he came himself
expressly to Venice afterward: so after much difficulty, and diverse proposalls
on both sides, a peace was at last solemnly concluded; the two main Articles
whereof were, that all the Venetian Merchants goods should be restored unto them
which were taken by Turks in so many years, and that the Signory should pay a
hundred thousand Crowns for three years.

The world passed sundry censures of this peace, specially in regard the
Venetians had done it without the consent of the other Confederats; Paul the
third then Pope stormed at it, but the King of Spain seemed to dissemble his
discontent, saying, That he doubted not, but that the motives which should
induce so wise a Senate were of great importance, hoping that as he had freely
employed his forces for the general incolumity of Christendom, and
particularly of the Venetian, so they likewise would if occasion required be
ready to do the like for him; The world wondered at this calmnesse in the
Spaniard, and the reason which peeple alleged then, was the revolutions in the
Low Countries, and that he was like to fall out with France, with whom he was
loath the Venetian should ligue together against him.

Notwithstanding this solemn peace with Selim, yet the Republic understanding
that Amurath, who had newly succeeded in the Ottoman Empire upon the death of
Selym, did arm apace to be revenged upon Spain, in regard that Don John of
Austria had lately sacked Tunis in Barbary; this made the Republic apprehend
some fears, that the Turk would fall foul up on some of their Dominions,
specially the I Will of Candy: hereup on she rigs up her Galleys again, but in the
interim a Chiaus coms from Constantinople in quality of Ambassador
extraordinary from Amurath to confirm the former peace.

This year 1573. The Duke of Aniou having bin newly elected King of Poland, and
scarce settled in the Throne, and understanding his brother Charles was deceased
in France, and fearing to lose the (...) for a Thistle, (viz. France for
Poland) got away surreptitiously from Cracovia, accompanied only with three
followers; and passing through the Territories of diverse Princes, came at last
to Italy, with a curiosity to see the admired City of Venice; being come upon
the Confines, he was met by a gallant troup of Noble men, with eight hundred
well armed soldiers: the next day sour of the Senators came to him from Venice
in quality of Ambassadors; the Dukes of Ferrara and Nevers came also to visit
him: so being attended by infinite nombers of peeple, he came first to Murano,
where the next day he was visited by the Prince and Senate with fourteen
Galleys; and being conducted thence to Lia, he entered the Bucentoro, together
with the Prince and Senate; from thence with mighty magnificence he transported
to Venice, all the channel 'twixt the City and Lia thronging with Boats, made
in fashion of Sea Monsters, wherein were all the youth of Venice richly attired,
with infinite number of Gondolas, which rowed before, and on every side of the
Bucentoro, which was gently towed to the Palace stairs, where he remained
diverse days, and was entertained to the height of all magnificence; and here
began that great League of Love which has continued so firm 'twixt France and
Venice ever since; but presently after the Kings departure, there happened an
ill-favor'd disaster, for the Prince celebrating the day of his Election, the
Ducall Palace was like to be all consum^d by a casual fire, and a fearful
plague removed it self from Trent to Venice, where it began to rage fearfully;
thereupon no humane remedy appearing, the Prince and Senate had recourse to God
Almighty, and meeting in the highest postures of reverenee at S. Marks Church,
the Prince in all their Names made a solemn Vow to God, to build a Church and
dedicat it to the worlds Redeemer, imploring his Divine Majesty with heart and
mouth, that it might please him of his infinite mercy to hear them, and appease
his just wrath; it pleased God that this furious contagion did thereupon cease
in a wonderful manner: The Church was suddenly built at La Zuecca, whither the
Prince and Senate go in solemn procession every year ever since; Baromeo did
also, as they write, strange penances in Milan for asswagement of such a
contagion the same year.

SEBASTIANO VENIERI succeeded MOCENIGO in the principality, 1574
the peeple with extraordinary acclamations extolled this Election to the very
Stars, in regard he had done such exploits while he was General so long at
Sea, both in the battle of Lepanto, and elsewhere: but that which seemed most
strange, was, that among such multitudes of all sorts of peeple who went to
congratulat his new Dignity, ten Turks who were then in Venice came and kissed
his feet, saying aloud, This is that invincible General, who by defeating our
Fleet and Us, has justly pourchas'd to himself this deserved Crown of honor,
unto whom we wish a long and happy life.

Pope Gregory the thirteenth sent him a little after a Rose of Gold, which
uses to be one of the greatest favors that the Pope uses to confer upon
Princes. Alexander the Third sent the like in the year 1177. to Sebastian
Ciani, for preserving him from the fury of the Emperor Barbarossa.

Old VENIERI had scarce governed nine months, but being stricken deeply in
years, and having lost much blood in the wars, he paid nature her last debt;
the Archduke of Austria, with other Princes, desired to have his picture; and
about the same time, Anno 1578. Don John of Austria died in the Netherlands,
having bin both Generals in the battle of Lepanto.

NICOLO PONTE a grave and learned Senator succeeded VENIERI 1575
in the Dukedom, being aged eighty eight years; Francisco de Medici, great
Duke of Toscany, a powerful Prince in those days, was desirous to marry
Signora Bianca daughter to Capello a Venetian gentleman; to which end he sent
Maria Sforza to acquaint the Senate; the Senate sent for Capello and his Son
Vittorio, whom they Knighted; then they adopted Bianca who was to be Gran
Duchess, daughter to the Signorie, in the same manner as they had done
Catharina Queen of Cyprus.

This year diverse new Constitutions were enacted against lux in apparel.

1. The use of all sorts of Perl, true or counterfeit, was prohibited, only
women might wear a small collar about their necks. 2. Costly Skins and Furrs
were wholly forbid to be worn. 3. All gold and Silver Lace was prohibited upon
garments. 4. No Courtezan must wear any Jemms or Jewels, or use any Tapistry.
5. Excessive expenses were forbidden at women's Churchings, and the
extraordinary invitation of friends, except nere kinsfolk, was restrained. 6. A
decree was made against all super fluous diet, and that no double dish of fish
or flesh should be served in. These Laws are exactly observed to this day.
In this Dukes time, and partly by a hint given from him, the Calenlendar was
reformed: for Pope Gregory the XIII. finding by consultation with the best
Astronomers, that because the Solar motion had not bin rightly observed, the
Vernall Equinoctial had gotten ten days before ^he course of the Sun, whereby
the Feast of Easter, whereon all other moveable Feasts depended, was not
celebrated at the just time appointed in the Primitive Church by the Council
of Nice; the incongruity thereof was, were it not reformed, that the Festivalls
of Winter will be celebrated in Summer, and those of Summer in Winter: hereupon
the chiefest Mathematicians of Europe were summoned to Rome, to confer their
speculations about this point, and commanded after an exact calculation of the
course of the Planets, to refer the Vernall Equinoctial to the twenty one of
March, as it had bin in old time decreed by the Fathers of the said Council
of Nice, and so to find out some rule, that the same inconvenience might be for
ever removed; These learned men did what the Pope commanded, by referring the
Equinoctial to its true place, and by taking for once ten days from October:
the Pope concurring with them in opinion, and being a great Theorest himself,
enjoined this computation to be observed all Christendom over, Lodovicus
Lilius a famous Astronomer, was one of the chiefest instruments in this
business, 1581.

In this Dukes time there happened a contrasto 'twixt the Republic and the
Knights of Malta, because they had taken some Turkey Vessels in the Venetian
Seas, whereat Amurath did thunder out a revenge; the Republic complained to the
Gran Master, entreating him to forbear the taking of any Turkish Vessels in
her Seas, while the peace lasted 'twixt Her and the Port; but the Malteses
making no account hereof, the Venetian Galleys took from them a Galeon which
they sent into Candy, and not long after two Galleys more, which being brought
to Corfu, all the Turkish sl^ in them were set at liberty, and the empty
Galleys restored to the Knights.

The Ve^erians also the same year to satisfy the Turk, caused publicly to be
beheaded Gabriele Meme a gentleman of Venice, in regard that meeting with a
Turkish Galeot passing from Algier to Constantinople, with the Vice-Queen of
that Kingdom and her children, who carried rich ^esents to ^urath, the said
Heme put to the sword all the Turks in the said Galeot, and freed the
Christian slaves.

PASCHALE CICOGNA came to be the next Duke of Venice, in his 1583
time an Academy was in^uted in Venice, at the instance of some choice
gentlemen; besides that exact and admirabld Fort Nova Palma in Friuli was
erected with so much expense and enginry; that miraculous high arched Bridge at
the (...) was reat'd up also in his time.

MARINI GRI^ARCI succecded CICOGNA in the Government, 1584
in his time a (...) little wa^e happened 'twixt the Vscoc^ht and the Republic,
who committed daily depredations upon the Coasts of Dalma^ia and (...), but
they were quickly chastis'd and restrained by Phileppo Paschali; Theodoro Balbi
was also employed against some Barbary Pirates, who (...) the Seas far into the
Gulf, he took from them three (...), and set many hundred Christian slaves at
liberty, and so terrified them, that they durst look no more that way.

I^ fell out in this Dukes time, that the Clergy of Padona having ve^emently
p^sted against Francisco Zabarella, for the suit preferred to sell certain
ancient church Lands, the Senate made a Decree, that the Church should not
appropriat to her self rents possessed by the Laity, grounding that Decree upon
a prohibition made by the Senate, Anno 1333. that no (...) should be given or
bequeathed in perpetuity to any Church within the City and Signory of Venice,
and if any were left, they should be sold by a certain time prefixed, and the
money arising out of the sale to be o ly theirs, alleging for reason, that the
Clergy who pretend themselfs and their goods to be exempt from all necessary
charges belonging to the Commonwealth, the number of them daily increasing,
and on the contrary, that of the Citizens still decreasing, who serve and b^sie
themselfs in the Civil Government, and the quantity of their goods, whereon
the public revenue depends, beginning to fail, in the end all Wealth would of
necessity fall to the Clergy: this Law was variously observed till the year
1536. when it was reduced to this form, That none ^f what quality soever should
g^ve Lands to the Church, but only for two years space, after which time they
should be sold, and if the sale were not made by the (...), a Civil Magistrate
should be appointed to do it; this being considered by the Senate, it has ever
since b^n practiced generally throughout the whole Republic.

The year 1603. the Senate decreed, that no Venetian Citizen of what (...)
soever, should within the precincts of the City without the Senats consent build
any new Church, Hospital or Monastery, yet did not the Senate totally prohibit
any such buildings, but because the Prince and State as Super^ors would consider
whither i^ were needful or no, there being already in the City one hundred
fifty Churches, Monasteries, and Hospitalls, with other like places of devotion

In this Dukes time the famous Fort called Nova Palma was finished, which is
thought to be the goodliest, and built more exactly according to the modern
rules of enginry, then any in all Italy, the expenses whereof viis and modis
were estimated to be half a million of Crowns; there was another strong Castle
erected also in Cephalonia; that stupendous Arch in the Rialto was also
perfected, having thirty six stairs on each side built of the stones of Istria.

In the year 1605. Pope Clement the eighth deceased, and Alexander de Medici
succeeded, who lived not a month to an end; the Cardinals proceeding to a new
Election, and desirous to make have, the Cardinals Farnese and Montalto went
to Cardinal Aldobrandini, entreating him to name three among the whole
College of Cardinals ( Tuscus and Baronius excepted) and one of those three
should be created; thereupon Cardinal Borghese was chosen by the name of Paulu
Quintus.

The Venetian Clergy, notwithstanding the Senats decree, did daily more and
more augment and improve their revenues, as well within and about the City as
abroad; the Senate for reducing the State to one conformable custom, had
before, as it has bin said, divulged their decree through all their
Dominions, and added thereunto a Prohibition, That none within the City or
Signory under what color soever, should sell, give, or in any sort al^enat
Lards to the Clergy, without the Senats Commission, which should not be granted,
but with the same solemnities usual at the alienation of the public Revenue,
and all the Alienations made otherwise should be declared void, the Lands
confiscat, and the Notaries punished: Paul the V having notice of this Law, did
strictly examine it, and would by no means approve of it; but toward the end of
October the same year, complained thereof to the Venetian Ambassador at his time
of public audience, saying, That whilst the Sea of Rome was vacant, the
Venetians had made a Law which prohibited the Clergy to pourchase Lands,
adding, that though it were made upon urgent occasion, as they pretended, and
by virtue of a former Decree, yet the Canons disanull'd them both, therefore
his pleasure was to have them repealed, injoyning the Ambassador accordingly to
signify so much unto the Republic.

The Ambassador did what the Pope enjoined him, and within a while after he
received instructions and a Commission from the Senate, to acquaint his Holiness
with the equity of their cause, and Justice of their Law, together with the
Signories decree, and unquestionable authority to pass such decrees: The Pope
being confident in his own Opinion, said aloud, that he gave him Audience only
to content the Venetians, but not to admit any of his propounded reasons or
excuses, Then he made another complaint about the detaining of a Canon of
Vicenza, and the Abbot of Nerveze, both of them accused of notorious Crimes;
And within a while after, concerning another Law forbidding to build Churches
without permission, being resolved to have those two Laws revoked, and the
prisoners delivered to his Nuncio residing in Venice: hereupon on the tenth of
September, he passed two Injunctions, one concerning the two Laws, the other
about sentencing the Clergy; so he sent a Commission accordingly to his Nuncio
to present them, resolving upon their refusal to proceed to Excommunication;
but the Nuncio being peradventure moved with pity because the Senate at that
time had chosen an extraordinary Ambassador, by humble means thinking to divert
his Holiness from his resolution, and to induce him to consider better of the
matter, delayed the presenting of those Injunctions, which the Pope took in ill
part; whereupon in all have he sent him an express Commandment, to present
them without further procrastination; In regard whereof upon Christmas day when
Duke Grimany lay at the point of death, and that the Senators were solemnly
assembled, some whereof had received the Holy Sacrament, and others were ready to
receave, the Nuncio craved Audience, and produced the two Injunctions, but the
Dukes death happening the next day, they were not opened till after the Election
of the new Prince.

LEONARDO DONATO Knight and Procurator of S. Mark succeeded 1605
GRIMANI, after whose Election the two Injunctions being opened, were found to
be both of one substance, which in effect was, That his Holiness was advertised
that the Venetian Senate had decreed diverse things contrary to the Liberty of
the Church, and Authority of the Sea Apostolie, and divulged through all the
Dominions of the Signory certain Laws peculiar only to the City of Venice,
forbidding to build Churches or Monasteries, or to alienat the secular
possessions of the Clergy without the Senats permission, which, as repugnant to
the Churches Liberty, his Holiness declared to be invalid, and they who enacted
them to have incurred Ecclesiastical censures, commanding them under pain of
Excommunication, presently to revoke and abrogate the said Laws, threatening
to proceed further in case they did not conform.

To this the Senate answered 28. of Ian. Anno 1606. as follows: That with
grief and amazement they understood by his Holiness Letters, that he disliked
the Laws of the Venetian Republic, prosperously observed for so many Ages, and
never taxed by any of his Predecessors, the revokement whereof would not only
shake, but utterly overthrow the very fundamentalls of the State; that he
interpreted those Laws to be prejudicial to the Sea Apostolic, and the
Authority thereof, blaming those who had made them as infringers of the
Churches Liberty, notwithstanding that they were known to be persons of
singular piety, and to have done good service to the Sea of Rome*, and were now
doubtless in heaven; that the Senate according to his Holiness advertisement had
narrowly examined both the New and Old Laws, and could find nothing in them but
what might be decreed by a Sovereign Prince, concluding, that the Venetians did
not think they had incurred any censures, and that therefore his Holiness so
repleat with Religion and Piety, would not without pondering well the cause,
continue his menaces.

This answer did much displease the Pope, who presently awarded an
Excommunication against them, which on the seventh day of April of the same
year was published throughout all Rome, and hung up in the usual places,
namely on the great Gate of S. Peter's Church, the Chancery and Market place of
Campo di Fiore by Christophoro Fonduto and Gio. Dominico di Pace the Popes
Poursuyvants.

The Prince and Senate having intelligence of what had passed at Rome, to
prevent all popular tumults and commotions which might peradventure thereby
arise in the Towns and Cities subject to their Jurisdiction, were desirous to
acquaint all sorts of people therewith; to which end they framed two
Declarations, the one directed to all the Clergy of their Dominions, and the
other to all secular Magistrates and Officers, to stop and restrain all
disorders that might hence ensue; whereupon all that year diverse books were
written pro and con, some condemning the Venetians, others the Pope, every one
as his passion did transport him; but at last this great contention had like to
have bin decided by the sword, both sides making preparations for war. For the
Venetians having understood that a great number of Foot and Horse was levied at
Ferrara, and that the Romans had offered to aid the Pope in that war with men
and money; They likewise raised forces accordingly, and fell to fortify their
Towns with greater strength, because they would not be surpised, or taken
unprovided, so that there was a great likelihood of an eager bloody war, had
not France vigorously appeared as Mediatrix in the business.

Hereupon Henry the IIII. to prevent the danger and scandal which might arise
by this war, did speedily send the Cardinal Ioyeuse both to the Pope and the
Venetians from him, and in his name to intercede for a peace amongst them,
which Embassy took very good effect; for the Cardinal being speedily
dispatched from France with instructions and other dispatches necessary for his
Negotiation, He arrived at Rome on a Thursday night 23. Martii 1607. and the
same Evening conferred with the Cardinals and the French Ambassador there
resident, to propound the business to his Holiness: thereupon the next day the
Cardinal accompanied with the Ledger Ambassador, went to see his Holiness; unto
whom the Cardinal did largely relate the occasion of his coming; But the Pope
seemed to be inexorable to any terms of agreement with the Venetians, til the
Clergy and Jesuits (who had bin banished not long before) were restored to
their Churches and Colleges; The Cardinal at this first Audience would not put
him out of hope of their restitution, but only told him, that he did not
despair of reconciling the Jesuits to the Venetians, having bethought himself
of a fit means, whereof if his Holiness would not make use, he doubted not but
it would be prevalent.

The Pope being much desirous to know this new devise; did the next day early
send for him, then the Cardinal de Ioyeuse told him, That to hope by any
express Treaty to obtain of the Venetian Senate the restoration of the
Jesuits, were but to spend time to no purpose, but if his Holiness would give
ample Commission and Authority to revoke the Censures, and send him to Venice
with such a power, some good might be done upon the public producement of the
said Commission.

The Pope made show, that he neither could nor would approve of this motion,
therefore he said, That he had engaged his promise not to abandon the Jesuits,
who had bin expuls'd for favoring his Interdiction, unto whom he had passed
his word never to be reconciled to the Venetians, till they were
reestablished; but after sundry other Allegations, this conference was to
little purpose, every man perceaving by his Holiness countenance that he was
perplexed.

The French Cardinal and others meeting to reconcile these differences, and
remove the difficulties, entreated Cardinal Perron to go the next day after
dinner, to get express Audience of the Pope, and if it were possible to induce
him to grant certain points for the advance of the business.

Cardinal Perron at their entreaty undertook the task, and a good while
debated the point with his Holiness about the restoring of the Jesuits, showing
him the danger whereunto he exposed the Church and Christian Religion for one
particular Order, whose restoration was to be hoped for thereafter, though for
a time deferred: He told him that his Holiness should first re-establish his own
Authority in Venice, and that being once done, there was no doubt but the other
might follow after: So after many other prevalent reasons, Perron obtained of
the Pope, that seeing for the present he could not prevail in the Jesuits
behalf, he should let it pass, and insert a Clause in the Article, whereby it
might appear to the world, that he had not neglected their restoration: then
the Cardinal speaking of the Commission, the Pope would hardly be drawn
thereunto, supposing it to be dishonorable to the Sea Apostolic, in regard that
the revocation of Censures ought to be done at Rome, and not sent to Venice;
yet the Cardinal alleging diverse reasons to the contrary, the Pope at last
consented to give the Cardinal Ioyeuse Commission to revoke the Censures which
he should carry with him to Venice, but on this condition, to do his best for
the restoration of the Jesuits, before he disannulled the Interdiction. He
also, though with some difficulty, induced his Holiness to be pleased that the
French Ambassador resident at Rome, and not he who lay at Venice, should in the
French Kings, and the Signories Name, crave of him the revocation of the
Censures in writing; for the Pope told him that the Spanish Ambassador resident
at Venice had craved it in the name of his Master and the Republic; In a word,
the Pope granted all his demands, only he seemed unwilling to declare his
intention to the Consistory, saying, that he supposed he ought not to do it
publicly, because he had not yet acquainted the Cardinals herwith;
nevertheless he would resolve upon it, and the next day in the Consistory would
impart it to some particular Cardinals, and the same afternoon call one after
another into his Chamber, to take their suffrages in secret: According to this
resolution, the Pope having in the Consistory declared his intent to some
particular Cardinals; he did the same afternoon call the rest into his
Chamber, secretly to take their Opinions, and in that business spent the whole
week.

The Spaniards being not well pleased, that they were not sought unto in this
business, and desirous to frustrate the matter, divulged certain rumors
contrary to the Popes will and meaning, and among others, a cunning letter was
written by Don Francisco de Castro, wherein he certified the Pope, that if he
stood first for restoring the Jesuits, he was likely to obtain, it and that the
Republic determined to make a Protestation, by surrendering the Prisoners
contrary to that which had bin concluded, and which his Holiness had promised to
himself: these false rumors distracted the Pope, who thereupon made some
difficulty to proceed further; but Cardinal Perron soliciting him, and
assuring him of the contrary, he delivered, according to his former resolution,
the Commission to Cardinal Ioyeuse, willing him to make have to Venice.

The Spaniards being not able to cross this resolution, made suit to have
Card^nall Zapata joined in Commission with Cardinal Ioyeuse, but their labor
in that point was lost; and yet in other Solemnities Zapata and the Spanish
Ambassador had in appearance some intelligence with the French Ministers;
because in the Kings Name they were Sureties for the Signory, as were Cardinal
Ioyeuse and the French Ambassador for his Christian Majesty; yet the world
accounted it but a vain and idle fable, for they had no such Authority from the
Republic, as had the French, who executed their Commission to their Kings
advantage and honor.

Cardinal Ioyeuse with the Commission received from his Holiness containing the
conditions whereon the Censures were to be revoked, being in number six, goes on
his journey: The conditions were to this effect, 1. That the two Churchmen
prisoners, namely the Abbot of Nerveze, and the Chanon of Vicenza, should be
freely given to the Pope. 2. That his Holiness should revoke his Censures, making
a Declaration thereof to the College. 3. That the Venetian Signory should within
a while after send an Embassage to the Pope: That the Venetian Duke by a
Declaration should certify the Clergy under the State, that the first
Declaration is revoked: That the three Decrees mentioned in the Popes
Inderdiction, and other Laws of the Signory should continue in their full force
and power, with this Proviso, That the Senate shall promise the French and
Catholic King, not to execute them till the business be fully concluded 'twixt
his Holiness and the Signory, having first more amply informed the Pope of the
justice and equity of those Laws: Lastly, that all Churchmen and Religious
Orders which are banished and expuls'd from Venice, or the Jurisdiction thereof,
by reason of these troubles, may return home to their houses and Convents; but
concerning the return of the Jesuits, his Holiness is contented to defer it,
till an Ambassador from the Signory has treated particularly with him
concerning that point, certifying him, that their expulsion proceeds from
certain causes and reasons which have no community with the Interdiction, and
if it shall be found otherwise, then to admit their restoration, as well as of
other Ecclesiastiques. Now Cardinal Ioyeuse departed from Rome with his
Commission, and the Articles aforesayed and arrived at Venice, where he was
extraordinarily entertained, many Senators going to meet him in the Bucentaure;
the next day one of the States Secretaries accompanied with the Captain and
other Officers of the Prison were sent to him; and for the greater solemnity,
with a public Notary, brought the two prisoners to the House of Monsieur du
Fresne Ambassador for the French King at Venice, and delivered them unto him,
as granted to the Pope at the instance of the King his Master, without
prejudice to the States Jurisdiction in such cases, and the French Ambassador
did presently consign them to the hands of Cardinal Ioyeuse, who was in the
same House in the presence of the Secretary, with these words, These are the
prisoners which the Signory has granted to his Holiness, not adding at whose
entreaty, and so the Cardinal received them as his proper prisoners, whereunto
the Secretary at that time made no reply; In this manner, by this omission on
the one part, and silence on the other, it seemed that some did not well
understand what remained betwixt the Pope and the Signory.

The next morning the Cardinal came to the College, and after some
circumstances of the Popes Fatherly goodness, he assured them that the
Censures were revoked; so having given them his Benediction, he went to
celebrat the Mass in the Patriarks Church; the Dukes first Declaration was
revoked also in this manner.

LEONARDO DONATO, by the Grace of God, Duke of Venice, etc.
To the reverend Patriarks, Archbishops, and Bishops of our State and
Jurisdiction of Venice, and to the Vicars, Abbots, Priors, Rectors of Parish
Churches, and all other Ecclesiastical peeple, Greeting.
SEeing it has pleased our good God to find out a way whereby our Holy Father
Pope Paul the V. has bin duly informed, as well of our good meaning, as of the
integrity of our actions, and continual honor and reverence which we bear to
the Sea of Rome, and thereby to take away all cause of strife, we, as we have
ever desired and procured Unity and good correspondence with the said See, of
which we are loving and obedient children, do receave likewise this
contentation, to have at last obtained the accomplishment of our holy desire;
therefore we thought good by our Declaration to advertise you hereof, giving you
besides to understand, that whatsoever did belong herunto, has bin faithfully
performed on both parts, and the Censures and Interdiction removed; the
Protestation likewise we made against them, has bin, and is revoked; we being
desirous, that herin, as well as in all other our actions, the Piety and
Religion of our State may still more and more appear, which we will carefully
observe as our Predecessors have ever done.

Given in our Ducall Palace the 21. of April 1607. Signed, Marco Ottobon
Secretary.


The Duke having published this Declaration, the Senate was not a little
perplexed with a doubt of no mean consequence, which was, that the Pope for his
part having made no mention at all concerning books and writings published in
the behalf of the said Decrees, nor of the Authors of the said books, which
were two very important points, and which did threaten ^ breach of the whole
reconcilement; the State doubting that the Pope by this silence and Omission
had an intent to proceed afterward against the Authors of the said books, by
the ordinary way of Ecclesiastical Justice, and thinking it dishonorable to
abandon those that had done them so good and faithful service, after mature
consultation, the Senate made a very notable and honorable Decree, that the
Signory should protect them against all dangers, and assign them a perpetual
Pension.

A particular Narratif of the notable Contestation 'twixt Paulus Quintus, and
the Republic of Venice, 1606. etc.
NOw, in regard that every Corner of Christendom did ring aloud, and sounds
yet to this day of that high Contestation 'twixt Pope Paulus Quintus and the
Republic, I shall spend a little more oil and labor to acquaint the judicious
Reader with the circumstances thereof.

Paulus Quintus having ascended to the Pontificat, the bent of all his
consultations were to advance the Privileges of the Church, and mortify the
presumption, (those were his words) of such secular Princes and States that
seemed to bandy against them, specially of the Signory of Venice; whereupon he
employed thither in quality of Nuncio, Horatio Ma^hei Bishop of G^erace, a man
so fervent in this cause, that in full Assembly he told the Duke of Venice,
That Alms and other works of piety, the frequenting of the Sacraments, with
all other good and Christian actions, ad nihilum valent ultra, were nothing
available, if men did not favor the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: In private
Communication he also said, That he had heard the piety of the City of Venice
often and amply magnified, yet he himself could perceave but little,
considering that Christian perfection does not consist in deeds of charity and
devotion, as much as in exalting the Ecclesiastical Authority, which is the
true C^ment of that perfection.

There happened a little difference betwixt Paul the V. and the Republic of Luca
at this time, who in regard that many of her Citizens having changed their
Religion, had retired themselfs to Protestant Countries, She published an Edict
by which all her Subjects were forbidden to have Comerce, or to correspond any
way with such persons: This Ed^ct being come to the Pope, he highly approved of
the Law, but he said, That the State of Luca had no Authority to make any such
Ordinance of her self, because it concerned Religion; therefore he commanded
that the said Edict should be razed out of the Records, promising to form
another which should be the same in substance, but to be published by his
Pontifical Authority.

There happened about this time another clash 'twixt him and the Republic of
Genoa, who being informed that the Governors of certain lay-Fraternities,
instituted by devotion, had not dispensed the revenu with requisite fidelity,
She resolved to examine their accounts, to which effects the books were
commanded to be brought before the Duke; but this was not well accepted by Paul
the V. therefore he gave the Republic of Genoa to understand, that these
proceedings were against the Liberty Ecclesiastical, So he expressly enjoined
them to revoke their Edicts, otherwise he would proceed to the Censure of
Excommunication: both these States complied with the Pope, but the State of
Venice was more stiff-neck'd, and constant in the maintenance of her Decrees.

The first cloud of discontent 'twixt this Pope and the Venetians appeard, when
he having solicited the Republic for a contribution of sums of money to aid
the Emperor in the wars of Hungary against the Turk, he received from her a
complementall denial: He afterward proposed the revocation of an Ordinance
made by the Senate a little before, forbidding the Subjects of the Signory to
set forth any Vessels by Sea, or to make any assurances or Companies for the
traffic of any Merchandise whatsoever, to be exported out of the State of
Venice into any other Countries, unless it passed first by Venice, alleging
that this would hinder the Commerce in the State of the Church and was against
the Ecclesiastical Liberty.

The Republic answered herunto, That every Prince commands his Subjects, in
that which may serve for the commodity of his own Estate, without considering
what may follow thereupon to neighbor Princes, who cannot justly be therewith
offended, howsoever they may be in some sort incommoded; therefore whenever
his Holiness shall command his Subjects any thing which may turn to the profit
of his Government, the State would not take it in ill part, nor esteem it
against their Liberty.

The Pope perceaving by this Essay that he could not compass his ends, these
differences being not within the bounds of things spiritual, and finding that
his desires were so little prevalent with the Venetian, thought to be quit with
him some other way, and an opportunity was offered a little after; touching one
Scipio Sarraceno Canon of Vicenza, and upon the complaint of a young
gentlewoman his cosen, whose door and ring thereof (which is a common kind of
revenge in Italy) he had besmeared with excrements, and don her some other
wrongs; she herupon complained to the Senate, who thereupon cited and imprisoned
the Canon; complaints hereof being made to the Pope, the Republic answered, That
the just Title and Authority which She has to judge Ecclesiastical persons in
causes criminal, were founded on the power of a natural Prince, and on
custom, never interrupted by the space of a thousand years and upwards, which
has bin approved of by the Popes Breve's themselfs, yet extant in the public
Archives.

This being delivered by the Venetian Ambassador to Pope Paul, he received it
with some impatience, saying, That the reasons alleged were frivolous, that to
judge of an affair, it was to no purpose to ground it upon custom, which is
often so much the worse as it is ancient; and for the Breve's, there were no
other Archive of the Papal Breve's but at Rome; that those which they
pretended for their justification were but wast papers, etc.

To this occasion there was superadded another, which was the imprisoning of
Count Brandolin Valdemanno Abbot of Nervese, as was formerly mentioned; the
Pope sent Order, that both the said Count and Canon should be released, but the
Senate passed it over with a complement; the Pope also excepted at that Decree
in Venice, That none should erect either Church or Chapel without the
permission of the Senate; He adjoined further, that the Republic retained in her
hands five hundred thousand Crowns of Ecclesiastical Legacies; charging, that
in all these particulars she should give him satisfaction; answer was made, That
God had not given to Popes any greater Authority in the Government of their
Estates, then to other Princes, who by the Law of Nature have all power which
is necessary, and as it appertained not to the Venetians to govern the State of
the Church, no more does it belong to Ecclesiastics to govern the State of
Venice; and whereas it was alleged, that the Republic had reserved such a
portion of Legacies Ecclesiastical, it was a mere suggestion, and if his
Holiness would give credit to every such calumny, differences would grow infinite.

Here the Pope stayed, saying, that touching the Legacies he would say no more;
but he would reduce all the differences to three heads, viz. 1. To the Decree
touching building of Churches. 2. To another Decree against the aliening of
Laymens possessions to Ecclesiastics. 3. To the wrong imprisonment of the Canon
and the Abbot aforesayed. In all these he expected to be obeyed, otherwise he
would apply such remedies as the nature of things required.

About this time Genoa published a Manifesto, by revoking a Decree which the
Pope had excepted against* he made use hereof for an example, to make the
Venetians conformable to his will, using these words, Sequimini paenitentes,
follow the penitent; answer was made, That there was not the same reason for the
Republic of Venice, seeing she had not seven Cardinals her Citizens, as Genoa
had, to mediat for her upon all occasions with his Holiness; That the Decrees of
the Senate were the main Pillars of the Republic; That they were well known to
his Predecessors, who, before their Election to the Papacy had lived at Venice
in quality either of Confessors, Inquisitors or Nuntio's, and that after their
promotion they never questioned them.

This gave no satisfaction at all to the Pope, therefore he said he would send a
Breve hortatory to the Republic, concerning the three points before mentioned,
and if he were not obeyed by such a time, he would proceed further; for he must
not suffer the Authority of the Church to decline, but according to his Office,
he would vindicat and uphold it to his utmost, and to which end he had Legions
of Angels for his aid, and assistance, etc.

Herupon he sealed and sent two Breves a little after to his Nuntio in Venice,
with charge to present them accordingly; they were addressed Marino Grimani
Duci, and Reipublicae Venetorum. After this he called a Consistory, wherein he
declared how the State of Venice had violated the Ecclesiastical Liberty, by
publishing two Laws prejudicial thereunto, and by detaining in prison two
persons of the Church, etc. The Cardinals were very sparing to deliver their
Opinions herin, and when it came to Bellarmin to speak, he said, That his
Holiness should rather think on the residence of Prelates in their Churches.

The Venetian Senate thought good to send an Ambassador expressly for this
purpose; and to show their high respects to the Apostolic See, they made choice
of the Lord Leonardo Donato an ancient Senator of the wide Sleeve, who was
afterward Duke.

The Nuntio in Venice having received the Breves but the next day after, the
Ambassador extraordinary stayed the presentation thereof, and sent advice by an
express of the choice of the said Ambassador; the Pope was not well pleased
when he heard of this, that the Nuntio should presume to interpose his own
judgment after his Ordinance; therefore he dispatched unto Venice an express
Courier with a mandamus to the Nuntio, to present the said Breves immediately
after the receipt of his Letter, and that this might be concealed from the
ordinary Ambassador of Venice, then resident at Rome, he caused the Courier to
go out in a Coach without boots, and so take horse at the second Stage. The
Nuntio having received this command on Christmas Eve, that he might punctually
obey his Holiness, did present that solemn high Festival day the said Breves
unto the Senators assembled to assist at a solemn Mass, in the absence of the
Duke Grimani, who was then struggling with the pangs of death, and expired the
morning after, so that the Breves were not opened till the creation of a new
Duke.

The Pope having advice hereof, writ to his Nuntio to make a protest unto the
Senate, and enjoin them not to pass to a new Election, in regard it would prove
void, being made by men excommunicated; the Nuntio pressing for Audience
herupon, was delayed, in regard it has ever bin the custom of the Signory to
treat of no business of State during the Vacancy.

Duke Grimani being buried, they fell to ballotation for another, nor according
to the Constitutions of the Republic, can they fall to the Election of another,
till the former Duke be under ground; so it fell to the lot of LEONARDO DONATO
to be chosen: all Ambassadors went to congratulat the new Prince except the
Nuntio; yet did the Prince write unto the Pope as the custom is, to give him
advice of his Election.

Pope Paul herupon, though it was beyond the expectation of diverse, did receave
this Letter from the new Doge by the hands of the ordinary Venetian Ambassador
then sojourning at Rome, and returned a congratulatory Amswer thereof, revoking
the Order formerly sent to the Nuntio of presenting himself to the Duke.

The first affair that was agitated in the Senate after this new Election was
this difference with the Pope, and Pietro Duodo Knight, was nominated
Ambassador for Rome instead of Donato; The Breves were opened, and they were
both of the same substance, viz. That it was com to his knowing, how the
Republic in former years had determined in her Counsels many things contrary
to Ecclesiastic Liberty, and to the Canons, Counsels, and Constitutions
Pontifical; but among others, that in the year 1603. she had in the
Decemvirat, having regard to certain Laws of their Ancestors, who had forbidden
to erect Churches or other places without permission, instead of nulling the
old Ordinances touching this matter, she had revived the same, extending that
Statute which only concerned the City of Venice, to all other places of their
Dominions under great penalties, as if Churches and persons Ecclesiastical
were in any sort subject to the secular Jurisdiction, or he who foundeth a
Church were worthy of so rude a chastisement, as if he had committed some great
Crime; moreover, that in the month of May last, the Senate having regard to
another Law made in the year 1536. whereby was prohibited the perpetual
alienation of Laymens possessions within the City and Signory of Venice to
Ecclesiastical persons, without permission of the Senate under certain
penalties, instead of revoking that Law, as their duty required, they had
renewed it, and extended the penalty to all their Dominions, as if it were
lawful for temporal Princes to ordain any thing for the exercising of any
Jurisdiction, or to dispose in any sort without the Ecclesiastics, and
particularly of the Pope, of the goods of the Church, specially of such goods
as have bin given to the Church, of persons spiritual, and other places of
devotion granted by the faithful for remedy of their sins, and discharge of
their consciences: That these Ordinances tending to the damnation of souls, to
public scandalls, and also contrary to the Ecclesiastical Liberty, were of
themselfs void and of no validity, as furthermore he declared them to be such,
no man being obliged to observe them; on the contrary, that they who had made
the Statutes, or any like, or they who had furthered them, had incurred the
Churches Censures, and deprived themselfs of all such possessions as they held
of the Church, as also their estates and demains were subject to other
penalties, in such sort, that they could not be absolved, unless they revoked
all such Laws, and reestablished all things in their former estate: That
thereupon being placed in the Sovereign Throne, and not being able to dissemble
or endure these things, he admonished the Republic to consider well the danger
wherinto they had cast their souls upon this occasion, and to seek remedy
betimes, otherwise in case of contumacy he commanded under pain of
Excommunication latae sententiae, that the before said Laws ancient and modern
should be abrogated; That this Monitory should be published in all places
throughout the Republic, expecting from them an account hereof, if not, upon
notice had from his Nuntio, he would proceed to execution of the Penalties, and
to such other remedies that were meet, remembering the reckoning that he was to
give to God at the day of Judgment, and that he could not in duty dissemble
when the Authority of the Sea Apostolic was diminished, Ecclesiastical Liberty
trod under foot, the Holy Canons neglected, the right of the Church and Clergy
violated; Of all which the charge lay upon him, affirming that he was not
induced hereunto for any worldly consideration, for he desired nothing else but
the glory to acquit himself of his Apostolical function; and as he intended
not to usurp anything upon the secular Authority, so he would not permit the
Ecclesiastic should be diminished; he concluded, that if the Republic would
conform, they would deliver him from much pain which he endured in their behalf,
and they might still retain the Lands which they held of the Church: That the
best means whereby she might prevent the incommodities that might fall upon her
from Infidells, were to conserve the Churchmen in their rights, who watch in
perpetual prayers to God for her conservation.

The Senate with much maturity pondered these Breves, and thereupon sent to
confer with their learned Counselors in the Civil Laws, amongst whom they
admitted Paul of Venice, of the Order of the Servites, an eminent Divine and
Canonist, with other Padouan Doctors, to consult what answer they should return
the Pope.

The Republic also sent to consult other Doctors, themost renowned of Europe
for sound knowledge, as Henry the VIII. of England, had don touching the
legality of a divorce with Katherine of Aragon. Having received the judgments
of the learned men in France and Spain, specially of Giacomo Monochio
President of Milan, a man much cried up in those days for learning, the Senate
framed the Answer to the Popes Monitory, as follows.

That with much grief and wonder they understood by the Letters of his Holiness,
that their Laws observed carefully through so many Ages, and never questioned
by any of his Predecessors, the revokement whereof would shake the very
Foundations of the Republic, were reprehended as contrary to the Sea Apostolic,
and that they which made them (having bin persons eminent for merit, and well
deserving of that See, who are now in heaven) were noted for Violaters of
Ecclesiastic Liberty; that according to the admonition of his Holiness, they had
examined with much exactness their Laws Old and New, but had not found
anything which a Sovereign Prince might not have well ordained without any just
offense to the Popes Authority, it being a thing evidently belonging to a
secular Prince, to have regard what Companies are erected in h^s Dominions; as
also to prevent the building of such Edifices as in time to com might be
hurtful to the public safety; and though their State abounds with Churches,
and places of piety as much as any other, yet when they saw it convenient, they
never refused to permit new Foundations themselfs contributing liberally
thereunto. That in the Law against perpetual alienation of lay goods unto
Ecclesiastics, the question being of things purely temporal, they could not be
taxed to have don any thing contrary to the Canons or Decrees; That if the
Popes have power to forbid the Clergy to alienat any goods of the Church unto
persons secular without leave, Princes may do the same, and take Order that the
goods of seculars shall not be alienated to the Clergy without permission; nor
do the Ecclesiastics lose any thing bequeathed unto them herby, seeing they
receave a price answerable in value, to the immovable adjoining; that it tends
to the great prejudice, not only of the temporal State, but also of the
spiritual to weaken the Forces of the Republic, which by such alienations is
deprived of necessary services, and which in effect is a vangard or fortress
for all Christendom against Infidels: That for these reasons the Senate could
not persuade themselfs to have incurred any Censures, since secular Princes
have by Divine Law, from which no human Law may derogat, a power to establish
Laws in things temporal; as also that the admonitions of his Holiness have here
no place, where the question is not of any thing spiritual, or any way
trenching upon the Pap^ll Authority, much less yet could they believe, that
his Holiness, so full of Piety and Religion, would persist without knowledge of
the cause in his Comminations.

This was the substance of the Senat's Answer, remitting themselfs further to
their Ambassador extraordinary.

There happened a business in Savoy about this time, which might have scatr'd
the Venetian, being much of the same nature; for Pope Paul hahaving notice that
the Duke of Savoy had commanded the Bishop of Fossano to depart out of his
Dominions, the Pope being incensed thereat, did so menace the Duke with
Excommunication, that he revoked his Commandment.

The Senats Letter being delivered to the Pope by Nani the Venetian Ambassador
in ordinary, to prepare the way for Duodo the Extraordinary; he said, being a
little transported, that Monitory Breve's must not be answered by Letter, and
that the Answers of the Senate were frivolous; He added that lately he had heard
of another Law touching goods Ecclesiastic holden as Emphyteutike, which was
fit to be revoked with the other, and although he had not till then made any
mention of it, yet he had more to say against it then any other, therefore it
behooved them to obey him, because the cause was Gods, Et portae Inferi non
praevalebunt contra eam; and if they would not revoke the said Laws, they were
Tyrants, and degenerating from their Ancestors, etc.

A little after he sent another Breve to be delivered the Duke, for the release
of the Canon and the Abbot under pain of Excommunication, latae sententiae,
which he commanded should be delivered into the hands of his Nuntio, etc.

The Senate consulted the Doctors again about this Breve, whereupon after some
Eventilations of the matters, this Answer was sent:

That the Breve of his Holiness was read with much reverence, and no less
regret, as perceaving thereby that matters tended to increase discord, that his
Holiness went about to destroy the Laws of their Republic, which so many Ages
had bin kept entire; to deliver up the Canon and Abbot, was nothing else but to
demand that they should despoile themselfs of their just power to chastise
crimes and wickedness, which power they had enjoyed with the approbation of his
Predecessors, from the Original of the Republic: that God the Founder of all
States had bestowed this power upon them from the beginning, and that they did
derive it from their Progenitors, etc. Duodo the Extraordinary Ambassador made
no great have to Rome, whereat the Pope received offense; being arrived there at
last, he was not suffered to pass his first Audience with complement as the
custom is, but the Pope wished him to fall to the business presently; so he
delivered with much gravity and pressing elocution the reasons that moved the
Republic not to revoke those Laws, and to detain the persons of the said
Churchmen.

The Pope answered with some heat, that the exemption of the Clergy was Iure
Divino; he said, that he would not meddle with things temporal, but their
three aforssayed Laws were Usurpations.

As the Pope had formerly acquainted most Princes with these traverses 'twixt
him and Venice in a complaining way, so the Senate sent unto the Republics
Ambassadors abroad, that they should truly inform those Princes in whose Courts
they resided, of the truth of things; In Venice there were at that time
Ambassadors from the Emperor, France and Spain, to whom the business was
communicated by some of the Senators; The Imperial Ambassador said, That his
Master desired peace, and that in such matters he would not foment the will of
the Pope. The Count of Santa Cruz who was for Spain, approved of the reasons
already alleged in Rome for the Republic; Mons du Fresne the French Ambassador
answered, That he knew not what to make of those pontifical Laws, whereby
Princes are restrained to govern their Subjects, etc.

Pope Paul was still eager in the business, telling the Venetian Ambassador
that there were none in the Senate that understood rightly the case, which made
them have recourse to Doctors, but that he had written to such persons as were
able to set their Doctors at School, concluding that he would proceed with his
spiritual Arms in this matter, but touching other things, he would still
account of the Venetians, as of his children.

Herupon a Consistory was called, and most of the Cardinals ran bias with the
Pope, except the Cardinals of Verona and Vicenza, who were more moderat;
examples against Hen. II. King of England, the King of Castile, and against the
Kings Charles, II. IV. were produced, who underwent the spiritual Censures in
like cases; so he resolved upon an Interdiction, yet he would give the Senate
twenty four days of longer time to consider hereof, whereunto the Cardinals
gave their suffrages, but a Libell was cast up and down the streets of Venice,
that the Consistory herin was brought to assentari, not assentiri.

A little while after the Interdict was affixed in the accustomed places of the
City of Rome, and scattered every where, some in Latin, some in Italian, wherein
after recapitulation of those Decrees in Venice, and the imprisonment of the
foresayed Churchmen,

The Pope declared that after the example of ten of his Predecessors, with the
Council and consent of the Cardinals, after mature deliberation, though the
former said Decrees of the Senate were of themselfs void, and of no validity,
nevertheless he now declared them to be such; therefore he did excommunicat,
declare and pronounce for excommunicated, as if they had bin particularly
named, the Duke and Senate of Venice which then were, and which should be
herafter together with all their favorers, promoters and Counselors, if
within the term of twenty four days to be counted from the day of the
Publication, the Duke and Senate did not recall, abrogat and disanull the
Decrees aforesayed without any exception or excuse, and if they caused not
openly and in all places the said abrogation to be published, as also actually
to render into the hands of his Nuntio the imprisoned Canon and Abbot.

That from this Excommunication they could not be absolved but by the Pope,
except it were upon the point of death, in which case if any one received
absolution and should afterward recover health, he should fall again within this
Excommunication, if he did not as far as in him lay obey this his commandment;
that until they had obeyed, he forbad any one to be buried in holy place; and
if after the said twenty four days, the Duke and Senate should continue in
their obstinacy, he put all their State under the Interdict, in such sort, that
none should celebrat Mass or Divine Service; he deprived the Duke and Senate
likewise of all their goods which they held of the Church of Rome, or of other
Churches, as also of all their Privileges and indults obtained by it, and
specially of that Privilege inabling them to proceed against Clerks in certain
cases, reserving to himself and his Successors a power to aggravat and
re-aggravat this Censure against them and their adherents, etc.

The public Ministers of State who were than resident at Rome, made instances
to the Pope to retard a while this Interdict: the Marquis of Chastillon who was
for the Emperor, D' Alincourt who was for the French King, The Count of Verriie
who was for Savoy, but his Holiness was inflexible, saying, he would bring the
offenders to obey; whereupon the Savoy Ambassador replied, that the word obey
was too harsh to be used toward a Sovereign Prince; yet after the publication
of the said Interdict, the said Ambassadors gave a solemn visit to the
Venetian Ambassadors, and communicated unto them what they had don with the
Pope in the transaction of affairs.

The publication of this Interdict being flown to Venice, it was ordered by the
Senate, that every one should have recours to his prayers; it was resolved upon
to recall the Ambassador Extraordinary from Rome, to testify the resentment
they had of the wrong, but to leave the Ledger Ambassador there still, to prevent
an absolut rupture; It was also determined to write to Gregorio Iustiniano then
Ambassador in England, that he should inform the King hereof: Sir Henry Wootton
Ambassador at that time in Venice, complained that the Senate had communicated
these things to other Foreign Ministers before him, but for the pretensions of
the Pope, he said, he could not understand that Roman Theology, etc.

There was public command given to all Prelates and Ecclesiastical persons, that
they should not publish, or cause and suffer to be published or affixed in any
place whatsoever, any Bulls, Monitories, Breves, or other writings which should
be sent unto them from Rome: furthermore Proclamation was made under pain of
incurring the displeasure of the Prince, that whosoever had any copy of a
certain Breve divulged at Rome touching the Republic, he should bring it to the
Magistrates at Venice, or to Governers of Castles and other Officers of the
State.

Hereupon all peeple did so cheerfully obey this command, that 'twas a
marvailous thing to see how many had bin imprinted and scattered; neither was
any one of them affixed in any place, by reason of the general diligence of
the peeple.

Duodo the Ambassador Extraordinary at Rome, having received order for his
revocation, went to take his leave of Pope Paul, telling him, that since his
Holiness would not take into consideration the reasons by him represented, and
having no more to say or act, he was recalled: the Pope answered with more
mildness than ordinary, That touching the difference, he had don nothing but
what his conscience and duty obliged him to do, that the case was clear and
decided, that in the whole order of his proceedings he had followed the example
of his Predecessors, that his weapons in this quarrel were spiritual, the use
whereof accorded well with that fatherly love which he had ever born to the
Signory, requiring only such obedience as the greatest Princes render him.

The Popes Nuntio at Venice after th^s Interdict was observed to frequent the
College of the Jesuits where were Possevino, and Bernardin Castorio men
eminently known, the first had don great things in Moscovia, the other had bin
provincial of the Jesuits when they were expelled out of Lions, with diverse
others of note. The said Nuntio came some days after to the Senate, where first
showing a resentment of what had passed, he said that they ought not to
proceed toward his Holiness with such a repugnance, that the Pope was moved by
pure zeal, and that yet, if they yielded a little, all things might be
accommoded; to which effect he desired that his Serenity would think upon a
temperament, that for his part he was not most ready to present and favor it.

The Duke answered that none of sound understanding could approve that a
Republic so pious and Catholic should be vexed in such a fashion, and that the
actions of the Pope could not be justified; that he had published a Monitory
which every one held injust without scruple, that he fell upon so weighty a
resolution, without weighing before hand how the world is governed; that his
Holiness could not have don an act more perilous to cast the Apostolic See upon
the censure and hatred of all peeple, and into a manifest danger, that if the
Republic should think upon a separation, it would be followed with an irreparable
loss; but though the Republic would not depart from her piety, yet would she
defend her self; that for his particular (meaning the Nuntio) he did well to
persuade peace, but he should turn his speech to the Pope who troubled it. Eight
days after the Nuntio had Audience again, wherein speaking much of the Popes
prudence, he showed a displeasure, that he saw no appearance of a temperament,
concluding, That the Senate should take heed, lest while they desired to support
a particular Law, they might draw on themselfs universal ruin; whereunto the
Duke answered, That he ought not to speak of prudence in the Pope, who had used
so much precipitation, and that he should do well to set before his eyes the
imminent danger which may follow herupon, and tell him that these Counsels
came from a man old in affairs of State, as well as years.

The Pope hearing of the Proclamation against his Monitory, and how the pulse
of the Venetians did beat, who showed themselfs so obedient to the Senate, and
so forward to uphold their liberty, he thought his Nuntio could not stay in
Venice any longer with his honor; therefore he sent him Letters of revocation,
and dismis'd from Rome Nani the Republiques Ambassador, charging him expressly
not to leave behind him any of his company: yet he desired to see him before he
went provided, if he came unto him in quality of a private man* Nani made
answer, that he could not tell how to separat from his person the title of
Ambassador; so he left Rome, being well accompanied out of Town with Roman
Barons and gentlemen, but with few Prelates* The next morning, the Pope sent
after him a Colonel to accompany him throughout the State of the Church, who
o'retook him at Gorligno.

In Venice the Duke had caused a Manifesto to be published and affixed at every
door, That whereas he had received advice of a publication made at Rome of a
certain Breve fulminated against the Senate and Signory, he being obliged to
have a care of the public tranquillity, and of the Authority of a Sovereign
Prince, did protest before God and all the world, that he had not omitted any
means possible to make the Pope capable of the most clear and strong reasons
that were produced in behalf of the Republic, but having found his ears shut,
and seen the Breve published against reason and justice, against the Doctrines
of Holy Scriptures, of the Fathers, and Canons in prejudice of the secular
Authority given by God, and of the liberty of the State, with the trouble of
the repose of his Subjects, and to the great scandal of all the world, he did
pronounce that Breve not only injust, but merely void and null, and so
unlawful, that he need not repute it needful to have recours to such
remedies, as in other occasions the Republic, and many Sovereign Princes have
used against such Popes as out-pass'd their power, exhorting and enjoying that
the Prelates continu in their accustomed cour^ in celebration of Divine Service,
the Republic being resolved to persever in the Holy Catholic Faith, and in the
reverence of the Roman Church, as they have done from the beginning.

Upon this Interdict, the only Ecclesiastics that went out of the Republic,
were the Jesuits and Capuchines, whereof the first was banished, the other
dismissed, the rest did still officiat, alleging, that the difference 'twixt
the Sea of Rome, and the Signory was not touching any point of the Catholic
Faith.

But at Rome her self it was expected that the said Interdict would produce
three effects: 1. That the Religious would al depart: 2. That the Cities and
peeple seeing themselfs deprived of Church Offices would raise a sedition, and
so force the Senate to give the Pope satisfaction: 3. That the Nobility upon
this occasion might be disordered, terrified, and divided among themselfs, but
none of all these three effects happened; for the Senate was greatly united in
their resolutions, the City of Venice and common peeple kept themselfs in
wonderful obedience: and this so general a calm did not only proceed from the
voluntary conformablenes of the peeple, but also from the providence of the
Senate, and diligence of the Magistrate, who provided for all accidents; Besides,
this great affair was conducted with so much prudence and dexterity, that no
blood of any man was shed for contempt or mutiny, which made the world to stand
at a gaze, that so great a Body and Government should be kept npright without
any violence, execution, or the least shock given; notwithstanding there were
many under practices used afterward.

The Jesuits in every place where they had taken footing, did put all irons in
the fire, and fell a beating them to brand the Republic of Venice, insomuch
that her Ambassadors received affronts in some places, as in Poland and Prague,
but it was by private persons, for which they had satisfaction from the
Emperor, and the King of Poland; for the Signory was not so careless, but she
sent a punctual account of all these traverses 'twixt the Pope and Her; Genoa
and Savoy was also displeased with Her, because both they had bin succumbent to
the Popes Censures before, and submitted.

Among other Princes, Iustiniano the Venetian Ambassador residing then in
London, had command to acquaint the King of England with his Contrasto 'twixt
the Pope and the Senate. King James after he had very attentively heard the
relation of the Ambassador, showed how well he accepted that esteem, and highly
commended the Laws of the Republic, adding, that he longed to see the whole
Church of God reformed, to which end, he much desired a free Council to
determine so many controversies, which have no other cause but the usurpations
of the Roman Bishops, in which desire, he thought the King of France and other
Princes would join with him; that perhaps God meant to produce this happiness out
of these troubles of the Signory; that he had sent word thereof to Pope Clement,
then when he was moved by him, the first time he came to the Crown of England,
to unite himself to the Roman Church, but he would not hear any thing of a
Council; that this union was much to be desired, but clearly there was no other
means to effect it then by a General Council; he added moreover, that that
ruin of the Church proceeded from this, that the Popes esteemed themselfs as
Gods, and were so corrupted by flattery, that 'twas no marvail they could give
no ear to any reason, and if they proceeded oftentimes with such precipitation.

The separated States of Holland writ letters full of of affection unto the
Republie upon this occasion, offering Her a supply of Arms, Ships, and
Victuals, if the case required, with any other good office of friendship.

All Christian Princes were sensible of this rupture 'twixt the Pope and the
Republic, specially the Roman Catholics, in whose Courts the Venetian
Ambassadors did refrain for a while, to go with the rest into their Chappells
after the accustomed manner.

The Duke of Savoy did appear more against the Republic then any other, not
treating her Ambassador as formerly, though he took hold of another occasion,
because She had written to his children by the title of Excellency not of
Highness.

The Republic apprehending some fears, that such a confederacy might be procured
against Her by Pope Paul the eight, as was by Julius the second, who carried
fire in his hands; She was very willing that matters might be reconciled by the
mediation of other Princes* wherein Mons. du Fresne stirred more vigorously then
any other, by order from Henry the IV. of France his Master: the Duke of
Mantoua also offered to com to Venice in disguize, to know their intentions,
and then pass to Rome, of purpose to treat with the Pope for an atonement.

The Senate took this as a very high respect, and said, that the Republic who
used to be accounted the Right Hand of Rome, would do nothing unworthy of her
self; and it was just, that he who had first offended should repair the offense;
therefore it was fitting that the Pope should revoke his Censures, and so open
the way to a Treaty; for no wound can heal, till the inflammation be taken away.

While this difference lasted 'twixt Rome and Venice, a certain writing was
affixed at Vicenza, and other places, wherein the Republic was exhorted to shake
off the Popes Yoke, calling him Antichrist* etc. The Senate was much moved
herat, therefore they caused a rigorous Ba^ to be published, wherein they
promised a large reward to him or them that should discover the Author of that
infamous paper, giving charge that a diligent search should be made after the
Authors; but none being found, 'twas thought to be an artifice of the Jesuits,
to induce the Venetian thereby, to com the sooner to an accord with the Pope.

The King of Spain in these doubtful traverses of things, writ a Letter full
of terms of reverence and complement unto the Pope, that if need were, he would
join his temporal Arms to maintain the spiritual Arms of the Church; to which
purpose, he had written both to his Viceroy of Naples, and Governor of Milan:
upon the receipt of this Letter, there were Bonfires made at Rome, and the flames
of the fire flew upon the wings of fame all Christendom over, which gave the
Republic such an alarm, that She began by Land and Sea to arm apace; She was
offered assistance if need were from some of the Greek Christians, that were
subjects to the Turk, as also from the reformed Churches of France, but she
waved both; but it was thought that this Letter of the Spanish King, wherein he
promised warlike succors to the Pope, was not a thing really meant, but only
to terrify the Republic, and bring her the sooner to an agreement; which
appeared, in regard he had sent express commands to Don Innigo de Cardenas his
Ambassador, residing in Venice, to propound some Overtures of Treaty: whereupon
he proposed to the Duke and the Senate, That his Catholic Majesty affecting the
conservation of peace, desired that the disgusts 'twixt his Holiness and the
Republic might cease, to which end he had commanded all his Ministers to
co-operat accordingly, and particularly had commanded him to pray the Senate
accordingly, etc.

The Duke much extolling the good inclinations of the Catholic King, answered,
That the Republic could not do more then what they had done already, that it
was more proper to begin with him who had bin the cause of all these broils,
that it was not for them to open the way which had bin stopped up by others;
that the Pope by dismissing their Ambassador, and revoking his Nuntio, had
broken off all means of Treaty, which could not be set on foot, unless the
Censures were taken off, with which the Republic thought her self much injured.

The Ambassador replied, asking the Duke, Whether his Serenity were content
that he should pray his Holiness in the name of the Catholic King to take off his
Excommunication.

The Duke rejoined, that it was necessary to remove the impediment, but that
this should be don by this means or that, by the free will of the Pope, or at
the instance of another, it little imported for the substance of the thing, and
that his Majesty might do what pleased him. The Ambassador answered, Your
Serenity may well be content that the Pope be entreated by your Name; the Duke
said, That for the repose of Italy, if the Catholic King were certain that the
Pope being thus moved would do the thing, he would not hold it any inconvenience
to be so contented; He said further, that neither himself nor the Senate had
given any occasion of disgust to the Pope, if he had taken any of himself they
could not help it, that in voluntary discontents there is no other remedy then a
voluntary acknowledgement, besides he desired him to consider, that the King
his Masters Interest, and of all temporal Princes besides, was involved in the
cause of the Republic.

The French Ambassador du Fresne being then also in the Senate, said, That the
Pope could not be induced to revoke the Censures, unless there were some
assurance given what the Republic would do in point of correspondence, that it
was needful for her in some sort to submit, for no temporal Prince could be
disparaged to yield unto his Holiness, it being a jus commune to humble ones
self to the Sovereign Bishop.

The Duke answered, That it was necessary to apply the remedy to the part
whence the evil proceeded, therefore since his Christian Majesty desired a
pacification, it was meet that he should make his address to the Pope, etc.

While these Traverses happened at Venice, the Pope by the predominant advice
of some Cardinals, and relying much upon the foresayed Letter which the King of
Spain had written unto him, made a show of arming, whereunto the Conte de
Fuentes Governor of Milan was very forward, therefore it did not stand with the
prudence of the Republic to be idle. Herupon She sent to Her Ambassadors abroad
to acquaint the Princes, wherewith they resided, to inform them accordingly; She
imparted the business likewise to those Ambassadors that lay at Venice, and
among the rest to the English, who having thanked the Senate for this
communication of affairs, He prayed their generosity and resolution to defend
their honor, assuring them, that upon so important occasion, they should have
from his King all furtherance and aid, as well in good offices, as in arms and
succors: he said further, That he had particular commandment from the King
his Master, to oblige him under the word of a King to a near Union with the
Signory, to assist Her with council and forces, as also to labor that all his
friends should do the same, not for any base ends or private interest, or to
foment division, or com into concurrence and opposition with any other Prince,
but specially for two reasons. First, for that acknowledging himself obliged to
God for infinite favors received from him, he thought it his duty to defend his
cause, that is, to conserve the power which his Divine Majesty had established
upon earth: Secondly, in regard of that Bond of Amity which he renewed with the
Republic, etc.

The main knot in the business was, whether upon a promise of the revokement
of the Ecclesiastical Censures by the Pope, the Signory would also promise an
abrogation of the foresayed Decrees touching Church Lands, which She could not
be induced to do; but something should be don if a Treaty were comenc'd, whereof
the Senate was thought incapable while they lay under the said Censures.

The French Ambassador a few days after came to the Senate, where he made a
long discourse for an accord; But he was advertised from Rome, that the Pope had
received some new offenses from the Signory, for hindering Navigation into the
places of the Church, and for the eternal Ban against the Jesuits.

Whereunto the Senate made answer, that touching that point of Navigation it
appertained to every good Government to provide that the State may be well
furnished with things necessary for her self, and provide that they be not
carried away to others; that in order to this, the Republic had stayed all
Vessels at Sea, wherein there were provisions necessary for the State; whereupon
if the State Ecclesiastic was in want, this was not their fault, but the order
of human things so required: Concerning the Jesuits, it was alleged, that they
were not banished, but rather were gone away of themselfs, as refusing to obey
the Commandments sent unto them to continue Divine Service; but after their
departure, having notice of an infinite number of injuries, machinations and
treasons contrived by them, the Senate ordained, as Justice required, that they
never more return.

Whilst these things were in agitation, the Spaniards were like to have
imbroil'd the Signory in a war with the Turk, in regard the Marquis of Santa
Cruz with a Fleet of Napolitan and Sicilian Galleys had sacked and burnt
Durazzo, a Town of the Turks in Albany; some thought this was done of purpose to
make the Turk fall upon the Venetian, and so impell him to make his address to
the Spaniard for aid; therefore at Constantinople the Gran Vizier perceaving
well the Artifice of Spain herein, and that the taking of Durazzo had bin
attempted to no other end, then to set them at odds with the Signory; Letters
were sent to the Captain Aga the Admiral, that he should still keep good union
and intelligence with the Venetian Forces, to the damage of the Pope and the
Spaniard.

This year there were diverse Libells, Pasquills flew up and down in every corner
of Italy, some in favor of Rome, some of Venice: there were also many Books and
Tractats came forth on both sides. The Doctrine of the Venetian Writers was,
That God had established two Governments upon Earth, the one Spiritual, the
other Temporal, each of them being Supreme, and independent one from the
other: the one is the Church Regiment, the other the Civil; Of the first he
gave charge to his Apostles and their Successors; Of the temporal, the charge
is put in the hands of secular Princes, in such sort, that one may not
intermeddle with that which appertains to either: Therefore the Pope has no
power to abrogat the Laws of Princes in civil matters, nor to deprive them of
their estates, or free their Subjects from their allegiance which they owe
unto them; That to depose Kings, is a new thing never attempted but within
these five hundred years, it is against the Holy Scriptures, the examples of
Christ and his Saints: That to teach, that in case of conscience 'twixt the
Pope and a Prince, it is lawful to poursue him with fraud and force, and that
the Subjects thereby do obtain remission of sins, is a Doctrine seditious and
sacrilegious; That Churchmen by Divine Law are not exempted from their secular
power, neither in their persons or goods, whenever his necessities constrain
him to serve himself of them; that the Pope ought not to think himself
infallible, unless where God has promised him his Divine assistance, which
must be understood only in the fundamental points of Faith; that the Authority
of binding and loosing ought to be understood with this caution, Clave non
errante, seeing that God has commanded the Pastor to follow the merit and
justice of the cause, and not his own inclination; that when the Pope thunders
out any Censures, it is for the Doctors to consider whether they have proceeded
Clave errante aut non errante.

That the new name of blind obedience, invented by Ignatius Loyola, is a
Psudodoxall tenet, etc.

On the contrary, the Doctrine of the Roman Writers or Papalines, as they
termed them, was, that the civil power of Princes is subordinat to the power
Ecclesiastic, and subject unto it; therefore the Pope has authority to deprive
Princes of their estates and honors, for their faults and errors which they
commit in Government; yea though they have committed no fault, when the Pope
shall judge it fit for the common good of the Church; That the Pope may free
Subjects from obedience, and from their Oath of Fidelity which they owe the
temporal Prince, in which case they are to shake off all subjection, and even
to poursue the Prince if the Pope command it; some of the modester sort held
that this Authority did not reside in the Pope, because Christ gave him any
temporal Authority, but because this was necessary for the spiritual Monarchy.

Diverse Tretises were imprinted and published pro and con 'twixt the Pope and
the Republic to this effect, and Bellarmin was very busy in upholding S.
Peter's Chair, at last there was a strict inhibition there should be no more
writing on this point, so the Treaty began to advance, wherein the French
Ambassador was very active, therefore he proposed two things to the Senate.

The first was, That the Duke and Senate would suspend the execution of the Laws,
and the Protestation published against the Monitory of the Pope, upon condition
that his Holiness would do the like to his Censures for five months, during
which time they might treat of the merit of the Laws that were questioned.

The second was, That the Ecclesiastic Prisoners might be rendered without
prejudice to the cause of the Republic; That the Religious gone out of Venice by
reason of the Interdict might return; he concluded that it was not the
intention of his Christian Majesty that any thing should be don against the
Dignity and Justice of the Signory, and if either of these proposalls were to
Her prejudice, he was content to let them pass in silence: He desired them
further to consider, that it was necessary to give some apparent occasion to his
Holiness to induce him to a retractation, because it was never heard that a Pope
had revoked his Bulls, excepting at the Council of Constance.

The Senate did fall to deliberat of things with more maturity then was usual;
at last they resolved with one joint consent to prefer the conservation of
their Liberty before all other respects, together with the Authority of their
Laws: But for yielding up the prisoners in gratification to his Christian
Majesty, they thought this did not trench much upon their Liberty, in regard it
was a particular fact which drew not with it any consequence, that the like
ought not to be don in time to come; therefore the Senate answered the
Ambassador, thanking his Majesty for his mediation, and adjoined, it was easy
to perceave, whereat the designs of the Pope aimed, who seeing that the Justice
of the Republic, for the merit and ground of the cause was known and confessed
by all, would therefore find out some error in the form of proceeding, wherein the
Justice of the Republic was so clear that it was manifest to all, and the
errors of the Pope so gross, that they could not be excused: wherefore it was
not consentaneous to reason, to correct the faults of another with their own
detriment and dishonor, They added further, that these proceedings of the Popes
were of such pernicious consequence, that they might have hurled the whole
Signory into flames of civil combustions.

The Senate at last granted, that when the King should be assured and have the
firm word of the Pope that he would totally take away the Censures, the two
prisoners should be rendered unto him, although they were guilty of foul Crimes;
They would also let fall their protestation, yet saving their public reasons,
and their power to judge Ecclesiastics when it should be expedient for the
State; this was all the French Ambassador could wring from the Senate, whereof
when the King was advertised, he writ a Letter, wherein he thanked them for
their fair respects, in which Letter he took occasion to renew the memory of
the favor they did him to co opt him into the body of their Nobility.

After this Don Innigo de Cardenas the Spanish Ambassador, earnestly solicited
the Senate for an accommodation, but he could hardly prevail as much as the
other: In the interim there was a new kind of Council erected at Rome, called la
Congregation de Guerra, the Congregation of War, which consisted of fifteen
Cardinals, and this was don, to strike some apprehensions of fear into the
Signory.

The Senate informed the French and Spanish Ambassadors of this strange news
from Rome, touching a Council of War; they also impa^ed to the English
Ambassador, telling him, that he might now publish the Declaration of the King
his Master, and think upon the succors he promised.

Cavalier ^tton (then Ambassador) testified very much contentment to do this
office, affirming that it was to publish the glory of his King; He passed
further, and said, that there were but three ways to compound this difference,
either by yielding, or referring the matter to Princes, or by War: he saw well
the Signory had no mind to the first, and if they resolved to make a reference
to any, they could not make choice of any fitter then his King, who
marvailously well understood how much it imported him to maintain the Authority
given by God to Princes; but if the matter should come to Arms, he prayed his
Serenity to consider, that though Philosophy tells us the Sun warms these
inferior bodies, without heat in it self, yet in human things it is not so, but
he that would heat in his favor, must first be hot himself.

The Senate determined to signify unto all Princes the Declaration of the King
of great Britain, wherein he called God to witness, 'That his resolution to
defend the cause of the Republic, had no other end but the service of God, and
to conserve the Liberty which God gave to all Princes, not for any ill will
that he carried to the Pope, nor was he moved by the particular interest of the
Republic, but only so far, because he knew She defended a cause most just and
acceptable to God, which the more he considered in his mind, so much the more
was he confirmed in Her protection and defense, not finding any the least
shadow of reason to relinquish Her; That he had already taken this resolution,
and would sustain it suddenly; That he would not do as the Spaniard, who by a
Letter had filled the Popes spirit with vanity to carry him into a precipice,
but that he would execut with courage and sincerity what he had promised: he
considered also as a thing of great consequence, that the Pope prepared himself
for war, and had to this effect erected that new Congregation of men
disaffected to the Signory, and all dependents of Spain: herunto he added, that
he would be as ready to perform his promise, as to publish his Declaration, and
would besides procure some good offices from his brother the King of Denmark, and
other Princes of Germany his Allies.

The Kings of France and England appearing so earnestly in this business, the
Emperor also did contribut his intercession; the Grand Duke of Florence
likewise stirred in it, yet nothing could be concluded to any purpose.

Therefore the Spaniard begins to arm in the Duchy of Milan, to which end the
Count de Fuentes had particular Commission. The Republic having intelligence
hereof, it did not stand with Her wonted prudence and circumspection to stand
idle; wherefore to meet with all occasions that might occurr, She sent to
Padoua, Verona, Crema, Bergamo and Brescia five hundred thousand Crowns, one
hundred thousand for each City to prepare themselfs for all exigents: Unto the
old nine thousand six hundred Footmen, and six hundred Horse: To the one
hundred and fifty Albanian Horse, She added six hundred Italian Foot, and one
thousand Albanians more under Paolo Ghini. Order also was given to Count
Francis Ma^tinengo to levy in the Confines four thousand French soldiers, and
six hundred Cuirasses which She caused to be armed: To the three great Galleys
was adjoined one other, and to the thirty eight light Galleys they sent five
more in the Isles of the Levant, and twelve more newly armed at Venice. In Candy
also were armed twenty Galleys, and Nicola^ Sagredo Proveditor general by his
prudence and dexterity, which was singular in managing of Martial affairs,
wrought in such sort, that all this was don at the expense of private gentlemen;
so that there were in all seventy five light Galleys, and four great ones got
together: Diverse of the French Nobility made profer of their service to the
Republic, and the great Turk seemed to importune her to accept of his
assistance: She utterly refused the last, and waved the first.

The rumor of these preparations filled every corner of Christendom, therefore
the Kings and Princes who were already engaged in quality of Mediators 'twixt
the Pope and the Republic, stirred more nimbly in the business, specially the
French, who to accelerat things, and do them with greater countenance, employed
to that end the Cardinal de Ioyeuse in a splendid Embassy both to Rome and
Venice.

In Spain the Duke of Lerma complained to the English Ambassador for the
proser of such assistance that his King had made to the Republic, which had put
her to stand higher a tiptoe against the Holy Father, and impeded the Treaty,
for She would not show Her self so obstinat against him, if She were not so much
encouraged by his King, because from France She could expect but words, or
peradventure some troops hired with her own silver.

The Treaty began now to be poursued with some heat, and the Cardinal de Ioyeuse
carried himself with such address, that he overcame all difficulties, and
brought both parties to a conformity; but the Republic would by no means part
with her Laws, or revoke Her Decrees formerly mentioned touching Ecclesiastics,
and Her Ban against the Jesuits, She only delivered the foresayed Count and
Canon to the French Ambassadors hands, who delivered them afterward to the
Nuntio; so the quarrel ended, the thunder c^as'd which had made such a noise,
and cut the Princes of Christendom so much work to do: herupon Letters of
thanks were written to the Kings of France and Spain, but specially to the King
of great Britain, for his propensity and good intentions toward the Republic:
The Cardinal Ioyeuse had a present of 6000. Crowns value, and Don Francisco de
Castro had another of 3000. who had bin sent from the King of Spain expressly
to compose these differences, which charge, in his first Speech before the Duke
and Senate, he said, that he had willingundertaken both in obedience to his
Catholic Majesty, and for the particular affection he did bear unto so
illustrious a Signory, hoping easily to conclude a peace betwixt the Holy
Father and his Serenity, specially seeing he should not meet with those three
impediments that usually render all Treaties difficult; which are, first, the
passion or extraordinary affection of him in whose name men treat, or of him
who treats: secondly, the inconvenience of the matter treated; and thirdly,
the incapacity or want of good will in the person with whom the treaty is. For
touching the first, it was certain that the King his Master was well-affected,
and had no other aims but the common good; That the greatness of the Republic
was advantageous unto him, as being the Bullwark of Christendom against the
power of the Turk; and for his own person, he protested, that he was not com to
use deceit or subtilty being Noble by birth, and therefore obliged to tell truth
above all things. Touching the second, the point of treaty was for peace, a
thing excellent in its own nature, and for an union with the Sea Apostolic, a
thing very profitable to the Republic, all stories being full of the mutual
good offices which they have ever rendered one to the other, as on the contrary,
their disunion must needs be pernicious to the Republic; for if their cause
were injust it would incense all Princes against them, and though it were
reasonable, yet was it not fit therefore to forget what reverence men should owe
to the Sovereign Bishop. Touching the third, That the Treaty was with a Senate
of great prudence, lovers of peace, enemies of novelty, who had bin Authors
always of tranquillity in Italy, not of troubles: he discoursed further of the
domages of war, and the m^schiefs of heresies, saying, That although the
Republic by her own strength and greatness could repel all sorts of violence,
and was able to withstand sufficiently all that should assault her, nerethelesse
other succors not expected or desired would, un^all'd for, offer themselfs, and
such as might be suspected hard to dismiss, etc.

We will now take a little more pains then ordinary to acquaint the Reader with
the manner of that Ban by which the Jesuits were exterminated from the Venetian
Dominions; which was exactly as follows.

Of the expulsion of the Jesuits.
THe Republic of Venice having taken, as formerly was said, into their prudent
and cautious consideration the multitude of Religious Orders, and the daily
increase of them up and down, and that almost half the Revenues of the State
was by that means got into the Churches hands, perceaving also the multitude of
Monasteries, and that they were seated in such posts as might prove a hindrance
to the public defense, being places fitter rather for Fortresses then Convents,
considering also that there were instituted already Religious Orders enough for
the propagation and preservation of Christian Religion, and for directing them
in the way to heaven; and having upon these reasons passed those two Decrees,
the first whereof was, That no other Order but what was already established
should be admitted into the Territories of the Republic, and that none should
build any Churches without the concession of the Senate; The second, That no
person whatsoever should give or leave any Lands by way of Legacy unto the
Church, but those Lands should be presented to the Senate, who in lieu of those
Lands would give the Church a countervailable sum of money* and annex the
Lands to the public demeans of the State, to prevent, least in tract of time
the Church might ingrosse all the staple possessions of the Signory: The
Republic, I say, having passed these preventive edicts, the Jesuits, who not
long before had crept into the Republic, began to stir and storm at these new
Decrees, conceaving that they were made directly against Them, and their
Society; whereupon they complained to the foresayed Pope Paulus Quintus a
Borgheze, desiring his Holiness that he would write to the Senate to have these
Decrees revoked, and abolished, as being destructive to the Church, to piety,
and charity in general, as also to some particular Orders of Religious men,
who subsisted by the secular charity; which if it were thus restrained, would be
of exceeding ill consequence: herupon the Pope writ to the Senate (as was said)
to recall their Edicts; they refuse it, he thereupon interdicts and
excommunicats the Republic, commands all Religious Orders to come out from
amongst them, and that none should say Mass, or officiat in any of their
Churches; whereupon many departed. The Senate herupon, to justify and uphold
what they had done, sent for all the Religious Orders, and commanded them,
notwithstanding this Interdiction, to officiat, and sing Mass as formerly,
otherwise they should expect severity from the Duke and Senate: The Jesuits,
among others, were convented before the Senate, who appearing, they were
interrogated, if they would continu to officiat and say Mass notwithstanding
this Interdiction; they answered, That they would do their Offices. The Senate
herupon not expecting any equivocation, dismissed them to their Cells; so they
departed, and instead of officiating they did shut up their Church doors, and
refuse to say Mass: Herupon the Senate sent for them again, and asked them
whether they had not promised to officiat, and celebrat the Mass; they
answered, We promised to do our Office; by which they meant to read so much
every day in the Roman Breviary as was enjoined them: The Senate finding
themselfs thus trifled withal, and affronted by these equivocations, presently
dismissed them for the time, and falling to a serious consultation what to do,
and weighing well the danger of their stay, took occasion forthwith to banish
them, both from the City of Venice, and out of all the rest of Her Dominions:
this business was carried so closely, that within two days after, in one and
the same day and hour, they were exterminated out of every part of the Republic
to Ferrara, and to other parts of the Popes State. But the Jesuits themselfs
all this while, having not the least suspicion or fear of such a rigid
proceeding, they were surpised upon a sudden; and the Decree executed upon
them in this manner. At night some Senators were appointed to go to the Jesuits
Monastery (which was done in other parts at the same hour) where being com,
they call for the Rector to appear presently before them; he in Venice comes
out half unready, he was demanded what number of Jesuits there was in the
Convent, which being known, they were also suddenly sent for, some were taken
out of their beds, some without shoes or stockins, and generally all unprovided;
The Senators demand strictly whether there were any more of the Order, they
said there were one or two who were in nature of Cooks, and did other servile
offices; they were sent for also, and so the whole Society standing thus before
the Senators, they acquainted them with the substance of the Decree, viz. That
forthwith, without returning any where back, they must immediately quit the City
and Republic; the Jesuits being astonished at the suddenness of the thing*
desired they might have time to put their affairs in order; 'twas replied, no,
they must away instantly; for there were boats ready for them: since there was no
remedy, they desired their books and papers, but it would not be granted, nor
leave to fetch their clothes, but just as they stood they must pack thence;
which they did, being some of them half naked, and so they were transported to
Ferrara. Afterward there were some appointed to peruse their papers, notes and
books, where many discoveries were made: The next day the Senate met and
confirmed the former Decree, whereunto was added this new clause, That if any
Prince d^d mediat for them, before they should enter into any consultation for
an Answer, the old Decree should be first solemnly read, and if it was to be put
to the question, there should be an hundred of the hundred and twenty Senators of
the Pregadi concur in their suffrages for them, else the determination should be
of no effect.

Immediately herupon they sent a solemn Embassy to the Pope, to declare unto
him the motives that induced the Republic to such an extraordinary proceeding,
hoping that he would not prefer so upstart an Order, before so ancient a
Daughter to the Church of Rome, etc.

This high Act of Ost^acisme for the expulsion of the Jesuits, was not much
displeasing to the Venetian people, but men women and children sent these
acclamations after them as they departed, Andate, minte pigliate, and man
retornate; go your ways, take nothing, and never return; and a solemn suffrage
passed afterward in the Senate, that none of what quality soever, not excepting
the Duke himself, should for the future intercede for their readmission, nor
were the ^est of the Ecclesiastiques much sorry for their banishment; for it is
observed, that a kind of strangeness and aversion appears betwixt other
Churchmen and reclus'd Orders, and this new Society since their first
establishment; b^t mere reason of State induced the Venetians to shake them
off, because they profess a stricter tie of obedience or slavery rather to
another Prince, which is the Pope, to whom they do transmit, and make a kind of
resignation of their bodies and minds; they are to acknowledge him tanquam
Christum praesentem, and Scripturam loquentem, as appears by Loyola's Letter to
the Fathers of Portugal, wherein among other passages, he writes thus, We easily
endure to be outdone by other Orders, in fastings, watchings, and other
hardnesses which they use in a holy manner, according to their Institution, but
in purity and perfection of obedience, I earnestly desire that we should
surpass all the rest, with a true resignation of our own will to the Holy
Father, and a denial of our own judgment.

This Vow looks full upon another Power, that under which they live, viz. the
Pope, to whom they commit both soul and body, and to be no more their own, not
to believe their own sense, judgment or understanding, but to transfer all, and
to submit themselfs totally to him, to go, com, do, say, execut upon all, and
against all, whatsoever he shall command, according to the form of their Vow,
which is not improper to insert here, and runs as follows;

As many as shall make profession in this Society, let them not only know
before they make it, but remember as long as they live, that all this Society
in general, and more particularly those that are professed in it, serve God
under a faithful obedience to the most Holy Father the Pope, and although we
be taught by the Gospel, and do know by the Orthodox Faith, and firmly hold
that all the faithful people of Christ are subject to the Pope of Rome, as to
the Head and Vicar of Jesus Christ, yet notwithstanding for the greater
devotion to the obedience of the Sea Apostolic, and the greater denial of our
own wills, and the more certain direction of the Holy Ghost, we have judged
that it would be very commodious that every one of us, and every one that shall
herafter follow the same profession, besides the common tie of the three
ordinary Vows, be bound herunto by a more special Vow, to wit, that whatsoever
the present Pope, and all others herafter for the time being, shall command for
the good of souls, and the propagation of the Faith, or into what Country
soever they shall please to send us, that we be bound to perform their pleasure
immediately, without any tergiversation or excuse for as much as lies in our
power, whether they be aminded to send us against the Turks, or other Infidells
whatsoever, yea though it be even unto those that are called Indians, among
Heretics and Scismatics, whosoever they be, or among Christians; and to the end
that no ambition or refusal may take place amongst us, by occasion of these
deputations and elections of Provinces; let every one know that he need not
trouble himself about it, nor take thought for it, in as much as all the care
thereof must be left to God, and the Pope as his Vicar, and to the General of
the Society. Besides this general astringing Vow reflecting upon spiritual
matters and missions, they have other Tenets which are pernicious and
destructive to the temporal Jurisdiction of the Prince, as Emanuel Sa, who was
accounted one of the chiefest Oracles of that Order, has it in his book
entitled, Aphorismi Confessartorum, wherein after that he had studied the point
forty years, as he professes in his preface, he does assert, That the
rebellion of a Clergie-man against the King is no Treason, because he is no
subject of his. They have another Tenet, that subesse Romano Pontifici est de
necessitate salutis, viz. That to be subordinate to the Bishop of Rome, is of
the necessity of Salvation; besides, they hold that an error in points of Faith
is no other thing then an opinion held against the Papal Decision; but the
most dangerous of all is, That the Pope can dispense with Subjects from their
Allegiance to their Prince, though lawful and natural.

For these and other political considerations, the wise Venetian did rid
himself of the Jesuit, fearing that in a short time this subtle Society might
prove to be Respublica in Republica; nor since that day would any intercede or
stir for their readmission, till this year 1650. that the King of Polands
brother being of that Order, has made an Overture of Introduction in their
behalf, with a profer of three hundred thousand Crowns, which business is now
in agitation.

Add herunto, that the Jesuits being commonly Incite^s to war, and Paedagogs
of Arms (as they call them) they could not suit with the disposition of the
Venetian Republic, who has bin observed from her cradle to be more inclined to
peace then war, therefore does she give the shield for her Arms, which is the
emblem of defense, not of offense and assaults.

ANTONIO MEMMO was created next to LEONARDO DONATO 1612
Duke of Venice, who governed the Republic about three years.

GIOVANNI BEMBO came after, in the beginning of whose 1615
principality the old Controversy was revived 'twixt the Archdukes of
Austria, and the Republic, touching their Confines; whereupon the Vscocchi did
much infest the Seas; so that the war grew hot with the Archduke Ferdinand;
the Venetians marched into Friuli, with a considerable Army, and seizing upon
some Towns upon the Frontiers, beleager Gradisca, ravaging the Country up and
down; Moscaniza afterward was taken by the Venetians; the siege of Gradisca
being quitted, much hurt was given, and taken in Croatia, Istria and Dalmatia,
and the Territories of Friuli; but afterward the Venetian Army was disbanded
by reason of the raging of the plague; the Castles of Lucmi and Z^mini were
taken by the Venetian, but Archduke Ferdinand having got to be King of Boheme,
a Treaty of Peace was set on foot by the interposition of the Kings of Spain
and France, but so many difficulties occurred in the business, that no accord
could take place; thereupon diverse Traverses of Hostility passed between them
afterward; then a Truce was agreed upon, which brought with it a-little after
a firm peace, upon the conclusion of which peace, Duke BEM^O finished also his
course in this world.

NICOLAO DONATO being nere upon fourscore years of Age, was 1618
elected Duke by the Senate, the people not liking this choice, some sparkles of
sedition began to appear, which by the sagacity of the Senators were quickly
quenched: This Duke lived but one month and a day, he was used to be much
carried away with predictions, and to tamper with Astrologers; whereof one
having pried into the horoscope of his Nativity, and taken much pains to
measure out his life, and foretell his destiny, he told him positively, that he
should die in carcere Nobili, in a Noble prison, meaning the Dogeship or Dukedom
of Venice, which is barricadoed with so many restrictions, specially, That the
Duke may not go out of the City of Venice, without the knowledge and consent of
the Senate, etc. that it may truly be called no other then a Noble Prison, or
golden Cage, which made one say, when the Senators were once so busy in their
mysterious ballotations for creating a new Duke, Here Is a great deal of stir
for setting up a Head of Wood; alluding to the small latitude of power the Duke
has.

ANTONIO PRIULI came to wear the Ducal Cap, and the Coronet of 1618
Venice next after Nicolao Donato; in his time there was a League struck betwixt
the Republic, and the States of Holland; to which purpose there were splendid
Embassies sent by both Parties; but a little after this Duke breathed his last.

FRANCISCO CONTARENO then succeeded, at the beginning of 1623
whose Government the Republic made another League with the French King, and
the Duke of Savoy; both these Leagues were made by the Republic, of purpose to
spite the Spaniard, who had not long before set upon her skirts the Duke of
Ossuna, being Viceroy of Naples, who would pick a quarrel of purpose with Her
about the extent of her Dominion in the Adriatic Gulf, which war put S. Mark
to spend much of his Tresure for the time. A little after, there happened a keen
war about the Valtoline, wherein the Republic was interested, and stirred nimbly
in it, and good reason she had to do so against the House of Austria.

Whilst the wars lasted 'twixt the Republic and the Duke of Ossuna, she hi^'d
some men of War from England and Holland; the two thousand English, which were
under the command of Sir Harry Payton, complained about the conditions of their
pay, which were not so good as those the Hollander had: Herupon a mutiny
happened, and some of the English died by Martial Law, but Mr. Herbert one of
the chiefest of them was pardoned, in regard he was allied to William then Erl
of Pembroke, who interceded strongly for him, and had a great stroke with the
Venetian Ambassador at that time resident in England.

GIOVANNI CO^RELIO was the next in succession to Priuli. About these times there
was a notable and most rigid (though mistaken) piece of Justice upon the person
of A. Foscarim, ^ Noble Venetian and Senator of the wide Sleeve, which is of
the best rank, who had bin formerly employed Ambassador in England, and other
places for the Republic: Two pernicious malevolent fellows* who it seems owed
him a revenge, for some cross office he had done them, did traduce, and accuse
this gentleman upon oath, that he had had private intelligence, and litterall
correspondence with the Spanish Ambassador. Now the Republic of Venice has bin
always observed above all other States to be so cautio^s of home conspiracies
by a kind of exces of circumspection, that upon the least proof, the party
suspected is dispatched to the other world, and never suffered to err twice in
this kind: the said mischievous fellow being pertinacious in his accusation,
this infortunat gentleman was condemned, and being dragged to the place, was
executed like a common Malefactor betwixt the two Columns in S. Marks place,
and sent on an Embassy to the other world, though never to return: The year
had hardly com about, that the said Accusers were apprehended and imprisoned,
condemned and executed for some flagitious crimes; but as they were bidding a
farewell to the world, they confessed that they had wrongfully and most
injustly accused the said Noble gentleman: thereupon his body was taken up and
re-inter'd with extraordinary solemnity, and reparations made to his Heir in a
high measure; besides, there was a Manifesto published by the Senate, for the
vindication of his honor, and fidelity to the Republic.

There was a casual ill-favored clash happened 'twixt England and Venice about
these times, which was thus: England having a declared war then both against
Spain and France, Sir Kenelme Digby had got Letters of Mart, or rather a
Commission Royal, from the King against the French; he steered his course into
the Mediterranean, and arrived at Algier, upon the Coasts of Barbary, where
being a Cavalier of that luster, and known to be a servant to his Majesty of
great Britain, he was magnificently received, so that he did many good offices
for the English Captiffs that were there: thence he sailed into the Ar hipelago,
and taking some prizes in the way, he turned the Ships to men of War, so that he
came to have a Fleet of six Vessels strong. After many encounters, he made at
last toward the Bay of Scanderon; he came first before Cape Congare, ten
Leagues distant from Alexandretta, or Scanderon, which is counted the key of
Aleppo by Sea, and where he lay at Hull all night: On the morrow he sent a boat
to descry the road, and to bring back intelligence accordingly; word was
brought, that there were before Scanderon two Venetian Galeasses, with two other
Galeons, two English Ships, and some French Vessels, one of which had com in
but the day before, being very rich, and having not as yet unladen any thing:
Sir Kenelme spent all the night following surveyng the preparations for fight,
and firing, in his several Ships, for that he expected a furious assault the
next day from the Venetian General, who had declared himself protector of that
Road, and was reported to have given out, he would sink all the English men of
War he should meet, either in the Venetian or Gran Signor's Seas; Sir Kenelme
understanding this, was not much daunted, but made toward the Road, having
prepared all things, and fitted his Ships for defense, if need required.

The Venetian General having weighed Anchor, hois'd up his Sails, and directed
his course toward the English Fleet, and being com within half a League, Sir
Kenelme sent a Satty to inform the Venetians of his quality, and that he sailed
by virtue of his Majesty of great Britains Royal Commission, giving them
assurance of all respect and friendship, and that the French were the only
object of his attempts, for which he had sufficient warrant: He sent Letters
also to the two English Vessels that were in the Bay for their satisfaction,
that his business was not to disturb their Negotiations: But before this Satty
could go aboard to deliver the Venetian General this message, the Admiral
Galeasse of the Venetians discharged seven or eight shots, the first whereof
lighting short was received as a salute, and was answered with another piece
from the English, but some of the rest hitting Sir Kenelmes Ship, and seeing
that ^hey aimed at his Flag, he gave them three or four broad sides in a very
short space, which did much hurt both to the Venetian, and the French, who were
joined with them for protection: so they retired to a further distance, but the
English Ships poursued them, and played so well upon their Galeons, that the
men stowed themselfs under hatches, and left their Vessels to the fortune of
the Sea without guidance: The Galeasses coming up then to their succor,
received also such a rude welcome, that they rowed away to shelter themselfs
under the English Ships that road in the Bay, which was don purposely; so the
French were left alone, and some of their Ships being lusty Vessels, they came
up close to Sir Kenelme, who directed his two less Ships to deal with them;
but they being not able, the Rere-Admirall went to their succor, and so put
the French to the worse. Among the English there were none hurt to death, but of
the French and Venetians it was reported there were above eighty stain, of whom
one was a Commander of the Land soldiers, whose loss was much lamented: This
action of the English was questioned by the Turks, because they had don
hostility to his friends within the Gran Signor's Road; therefore by the
subtilty of the Venetian, and complaint of the French; the Bassa of Aleppo, and
Cady of Scanderon took hold of the occasion to take an avenia upon the English
Merchants, exacting from their Consulls large sums.

But Landi the Venetian Ambassador then residing in London, made a high
clamorous complaint against Sir Kenelme Digby and his Adherents, in a solemn
audience before the King and Council of State; aggravating the business to
the very height, and aspersing Sir Kenelme, that such a man should infringe the
sacred peace, which was kept inviolably 'twixt the Crown of England and S. Mark
so many Ages, and never broken till then from the beginning of the world. But
Sir Kenelme at his return justified all his proceedings, and proved that he had
not contraven'd or transgressed his Commission any way. Landi being shortly
after to depart, and apprehending some danger from Sir Kenelme, the King
commanded him to visit the said Ambassador, and (to save his Honor) to tell
him that he had received Commandment from his Majesty for so doing: Sir
Kenelme accordingly performed this Ceremony, which he had no sooner done, but
the Venetian Ambassador came immediately* to his house to repay the visit, so
they were reconciled, and the business ended.

FRANCISCO ERIZZO was sworn Duke of Venice afterward, which swearing they do
not call an oath, but by a more civil term, it is styled, Promissione Ducale in
the record: he was a person full of years, and freighted with experience,
therefore ripe enough for the Government.

At the beginning of his time the Republic enjoyed a profound universal peace
by Sea and Land; but the growing greatness of the house of Austria did trouble
Her, in regard of their new acquests in Germany, the Emperor having reduced the
Bohemians to an exact obedience by way of conquest, and the Spaniard having the
Palatinat in his hands, therefore she was well pleased that the Swed did rush
into Germany, which wars she fomented with her countenance, and something else:
Besides the Emperor had a little before disturbed the peace of Italy, by the
imperial title he claimed to the tutele and protection of the young Duke of
Savoy, during his Minority, which the French King his Oncle by the maternall
side took upon him, but the Emperor, backed by the Spaniard, thought to get it
by the sword, which caused some perturbations in Italy, therefore the Pope also
was well contented that the Emperor was shaken a little by the Swed.

There was employed about this time M. Capello a Venetian gentleman of an
ancient extraction, a person of a small bulk, but well timber'd both for body
and brain, to have the charge of the garding the Gulf, with a number of well
appointed Galleys. At Vallona upon the Coasts of Dalmatia, he met with the
Barbary Fleet, whom he assaulted so vigorously, there being many gentlemen of
his own kindred engaged in the service, that he sunk diverse of them, and took
the Admiral Gally of Algier, (a Vessel of vast bigness) which he brought
with him away, and she remains to this day for a Trophy in the Arsenall of
Venice: The Gran Turk did very much storm at this; therefore the Republic,
rather then enter into open hostility against so potent a Neighbor, was
contented to part with three hundred thousand Crowns to accommode the
difference, whereof she recovered part out of the Comendams of the Knights of
Malta, which they enjoyed within Her Dominions; but the foresayed Capello was
clowded a good while after, and had it not bin for his great Alliance, it might
have gone worse with him for having exceeded his Commission in this action, such
an exact obedience the Signory expects to be had to her Orders, be the success
never so glorious.

There was another piece of Justice executed also upon C. Moro, who had bin a
Senator, and one of the Pregadi, but afterward he took Holy Orders, and shaved
himself to become an Abbot; he was used to go frequently in a disguize to the
Spanish Ambassadors house, and hold correspondence with him, which is Treason
in a high degree among the Venetians; therefore being discovered by a Bandito,
who had fled to the said Ambassadors house for shelter, the Bandito had the
Ban taken off, and a considerable annual Pension given him ever after, but the
Abbot was strangled, and his carkase dragged to S. Marks place, where he hung by
the leg betwixt the two Pillars from Sun to Sun, in his Monastical habit.

Some years after there happened a new disgust 'twixt the Republic, and Pope
Urban the VIII. about the extent of their Boundaries upon one another
Frontire, which was aggravated by some books that were printed, and permitted to
be exposed to public sale in Venice, which books reflected upon the old
quarrel that had bin 'twixt Paulus Quintus, and the Republic; Pope Urban
resented it so far, that by the impulses of his Nephews, he caused an ancient
Inscription or Elogy to be defaced and razed, which had bin set up in the Sala
Reg^a in the Vatican, as a Monument of gratitud to the honor of the Venetians,
for restoring Pope Alexander to S. Peter's Chair, when he was chased thence by
the Emperor Frederic, (as formerly has bin declared:) The world thought that
the Republic was offered hard measure herin, and though the affront sunk deep
into Her, yet she hid the impressions it had made a good while, till she might
find some opportunity to right her self. The Luqueses also having ordained
something for restraining the exorbitances of the Clergy in that Commonwealth,
provoked the Popes indignation so far, that he excommunicated them: The Gran
Duke of Toscany fell also under the same Censure, because he made the Churchmen
to pay a n^w Gabell upon Grinding Mills, as well as the secular subject. But
there fell a higher clash then all these 'twixt Pope Urban and the Duke of Parma
about a sum of money, which he was accountable for to the Fameze bank in
Rome, for which he had engaged his Castle of Castro: herupon he was also
excommunicated, and a high feud fell out 'twixt the Cardinal Fameze, and
Cardinal Barberini, the Popes Nephew, herabouts. The French Ambassador at Rome
interposed in the business, by instructions from his Master, but Pope Vr^an
told him, That he might chastise the Duke of Parma, who was his Subject, as
well as his Christian Majesty d^d take off the head of Montmoreney, and c.
Herupon the Castro was secured for the Pope, and besides, he musters up an Army
which advanced as far as the ^rontires of Modena, and so seconds his spiritual
Arms (which had gone before) with the temporal, making his Nephew Don Taddeo
his General, who demanded passage to go on to the invasion of Parma; but he
found more difficulty in this expedition, then he did in the taking of Castro,
where he found no opposition at all. The Duke of Modena sent a complementall
Answer to the Pontificiall General, touching a free passage, which in effect
did countervail a denial, and this he did by consultation with his Neighbor
States; for this Papal Army tending so much to the disturbance of Italy (who
was in an universal repose before) did awaken the spirits of all the Princes:
The Luqueses in their little industrious Republic began to humm like so many
Bees in a hive; The grand Duke of Toscany stood in a maze, but the Signory of
Venice, who was used to be the chiefest instrument to preserve the common peace
of Italy, was more deeply sensible of this disturbance, in so much that Don
Taddeo was denied passage every where, which made one say, That there was a
great deal of difference betwixt that Pontificiall Army, and the ancient Army
of the people of Israel; for at the marching of the one, the Sea it self
divided his fluid body to let it pass, but at the marching of this, all the
world seemed to close together to hinder the passage: For a little after a
League was struck to that purpose, 'twixt the Republic of Venice, the Gran
Duke, the Duke of Modena, and him of Parma, who had all former grounds of
discontent.

During this ^ontrasto, and Traverses of war 'twixt the Pope and Parma, there
was a notable Libell or Satyr dropped up and down in diverse places of Italy
against Rome, and the person of Urban, which in regard it is a very material
piece, composed of a mixture of divinity and policy; and that it tends much to
the understanding of the State of Italy, I thought worthy to insert here, a
person of great knowledge and quality being the Author thereof.

The famous Invective against Pope Urban the Eighth, and Rome.
THe Author faineth that the second Person of the Holy Trinity complains to the
first, touching the distolutenes and excesses of the Roman Church his Spouse,
therefore he desires a divorce from her. The Father being moved by his Sons
reasons, commands Paul to transfer himself to earth, to visit mortals, and
take knowledge of their complaints, specially in Italy, against the Roman
Spouse, and if need be, to form an exact process of her actions, speaking to him
as follometh:

Paul, Great are the discomposures, and mischiefs which arise from an unchaste
woman, this very heaven cannot glory it self to be free of them; my only
begotten Son is troubled and aggrieved at the dishonest actions of the Church
of Rome his Spouse: I well hoped that she had bin capable of a reconcilement,
but he holds himself so highly offended, and finds her nature to be so
perverted, that he thinks she is incorrigible; therefore with a constant
resolution he seeks a divorce from her. Now, what can I deny to my only Son,
specially when so much Justice favors his complaints? yet I do not intend to
determine any thing upon the business so hastily, though the eternal Word
cannot tell an untruth, that to the end that our Decree may have a sufficient
foundation, we command thee to betake thy self on earth, and hear what mortals
can say against the Roman Spouse, and frame a charge against her accordingly;
the enterprise may prove somewhat difficult, because she uses to palliat her
faults, and to persecute those men that write against her proceedings; but we
assure our selfs, that the approved virtue of Paul, which heretofore knew how
to support the persecutions of the wicked against the honor of Christ, will not
shrink a whit in this employment for his service.

S. Paul does readily obey the Lord, and descends to earth in human disguize,
and steers his course for Venice, but before he there arrived, he casually
found upon the way a writing, the Tenor whereof was as follows and the
Endorsement thus, A Memorandum for the most renowned Republic of Venice.

Amonst those Princes who reverence Rome, your Serenity is She, most renowned
Republic, who being free from all superstitious credulity, do conserve your
Christian Empire from all insidious pretenses of Religion; by a most sage L^w
therefore you did constitut some years since, that the ^lergy should be made
incapable to inherit staple possessions, for the dead daily multiplying, and
consequently the number of Legacies every day increasing, in tract of time, the
Ecclesiastics would become Masters of all that wealth, which giving subsistence
to all kind of subjects, is destinated for the service of your Serenity;
therefore whosoever lives free from all passions to the interests of Rome, is
bound to applaud the maturity of your deliberations in this point; and he who
professes himself a friend to the greatness of your Dominions, must needs
acknowledge that your high wisdom is warned by public necessity to regulat two
other no less important abuses: The first consists in perpetuity of Legacies;
for what avails it to prohibit that staple goods pass not under the possession
of the Ecclesiastics all the while that by the multitude of perpetual
Legacies, which use to be bequeathed, and charged upon staple possessions, it
will fall out in time, that all the rents shall be drunk up so, and what
difference can there be then I pray 'twixt a perpetual Legacy, and staple
possession? or what benefit should your subjects receave from the foresayed Law,
who though they cannot be dispossessed of the propriety of the Land, yet they
remain deprived of the usufruit of it? Now, this redounds to the greater
advantage of the Clergy; for while the residuary seculars of the Testators
undergo the weight of all public duties and assessements, by keeping in their
hands the fee, the Churchmen do by virtue of their annual Legacies sweep away
the rents without any burden at all; The zeal of your known prudence will stir
you the rather for regulating this abuse, when you consider that the perpetuity
of Legacies was introduced at first, rather by the cunning of the
Ecclesiastics, then for the advantage of souls in Purgatory: for if the pains
of Purgatory are said to be but temporary, wherefore should the simplicity of
peeple be persuaded to bequeath in the behalf of their souls perpetual
Legacies and Mansionaries? Moreover your Serenity ought to consider, that the
obligation of Masses multiplying every day, with the number of Legacies, a
necessity seems to arise h^nce, either to increase the number of Churchmen who
are useless for public service, or to defraud the wills of the well devoted
Testators, whereon if the public eyes would fix themselfs, they should see that
the Ecclesiastics do not perform, no not the least part of those daily
Sacrifices which they are tied unto; but they salve their consciences, by
saying, that the Mass being of an infinite value, one Mass may supply the
necessities of many souls, one Mass may also suffice to releeve the urgencies
of one soul alone, and the remainder shall be thought a superfluous number,
proceeding not from the necessity of the soul, but rather from the cheat
arising out of the avarice of the Priest.

The second abuse consists in the multiplicity of Pensions, which are paid
annually to Rome from the State of Venice: Touching this, it comes into my mind
to remember your Serenity, that the Court of Rome is like the middle Region of
the Air, who uses to make her thunderbolts against the earth, ou^ of those
exhalations She draws from the earth it self: so the Roman Church is used to
form her power for oppression of other States, out of the rents, contributions,
and pensions which She receaves from those States themselfs: and let this
suffice for the high wisdom of your Serenity in this particular.

S. Paul being arrived at Venice, and sojourning there some days, saw a Priest
dragged into prison by order of the secular power, and it being asked why the
temporal Magistrate did exercise his jurisdiction so over an Ecclesiastic, a
Venetian answered him thus.

The Republic of Venice, nor for any other men's threats, or insinuations, ever
deviated from that constant path which Her Progenitors has pointed her out for
her own safety from the beginning, among other jurisdictions which She has
always conserved in the very face of Romes pretensions and power, one is, to
have authority to punish the persons of Ecclesiastic Delinquents, esteeming
that Dominion to be absolute and universal, which heaven has afforded Her
within Her own Territories.

This Republic knows well, That when God did institut Sovereign Power, he
conferred it upon Saul over all his people, and over all the Tribes of Israel
without exception; Now, you cannot deny but among the twelve Tribes, there were
a great number of Levites and Priests; ought the Priests therefore to dissuade
the people from that obedience which was ordained by the Divine Majesty it self
toward their natural Princes? The Sacraments were ordained by God to wash
away the pollutions of sin in the soul, but not to deface the Characters of
subjects on the body: Nor was the Law of Christ ever incompatible with the
jurisdiction of Caesar, but in their opinions only, who seek pretenses to
traduce and calumniat it. The Ecclesiastics who interpret all things to their
own advantage, pretend to withdraw themselfs from the secular Power, by those
words of the Gospel, Nolite tangere Christos meos, but he who is of a sane and
sound understanding, will easily discern how much they are deceav'd in the
sense of these words; For although the same God forbad murder to all men by an
express Commandment, yet it is lawful for Magistrates to take away the life's
of Malefactors. In the administration of Justice Lay-Princes also represent
God. Now, for any to pretend a withdrawing of himself from their authority, is
no other thing, then to be unwilling to be subordinat to divine institution: If
Ecclesiastics would interpret Scriptures with more reason then passion and
partiality, they would discern that those words Nolite tangere Christos meos
bear no other sense, then to prohibit any injust outrage against those
Ecclesiastics, who for the goodness of their life's, and innocence of their
manners deserve the title of Christ's; when a Churchman is naught, he falls
from that title, and consequently from the privilege of it; nor can the Clergy
of these times pretend to be exempted from the power of temporal Justice by
the foresayed words, unless it had bin in case that Christ had said, Nolite
tangere Anti- Christos meos.

This Signory which can discern things in their true essences, does not admit
the falsehood of any interessed opinion to purblind Her own proper
understanding: If a Clerk may err temporally against the State, the State
thinks it reasonable that he may be punished temporally, by no other hand, then
by that to whom God has committed the care of the State. The danger of a State
would be too too evident, and the confusion also, if the Crimes that are
committed against the conservation, and common tranquillity thereof, should stand
in fear of no other punishment then what shall come from a foreign Prince, who
regulating himself by certain politic interests in lieu of correction, would
happily tolerat, or^connive at the Crime to the public damage of that State, and
for his own advantage: Behold for example how many Princes in Italy, where the
Pontificiall Power predominats, are disquieted ever and anon, and corrupted, by
reason of the impunity of ^lericall Libertines; and what other thing can be
hence expected, but that the Ecclesiastics being exempted totally from secular
Justice, they may arm themselfs, join in bands, and turn their Cloisters to so
many Castles, that trampling so under foot the authority of their own Prince,
they may establish another Kingdom within a Kingdom? That wisdom which sits at
the Stern of the Republic of Venice, will never suffer Her own subjects to be
able to supplant Her, by the protection and support of any foreign Authority;
Clerks are punished temporally, when they offend temporally against the
tranquillity of the State, not else, and if it seems strange to the Pope that
the Venetians assume to themselfs civil jurisdiction over the Ecclesiastics,
much more seems it strange to the Venetians, that the Ecclesiastics should usurp
worldly dominion over the persons of Seculars: In the mean time they know well
that Christ professed openly to have no Kingdomin this world.

This Speech being ended, and S. Paul desiring to understand the late
differences which had bin controverted 'twixt the Republic and Rome, is
informed by a Noble Venetian as follows.

The Church of Rome was reverenced by us in that manner which was sitting for
Christ's lawful Spouse, but she corresponding with little gratitude, has not
only conspired our ruin more then once, but at last has thrown out of doors
the ancient monument of our services, which have bin proclaimed to the world
for so many ages by the Trump of Fame, by the tr^ Narration of Historians, and
approved by all precedent Popes in public Elogies; S. Marks Lion can hardly
endure to have that glory eclipsed, which was always the food of his generous
thoughts, and it seems strange to us, that Venice having rescued a sugiti^
Pope, and re-plac'd him in his lost Chair, with the expense of so much of her
blood and gold, the memory of this high desert should be now thrust out of Rome:
yet the Republic being very unwilling that any incongruity should grow 'twixt
the Roman Church and Her, consented that the Crown of France should be Umpresse.
But Pope Urban the VIII. since he differs so much from S. Peter, will not
confess when he denies the truth imo nec voce Galli, but persevering in an
obstinat opinion not to restore the Elogy, being contented by a foolish
capriccio of his own to give this general attestation only, that the Church of
Christ has bin always served by Princes of all sorts: Insomuch that that
ancient inscription which was seen registered in the Vatican, as a monument of
Ecclesiastic gratitud toward Venice, that monument which Time it self could
not deface all this while, the Barberini have annihilated at last, because
peradventure that having banished all virtue from Rome, it displeases them* to
see gratitud lodged under the roof of their house; or rather because the
Barberini do not hold themselfs beholden for those services that the Church
received from S. Mark, in regard they are more her Betrayers then Governors; In
the interim we cannot but be sensible of this monstrous ingratitud, yet we
comfort our selfs to see that the Popes disaffection and power to do us hurt,
can extend it self no further then the walls of his own house. S. Paul having
parted with Venice, goes to Lucca, where understanding the contumacy of that
little Republic, he would know the grounds of it, and a Citizen answers him thus
in a sad and solemn posture, being glad of the occasion to make the truth known.

Among the Popes of our age, Urban the eighth has bin most prodigal of
Jubilees and Indulgences until these his latter years; but to show,
peradventure, that he has no less power over curses, then over benedictions,
he has at last by altering his style, put forth his hand to dart out
Excommunications: It was the fortune of this small Republic to bear the brunt
of his first Censure in this kind; he thereby imitating those who use to try the
virtue of poison upon the lesser animalls first: The connivency whereby other
Princes dissembled this out mishap, gave him scope to thunder out the second
against the Duke of Parma; nor must Christendom expect other things herafter
but Excommunications; in regard that if the affairs of the world use to succeed
one another in equal vicissitudes, it is necessary that Excommunications be as
frequent as Jubilees have bin. Now touching the grounds of the Papal distasts
with us, they are aldy manifested to the world, I must say, though very
sparingly, That the original of every accident here, sprung from the
insupportable licentiousness of Churchmen, who did necessitat us to a just
resentment. It seemed strange to the Church of Rome that so small a Republic as
ours durst resent the outrages of Ecclesiastics, who should rather comply with
them, considering that this State is too narrow to be sensible of such
insolences; and so persisting in an obstinat Censure, he chooses rather to
see our perdition hastened, then the exorbitances of his Clergy moderated; but
we being not conscious to have committed any Delinquency which might deserve to
exclude us from the face of God, we comfort our selfs in this case with the
memory of Balaam, who injustly cursed the people of Israel; nor have we ever
rested since, to procure a right understanding, by the interposition of a
person of great credit with the Cardinal Nephews, that they would be pleased to
appease his Holines's displeasure (expecting still a miracle from the words of
some Ass) but to this hour there has nothing come of it.

But the Barberini are in Arms, and this Martial appearance they think will
enforce us to desire a reconciliation; as for the rest which concerns the soul,
if an Excommunication has power to cut us off from the union of this present
Church, why should we think it capital to be separated from so infected a body,
and freed so by continual examples of sacrilegious life's, and from the despair
wherinto the Clericall Tyranny would plunge us! Confiding therefore in the
Justice of our Cause, and in the assistance of those wise Princes who cannot
away with the ravenousnesse of this Pope, we trust to receave some fruits of the
introducement of these Censures, in regard that if this course hold, the world
will see that as Jubilees passed were pretexts for some new imposition,
Excommunications will serve herafter as pretext for some new Rapin.

S. Paul having understood the grievances of the Luqueses, passes on to Parma,
where having in the habit of a Friar insinuated into the acquaintance of the
Duke, he desires to understand from his mouth the Contestation he has with the
Roman Church, and the Duke answered him thus.

The world has already understood too much the causes of the quarrel I have
with the Church of Rome, being published not only by my Manifestos, but by the
writings of other particular pens, who have willingly protected the justness
of my cause. But since it pleases you, good Father, to hear from my own mouth
the grounds of these differences which have kept such a noise. I will relate
them unto you with that brevity of words, which may suit rather with the
present encumbrances that afflict me, then with the nature of the thing it self.

Know then that the particular urgencies of my house have erected in Rome a
Bank called the Farnese Bank, which obliges my fortunes to contribut an
annual cense to my Creditors. Now Urban the VIII. being assailed by some
turbulent spirit in these last periods of his life, thought with himself to
build a little new Fort of diverse pretenses upon this bank, thereby to set upon
my Duchy of Castro: But I had good reason to hope now in these my troubles some
support, rather then any oppression from that Seat, of whom the ashes of my
Progenitors do yet glory to have merited so well; but all gratitud being
extinguished in the breasts of Ecclesiastics, charity is also much diminished
amongst them, which neither moves them to any compassion, nor to be a whit
aggrieved, though they see mountains of miseries heaped on one's back; a desire
to enrich the Nephews, which is the primum Nobile of the Popes mind in these
times, prevailed over all reason, and prepotency of plundring did facilitat the
way to dispossess me of mine own; nor did the tyranny of Urban the VIII. stop
here, but he thought that I would take it nothing ill if he did excommunicat me,
that being so segregated from the Communion of the Faithful, none durst hear
my grievances, or reach a hand to help me: A great cruelty in a Shepherd, that
flaying his sheep alive, would not have them to carry natural affections about
them to resent the hard case of one another; Moreover to varnish the pretext of
his Censures, he publishes me for a disobedient son to the universal Father
of Christianity, But whether he is to be acknowledged as a Father, who
enemy-like robs his children, judge you? Can he expect to be reverenced as S.
Peter's Successor, when diffring from S. Peter, he stops his ears to the words
of Christ, who commanded him to sheath his sword? Christ did institut a
peaceful Kingdom, nor did he ever ordain that his Cause should be handled with
Arms: Nevertheless the present Bishops make use of them, because they are
ready to meddle with any other Cause then with that of Christ: In the interim,
good Friar, my fortune is worse then that of Malchus, for if Malchus was
offended with the weapon of Peter, he was healed again by the hands of Peter;
but I find my self hurt by S. Peter's sword, yet cannot perceave his hand is
disposed to cure me, or restore me mine own. S. Paul being departed from Parma
goes to Florence, where being brought to the Court, he heard the Gran Duke much
transported with choler, speaking to a Councellor of his in this manner.

Then Urban the VIII. intends that a Clergie-man shall go exempted from the
imposition of Millstone, whereunto the interests of my State oblige me to subject
without exception any one that lives under my Government; and who is he that
arrogats temporal Jurisdiction over another Authority? In the time of Christ
secular Princes had their tribut, and shall they now be refused in Vrban's
time? By this means the credulous simplicity of the Laity shall be continually
taught to contribut so many Gabells to the Clergy, and the Clergy shall be free
from all taxes to them, and who at any time leaves possessions to the
Ecclesiastics, they must be free from such Contributions which the Law of
Nature awards every protecting Prince. Who did ever affirm that the Legacies of
private men can be exempt from the public Jurisdiction of their Prince? These
are new Doctrines which tear the world in pieces, being introduced by those
Bishops, who together with the Evangelicall precepts, have forgot that Christ
himself when he was upon earth paid tribut to Caesar, professing that he came
to fulfill the Law, not toabrogat it; and shall we admit in our free States an
Authority, which beyond the Order and example of Christ pretends to have power
to control, and transvolve the Dominions of others; yea to trample upon the
Princes themselfs; Is this the paradise that Christ promises to them that
observe his Law, or rather a Hell, which they worthily deserve who believe too
much in an adulterated Church. But I observe that the Ecclesiastics by too many
styles* do subject the simple seculars to pay contribution for Indulgencies,
for Dispensations, for the Word of God, for sacrifices of the Altar, and in sum
for all the Sacraments, which the Divine goodness ^ath afforded gratis to all
the faithful: But what do I say? the avarice of the Clergy is grown to that
height, that it does not permit those poor souls that are under the agonies of
Death to depart from this world to the other, till they conjure them under the
pretext of pious Legacies to pay a toll for their safe conduct, constraining to
bargain for their very graves, they sell them for ready money the embraces of
our common Mother the earth; and I in my free State must not impose the least
Tax as that of the Millstone upon my subjects: But let Urban practice what he
please, let Him thunder what Excommunications he will upon my Gabelleers, I
shall learn well enough how to fence away his blows, I will make the Jews my
Receavers; nor shall I ever suffer that Toscany be oppressed by such rapacious
Tyrants, who under the mantle of Religion exercise such robberies upon us. S.
Paul leaving Florence, resolves to visit the State of the Church; in his
journey he is accompanied with a subject of the Popes, who vented forth his
discontentments unto him in these words, upon some expostulations of S. Paul's.

I was born a subject under the particular Dominion of the Church of Rome; and
that is enough, good Friar, to pronounce me miserable; The Civil Justice
administered in my Country by Ecclesiastics, the Authority abused by them that
govern, and their custom degenerating daily into cruelty and rapine, have made
the subjection insupportable, and the life's of those unhappy who live under the
temporal Scepter of the Roman Clergy; my tongue cannot sufficiently express
the rigidnes of their Government, let every one comprehend by their tyrannical
practices they do exercise abroad what they do at home; I was enforced to
forsake my house for a Tax imposed upon me for living well; when a young rich
man is discovered by greenness of Age, and heat of blood to be prone to any
lightness, presently comes a new Edict which will make him lie under a gross
sum of money; herby it comes often to pass, that a small fillip sometimes does
equal murder, and words are as dangerous as deeds; for all comes under the
title of transgression, though the fault be no other then a slip of youthful
lightness. Furthermore, the Ministers who govern our State of Rome under
color of zeal to our Salvation, are wont ever and anon to send certain
Catchpouls to search mean blind places and cottages, to see whether any subject
cohabit with a Concubine; every thing lies under the search of prowling eyes,
and the insolent hands of those Ragamuffins; I will say no more then this, that
under the Domination of other Princes the Jews are more gently used then we are
under the regiment of the Ecclesiastics; nor is it a wonder; for some Churchmen
of our times are happily greater Enemies to the Gospel of Christ, then some
Christians are to the Talmud of the Hebrews. S. Paul a little after meets with
a Maronit passenger, who had taken a journey from Mount Libanus in Syria to see
Rome, and was returning homewards; S. Paul begins to mingle speech with him,
asking him of his Country, and of the Motives that induced him to com to
Italy, and what opinion he had formed within himself of Rome? whereunto he
answered thus:

My Country is Armenia, the cause which brought me to Italy was no other then
a desire to learn the true Tenets of the Catholic Doctrine, which in our Region
is adulterated with such a multiplicity of Sects, that they confound one
another. The eleventh year is now coming about that I have breathed air under
the climes of Europe, having sojourned longest in Rome, being led thither by
Fame, which sometimes uses to represent things otherwise then they are in their
own essence: I figured within my self That City to be She, who as She pretends,
so She had deserved to be the Head of all Christian people, as being the School
of Sanctity, and pattern of all virtue. And truly at the first sight I thought I
was not a whit deceav'd by any extern appearance which often times does dazzle
and fascinat the eyes of the simple. The magnificence of Her Temples, the great
number of pardons, such a confluence of people flocking to Church, and the
visit of holy places, imprinted within me such an opinion of the Roman piety,
that when afterward I fell to observe the life's and luxury of the Cardinals,
little compatible with the Doctrine of Christ, I ascribed the cause of my
mistake rather to my own ignorance, then want of Religion in others; but when I
seriously descended into my self, I thought I was not born senseless: Process
of time and mature reflections, made me discern afterward that the Roman
Religion consisted most in Ceremonies of exterior worship, which were it
properly defined, might be called a kind of practice of life in the small sort,
and an hypocrisy in the greater. For the rest, every action being judiciously
examined, you will find it tending chiefly to objects of private interest and
temporal benefit; profit and delight are the two poles whereon the Firmament of
Roman designs wheel about; if Christ and his Law be embraced, it is not
embraced for the true final end, but as means to compass some terrene
business, which transformed me to wonder while I observed how much Christ was
vilified among the Romans, considering how much he serves their turn for
increasing their temporal interests: You shall find all vices reduced in this
City, as to their proper center, and which is worse, with specious titles of
holiness; their pomp appears under the name of Church decorum, and their
ambition under the title of Majesty, their tyranny under the semblance of zeal,
nay most scandalous lusts are brought into the houses of the greater sort under
the mantle of spiritual recreations: Adulation has founded here her Palace,
for you shall have it preached most impudently that the Pope cannot err,
notwithstanding that his actions are the very tops of errors: Tell me O
reverend Friar, if the Pope cannot err, wherefore are there Decrees and
Ordinances of Counsels instituted; 'twere enough to be regulated by his will,
only without importuning any Synod, or attending any rules from the universal
fuffrage of Christianity; But to unbowell unto you my true meaning, I hold that
the Ecclesiastics now that they see they cannot fit the custom of the Pope to
the Laws, they procure to fit the Laws to his customs; God forgive them who
somenting a parasiticall Doctrine introduce so many enormities to Gods House,
so frontlesse and void of all shame; these men being dandled with ambition,
have transported S. Peter's Seat from Caves to Thrones of Gold; these being
carried away with avarice to declare this magnificence to be necessary for the
dignity of the Church, together with those worldly Dominions so expressly
forbidden by Christ: Poor Church, to what case art thou reduced? the time was
when the Clergy were reverenced for the Sanctity of their life's, and
profoundnesse of their learning, and for the fame of their miracles; but now
they raise respect unto themsels by worldly rule and greatness, for nothing
else makes them to be reverenced now adays. But to compass this mundane
grandeur, which is founded most commonly upon Bases of gold, what unlawful
path is not trodden? what iniquity is not practiced? the Law of Christ being
turned by the Ministry of the Romans to be a Law of ruin and rapin: there is no
action exercised in the Roman Church, but you shall find it conjoined with the
interests of worldly emolument? O how deplorable are these times, were they
paralleled with those of the Ancients, yea, when the world was deprived of
Evangelicall Light! Then, if an Alexander rose up, who with an immense kind of
cupidity snatched at every thing; Nature who is a friend to counterpoises,
created a Philosopher, who glorying in his poverty, contemned the possession of
all transitory Princes. But now among the Christians, if a Pope starts up, who
with insatiable appetit goes about to grapple all, we do not find that virtue
has such a force as to dispose any Ecclesiastic to show an example of that
poverty which is commanded him by heaven: Good Friar, if you have ever bin in
the Dominions of the Church, you will be astonished at such abominations
wherewith the Worship of God is daily profaned. Moreover, you shall hear
nothing else preached in the Pulpits but Paradoxes, Delight, not the utility of
souls being the scope of their matter, and so the ears being tickled with the
Doctrine the Collections use to be greater, which under the name of Alms is
drained afterward from the Auditors; but their sacrilegious greedines stops
not here, you shall see often lame miracles published for gain, you shall often
see those inspired Fathers use certain acts of Conjuration, rather to draw
money out of the purse, then to cast devils out of the body; you shall often
times see many neglected Images making themselfs miraculous upon a sudden to
enrich the Ecclesiastic professors, deluding by this trick the simplicity of
those who hold that the virtue of doing miracles being lost in men, is retired
into statues of stone and wooden pictures. In somm, the abuses are so many
which are introduced by the covetousness and rapacity of the Romans, that I
prognosticat that all reality of Religion will be quite extinguished e're it be
long, and faith her self also as much as remains; for I have observed that
Christ did not live long upon earth when he was put between two thieves.

There is an opinion that is current among some Theologues, that when the Host
begins to moulder the Divine Presence, immediately departs from the Eucharist.
Now, if Christ cannot stay, no not the least moment in corrupted bread, how
shall we think that he can abide to stay amongst a corrupt people? Friend, if
your salvation be dear unto you, turn face about and never go to Rome, cast
your self rather upon the remotest shores of India, whither they say all virtue
and Religion is retired perhaps to be the further off from Rome; one cannot so
journ in this City without endangering his Faith; take example by me, who being
com from among the Mahumetans to learn to lead the life of a Catholic, do now
go away hence with strange kind of confused imperfect thoughts within me to
turn Turk.

S. Paul having parted with the Maronit, and advancing toward Lorette, while
he passed in a Friars froc hard by a village, he was called in to confess a
dying Cardinal, he goes in, and hears his confession, which was thus:

Father, I feel the pangs of death com upon me, God summons me to satisfy the
last debt of human nature; my soul finding her self in these extremes,
trembles to appear before the face of God, in regard She is so full of carnal
spots. It is your function to help me to wash them off, while these eyes of mine
shall afford you tears, and this panting spirit, though struggling with the
assaults of death, shall endeavor to declare unto you in short periods the sum
total of all my offenses passed.

Know then that I was born to a poor fortune, but nature, who has also her
portion of goods in this world to dispense among mortals, was pleased to endow
this body with such Prerogatives, that my parents might well formalize some
hopes within themselfs of my greater advancement at Rome, Being grown up to
twelve years, devoting my self not to God but to Ambition, they clothed me
with the habit of an Ecclesiastic, and to stablish the foundation of their
hopes the better, they applied me to the service of a Cardinal. Now it is a
rule, that where the end is crooked, the means tending to that end can hardly
prosper: Hence it coms to pass, that now adays in Rome to arrive to the end
of their designs, they do not use learning and virtue, the effects of a true
heavenly vocation, for means, but courtship and flattery, which are the base
parts of that interest which has always an eye to the worldly advantage of
ones self: I applied my particular study to be a proficient in the garb and
fashion of the Court, which is no other thing then to devote ones person to any
pleasure of the great ones; He who confesses must not conceal any thing, but
be pleased Father to comprehend in your imagination whatsoever, wherein an
engaged and well respected youth may sin, and suppose it in me, so my feeble
tongue shall be exempted from the labor of my Narration; only this I tell you,
that I knew how to gain the entire affection of the Prelat my protector, and
he, for my sake was not ill looked upon at Court. Pensions did reign upon my
person, which made me wonder at that which the Ancients write, that Jupiter
should Metamorphose himself into a shower of Gold only for Danae, since he
converts himself so more often now for Ganimeds: This my youthful age was free
from those passions which use ordinarily to transport the minds of young men,
viz. from the love of women; yet I do not deny to have tried it often, it seeming
to me very strange that I should pray, who was used to be prayed unto; but I
continued not long in that state, my humor altered with my age, then I
entangled my self in Feminine Love, and in a short time I tried what adultery,
fornication and incest were; In the mean time I arrived to that age which was
capable of Priesthood, then taking Holy Orders I lived a while retired within
my self, being persuaded to a moderation of life by that Synedresis, that touch
of conscience, which coms sometimes by nature, and teaches some sort of respect
which is to be had to that Sacrament; but at the end too much familiarity
turned into contempt, for whereas at first I began to sin with some scruple,
those scruples quickly flew away from my conscience, and so I came to such a
reprobat sense, that fornication, rebellion of the heart, and celebrating of
the Mass, was in my person but the act of one hour oftentimes. Father, 'twas
no Sacrament, 'twas a Devil that entered into my soul when I took the Character
of a Priest; it was an infernal Spirit that persuaded me not to fear that
Christ, which was daily to pass through my hands; I found my self immediately
disposed to every wickedness: And whereas at first no affection molested me, but
that of Lust, me thought that all vices assailed me in a moment: Nor is it to
be wondered at; for if Judas found himself to betray Christ after he had taken
the sop unworthily, though but once, much more must it be supposed, that those
impious Priests must be inclinable to all motions of profaneness, who every day
receave the Sacramentated Redeemer, peradventure more unworthily then Judas:
Covetousness also came to be my inseparable companion, fomented chiefly by
occasion of that command and authority, I began to get in the State of the
Church; while I exercised the Office of a Shepherd, I learnt quickly the art
to shear my sheep, all that belonged to the subject was created, me thought, by
nature; for the service of my affections: my favors were still exposed to the
highest offerer, nor did I ever refuse a present from any hand, I did wonder at
the custom of the Priests of the old Testament, who rejected many Oblations as
unworthy for the Sacrifice, and so concluded within my self, that because the
times and Laws were altered, the Priests of the New Testament ought to receave
any thing offered them: But this was the the least; for if the Parishoners did
not do it voluntarily, I found ways to snatch it from them. I remember that
among other passages, taking occasion once to visit a young gentleman, who was
within the compass of my Jurisdiction, I observed in his house some pictures of
good value, and giving him an inkling of my desire, he with many humble
complements answered, That he would be very unwilling to be dispossessed of
them; I kept this denial in my breast, and having traced a way by means of the
Holy Inquisition to clap him in prison, he presented unto me the foresayed
Pictures, that he might be removed only to a gentler Goal, and afterward, for
his full Liberty, was forced to suffer the better part of his estate to be
confiscated; but fearing that by his appeal to Rome, this act of mine might be
too narrowly winnow'd, and so I might run a hazard of the precipitation of my
fortunes not yet so firmly grounded, to secure my self from afterclaps, I
called him unto me, and rebuking him for his course carriage toward me at
first, it made me by right of that incumbency I held over him, to reform all
misdemeanors, and to teach him how to comply with Church Governors for the
future: In fine, for the reparation of his losses passed, I made him a friendly
promise to point him out a way how he might be made capable to wear an
Ecclesiastic habit, and so ascend to the Dignity of a Prelat: For they in the
Roman State, ^ among the multitudes of their miseries, have no other comfort
but this, that they may easily arrive to such a condition, as may enable them
to a revenge upon some others the wrong they receave themselfes: By these
means I knew how to feather my nest so well, that I returned afterward to
Rome to live in the luster of a conspicuous Prelat, by introducing to my house
the wonted pomp and exces of the old Romans, I paralleled any other in
ornament of rich hangings, of magnificent Coaches, in number of Grooms and
Laquais, and specially in multitudes of Courtiers, and gelded Musicians, the
greatness of Rome's ambition being to show her self barbarous, yea in the pomp
of Eunuchs; eleven youths did undergo the Martyrdom of Orig^n, of purpose to
devote themselfs to the luxury of my pleasure: Poor Boys! by what a strange
effect does the lust of others make you chaste?

While I did lead this splendid life, the Cardinal my Protector came to the
Popedom; By this exaltation myhopes soard very high, nor did there much time
pass, when I saw my person, being a Creature of the Popes, advanced to the
dignity of a Hat; so I moumed to the degree of a Cardinal, wherein I stand
now. Now if my voice had strength to unmask every particular thing, you would
be struck with amazement to discover a life so impious in the persons of them
who glory in the title of Christ's Disciples. I Will tell you in a word, that from
the time I obtained the Cardinallship, I never kept Lent, I never recited my
hours, I never confessed to God, till now in these extreme agonies of my
sickness: Such being the custom almost of all Cardinals, who finding themselfs
in a posture to aspire to the Keys of Heaven, do think perchance to be able
one day to find a way to enter there, without any necessity of good works. But
woe is me, I perceive now to have deviated from the ways of Heaven; I discern
too well by the light of Divine grace (which I know not by what excess of
mercy may please to save me for all this) that to lead an ecclesiastical life
is an now accustomed is nothing at all to live a Christian: But if Pagans, yea
Atheists, preceiving their own errors, have hopes to be saved, why should I
despair? This is the only argument of my hopes, although I think the salvation
of an Infidel more easy, than that of a perverse Christian; because my soul
finds at this very moment that the understanding is more easily illuminated,
than the will humbled and rectified being too tenacious of her delights in
those pleasures, which she must now relinquish with the Hat; But, father, my
spirit fails me, give me an absolution, for I feel my self upon point of
expiring.

S. Paul having absolved the Cardinal, upon his departure thence he met with
an Angel, who after some salutations fell to relate unto him what he had
overheard in a Parlatory of Nuns as follows.

You know allredy, O Apostle of God, that I am of those Angels which never
descended before on Earth, and if in strange Countries the curious mind of the
passenger desires to satisfy it self, I confess that among other things, which
I coveted to see, one was a Monastry of Nuns, who were so much spoken of in
Heaven that I took them to be Angels on earth. Being come therefore to one of
the prime Cities of Italy, I took the form of a strange youth, and entered at
the privatest hour I could into a Monacall Parlatory. I found at the windows a
young Nun, which had no other business it seems, but to attend the coming of
some body. I was scarce spyed by her, when she asked me an account of my
Country, and what fancy took me to traverse the World up and down in that
manner; I, bethinking my self of Heaven, answered, my Country, most gentle
Sister, is too far distant from this place, and whereunto few of this Region
arrive. Touching the fancy that leads me to traverse up and down the World, it
is no other than curiosity, which often draws youthful lightness to neglect
their own profit, and to regard others. Foolish youthfulnes which can not
learn how to value thy Countries good but a far of; then I added, happy are
they who never departing from within the Paradise of these holy walls, seem as
so many Angels always appearing before the face of God. She being as full of
Spirit as She was of beauty answered thus, O how many of us would willingly
change our Paradise for your peregrination, wherefore then do you complain so
causelessly of your travels? which being no other than the motions of a civil
life, it cannot choose but be so much the sweeter to elevated minds, by how much
the higher the movements of their souls are. Behold the Sun, behold the
Planets, which never staying still in one place delight to be continual
travelers in the Univers.

I being much taken with the vivacity of this femal spirit, replied: It is true
Lady, that the Sun and the Planets are in a continual peregrination, but there
are in Heaven fixed Stars also, which, because happily they are more noble, are
superior to the other, and consequently nearer the throne of the Almighty;
These Nuns then, who to serve God are always permanent in one place, like the
fixed Stars, may more than any other mortals comfort themselves with an
assurance that they are nearer God. The beauteous Maiden sighed at these words,
and then answered: God, I deny not, dwells nearer to the fixed Stars, but not to
desperate souls; And now you discover your self to be a stranger, that you are
not acquainted with our condition. The cruelty of our Parents, and the rigor
of our destiny has pend us in here for ever, the Church of Rome concurring
hereunto by admitting any pretext whatsoever, bear with me Sir, that I speak
thus. It is a hard fate to be born to a perpetual prison, while it is seen
that all other living creatures have the whole World to solace themselves in;
And that Prison, which it seems the very infants fly from, when they sally out
of their Mothers wombs before they have as it were any sense of life, we are
constrainde to endure, after that nature has given us the perfect use of our
sense, and life, and the knowledge of our miseries; The destiny of that mortal
must needs be a hard one who is born to live in restles infelicity. This
Cloister, which surrounds our Liberty, is not, as you imagine, a Paradise; for
in Paradise there dwells no coffeehouse; It is rather a Hell wherein the
flames of inextinguible desire the natural affections of our humanity are
condemned to be tortured every minute. I will not stand to express the cause
why our Parents are so inhumanly cruel unto us, for it is too well known, that
for to spare that dowry which is due to our Sex, they condemn us twixt these
walls, to be deprived for ever of any worldly delight, for no other cause, but
because we are born Women, yet you must know, that the shutting us thus by
force between these stones, cannot deprive us of those carnal affections which
may well be covered but not quenched in that religious habit that you see about
us; Nor can this kind of life conduce to Heaven, considering there is no
concurrence of the will, which is so acceptable to the allknowing Lord, we are
rather destinated to an Abisse, by a course clean contrary to our genius, being
bereft also of that common privilege, which other souls use to have to go to
Hell what way they please. In ancient times it was the custom to slay the
Victimes first, and then Sacrifice them to God, because happily the principal
seat of the corporeal affections lying in the blood, 'twas not held convenient
to offer his Divine Majesty any holocaust, which was not first purged by
effusion of that blood from all earthly passions; But this is not observed in
us by our Parents, who do make Sacrifices of us with all our blood and passions
about us, then, how can we believe that it is grateful to God Almighty? and
being not grateful to him, consider what despair our souls are plunged in,
which see themselfs shut out of the world here, without any assurance of Heaven
herafter in regard we have not power to extinguish our natural affections, and
so are in danger to precipitate our selfs headlong into Hell through a kind of
supposed innocence. If Christ died to reduce us to such a hard condition, oh
how better were it for us that he had not died. Be not offended O stranger at
the words, for the tongues of the damned can bring forth nothing but
blasphemies: yet we know that Christ has no hand in this our hard condition,
for his death had for its principal object the freedom and enlargement of
souls, not their captivity. The Popes are most in fault, by yielding to the
cruel covetousnes of our Parents to transvert the Keys of Paradise into the
Keys of a Prison. It was not Christ, no, it was the impiety of Herod, that by
reason of the humanation of our Savior caused so many innocents to be slain.
Behold, we are in a case equal to theirs, because we being yet innocent
children under the mark of holiness, we are segregated and cut off from the
society of the living, there being no difference twixt us and them, but they dye
before Burial, and we are buried before Death. Nor can our innocence, or our
fears Prevail any thing, nor are those privileges sufficient which nature has
granted these faces of ours (for which peradventure you styled us Angels) to
implore from others pity and succor, having found the Church of Rome so
ungrateful, while we consider that the time was when St. Peter was freed by an
Angel out of prison, but now clean contrary Angels are cast into prison by
the successors of S. Peter. But whither does violence of just passion transport
me thus to rave? Helas, the name of Angel does not suit with our condition,
and l^sse with our operations: For although we are brought innocents hither,
yet we cannot preserve our selfs long in this Monastique life from the motions
of desperate passions; The Religion which clasped us in here is not adored, but
detested by some of us, vanity and faeminine wantonness is here in the height;
Here dwells curiosity in excess, and desire of knowledge in worldly matters
without end; Ambition, Envy, Discord, and Hatred, is never wanting among us:
Lastly here is observed neither Constitution, Law or Vow, but out of pure
necessity and unavoidable violence. But what shall I say of that
Maiden-chastity for the conservation whereof we are principally penned in here?
I leave that for you to imagine, it being not permitted to femal modesty to
make any further expressions in this kind; I only tell you this, that we
procure all means possible to outrage and abuse it, and not without reason, for
if this Chastity has been the principal thing that has retrenched our
liberties in this manner, we ought to aim and bend our chiefest forces to be
revenged of our chiefest enemy. And here this beauteous Nun blushed, and broke
the thread of her Discourse. I confess unto you O holy Paul, that if I had a
breast capable of terrene affections, I would doubtless have tenderly resented
the misery of this discontented soul; but compassion is vain, where there is no
power to comfort; therefore I held it expedient to take my leave, that I might
not imbitter her passions any further; so at my departure, I said, When I came
in hither, Oh most beauteous Nuns, I looked upon you as on so many Seraphins,
but hearing the state of your hard condition, I find you to be the unhappiest
creatures that live under the Law of Christ. Were it permitted me for to help
you, I promise you I would batter down these walls and give you that liberty
which others take from you; but since it is not lawful for any to do so,
comfort your selfs at least that Heaven is reserved for your suffrances. And
although you protest not to suffer for Christ, yet Christ is so merciful, that
he can give beatitudes to those Cyreneans who carry his Cross though forced
thereunto; And I dare assure you, that if you cannot gain Heaven as Virgins, you
shall gain it at least as Martyrs.

S. Paul afterward going on in his Journey arrives at last at Rome, before the
gates whereof he meets with an Angel in a melancholy posture, who was the
Gardien Angel of Urban the 8. therefore he making himself known to him begins
to expostulat with him why he had abandoned the care of the Popes person,
whereunto the Angel made this Answer.

I Stand here, O holy Paul, to guard the Gates of this City, because it is not
in my power to preserve the soul of Urban; it is impossible to bridle his
Caprichios, nor can any Angelical strength do it; I have tried al imaginable
means to reduce him to the way of reason, but cannot do it; therefore I will
expose no longer the Divine Inspirations to scorn, but I intend to take my
^light to Heaven to give God an account of the deviations of his soul, and to
supplicat afterward that he will be pleased to disburden me of the weight of so
heavy a charge, which has in a manner perturbd the whole peace of my
Evangelicall state; It is a great happiness for holy Paul to be made an Angel,
but he who knew how heavy the Ministry of garding humane souls is wherein we
Angels are employed, specially when we encounter refractory humors in a soul,
as in that of Urbans, he would peradventure more esteem the happiness of man, who
having travelld but one age only in this lower World, goes afterward to enjoy
without any disturbance the repose of Heaven: But I repine not at the state of
others, yet you well know that he must needs be somewhat movd who finds he
cannot serve his own Lord as he desires: You, who have had the incumbency to
instruct peeple, and convert whole Nations, know it by experience how uncouth
it is to observe the humors of men. And now that you have understood the
grounds of my grievances, tell me freely whether I complain without cause, for
perchance God has sent you hither either to check me, or comfort me. The
twentieth year runns now on that Urban the 8. holds the Papacy, whence one may
easily calculat how few years are left behind, if it be true what is commonly
spoken, that no Pope shall see as many days as Peter; But if I may unfold my
thoughts, I do believe that he who spoke those words seemd to prophecy, that
none shall see the Church of God in that state of Christian perfection as it
was in the days of Peter; But be it as it will, the more years com on, the
faster evry man runns to that pit which is the center where all Mortals
terminat their course, being drawn down by the weight of that Earth whereof
Humanity is composd: Most commonly old men when they com to such a period of
years use to check within themselfs those spiritts which in their youth were
usd to lash out into a thousand inordinat passions, endeavoring, being now as
it were abandond by the World, to acquire unto themselfs by means of a true
repentance some sort of shelter in the Sanctuary of Divine grace which is ever
ready to receave all those that are forlorn; But be astonishd, O Paul, Urban the
8. the older he grows, the more loose he leaves the reigns to his own senses,
and the nearer he approaches death, the further he goes from good operations:
He excessively loves the pleasure of his Nephews, nor does he study any thing
but what aims at their interest: He seldom reflects upon the incumbency of his
charge, and if at any time some flying thoughts represent unto him his own duty,
he discerns well that a kind of relation passes twixt the Papacy and his
Person, yet he flattereth himself with this fond conceit, that the Papacy is
more bound to serve his Person, than his Person the Papacy: He detests in the
extreme the memory of his excesses, the most effectual means whereby the
garding Angels use to tame the prowdest souls; He will not as much as think
on death, or if sometimes he is brought to think ont, by converting the physic
into poison, he applies his cogitations presently in ruminating how he may
aggrandize his house before he goes. If I should tell you how often I found him
chimerising within himself how he might make it possible to render the Popedom
electif, and to depend no more upon the Consistory, but solely upon the person
regnant, that he might establish it in his posterity, you would be amazed at
those extravagant imaginations that possess the mind, even of the Vicar of
Christ. But would God were pleased, that such wishes did terminat altogether in
the vanity of the design, They end commonly in more practical resolutions, to
drain the patrimony of Saint Peter for to enrich their own houses with the
spoils of the holy Church. But the avidity of Urban stops not here, He little
esteems the millions of Gold purloynd from the Altar, to leave his Nephews the
possession of an independent Principality, where they may lay up the unsecurd
tropheys of their own rapines; There was ever yet in the World a greater number
of those who wish to be Princes than Principalities themselves.

Hence it comes, that to purchase these from the tenacious hands of others,
there must be force necessarily usd, because hardly any reasons can be found,
which may persuade the mind of man to lay down voluntarily the right of a free
dominion; which makes Urban the 8. being transported by his passions to
machinat violent means for to invest his Nephews in another Princes Estate. I
could tell you some further designs and fury of his. He accounts often upon the
Kingdom of Naples, but he finds the enterprise to be fuller of desire than
hopes; He thinks upon the Duchy of Milan, lending his ear unto the glozing
offers of some Minister of a Tramontane Crown, but he dares not trust to that,
for if others should intervene, he cannot leave all to the Barberini. He fixd
his eyes upon Lucca, but perceiving it a petty State, he doubts whether the
benefit will countervaile the charge. He has a months mind to Mirandola, but
being feudetary to the Empire, and a place that breeds some jealousy twixt the
neighboring Princes, he is afraid to draw Germany or Lombardy on his back.
Lastly, he turns his eyes to Parma, and this enterprise being made less
difficult by the advantage of some pretenses, he purposes to deprive the poor
Duke (beginning with Castro) of all his possessions. I put him in mind how much
it did misbecom Bishops, and other Prelates of the holy Church, who make
profession of a life differing from Swordmen, to change the Crosier into
Musket-rests, Rochets into Corslets, and their Miters to Murrions. I put before
his eyes the scandal that would redound to all Christendom thereby, the scorn
that Infidells would conceive of it, and the danger the Church should incur,
foretold by our Savior, who positively warns that every Kingdom divided in
it self has its dissolution near at hand: But it is to beat the Air, to tell
Urban of all this, which has everything for his aim, but the indemnity of the
Church. Finding that these arguments were of little force, I applied unto him
the spur of nature, alleging that the events of War were dubious and dangerous,
to raise in him thereby some apprehensions of fear, which commonly takes place
in old men's breasts; But nature could prevail little, reason less, and the
inspiration of an Angel nothing at all over the hair-braind humors of Urban.
He who now enters Rome, may see a Pope turned Armiger, now in his decrepit
times, one that takes up Arms then, when he should meditate how to lay down
his life to nature; And which is worse, he thinks all this to be according to
the dictamen of reason, so that Urban the Eighth never does that which he
believes, but believes in that which he does, insomuch that at the same time
when he tears Italy to pieces, and snatcheth the state of another, he
publishes his actions to be right, his intentions holy, and that all tends to
the service of God, and the object of good; as if the formality of good in his
Idea were different from that which is in the opinion of other men. But I omit
many extravagances wherewith this capricious soul has abusd my last patience.
Once he settled a resolution within himself, not to give any satisfaction at all
to the Princes of Christendom, notwithstanding, that I often put him in mind
that this was the basis whereon was founded the conservation of Christian
obedience. Another time he resolved to create no more Cardinals, it may be to
merit the more of the Church of God by abolishing so perverse a generation; but
he repented himself afterward of this, for no other reason, but because I
opposd him in this resolution. If a tutelar Angel can suffer greater
contempts, tell me, O thou Apostle of God? I find that the reputation of
Angelical custody is too much engagd in continuing to stand about him thus:
Therefore in despair of his amendment, I have given over all care of his person
that I should not delay my return to Heaven.

Saint Paul having understood the complaints of the Tutelar Angel of Urban,
enters Rome, but an accident befell him which enforcd him to fly, and as he was
going along another Angel comes in his way, whom he encounters with these
expressions.

YOu come, O Heavenly Messenger, peradventure to charge me from his Divine
Majesty that I should avoid Rome: Behold how I have left her already before
your coming; for divine inspirations forerun the very flight of Angels: But
now that I am come out of Rome, let us repose a while, and I will relate unto you
the unexpected cause of my hasty departure. You know, O Angel of God, that I
was sent from Heaven to Earth to hear the complaints of Mortals, and to form a
process against this adulterons naughty Spouse: I lighted to this purpose in
many places, where having fully understood by all degrees of people her
dissolute deportments, to confirm with mine own eyes what came from other
tongues, I resolvd at last to come to the City of Rome it self. I passd too and
fro at first in the froc of a Friar, There, as I went through a little blind
Hamlet, I was called in to confess a dying Cardinal, which gave me warning,
that the habit descrying me to be a religious person, it was likely, that entering
so to Rome, I might (according to the custom) be questiond for the Patent of
my Orders, or the License of my Superiors; I hereupon to evade the telling of
any lie, held it expedient to lay down the Froc and take my Sword: So I came
into Rome intending to lodge in some Covent of Friars, who being usd to thrust
themselves into worldly affairs more than the Seculars themselves, I thought I
could there very leisurely have a free and exact information of all things,
specially because the freedom of speech is retird now into Cloisters for more
security, in regard of the extreme rigor which is usd to punish those who
speak any thing against the Court. The Monastery where I was lodgd was famous
for the study of Letters, and so it was frequented by many Learned men; But the
greatest concours was of Strangers, who so abound in Rome of all Nations where
desiring to know what conceit Forrenners had of that Church, I disputed often
upon some point of Religion: There happened to come thither a Turk, rather to
hear, as I imagine, the noise of the disputation, than to inform his judgment;
so I askd him his opinion of Christian Religion, whereunto beyond all
expectation, he answered thus.

Amongst the Turks it is held for certain that God does favor those people
most, where he is truly adored; so, from the prosperity of the Turkish Empire,
we infer, that our faith is good, and the observance of it not displeasing to
God. Touching the Christians Religion, we have an opinion, that she was not
naught, until she was adulterated, and made naught by Christians themselves:
But in the state she is now in this City, we believe her to be abominable to
God Almighty, specially since we see that of late she goes annihilating and
mouldring away by little and little, by her own inward and endless discords.
Such was the conclusion of the Turk, which made me, I confess, to marvel not
a little, while I observed, that even those who profess not much knowledge,
can deduce from far-fetchd Principles Consequences so near the truth.

Having had his opinion, I went on in making a further scrutiny, and I fell to
expostulate with a Greek, who was usd to repair to Rome for the opportunity of
studying in Clementine College, who answered to my interrogatories thus.

The Roman and Greek Churches are Sisters issued from one Father, but the Greek
is the first born, and I know not by what wiles the Roman came to take away her
birthright. For this cause they live in most grievous disgusts one with
another; But the one enjoyes the possession of all her Paternall goods, whereas
the other lives as Esau did excluded, and under the dominion of another.
Touching the particular customs of the Roman Church, I say nothing; for the
that censures her in this City, shows he knows not his own danger, And he who
approves her carriage, understands not the Law of Christ.

With such words the Greek satisfied my demands. As touching the opportunity
which was offered me to mingle speech with a Frenchman upon the same subject, I
understood his conceit thus.

The name of the Church is reverenced by a great part of the Kingdom of
France, but the wisdom of our Governors has never permitted the Pope to
extend that excess of pre-dominion beyond the Alps, which he does exercise in
Italy; for our policy is supported by particular Gallican rites: And the reason
is, because the French being naturally impatient, and now that nere half
France (to withdraw it self from under the Roman yoke) is infected with Heresy,
certainly if the Pope should exercise upon the Consciences of that spritfull
people the tyranny he does exercise in Italy, the rest of that great Kingdom
would fall from him quite.

Such were the expressions of the Frenchman, which did stir in me a curiosity
by way of opposition, to hear what the Spaniard would say. Nor was it difficult
for me to obtain my desire, by meeting with a Nobleman of Sevill, who
frequented the same Convent, I entered into his friendship, and he rendered me
satisfied by such discourse.

Friend, to serve you I will speak beyond the customs of this Nation, with all
ingenuity of heart: The reverence which the Spaniards do profess to the Roman
Church, may be considered in two manners, inward and outward: If you ask me of
the inward reverence, suppose it to be not unlike that of other people who have
full knowledge of her Customs (The Spaniards being of a genius apt to esteem
things as they are in value) But if you ask me of the outward reverence, knew,
that the Spanish Nation in extern appearance show themselves very observant of
the Roman Church, because that having found her always most partial to the
interests of their Crowns, they hold themselves obligd by terms of gratitude
to correspond with her at least in outward observance. My King knows well how
available for depressing of the suspected greatness of his Subjects has bin the
pretext of the holy inquisition: He lives mindful of that promptitude showed in
the Court of Rome, to deny an absolution to the House of Bourbon, until he had
conformd himself to the Austrian satisfaction; And lastly he knows how much to
this very howr the pragmaticall Jesuits have served him to dilate in evry part,
(with their own advantage) the bounds of the Castilian Empire; So that in
contemplation of all these respects, the Spaniards hold themselfs obliged to
reverence the Roman-Church, in exterior appearance at least, though she were
far wors than she is.

Here the Spaniard did terminat his censure, while my diligence, which desisted
not to procure all punctual advertisements brought me to discourse with an
Englishman, who gave this modest Answer: Sir, I am a declared Enemy of the
Roman Church, therefore, I presume, my words can gain no credit with you; but if
you desire to know what respects this Church finds Northward, read our Doctors
and perchance your curiosity will be fully satisfied.

Thus O Angel of God, I endeavored in Rome to bring to perfection the Process
which was committed to my charge against the adultrous spouse; And passing one
Morning by a Church, where they were casting out a Devil, I went in because of
the noise, and then the ill Spirit knew my person, and began to cry out, here is
S. Paul, here is S. Paul; Truly he is com in an ill time from Heaven, to view the
state of that Church for which he shed so much sweat; good Saint, what motives
brought him to this lower World? was it to see how his labors fructified? Ah,
the pure grains of that Doctrine which his eloquence sowed in the Vineyard of
the Lord are turned to tares, and become food for ravenous Birds such as these
are, who stand about me now, to disconjure me with their hideous noise. Upon
this cry the Priests began to fix their looks upon me, whereupon, fearing to be
discovered, I softly rotir'd; but the words took such impressions in the mind
of the Exorcist, that he did conjure the Spirit by violent threats to manifest
who I was, who being not able to resist the violence confessed I was S. Paul,
who by resumption of humane shape (he knew not why) wandered now upon Earth; The
Priest had no sooner knowledge hereof, but he presently found means to give
notice to the Pope; A little after, my lodging being found out by spies (whereof
there are a multitude in Rome) I suddenly perceived a Courtier making toward
me, and breathing out these words; O holy Paul, in the name of Urban the Eight
I com to do you reverence; He is well informed of the condition of your being
here: He earnestly desires that you would be pleased to favor his House with
your presence, for he is ambitious to have a stranger of so high a quality for
his Guest. The Courtier spoke to me, O Angel of God, thus in very proper
phrase; for in these times Saints use to be called strangers in the state
Ecclesiastique; whither I was astonished or no to see my self thus surpised
and discovered, judge you; I thanked his Beatitude in the best manner I could,
for his courteous offer, and excused my self not to be able to receive that
honor, in regard I was of necessity to depart from Rome within a a few hours:
when I had disintangled my self thus from the Courtier, I called my thoughts to
counsel, and feeling, that my heart did presage me some sinister accident, I
resolved upon flight; and I was gone but few paces further, when the same
Courtier came again and told me thus; Urban the Eighth, O holy Paul, does
remand me to you, to second his first invitation, but if in case you are
resolved not to grace his Palace with your presence, I have order to propose
another request unto you: In your Epistles we read, O Apostle of God, certain
passages which manifestly contradict the humors of our holy Father Urban the
Eighth, he prays you to mend them, because it is not fitting that Paul should
ga^nsay the will of Peter's successor: And if you desire to know which are those
passages, one among the rest is, that, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers. Urban the Eighth would, that from this universal proposition the souls
of Popes should be exempted; He thinking it not fitting that the Popes should be
subordinate to any other Law, but that of their own affections and fancy, for
so their actions should not be censured by every sensles man, as they are ever
and anon now adays; His Holiness also much desires, that the words be utterly
expunged, which assigning to every Bishop his own incumbencys, do speak in
particular, Diaconos habeant non turpe lucrum facientes, Let them have Deacons
not given to base lucre. These periods displease in a high measure Urban the
Eighth, for he of necessity must have about him his Nephew Cardinals and to
grow rich. Here the Courtier stopped, when I poor Paul fell to discourse with my
self thus: See, thou art in danger to be entrappd, notwithstanding that thou
have been confirmed in the state of grace, but what could be expected less in
Rome? perceiving at last that he attended no answer, I put my self to reason
with him thus: O Papal messenger, the business which you propound to me, is of
no light moment; for he who is tender of his own repute, cannot be easily
induced to unsay himself; you know that my Doctrine has run through the World
till this day without alteration, Now what will people say to see it now differ
from times past! And who will not persuade himself that the alteration proceeds
rather from the caprichio of some convicted Heretics, than from Paul's Pen.
Moreover to what purpose will it be to vary Apostolical Doctrins, when the
Popes without any regard to them do operat still according to their own
fancies? But now that his Beatitude does desire this superfluous alteration, I
will not fail to serve him in the best manner that God shall inspire me. The
Courtier departed with this answer, which he took for a promise; but I to
reserve my self to execute what God had enjoined me did immediately fly away
from Rome, being warned from Heaven so to do. I was scarce out of the City,
when I remembered to have left my Sword behind, and being in suspense with my
self, whether I should return to fetch it or no, I spyed coming after me, one
who was also a forrener in the same Convent where I had lodgd, and had often
showed me arguments of love, who coming near me, cried out, friend, begone,
begone, I come after you of purpose to tell you, that you were scarce gone, but
another Courtier came to seek you, and informed of your flight, he carried news
thereof to the Pope, and a little after the Pope himself came to your lodging,
who finding not your person, took away your Sword, saying in a kind of choler,
that if Paul's Pen refuse to serve him his Sword shall. This Sword shall force
Princes to bend and bow at my feet; This, this shall conserve Castro, subdu
Parma, and show the world that there is no necessity of reason, where the edge
of a brandishing Sword shall make a way. Giving thousand thanks to my friend,
who knew not what Paul nor what Sword the Pope spoke of, I took my leave of
him, and continued my flight, being troubled in my thoughts, that my arms should
be left in such a hand which imployes them for the service of his own
tyrannical affections to the universal scandal of Christianity. If it were
possible, O Angel of God, to bend him to the voice of the Almighty, I could
wish you to go and inspire him to peace; But Urban has too too refractory a
soul; therefore I hold it more expedient, that you would please to diffuse your
inspirations amongst the Princes of Italy, to incite them to take out of his
hands these Arms, which were taken from me without reason, and are now drawn
out against them without justice. To this end I have framed a Letter, addressed
to the Italian Princes whereunto I held it not much necessary to affix my name,
because it is known already I am on Earth, and it is of this tenor.

URban the Eighth, O Princes, transported with the violence of an unknown
wrath, took possession of my Sword, of purpose to make use of it against the
quietness of your States; If you will not resolve to take it out of his hands, I
do exhort you in the name of the Divine Majesty to do it, because it is not
fit, that that blade which is designed for the conversion of Infidells, should
be stained in your blood; Nor let that idle scruple amuse you, that he is your
shepherd, for the true shepherds do guide their flocks with gentle wands not
with weapons. Remember that Isaac suffered himself to be slain with the hands
of his Father, to be sacrificed to God, not to the fury and passion of his
Father. And S. Peter left a Fishers knife behind him to be used against Fish,
which are not creatures of our element. Encourage your selfs therefore by his
Counsel and mine, neither think ye the design difficult, for although Urban
seem furious, yet he that is not habituated to handle weapons may easily let
loose his hold. God inspire your hearts, and prosper your resolutions.


This is the tenor O Angel of God of this Letter, which I beseech you to carry
(with your inspirations) to the hearts of Christian Princes. I in the interim,
before I return to Heaven, must go and visit Jerusalem, to kiss that place
again, where the very inanimate stones being more grateful than Men, keep yet
fresh the memory of Divine Mercy.

THe aforesaid Confederacy being made between the Princes of Italy in behalf of
the Duke of Parma, his spirits were so heightened thereby, specially the Republic
of Venice being engagd therein, that he put spurrs to his Horse, and entered like
a whirlwind into the Papal Territories, finding no opposition at all in his
passage; He encamped the first night not far from Urban Fort, whence Don Taddeo
the Nephew had got away upon the news of his march; From the felicity of this
beginning his heart being elevated, he resolves to push on his fortunes to the
very walls of Rome; All Forts, and Towns at his approach did open their gates
to receave him rather for a friend than a foe; And although the Country could
not choose but be damnified by the march of such a tumultuary sudden
unfurnished Army, yet as one observed, the Vassals of the Ecclesiastic state
are so accustomed to hard usage from their own Governors, that the domages of
foreign troops seemed but light unto them; yet there were such strict rigid
injunctions, and martial comands given out for regulating the Army that none
durst commit any rapin or outrage under pain of life.

The Duke with these inexpected successes advanced toward the walls of Rome
with 3000 well appointed horse, which caused a great deal of confusion and
terror in the City; Pope Urban, with the Cardinals and chiefest of the Roman
Inhabitants, retired to the Castle of S. Angelo, where for more security they
stowed their tresure, and richest movables; Thus that Rome which in times
passed, could look Hanniball, and the Gauls in the face, does now shake as it
were into a quivering Palsy at the approach of 3000 horse only which came to
vindicat the quarrel of the Farneses; In this confusion there was not one would
propose the facing of the insolent enemy, evry one be took himself to stand on
his guard, and the defensive part; Evry gate looked like a Diocese having some
Bishop appointed to keep it; Herupon Pope Urban sent Cardinal Spada to
propound a Trety with the Duke, which Negotiation was carried so politiquely
that it took effect, and so a truce was agreed upon for the present; so the
Duke of Parma returned, having reaped no other fruit by this march, but the
name to have displayed his Colors almost in the face of Rome; which, as the
most serious sort of men were of opinion, became him least of any Prince in
regard he was a Vassal of the Church, his Progenitors having received such
temporal possessions from Her.

This little War produced good effects in Italy at last, for it took off
afterward various sorts of discontentments, these temporal Arms took off the
censures of the spiritual Arms under which diverse Princes lay; For by the
vigorous interposition of France a Trety was to be held at Venice, where the
Dukes of Parma and Modena came in person, and Cardinal Bichi, a person par
negotio, being a moderat grave prudent man came as Plenipotentiary from the
Pope, who in the conduct of this business carried himself with that dexterity
and height of wisdom, that in one afternoon he made an end of all differences;
The Signorie of Venice was to have her ancient Elogium set up in the Sala Regia
in the Vatican, It was to be renewed, and inscribed in a larger Table; The Duke
of Florence was to have the Excomunication taken off, and for the future, the
Churchmen should be subject to new impositions as well as the laity, provided
that his Holiness be acquainted there with before hand, and his consent had; the
Duke of Modena was absolved from the spiritual censures, and got the Gabells
of some places in right to the Duchy of Ferrara; The Duke of Parma had the
Church censures taken off of him, and got further time for the repayment of his
arreares putting in caution accordingly; Lastly the little Republic of Luca
fished so well in these troubled waters, that she also got her-self absolved
from the Church censures which lay upon her: Thus the Italian like a wise
Nation composed in a short time so many differences that perturb'd the public
peace, which was don by the sage management of the Venetian, as also by the
discreet comportment of the aforesayed Plenipotentiary Cardinal Bichi a
Sienese born, a kind of War having lasted above two years, in all which time
there were not 200. men lost in all, which argues that the Italian is more
parsimonious of his blood, and more careful of his life, than either German,
French or English who in their civil Wars have lost I cannot tell how many
thousands in a far shorter time especially the last, which shows that they are
not so indulgent of nature, and of that image which God Almighty has imprinted
upon man, as the Italian.

NOt long after that the Republic of Venice had got out of these briars, and
that principally by her intervention the Pope and the Italian Princes were
reconcild, an illfavourd black cloud began to engender against her in the
Levant, the Mahumetan Moon appeerd red, and her horns very sharp, which
portended windy and tempestuous wether as it happend afterward and continues
so to this day; The vapor that went to condense this hideous clowd issued first
from the Knights of Malta, who had taken at Sea some Galleys and Caramusalls
that carried passengers upon a Pilgrimage to Mecha, among whom was one of
Ibraims Sultana's, and another of the Ottoman race. The Malteses having made
prize of them, arrived afterward in Candy where they found reception and
friendly entertainment as was usual.

Ibriam the great Turk upon news hereof stormed mightily, and raged so far that
he vowed a revenge; Thereupon he sent for the Christian Ambassadors that resided
at that time in the Port, relating unto them by the mouth of his Vizier what
affronts he had received of the Malteses, and that he would peck that little
scabb of an Island into the bottom of the Sea, disguising his displesure all
the while he bore against the Venetians, who was more in his thoughts; so a
great Fleet was provided against Malta as was given out, though his aim was
against Candy; St. Sackvile Crow then Ambassador in Constantinople for the King
of great Britain, had such choice intelligence that he acquainted the Venetian
Bailio hereof, and writ also to the late Earl of Arundell who was then in Padua
to give advice hereof to the Senate, that the Turk armed for Candy: but the Senate
having no notice thereof from their own Bailio made no account of the
intelligence, wherein the World adjudg'd Venice to com far short of her wonted
circumpection* For that Summer the Turks with a formidable Fleet and Land-Army
did in a manner surprise Canea the second Port of Candy, coming with such a
resolution as if they came to meet a Victory and not expect one; The news
hereof being brought to Ibraim it puffed him up very much, though he was
overheard to mutter, That if he overcame so often he should lose all at last,
for above 50000 Turks, whereof the third part were Ianizaries, perished in that
expedition. The next Summer the Bassa of Bosnia tumbled into Dalmatia with a
great land Army, but he was repelled with much vigor, so that in regard he did
no exploit, he was sent for to Constantinople, where Ibraim caused him to be
strangled.

The Republic being now sadly engaged in a War against so potent an enemy,
betook Her-self to Her Prayers more fervently, making a vow to build a Chapel
to Saint Lorenzo, a holy man, who had lived about 400 years since in Venice,
which She performed with much magnificence.

The next Summer She had notable success against the Turk in Dalmatia in
diverse places, and made Her-self Mistress of Clissa a place of mighty
strength, and much consequence; being frontire twixt Bosnia and Dalmatia; The
Baron of Dagenfelt was employed by the Republic in Dalmatia, but in this
expedition of Clissa General Foscolo, Count Schotto, and Proveditor Georgio
were chief; Mehemet Bei Sangiac of Clissa after the Articles of rendition were
concluded, was to send four Hostages whereof Filippovich was chief, who after
fled away, whereupon the Sangiac himself stood for him and sent a Letter of
this humble tenor to Foscolo.

TO the most merciful, and preordain'd by God to all good fortune, the most
excellent Lord General of the Venetians, the most humble reverence of Master
Mehemet Bei Sangiac of Clissa. After that we had tasted of your Excellencies
grace, and concluded the Trety, Filippovich has betrayed us, whose face ought
for ever to freeze with shame, but his base flight has not only stained his
own honor, but it has also don us much wrong; if you think that I had any
hand in his escape, I stand to your mercy, for we are all in your hands, and I
will be responsible for the fugitif. I attend your answer, and God exalt you to
higher honors.

At the taking of this Town the Christian Soldiers were so fleshed in blood,
and heated for losses they had formerly received, for a great many of the
Morlacchi perished in the action, that the General could not hold them within
the bounds of obedience, but they fell furiously upon the Turks after they had
entered the Town, and hacked them to pieces, notwithstanding the Articles to the
contrary. General Foscolo being got into the Town planted the Venetian
Standard in the Market place, and then kneeling upon the Turkish Banners, he
heard Mass said by the Archbishop of Scutari, and afterward Te Deum was
solemnly Sung, and so loud that the very Heavens ecchoed with the sound. 700
Ianizaries were slain and above 300 wounded in this siege, and about 200
Christians.

There was a great debate in the Senate at Venice touching Clissa, whether she
should still stand or be demolished, they who persuaded a demolition usd these
arguments. That Clissa though never so famous and well fortified yet was she
known to be expugnable, insomuch that the Turk might recover her by the same
means as the Venetian got her; That Ibraim finding his greatness to be eclipsd
herby, would venture all his forces to regain her; Or that happly the Turkish
Army might leave her behind and march on to Spalato or Tragurio, and so cut off
all succors from her; That in case a peace ensued, Clissa must be rendered,
therefore to bestow any money to fortify Her was superfluous; The Venetian
tresure should be employed to strengthen her own Forts, and not the enemies;
lastly, that it stood more with the prudence of the Republic to conserve rather
than conquer.

They of the contrary opinion alleged that Clissa was always esteemed a thing
inexpugnable for her situation, as also for the valor of the puissant State
that now holds her; that she has repelled in former times an Army of 20000
Combatants, that she stood very conveniently to stave off the Turk from rushing
into Dalmatia; Moreover it would tend to the dishonor of the Republic to raze
Clissa, in regard the World will judge that she did it for want of strength or
courage to preserve her; That Venice was used to show her power not only upon
the ruins, but also within the fortifications of the enemy; That the keeping
of Clissa will render a peace more easy; That the Soldiers would lose the
comfort they use to receave in a conquered place, etc.

This second opinion prevayl'd, therefore Monsieur d'Amur with other Engineers
were presently sent to fortify the Town of Clissa according to the modern
Rules.

As by Land, so by Sea also the Republic bore up stoutly and successfully
against her formidable Foe this year, for meeting with a great Fleet of Turkish
Galleys and Mahoons in the Egean Sea, she chased them into the Bay of Foggia
(Phocis of old) where some English Ships, and a Scottish Vessel did her some
signal service; for the Turkish Fleet having fled into the bottom of the Bay,
the Ianizaries ran ashore, insomuch that the Captain Aga set out a
Proclamation, wherein he promised such a reward for any that would bring the Head
of a dead Ianizary, or his living Body: Had the Venetian Fleet poursued the
Turks into the bottom of the Bay, in all probability they might have don the
Turks much mischief at this conjuncture of time; but it seems the Generals
Commission extended not so far, and Venice loves to have her Comissions
punctually observed. The Summer following the Republic did hold the great Turks
Nose so close to the Grindstone, that his Galleys durst not peep out of the
Dardanelli into the Egean Sea; yet has he powered new forces since into Canea
by the Galleys of Rhodes, Sio, Cyprus and Negrepont.

This War has bin very expencefull to St. Mark, and drained much both of his
Tresure and Arsenall, the one of Money, the other of Ammunition; But the Tresure
and Arsenall of Venice may be said to be like the Sea (wherein they stand) who
notwithstanding the perpetual emission of Waters, yet no diminution is
discerned in him, besides if he lose one way, he getts another way* This potent
Enemy has put the Republic to extraordinary ways of raising Money by
Lotteries, sale of Honors and Offices, by revokement and pardoning of Banditi,
etc. Insomuch that though her Bank has been shutt for a while, it is now open
again, ajusted and regulated and of as high repute as ever. Genoa her Sister
Republic, and old Emulatix would furnish her with Money and ten Auxiliary
Galleys if she would stoop to treat Her in equality with Her-self, by the name
of Serenissima, which it is thought she will do in these pressures, for he is a
cheap friend that is got by a complement.

Besides, the Jesuitts offer Her a vast sum of Money of late to be readmitted,
to which end the King of Polands Brother, who is of the Society himself, is
lately sent to negotiat with her, but they write that he has but a cold
employment of it.

Thus have we drawn at length the History of Venice in the smallest thread we
could and freest from thrumbs, the Author being a professed enemy to
superfluities, and immateriall circumstances; We will now proceed to display
some other singularities, for the white at which we aim in this piece, is to
make the Reader thoroughly acquainted with this Maiden Republic.

A Discourse of the Interests of the Republic of VENICE, with the rest of the
States of Italy.
HAving bin a Guest so long to this hospitable Maid (the City of Venice) and
traversd Her Torritories up and down, it will not be amiss to give a short
visit to some of her Italian Neighbors, and look a little upon their differing
aims of policy, as they relate to other States, specially to the Monarchies of
Spain and France, which may be termd the two great Axletrees whereon the power
of this part of the World does turn.

THe Pope being a mighty temporal Prince as well as spiritual, and having a
great stroke in most of the Cou^ts and Counsels of Christendom, in regard of
the authority he is allowd to have over the Consciences and Souls of men, is
first to be considered; He knowing that other Princes cannot gain much of him,
and that first or last they must cast up what they have taken from him, takes
not much care, nor uses to beat any great charge to fortify his Frontires;
His power is safest by keeping the power of other Princes in their due
proportion, and that it may not out-balance; to which end he has often changd
his course of policy, and crossd the designs of the King of Spain (though
covertly) fearing that if he should swell too bigg he might be brought at last
to be but his Chaplain; he has also dealt so with France more than once.

Alexander the 6. who opposd the first ambitious motions of the French, was one
of the chiefest instruments that framed and fomented the Ligue, driving back
again the* other side the Hills Charles the 8. restoring the Arragonians to the
Kingdom of Naples, following heerin the true interest of the Apostolic See not
to permit any power to grow overgreat; yet afterward he betook himself again to
the frendshipp of the French, making a Bridge for Lewis the 12. to invade the
Kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy of Milan, hoping by the same Forces to
repress the contumacie of the Vicarii della Romagna, and della Marca, and out
of their ruins to erect a Colosse for the future greatness of Caesar Borgia.

Julius the second favored at first the designs of the French King, and
putting all Italy in a flame he suscitated all the Princes of Christendom
against the Venetian; but summoning his second thoughts to council, and
foreseeing that upon the depression of the Republic of Venice he might be
brought to depend upon the power of Forreners, he turned his arms against the
French, and drove them out of Italy, together with the Swisse, and the
Spaniards. Leo the 10. being passionat for the advancement of his Family was
sometimes a Partisan with France* sometimes with Spain as his interests directed
him. At first he sided with Francis the first, but afterward he did confederat
with Charles the 5. and employed the arms of the Church to chase away the
French out of Milan. Clement the 7. having labourd in vain to make a truce of
5. years twixt Charles and Francis, and perceaving at last that the latter of
the two was the stronger in Italy, he drew his own misfortune upon himself, by
the sack of Rome* and imprisonment of his person; so that he was forced
afterward to comply with the ambition of Charles to exalt his Nephews. Paul the
3. kept awhile that spirit of indifferency, and freedom* (...) the Pope should
professo toward all, yet to rear up the grandeur of the Farneses, he covertly
favord and somented the designs of Charles the Emperor to remove those
obstacles which lay in the way twixt D. (...) Lu^gi and a Principality. I^lius
the 3. to cast Duke Octavio out of Parma being already declared contumacious
to the Church, and to settle therein John Battista de (...) his Nephew, sufferd
himself to be hurld into a war against France, but being weary of the
excessive charge thereof, and in despair of any good to be don, he returned to
his former indifferency: But Paul the 4. being too indulgent of his affections
toward his Nephews, permitted himself to be transported upon vain hopes to an
open war with the King of Spain, procuring to this effect, that the truce did
break twixt the two Crowns; In which enterprise the success did not answer
his expectation, for had it not bin for the piety, and prudence of the Duke of
Alva he had bin utterly ruind, for there wanted very little that Rome had not
felt the same Catastrophe that happend in the time of Clement the 7.

The Civil Wars of France then beginning to rage, and consequently that wonted
power being taken away which usd to serve for a counterpoise to the greatness of
Spain, She grew thereby to a greater height, and became Arbitresse of the
affairs of Italy, in so much that the succeeding Bishopps had no opportunity
offered them to declare themselfs Partisans of the French, allthough some
sparkles of these affections did break out sometimes; So that for their own
interests, and by the cunning conduct of the Spaniard, some of them by degrees
came to be Dependents wholly upon that Crown; And the Spaniard finding that
their greatness in Italy could not receave a sounder establishment, or shrewder
shakings and shocks than by the friendship or enmity with the Pope, He has
ever since essayed all kind of ways to engage that Court unto him; And when he
waged any war, though the merit of the cause was mere civil, yet he gave out
it was for Religion, whereby he still engaged Rome to be his Partisan, as he did
against the Germans, and English, and in favor of the Guysards. Nor was he
short-handed in distributing his gifts up and down, with collation of honors
upon their Nephews, and other of their Favoritts, whereof he has plenty in
Naples and Calabria, which he enjoyes by paying a Heriot evry year: Nor is there
any Prince that is tied in more observances to the Pope than the King of Spain,
in regard that he pays him homage for most of his Kingdoms; nor is the Pope
of late years tied for more variety of respects to any Prince than to the
Spaniard; He complies also with the College of Cardinals, endeavoring mainly
to have a strong party there to out poise the French; though in the election of
Urban the eighth, the last Pope, his power fayld him among them; which Pope was
Fleurdelizd all over having bin raysd by the French faction that then was
predominant in the conclaves; which made this pasquill among others, to be
scatterd up and down, cur Petrus negat Dominum? quia Gallus cantat. Nor was
Urban the eighth averse only to the Spaniard, but to the whole house of
Austria, in so much that when the Emperor sent to solicit him for a sum of
money to support the War against the Swed, and the Northern peeple that had
hurld themselfs into the Territories of the Empire, he would not part with a
penny of S. Peter's patrimony to that use; which made the Spanish Soldiers up
and down the streets to call him Lutherano; And others to give out that there
was secret intelligence twixt Him and the King of Sweden, that when he had don
his work in Germany, he would assist him to recover his right to the Kingdom of
Naples; but indeed his aversnes to the Emperor was, because a little before he
had disturbd the common peace of Italy, about the quarrel with the Duke of
Savoy. This present Pope Innocent the tenth is as much an Austrian, as the
other was a Bourbonian which has not a little advantagd the Spaniard as it
has appeard by some successes since his creation; He is more Catholic than
Christian, whereas his Predecessor was vice versa.

TOuching the interests and disposition of the Dukes of Toscany, in regard they
were first introduced and establishd in that Duchy by the Arms of the house
of Austria, they hold their chiefest interest to be a dependency upon that
House, adhering always to that party with money and Arms; yet this tie was
not so strong but it slackned sometimes, when public liberty was at the stake;
wisely considering that the oppression of their neighbors would not exempt
them, but reserve them for a more certain ruin. Whereupon Cosmo the first stuck
not to assist the Genoways in a quarrel that was abetted by the Crown of
Spain; And after him Duke Ferdinand with great sums of moneys assisted Henry
the third, and Henry the fourth of France, persuading the latter to break with
Savoy, that by possession of the Marchisat of Salucces, France might always
have a gate open to Italy; And Cosmo the second to the same purpose supported
the Duke of Mantoua against him of Savoy; But this present Duke Ferdinand
although he makes show to breath nothing else than a kind of religious
observance to the Austrian Family, yet he has utterly refusd at present to
engage against France, whereupon in policy he disarmd those Galleys wherewith
he was usd formerly to scowr some of the Mediterranean and Greek Seas, to
prevent that neither Kings should desire his assistance.

TOuching the interests of the Republic of Genoa, since by means of Andrew
Doria She drew her neck out of the French yoke, and put Her self under the
protection of Spain, She has still mingled interests with that Crown; Charles
the first finding that the City of Genoa stood very commodiously for him to
convey his forces to Italy, solicited often Andrew Doria to consent to the
erecting of a sortresse, which, notwithstanding that he was movd thereunto by
the Emperor both with menaces and money, he would never agree unto; whereupon
the Emperor thought upon another new and more ingenious way to engage that
City, by putting a bridle of Gold into her mouth instead of that Iron one he
thought of at first; for ever since Genoa serves Spain for a scale to convey
her treasure to high and low Germany, whereby her bank of S. George has so
swelld, and the whole City has so enriched her self that it is wonderful;
for it may be said that most of the Indian Gold has passed ever since through
their fingers, so that much thereof must needs stick unto them, by the use the
Spaniard gives them when they advance any sum by way of assiento as they call
it, until his fleets com from the Indies; So that they have a saying in Spain
that the Genoways did use to carry their consciences in thin Pocketts, but the
weight of the Indian Gold has broken thorough, so that now there is neither
bottom or bounds left in them.

Now, there is no state in Italy that is more capable to incommode the Spaniard,
than that of Genova, and to put him in a hazard to lose Milan, and consequently
the other territories he enjoyes in Italy, which She may do if She denies Him
her ports, and hinder the landing of his Ships upon her coasts, or by shutting
the passages in that long list of Land which is called the River of Genoa;
Therefore the Spaniard, because he would not depend soly upon the affection of
that City, raised up a Fort at Monaco, and another at Finale, thereby, if it
were possible, to reduce the Republic to an entire dependence upon Him; In the
last War with Savoy the Genoways felt the benefit of the Spaniards protection,
which by way of diversion preservd them from much danger. Therefore in point of
interest Genoa may be said to be an inseparable confederat of the King of
Spaines both for profit and preservation, She is in relation to him like a
Partridg under a Faulcons wings, as the little Republic of Luca is to the Duke
of Florence, who can seize upon her when he list, but that he finds it more
advantageous unto him to permit Her to continu an industrious Republic still of
Herself.

TOuching the Dukes of Savoy, their interest has bin always to keep good
intelligence with France, therefore they never swervd from Her friendship, but
once in the time of Charles the fifth, when by the inducements of a Portuguez
Wife, Charles Emanuel refusd passage to the French King, which cost him
afterward very dear; And it had cost him much more, unless he had comported
himself with extraordinary cunning and artifice, which made Him to be termd the
little Fox of the Mountains.

THe Dukes of Mantoua, as the rest of the Minor Princes of Italy; were usd to
profess a total dependence upon the house of Austria; yet Duke Ferdinand a
wise Prince, knowing that in the first motions of Monferrat, the designs of
Savoy were fomented by Offices underhand from the Spaniard for his own
advantage, he chose rather to defend himself from Savoy without the Spaniards
help: but D. Carlo succeeding he was forcd to adhere to the King of France for
his safety, in regard of diverse Garrisons he had up and down Monferrat.

THe Dukes of Parma, though thrust out of Piacenza by Charles the 5. and having
bin beaten by him in Parma, they had good reason to follow the interests of
France, by whom they had receavd both their conservation and restablishment,
more than once, yet they thought safer still to stick unto Him that was Duke of
Milan, till now of late that this present Duke is much Frenchified.

TOuching the political interests, and inclinations of the Duke of Modena, and
the State of Luca, they have more confidence in the House of Austria than in
the French, and so they apply themselfs accordingly in point of respect and
compliances: Nor indeed can it be denied but all Italy is beholding to the
Spaniard in diverse respects, as for the introducing of Tresure, and increse of
Trade; as also that his outpoising power keeps the inferior Princes in peace,
and from encroching one upon the other, lest if he should strike in by way of
Auxiliary, he might swallow up both parties; yet, it may be observd, that the
Italians respect the Spaniard out of mere political interest, not out of any
affection; so that all of them would restrain his power if they could, but like
the Mice in the Fable, they cannot find any that will venture first to hang the
Bell about the Catts neck.

HAving by these short expatiations given a few touches of the rest of the
Principalities of Italy in point of political interests, we now return to
poursue and perfect the survay of the Signorie of Venice in this particular
also; which, taking her power by Land and Sea conjunctly, is acknowledgd to be
the strongest knot of strength in Italy, if we consider the reaches of her
Dominions, with the firmenes and solidity of her establishment, as also the
prudent and cautious conduct of her proceedings.

Now touching her interests, and disposition toward the two great Kings
forementiond, all her counsels and designs, ever since the entrance of foreign
Armies into Italy, have tended to conserve her own liberty and greatness: It
being an old observation, that all States do retain still the humor of their
first Founders; as ambition, and desire of war appeerd always in the City
of Rome, because her first Founders were full of that humor; But those of
Venice being not transported with such exorbitant thoughts, but addicted to
peace, trafic, wealth and repose, having bin formerly harassd by the long
calamities of Italy, and the inundation of barbarous peeple, when they had
got into those safe retirements, the first and fundamental maxim of policy
they proposd to themselfs, was to maintain their common freedom, and live
secure. And herin the Republic of Venice may be said to differ from the late
States of Holland also, whose first foundation was laid in blood by Arms and
War; Now it is a Rule that Eodem modo, Res conservatur, quo acquiritur; By the
same means things are conservd whereby they are got; In so much that if
Holland follow the humors of her first Founders, She will love war better than
peace, and happly be incited thereunto by an old prophecy that runns of her;

Mart triumphabis, Batavia, pace peribis.
Holland, by war Thou shall increase,
Thou will destroy Thy self by peace.
Now, one of the ways whereby the Republic of Venice has endeavored to
preserve her Maydenhead and freedom so long, has bin to keep the power of the
potentst Princes in a counterpoise; whereby She has often adapted her designs,
and accommoded Her-self to the condition of the times, and frequently changd
thoughts, will, friends, and enemies; She has bin always usd to suspect any
great power, to fear much, and confide little, to be perpetually vigilant of
the operations of others, and accordingly to regulat her own consultations and
proceedings; whereby She has bin often accusd of exces in circumspection.

Therefore when that impetuous shock was given Italy by Charles the 8. She only
lookd on a good while, and kept Her*self Neutrall; but afterward seeing the
common freedom of Italy floting among the French arms, She made head against
them at last, freeing Milan from that imminent danger which hoverd visibly ore
her head, and so forcd that King to find his way back ore the Alps, and to
leave the Kingdom of Naples to the Aragonians; To free Her-self from the
stratagems of More, and to join Cremona to her Republic, She favored the
designs of Lewis the 12. upon the State of Milan; But this conjunction was
like that with the Lion, who uses to snatch all to himself; For Lewis
afterward to thrust Venice out of Cremona colleagud himself with diverse other
Princes, inciting them to invade Her Territories on firm Land; In so much that
he introduced the Pope, the Spaniard, and King of the Romans; but while they
thought to rush into the Venetian Territory, they were cunningly excluded by
the Spaniards their Confederatts, who gathering the fruit of other men's labors
impatronizd himself of some Towns, to recover which the Venetians betook
themselfs to the friendship of Francis the French King, by which League they
recoverd what formerly had bin taken from them. But afterward finding that the
French for their disorders had lost the Duchy of Milan, and that by continuing
that League they exposd to some hazard their own liberty; the Republic with
fortune changd Her friend, and entered into League with Charles the Emperor: But
upon that monstrous success of fortune in Pavia when the French King was taken
Prisoner, to preserve the common liberty of Italy which was like to be
swallowed up by the Emperor, She re-entred into a new League with Francis not
without extreme hazard, because in the peace of Cambray he had quite abandond
Her, so She was left alone to wrestle with the Emperor and the formidable
Armies he had then afoot, against whom She bore up with much generosity a good
while, whereby together with the peace of Bologna She procurd the restitution of
Francesco Sforza to the Duchy of Milan; An accord which She observd with such
candor and punctuality that although She was invited by many favorable
conjunctures to unite again upon high advantageous terms with the Crown of
France, to thrust the Spaniards out of Milan, whereof they had rendered
themselfs Masters after the death of Francis Sforza, yet she would never lend
any ^are thereunto merely out of her filial affection to Italy, that she might
not be plungd again in new troubles; as also finding how unlucky the French
had often bin that side the Alps; so that ever since the peace of Bologna*
which was in the year 1530. there never happend any open War twixt Spain and
Venice. Ever since, the Republic perceaving that the Popes were often
transported with their own interests, and that other Princes were either their
dependents, or their forces weak, the Republic of Venice has stood as it were
in perpetual centinell to watch the common freedom of Italy, whereby She has
much incurrd the hate of the Spaniard, who seemd to stomach it much that Venice
should so stand in counterpoise with him* Thereupon because he could do no good
by open force* he went another way to work to do her a displesure, which was by
erecting (...) Fortresses in the Valtoline to impede all supplies that might
com that way unto Her upon ocasion; The Republic finding that tho Spanish
Ministers aymd at nothing more than to depresse her strength, and so make
themselfs masters of all Italy in time, she studied to find means by money,
and counsel to divert the strength of the Spaniard, and cut him out some work
another way out of Italy, imitating herein the Faul^r who standing himself in
repose and firm upon the Earth, letts fly Goshauks, and Faukcons at the Birds
of the Air.

And although Venice appeerd for the support of M^ntoua, yet this was don so
cunningly, that it did nothing prejudice her Peace with Spain, or obligd Her to
second France in that business, though She was much courted thereunto by
Belieure, and other great Ministers to engage. So that although in former times
She has bin often constraind to play fast and loose twixt Spain and France,
yet this last century She has kept herself always in a politic neutrality.

SInce the principal aim of this piece is to make the industrious Reader fully
acquainted with this Maiden Republic* therefore we thought it worth the labor,
to insert here the opinions of the most approved and authentic Writers, (that
have exposed to the World any thing of political goverments) and a collation
of their judgments, with the variety of expressions may conduce much to
instruct the Reader, and perfect his knowledge of this famous Signorie.

Bodinus de Republica Lib. 11. COntarenus thinks the same judgment to be
passed upon the Venetian Republic, which he thinks may agree with all the three
kinds of Governments; Est, inquit, in Duce Regia quod^modo potestas; in Senat^,
Aristocratia; In Concilio Maximo, Democrati^. There is says he, a kind of
Regal power in the Duke, an Aristocracy in the Senate, And a Democracy in the
great Council. But Ianotus who has described the state of that Commonwealth
from her first originalls, and written most accuratly of her secrecies of
Government convinces Contarenus, and accuses him of gross errors; He
demonstrates therefore that before Sebastiano Cyani who was Doge of Venice,
which is about 300 years since, the Republic then was plainly a Monarchical
Government. Contarenus averrs, that She has remaind about 800 years in the very
same condition She is now in; Paulus Magustius speaks of 1200 years, which
Ianotus proves to be false out of the public Acts, and the History of the Times.

Howsoever it be, It is most evident that, in statu quo nunc the Republic of
Venice is a pure Aristocracy: For by the description of the City and the cense
that was made of the Inhabitants 30 years since, there were about 60000.
Citizens excepting Women, and Children that had not exceeded seven years of
Age; as also the Patricians in whom the power of the Republic is seated, whose
number may amount to 4000. All kind of Churchmen are exempted out of this
number, and young men under five and twenty, who have no access either to the
great Council, or the administration of any Office, unless upon request made
by their Seniors the same be obtaind; Nor is there in the Assembly of the great
Council, which has bin so long establishd both in our Ancestors, and late
Progenitors times, more than 1500; but in former times there were much fewer as
appeers among the Historians; This Convention therefore of the Patricians,
Gentry or Nobility has the supreme power over all Laws and Magistrates, of
Peace and War, of last appeals, of life and death as Contarenus himself
confesses. Which being so who can doubt but this Republic is a pure
Aristocracy? For if the better sort of men had nothing else but the power of the
Law and Magistracy, it were argument enough to judge that it is an Optimacy as
we taught before; since that the election of Magistrates, of the Senate, of the
Colleges, of the Septemvirat, of the Decemviri, of the forty private, and so
many public Judges criminal and civil, depends merely upon the grand council
of the Nobility or Gentry, and the rest mere precarian powers.

The Duke is He, who being a Soverain Governor may be said only to want
command, for he can neither summon any one before him, or apprehend any by his
sole command, or demand any, nor has He more power in any College of Senators,
whether great or small but only that he gives the last suffrage; nor can He
open any Letters either from foreign Princes, or any Magistrate, or Officer, nor
admit or dismiss any Ambassadors without some of the College of the
Septemvirat, or Decemvirat; nor can He marry a stranger, or go out of the City
of Venice without leave. Duke Falerio, because he married a Lady that was born
out of the Dominions of the Republic without the consent of the Senate, was by
the Decemvirat Council sentencd to death, and executed; besides Him Sabellious
enumerats twelve Dukes that either were slain in a popular tumult, or punishd
when they abusd their power.

The same Author in his 3. Book writes thus: BUt the Senator must take this for
a principal caution, that he suffer not himself to be depravd by any bribes,
or engagd by any benefitt; which allthough it be capital there, yet is it
ordinary elsewhere in other States, and except the Signorie of Venice who has a
Senate so free and pure from this kind of sordidnes, that the very Churchmen
allthough they be Citizens and Patricians born are restraind therefore from
their civil Counsels, because they are known to be sworn to act not any thing
against the profitts, and interest of the Roman Bishop; That cry is well known
to all the world, that before all suffrages this acclamation uses to be in the
great Council, Fuora 1 preti, insomuch that Hermolao Barbaro (and what a man
was He?) receavd the sentence of banishment, because while Ambassador in Rome
he sufferd himself to be coopted into the College of Cardinals without the
consent of the Senate.

Iac. Aug. Thuanus Lib. 23. THe Venetian Senate, which may be truly called the
Shopp of all civil prudence, has it for a special Caveat, That none initiated
in Holy Orders should touch any part of the Republic.

The same in his 27. Book. There Is no Prince in all Italy except the Venetian
Republic, in the conciliation of whose friendship the King ought to labor much,
for by Her Laws it is severely prohibited, that none of Her Subjects receave
any pension from a foreign Prince.

Cardinal Arnoldus Ossat in his 353. Epistle. THe Venetians to speak truly
have no more devotion than needs; yet they manage their affairs with as much
prudence and gravity as any other Prince; you remember without doubt, how after
the death of the last King, they presently acknowledgd this present King ( viz.
Henry the 4.) and how they respected our Ambassador as formerly, yet they would
not admit him to com with the other Ambassadors to the Chapel, till the King
was reconcild to the Church of Rome; This they did because the Pope, with the
King of Spain, and all the world might bear wittnes, that, howsoever what they
did for political reasons, yet they were exact observers of the Catholic
Religion.

Interdicti Veneti Histor. Lib. 1. THe Republic of Venice excludes all
Ecclesiastiques from the participation of Her government, and only She neither
gives or takes any pensions from the Court of Rome.

Paulus Paruta in Histor. Venet. Lib. 4. OUr Progenitors took singular care
that the Citizens of Venice should employ their industry to navigation and
maritime negotiation for the increase and improvement of public and private
wealth, and that the Venetian name might be propagated to remote and outlandish
Nations; The situation of the City seems to invite Her to such studies and
exercises, and to infuse such a propensity into the minds of Her Inhabitants;
In regard that the City having not of Her-self any Lands to cultivat, which
might answer their industry, and make them rich, and being destitut of all
things else that are necessary for humane subsistence, necessity herself did
excite them to naval industry, and to furrow the Sea, which fills her with
abundance, and affluence of all things conducing to a being, and well-being;
This made Her employ hundreds of Ships and Galleys abroad into foreign
Countries, as well to Christian Regions, as to Infidells, and bring back rich
commodities of all sorts, not only for Her own ocasions, but to exercise
comerce and exchange commodities with Her neighbors far and near to Her
unspeakable advantage: In these Galleys many young men of the Gentry and
Patrician Order do use to imbark themselfs, as well for marchandizing, as to
gain experience up and down the world, specially in the Art of Navigation; Many
whereof use to sojourn a long time among foreign peeple, and dispatch not only
their own affairs, but do favors and negotiat for others: Whereby they attain
to a great proportion of knowledge in all things, and being returned and salted
as it were in the world, and composd to frugality and modesty, they com to the
management of the public affairs of the Commonwealth.

Bodinus de Repub. Lib. 3. BUt because no man may think that so many Counsels
should breed a confusion in so well ordered a Republic, he must think that She
divides Her Counsels into ^ower principal Classes besides the Senate, there is
the Council of Sages which is called the marine Council; then is there the
Council of Sages, who have the incumbency of matters by Land* Then is there a
Council of Decemvirs, and Septemvirs, wherein the Duke, as in all other
Colleges, presides; Which Counsels though they be sejoynd in Colleges and
Offices, yet when the quality of the affair requires, they all consociat. The
Senate is composd of 60. Gentlemen, who with so many more Citizens have the
greatest management of affairs.

Idem ibidem. WHat we have spoken for matter of taking Counsel, it is no where
practisd better than it is in Venice, for when there is a doubtful deliberation
of things in both the Counsels of Sages, they use to expedit it conjunctly
with the Decemvirs; Therefore it is subscribed underneath the decree con la
giunta; but if all this be not sufficient to put a period to the business in
agitation in regard of discrepancy of Opinions, the Septemviri are consulted;
and if this will not serve the turn, for discrepancy of censures, the Senate is
assembled, where the whole matter is displayed; but if the authority of the
Senate will not suffice, but there will be still dissentient suffrages, then it
is finally determined by the Great Council.

Idem Lib. 5. THe Venetians restrain Dowries by a specall Law, viz. that the
Portion of a Patrician Damsel, or Gentlewoman be but 1600. Crowns, lest the
wealth of illustrious Families be exhausted; but if a Gentleman marry a
Plebean, the dowry is terminated to 2000. Crowns: But they suffer now this Law
to be in a manner antiquated, that the poverty of some Gentlemen may be repaird
by the dowry of a Wife; But this is prudently observed, that they use as much
as may be to remove Women from hereditary right, if there be any Male extant.

Idem Lib. 6. NOt long since in the year 1566. the Venetians created three
Magistrates, and endowd them with a Censorian power, whom they called a
Triumvirat, for the Reformation of the manners of the Citizens; commonly called
I Signori sopra il ben vivere della Citta; and they were thus entitled because
the word Censor seemd to grave and severe for a City that was so free from
the beginning, and abounding with affluence of all plesures.

Idem Eodem Lib. THe Venetians do daily exercise and entertain above 4000.
persons in public works, than which nothing can be more profitable to the
common peeple, more commodious to the City, and more delightful to all men;
And as they employ so many in public works, so with wonderful benignity, they
distribut part of the public wealth for the relieving and sustentation of the
aged and indigent.

Paulus Paruta in Hist. Ven. Lib. 7. IT has bin provided by a singular way of
circumspection, and for the advantage of the Republic, that Her Ambassadors
which She employed abroad upon legations of State to foreign Princes, should not
reserve to themselfs what is given them by way of gift, but to confer it to the
public; but if by particular favor such Ambassadors were permitted to retain
such presents, such a grace must pass by the suffrage of the Senate, to oblige
them thereby more to the benevolence of the Senate, than to the bounty of any
foreign Prince.

Paulus Iovius Lib. 1. THe City of Venice is ample and magnificent, by navall
study, and Mercantile Negotiations She grew up from small beginnings, but for
Her incredible advantage of situation She is admird, and preferrd before all
other Cities under the Sun; because that She being girt about with the waters
of the interfluent Hadrian Sea, and so not exposd to any sudden surprises or
assaults, She securely enjoyes Her-self, and Her tresure, hoording it up for
times of danger; For there is no approach to Her by Land, in regard 40. Stades of
Sea intercede; nor any advenue by Sea, in regard of the blind and low foords,
unknown to strangers, which are round about.

The Venetians generally are grave in Counsel, severe in judgment, constant
in adversity, and moderat in prosperity; There is an unanimous study in them all
to conserve the public liberty, and to increase their Empire; In the Senate they
speak with much freedom and oftentimes with much heat and eagernes if the cause
require.

There is not any of the Senatorian Order or others, though he excel the rest
never so much in wisdom, spirit or valor, and services performd for the
Republic, that is sufferd to grow too high, or by conciliation of popular
credit and esteem to become too powerful; By which reach of policy and
institution, they use in their Wars by Land to employ strangers for their
General, lest one of their own might be puffd up with pride, and grow too
ambitious* They are all grave Gownmen, who have administerd this Republic from
the beginning, and preservd Her from intestin tumults; But touching maritime
affairs, and navall discipline these grave men shake off their togated
Habitts, and receave Martial employment, according to the exigency of the
ocasion.

Some Observations of the City and Signorie of Venice, taken out of Sansovino.
THe Air of Venice is exceeding good, because it is continually purgd with the
flux and reflux of the Adriatic Sea, which carry away with it every six hours
whatsoever is corrupt and noysom, besides the multitude of fires dissolveth all
unwholsom vapors, and the free scope of the winds blowing every where without
impediment makes the Air more sound, and vigorous; besides much is attributed
to the saltnes which being by its nature more hot and less cold engenders an
equal and most sweet temperature, so that strangers with great amazement do
not any where behold men more venerable, of greter age, fuller of flesh,
straight bodied, of goodly presence, and more vigorous constitution; but above
all other things this is most strange, that this Air by a special privilege of
Nature does agree with the complexions of all comers that resort thither of
what Nation, or under what climat soever they be born, whether the same be
subtle and penetrating, or thick and foggie.

Round about there is such an innumerable quantity of all excellent sorts of
Fish, that not only the Inhabitants have plenty of Fish taken twice evry day,
but they also furnish the adjoining Cities upon the Continent, as well those
that are under their Dominion as others; The like marvailous abundance they
have of wildfoull, so different in kind, and diverse in color, that it is strange
to see their various sorts, their variety being such that we have seen 200
several kinds of them painted most exactly in their natural hue by Marino
Malipiero, the most exquisit and ingenious man of his time in that Art.

This City above all other is worthy to be admired, as being singular by Her
self, and brooking no comparison with any other; For what other City soever
has bin either pleasant by situation, or glorious in goodlines of buildings,
yet it had some kind of resemblance with others; but only this being seated in
the midst of the waters has not any thing upon Earth to which it may be
resembled, the rare position whereof being such, that it injoyeth the
commodities of the waters, and the plesures of the Land, secure by being among
the waves from Land assaults, and free by not being founded in the depths of
the Sea from Maritim violences; So that whereas other Cities do keep and
defend their Citizens with Walls, Towers, and Gates, This being naked and
without Ramparts, is not only secure Her-self, but rendereth also with
admirable prudence such Cities secure as do sleep under Her wings. Among many
other rare Edifices sumptuous as well in the richnes of the matter, as
marvailous for the most singular curiosity of workmanship the Steeple of S.
Mark is most miraculous, the same being so huge high and stately, that in fair
wether it is seen and discernd by those that sail from Istria 100 miles off;
the special care and oversight whereof is committed always to a person of
special quality, who has for his allowance 150. Crowns yearly stipend.

WE will now descend to some particular customs of this Maiden City as her
manner of marying, and of the fruits thereof Her Christnings. Marriages among the
Nobility ar for the most part always treted of by a third person, the Bride
being never suffered as much as to see her future Husband, nor He Her, until
the marriage dower, and all things thereunto appertaining, be fully agreed upon
and concluded, which being don, the next morning the Bridegroom goes to the
Court of the Palace, and there the match being published he receaveth
well-wishing speeches, and salutations from such of the Nobility as do enter
into the Palace, and withal inviteth his friends to the house of the Brides
Father, to be there at a certain time appointed in the afternoon; At the entry
of the door they are attended by the Bridegroom and his kindred, and brought up
to a Hall where there are none but men only, and there the Bride is brought forth
apparrell'd by an ancient custom all in white, her hairs dischevell'd, and
hanging about her sholdiers woven in and out with filletts of Gold; where being
betrothed with many solemn Ceremonies, She is led about the Hall with Flutes,
Drums and other instruments, still dancing in a soft mesure, then She boweth
down to those that salute Her; Having so showed Her-self She goes in and
returns out again, If any men friends do chance to com that had not seen Her
before, She comes out and presents Herself, then She enters to a Gondola, and
being attended by diverse other She goes up and down to the Nunneries,
specially to those where any of Her Kindred are reclusd; Now this showing of
Her* self abroad is to no other end, but in regard of Her Children and sundry
other things, it may after happen She may make Her Nuptials apparent to all:
At evry Wedding there is a Gentleman or two called Compari, that are as it were
Masters of the Revells, because their charge is to see unto the Musik, and
whatsoever other shows or pastimes appertain to the Feast, the next Morning
their Friends and Kindred present the new Married couple with sundry sorts of
Restoratives and sweet Meats.

THe Christnings in Venice are somewhat diffring from other places, for the
Father inviteth not two Godfathers and a God-mother, or two Godmothers and a
Godfather, but as many as they list, insomuch that sometimes there have bin
above 150 at a Christning, but to the end that this Goshipship should no way be
a bar or impediment among the Gentlewomen in matter of Marriage, it was by a Law
ordained, that one Gentleman should not take another Gentleman for his Goship,
whence it comes that when the Priest powers the Water on the Child's Head, he
first makes mention of the Law, and then demands if there be among the
Goships any one of the Venetian Nobility. Nor are there any Women admitted to
the Christning but only the Nurse, who has the charge of the Child; The next
day the Father sends to evry Goship a Marchpane, and evry of them sends back
some present or other to the Child according to the custom of the City; Their
greatest magnificence and charge, is at the nativity of the Child, for then
they wonderfully exceed not only in the sumptuousnes of their Banquetts, but
also in rich furniture, and adorning of their houses.

Likewise there is no place on Earth where the Funeral of the meanest Citizen
is solemnizd with greater Ceremony and Expense; nor is there any Country where
strangers find better entertainment, and live in greater security.

The Plesures, Recreations and Pastimes of the Gentlemen are of diverse kinds,
among the rest they take great delight in Fowling making great matches who can
kill most Foul in a day, turning still the end thereof to banqueting and
pleasure. They have Boats of purpose called Fisolari so named from Fisolo, which
is the name of the Bird they seek after; In evry of these Boats they have six
or eight servants apparrell'd in bluish, or greenish garments, suited as nere
as they can to the color of the Water, These row the Boat up and down, turning
her suddenly to evry side as they are commanded by their Masters, who sits
close with his Piece or Bow wholly intentive upon his sport; If he chance to
miss when he shoots, the Fisolo diverse under water, and where he rises
again thither they turn their Boats with much nimblenes; Diverse Boats use to
go to this pastime, which is very chargeable to the Gentlemen; Upon their
return they hang the Foul they have killd out of the Window, as Hunters do
upon their Doors the heads of Bears, Bores, Hares, taking it as a great
reputation to kill more of these in a day than their fellows can.

The Dukes of Venice have by ancient privileges confirmd by sundry Emperors,
authority to create Earls and Knights, and likewise Poetts Laureat, with either
of which dignities the Prince of Venice does use to honor and reward persons of
merit and virtu.

The Dukes have oftentimes matchd in the greatest and royallest Houses of
Christendom, which alliances with foreign Princes growing suspected to the
Commonwealth, there was a Law made in the year 1327. that the Duke might not
marry the Daughter of any Stranger, though by privilege and adoption he had
obtaind the right and title of a Venetian Gentleman; And in the year 1383. it
was ordaind that he should not marry the Daughter, Sister or Kinswoman of any
foreign Prince, without the license and consent of the great Council.

The Dukes of Venice were wont in times passd to honor themselfs with high and
Princely titles, as calling themselfs Dukes of Venice, Dalmatia and Croatia,
Lords of a half part, and a quarter of the whole Roman Empire, etc. which
vanity of titles was taken away in the year 1360. and utterly prohibited, and
this title only allowd, I. D. By the grace of God Duke of Venice, etc. The
common coin is stampd with the inscription of the Dukes name then in being, but
it is against the Law that any Duke should ingrave, imborder or paint his
peculiar Coat of Arms in any Ensigns, Banners, Galleys, Seats of Justice, or
public places of honor, but only within the Precincts of the Palace. Yet is He
buried with all the Princely magnificence that may be: Being dead, His Bowels
are taken out, and His Body embalmd, after which He is kept diverse days openly
in the Hall attended by the Senators (as said before) His Hearse being coverd
over with a large Cloth of rich Gold, and his Sword and Spurs lying athwart
of the Hearse; He is waited on to His Grave by all the Fraternities of the
City, and the Churchmen with an innumerable company of Torches; Next follow
the Officers and chief Servants of the Dukes Family all apparrelld in black,
with Hoods ore their heads, and a long train; Next them com the Senators all in
Scarlett and grain, signifying the City of Venice to be ever free, therefore
ought not to mourn at the death of any Prince how virtuous soever: With this
pomp they pass to Saint Marks Place, where the Beer is lifted up on high nine
times that evry one might take his perpetual farewell of Him; Then is He
carried to the Church, and a solemn Funeral Oration is made for Him; then the
Senators return to the Palace, and presently proceed to the Election of a new
Duke, which they cannot do by the ancient constitution till the other be first
under ground; and so Corruption unius, est generatio alterius.

Private Instructions given to Cardinal F. when he was sent Nuntio to Venice.
IT being the main design of this Discourse to make the Reader perfectly
acquainted with this Maiden Republic, it will not be amiss to insert here the
Instructions that were given by Pope Gregory to his Nuntio, when he was employed
upon an extraordinary Legation to the Signorie of Venice; for it will conduce
much to understand the style of the Signorie, and compliances that must be usd
in that Court.

THe first Discourse your Excellency shall hold with the Prince and Signorie of
Venice shall aim at two ends; The one, to expose unto his Serenity the pleasure
of his Holiness, therein declaring the ocasion and aims of your Legation; The
other, to express the particular affections you bear to that most excellent
Signorie.

Touching the first, it shall suffice that you follow the tenor and substance
of your Commission, having a special charge not to recede from it in any
material point.

Touching the second, it is referrd chiefly to your own election and judgment
what to deliver, for endearing your self to the Duke, and Senators.

And in general you may say that what employment soever his Holiness had cast
upon you, you had esteemd it a high favor, being entirely addicted to Him, and
the Holy Seat; But that you were far more obligd to his Holiness, that He
vouchsafd to employ you to his Serenity, and that most illustrious Republic,
because you had a long desire to renew the memory of that servitude, and high
affections which the Archbishop your Oncle had vowed to the Signorie, to whom
both your parentage and person will be ever well affected; Besides, you held it
a great honor that you had to negotiat with a Prince so full of Majesty, and
Grandeur, being the Head of the greatest, the most flourishing, and best orderd
Commonwealth in the world; In so much that after the service of his Sanctity,
you will prefer that of his Serenity before all other, and that you will be
ever ready to make it good in effect, as well as in affection, and turn your
words to actions, and that you stand there most ready to give proof thereof;
Moreover, that the bent of your endeavors, and study will be to preserve, and
improve the paternall love which his Holiness bears toward that most noble
Republic; that you love the very name of Venice; therefore nothing shall take
greater room in your thoughts than to maintain the good intelligence, and union
which is, and ought to be betwixt the Popedom and the Republic, in regard that
the Princes of both aim at the same object, They have the same wills, and
incumbency to conserve the authority of their States; That in order to this you
will employ your main strength, with all your spirits, and that you will be so
zealous herin as if you were born his Holiness vassal, being very loath that
your Oncle should go before you but only in time in point of good will and
affection toward that most illustrious Signorie.

Your own prudence shall direct you herin, and how to place your words, that
they may be more or less moving to gain the amity and confidence of the Lords
of the Senate, wherein gravity will advantage you much, and it may be, more than
any thing else: In this first discourse you are to mingle with your best
dexterity some honorable mention of the Republiques Ambassador at Rome, and what
contentment he gives to his holiness in all Treaties, and how well he deserves
of his Country; As also what respect and benevolence all the Prelates of the
Roman Court do profess unto him; This intimation shall serve you for two ends,
for you will thereby draw thanks from the Kindred of the said Ambassador, and
making them your confidents they will further you in all your negotiations;
Besides, you will thereby oblige the Ambassador himself, who will take ocasion
to correspond with you in like civilities, therefore you must not fayl to give
the said Ambassador here a solemn visit, and take conge of him, desiring that
he would command you in any service to his Kindred and Friends, whither you are
going, endeavoring thereby to make the deepest impressions you can upon his
soul, That you go to Venice with a resolution to serve and honor him and his
upon all occurrences, whereof you are to desire him to certify them by Letters,
and possess them before hand in your behalf that they would love, and favor
you with their friendship; you may assure the Ambassador also that you will
never propose any thing that may be prejudicial to any of them. In sum, you
are always to preserve the friendship of the Ambassador entire, both by
Letters, and other good Offices you shall do to his Friends, and Kinsmen, but
not engaging your self to do the like in his behalf to others, for that would
happily turn to a disservice to the Gentleman, and be no advantage to your self.

Some days after your first audience you must think what visits to make, and
because you need no instruction how to comport your self toward the Prelates, I
must give you a special caution not to visit the Doge by himself, or speak to
him alone; Nor must you visit all sorts of Senators, specially those that be
young, for that would be unseemly; Nor indeed does any Senator much desire to be
visited because it may breed jealousy, and so draw danger upon him; And there
may be two reasons alleged why they do not desire to be visited by strangers;
The first is the parsimonious and private life's they lead; The other, because
they have some of their Brothers or Children that are Prelates, so that it would
be a kind of offense to them to visit their Parents, either for the small
splendour of their dwellings, or for the simplicity of their manners. Therefore
allthough no exact rule can be given you what persons you are to visit, yet in
the General, they must be those that for Office or Magistracy live with more
Magnificence, and splendour than others having Palaces accordingly, such as are
the Procurators of S. Mark; nor must these visits be frequent, but only twice a
year will suffice, or it may be a longer interposition of time, according as
custom shall teach you, allthough they who com to visitt you do it oftener.

When any of the principal Senators shall com to your House to salute you, or
treat of any business, those of your Family must be all ready to receave him at
the Gate, and you must meet him upon the stairs, but when they depart, you are
to bring them to the bottom of the stairs, though they reject it never so
much: your comportment toward Gentlemen of younger years, and less dignity
shall be regulated by your own judgment, and in such a manner as shall be
obliging to them but not undervaluing your self; You must propose this as an
universal rule to your self, that if you entreat the Prelates well, and bind
them unto you, as I know you will evertuat your self to do, they may become
instruments of great matters by the means of their Parents, although their
Parents may not make any show that you are so affected to them, or they to you:
the Prelates being well satisfied by you, will much avayle you, in giving good
reports of you at Rome.

I must advise your Excellency again that gravity will steed you much, because
the Venetian Gentlemen make profession thereof, and esteem it above any thing,
not as much for apparances only, as for well becoming public Ministers of
State; because it is an argument of staydnes, of virtue and prudence. Yet this
gravity must not turn to an austerity, or take away that affability, candor and
sweetness which you are to use toward all people, for so you may be esteemed to
be fantastical and proud. Therefore you must speak, and treat with such an
unaffected gravity that may be suitable to your person: And when you have any
thing to do in the Senate, be mindful of the rank you hold, and of the quality
of that Prince whom you represent; yet showing a great deal of reverence, and
presupposing that you are in the presence of a King. All the discourse you shall
make in the Senate, shall be addressed to the Prince, and allthough you speak to
the whole College, yet you shall always use these words, Vestra serenita, or
Serenissimo Principe.

You must have a special care to honor the Venetian Gentlemen, according to
their Age and Dignity, And you must know that those Gentlemen love to be
courted and complimented, specially if they be invested in any Office of
Dignity; And honor is the more dear unto them, when it comes from a person of
noble Employment and Extraction; Whereas otherwise they will deem it an injury
not to be respected, turning such disrespects into disdain and scorn of him
that will not give them their due, because the Senators and Patricians of
Venice have high conceits of themselfs for their antiquity, and for their
freedom continued so many Ages inviolable.

Besides the difference that ought to be put betwixt old and young, or those
that are graduated with offices or not graduated, whereof the first of both are
to be the more esteemd, you must also make some distinction betwixt Families.
Now, the Families of the Venetian Gentry is divided to three ranks, viz. to
ancient, new, and midling Houses; The ancientst are the most honorable, and
esteemd more then others, therefore allthough you are to respect all Gentlemen
in general, yet you must have a special regard to put your self in lower
postures of reverence toward those ancient families; but you must beware not
to do it in public, so that others take notice thereof, but particularly, and
in private discourse; So that this distinction of old and new Families must be
reservd within your own breast, otherwise the other rank of Nobles will take
exception at your partial behavior, which may turn to your prejudice.

Among the Prelates of that Nation the Patriark is the Prince, and more highly
esteemd than any other, as well for his age, as eminency, as also commonly for
his parentage, and friends, and that he lives more splendidly and hospitably
then any other; And the Senators afford him in some cases as much respect as
they do to the College of ten when they send to him for his opinion, which yet
cannot turn to a suffrage: You must make great account of him therefore, but
take heed that this great Prelat do not overact himself in point of return. I
believe you know well what was negotiated of old at Rome in behalf of that
Patriarch, and how the Signorie Her-self recommended him unto the Pope, and
thought to pourchase him that honor; but seeing him excepted against, She stirrd
no further, or made any more instance for any other during the time of that
Pope. That Prelat nevertheles cease not to aggrandize himself by recommending
his cause to all the Nuntio's: Therefore you shall be easily prayed to do some
good offices for him about his Holiness, it may be, you may receave high
answers, and replies, therefore you must carry your self with a great deal of
dexterity, and moderation in this business; But if you undertake to do such an
office, the Signorie will be ill satisfied, and the refusal he receavd from
other Nuntio's will serve you for directions what you ought to do: You must
declare to such as shall discourse with you about this Prelat, the high respect
you bear unto him, for his singular parts of virtue, and merit, making show to
serve him in all things to the utmost extent of your ability, provided that it
be acceptable to the Signorie, and herin your answer must be short and strict.

You must not invite any Venetian Gentleman to take a repast with you,
specially any Senator; yet in some case one may do it, and so your invitation
will not be unpleasing, but well accepted; This must be don, when any of those
Gentlemen chance to negotiat with you about eating time, because that inviting
him then, is a sign that you rather comply with the time, then that you do it
out of a real desire, but this rarely happens. If he who is invited does not
refuse to stay, you must remember that he is a Senator, therefore you must not
suffer him to sit beneath the Prelates, but you must place him in the highest
Seat, allthough happily he make resistance; but I believe you will find but
little opposition, in regard that the Prelates themselfs will concur with you
in this observance; A little after the repast you must rise from the Table, and
give this Senator the opportunity for to depart, without detaining him longer,
and when he departs you shall accompany him to the bottom of the Stairs.

You must refrain to show your self over curious to know the secrets, and pry
much into the mysteries of this Republic, for then you may deprive your self of
their conversation; therefore you must not seem to make any straight friendship
with her Secretaries, yet you must honor them upon all ocasions, that it may
appeer how much you esteem them; and for public transactions you may be well
assurd, that they will com home to your doors without the trouble of making any
reserches after them.

If it happen that you be requird to recommend anybody to the Senators, ponder
the business so well before hand that you may not com off with a denial; You
must take heed to recommend to any temporal Judges the persons of Churchmen in
processes against the Laiks: You must not favor in that City or Signorie the
execution of any sentence given at Rome, unless you have commandment from his
Holiness so to do, which you must show.

Let your Servants be observant to know the customs and fashions of the
City, not geering at such things that may happily breed laughter in a Stranger;
But on the contrary, let them be pliable to accommodat themselfs to the modes
of the place; for some fashions that are held comely in other places, may seem
ridiculous here. And oftentimes they will not disdain to use in ordinary
discourse some terms of that Country, and the Venetian dialect, which you must
not slight.

Allthough the commendation and praises which are given one, are accustomed
commonly to procure friendship, and the good grace of him who is praisd, yet the
custom and humor of the Venetian cannot brook, that a Nuntio or Ambassador
should extol and commend such that are in authority among them, either in their
own presence, or before any other, for those kind of praises do not use to
sound or relish well: It Is true, that before parents or kindred or intimat friends
one may blazon the worth and virtue of some Senator; but the surest way is to
abstain from commending any at all, and to be reservd in this point: But as a
public Minister cannot commend the actions or exploits of any Venetian
Gentleman without endangering the party, and wronging his own judgment, yet the
Venetians are very well pleased to hear the praises of the Republic in general,
or any thing that may tend to the glory thereof, or of the Nation; specially if
one points at those things which are peculiar to that peeple or City, and
cannot be applied to any other, as the marvailous site of the City; the manner
whereby She is preservd, and securd, with the causes thereof; The public and
private magnificences, the Patrician blood, wherein the chief extractions of the
Roman Nobility, and of many other Towns of Italy, with other places of Europe,
was conservd pure from mingling with the Goths, Vandalls, Hunns, Sarracens and
Longobards near upon 13. hundred years: the Christian nativity of this
Republic, having never followd any other Religion; the method of Her Government,
and that She has particular constitutions of Her own which She never borrowed
of others, but She did constitut Her-self; That She has conservd Her-self a
longer tract of time than any Republic that ever was; having never lost or
diminishd any part of Her first liberty, or acknowledgd any other superiority
but Her own; Her temperat kind of mixture in point of government tends also
much to Her honor, wherein all the qualities, and kinds of goverments are
involvd; The manner of electing Her Prince, and subordinat Magistrat^s by an
extraordinary way of balloting or lottery, wherein choice and chance have a
hand; Her forms of justice, with the cautious authority and moderation of Her
Judges; The prudence and maturity of Her Senate in all deliberations; Her
matchles Forces by Sea; Her vast provisions, and preparatifs for all kinds of
War, wherein that Signorie surpasses all other Potentats of Christendom; That
no Navall War can be made against the Ottomans, the common Enemy, without
conjunction with Her; That this Republic is called the Shield, and principal
safeguard, and as Paul the 3. said, the Bullwark of Europe; The mighty Forces
She employed against Cyprus against Selym for Her defense; The generosity She
has showed not to refuse the War; The deliberations She holds before She
engages in any fight, and Her most celebrous exploits in the great battle of
Lepanto in the year 1571. And not to extend my self further, I say you will
extremely plese the Venetians in elevating the achievments, ancient and modern,
of the Signorie; Moreover, twill be very gustfull unto Her if you speak of Her
piety, and munificence to the Church, and to have oftentimes bin the
Protectresse of Saint Peter's Chair, renewing the memory of what passd twixt
Frederic the second and Her, with the Negotiations and Protestations made by
Her before the Duke of Alva in the War against his Holiness, and all things else
that you can alledg conducible to this purpose; Lastly, remember well to extol
the royal and sincere proceedings of the Republic upon all occurrences in
public treaties; commending Her that She uses to negotiat frankly, without any
artifice or disguise, but really, and without palliations.

I will not name here the Princes that are beloved or hated by the Signorie,
for it will tend to little purpose. The Republic of Ragusa, and Genoa are no
great friends to this Signorie,; yet They hate Her not, but use to be sensible
of her dangers, and troubles; because that whosoever grows to be master of any
of these Republiques will have the greater strength; which is just contrary to
the aims of the Republic of Venice, whose policy tends that the state of Italy
receaves no alteration, but be always at a constant stand; And for this cause
She would be contented that the Dominions which the Spaniard has in that
Country were equally divided twixt Spain and France, that the power of those
two great Kings might be counterpoisd, and that neither of them were so
powerful in Italy. Whereupon the Signorie of Venice extremely desires that
Rome, with the State Ecclesiastic, and the Apostolic Seat, might be preservd,
in regard that beside the affair of Religion, She observes the excellent
Regiment of the Church, wherein all the vigor, and reputation of Italy
consists; And touching the holy Father, were he reducd to any extremity or
danger, this pious Republic would employ all Her power to protect Him, being
wisely persuaded that all the damage which would fall upon his Sanctity, would
rebound upon Her. I have forborne to observe hitherunto that the principal
object of the consultations of this noble Signory is the repose of Italy, and
to preserve her from revolutions of intestin broils.

You must also take it among your instructions that in the Discourses you
shall hold with the Venetians or others, you must not show your self inclinable
to make a new league against the Turk, but rather when you fall upon this
subject, you shall appeer rather for peace, and approve of the prudence of the
Signorie in her carriage toward this huge Potentat to have no actual hostility
with him; In which Discourse you must be mindful of the three reasons, which
the Venetians use to alledg that it is necessary for that state to have peace
with the Turk.

The first is in regard that all the Isles, Coasts and Maritime places which the
Signorie possesses do confine with some part of the Ottoman Empire, thereupon
She may be easily surpised and invaded that way.

The second is in regard that the City of Venice being the best peepled of all
Italy, She has not territory enough to maintain and support Her-self, or
afford her all sorts of necessaries, therefore She must be obliged to other
Countries for Her sustentation, now, there is no Prince upon Earth, that lies
so oportunely to furnish Her as the Turk.

Thirdly, if a War be declared in the Levant all traffic will cease by Sea, as
also commerce by Land, therefore the City of Venice being one of the greatest
Mercantile Towns in the World, her Citizens will grow poor, and want
employment.

You must add to these considerations the form and institution of the Republic,
being from the first time of her foundation ordained and born as it were for
peace and plenty, as She has found by experience; Therefore the Venetian
Senators are always pleased, when any motion is made of Peace, and when any
mention is made of the Turk they will not be discontented to here him extolled
for a mighty great Prince, implying thereby that the Signorie is the wiser to
be at good terms with him; The Reasons whereby the Venetians did justify their
proceedings, when against the capitulations of the league they did accommode
themself with the Turk, are so known to the World that it were a piece of
impertinency to insist upon them here; but in your Discourse among the
Venetians, you may make use of them as ocasion shall invite you.

I finish these Instructions with this necessary Rule that evry Ambassador, or
public Minister of state ought to render himself agreeable to the Prince, with
whom he negotiates, which may tend much to the happy conduct, and advancement
of all his Negotiations.

A Review of the Navall strength of Venice.
IN regard the main strength and incolumity, together with the principal
defense and glory of this Neptunian Damsel is derived from the Sea, it will
not be amiss to make inspection once more into her waters, and fadom the depth
of her navall power.

Now, to treat of her strength this way it will not be amiss to give a little
touch once more at Her Arsenall, which strikes an admiration into all men that
are curious to survey it, and may be ranked one of the wonders of the World in
that kind; It is sited and encompassed with a great channel of the Sea, It is
girt about with strong walls three miles in circuit; There have been counted
there at one time 300 Galleys, besides those that were in course to secure the
gulf whereof there were above 22 Galeasses, which in comparison of the other
Galleys may be called men in complete Arms, or Cuirasses, because they'are not
so nimble in their motion neither for Sail or Oar as others, but they give a
far greater shock, and if they have a rowsing gale of wind and favorable, 20 of
these are able to encounter 100. of other Galleys; besides they have the
advantage of Galeons, because they have Feet as well as Wings.

For Timber to build all sorts of sailing Vessels, there is such abundance that
by an extraordinary providence grow up and down upon the Coasts not far remote
from the City in the firm Land that she never wants any, but can furnish her
self out of her own stock.

For Rowers and Sails besides those that the City can afford, Her-self, She
has great nombers in all the Maritime Towns; And for Soldiers for her
Galleys She employes those of Dalmatia and Croatia with other places called the
Cernides; The Captains and Lieutenants of Her Galleys are for the most part
Venetian Gentlemen, whereof there is a great multitude; And besides the
Lieutenant, She employes always two young Gentlemen more to be exercised in
Maritime affairs, the art of Navigation, and navall Militia; The greatest
inconveniences She has is scarcity of Bread and Biscuit; howsoever She is
always very careful to supply their want, by those huge Magazins of all sort
of grain which She stores up in the Arsenall, and other places: She has
commonly evry year, though She be in peace with all the World, about 40 Galleys
to scowre the gulf, and secure her Islands in the Ionian Sea, whereof there is
an Admiral called the Captain of the Gulf, who has 5000 Duketts for his
annual salary.

These Galleys do not only free the Gulf from Corsaries or Pyratts, but they
preserve the Reputation of the Republic, and Breed always a nursery of able
Sea-Comanders: whenever She understands that the Turk Arms at Sea, She does
accordingly increase this number of Galleys, and names a General. She is
infested sometimes with petty compagnons called the Uscocchi upon the coasts of
Dalmatia, who having snap'd up any little prize, use to retire suddenly to some
of the territories of the House of Austria, which causes her to be at the
charge of maintaining a Fleet of small vessels called Fusti upon those Coasts
to secure her Merchants. Indeed, it cannot be imagind what number of Vessels
the Signorie can put to Sea, in regard She has all kind of Provisions,
Materials, Arms and other necessaries always in a readiness; And She does
daily improve Her strength rather than diminish it; Therefore if about 300
years ago she did arm above 200. Galleys and other Vessels toward the
conquest of the Holy Land, and so many in the conquest of Constantinople where
She joined with the French, it is easy to conjecture how her power has bin
augmented since; considering that all her Neighbors have increased in strength
since that time, and it has bin one of her prime Rules of policy to have an
eye to that, and proportion her Forces accordingly, This being the chiefest
thing that those great Officers the three Sages of the Sea, and the three Sages
de Terra firma have given them in charge: therefore when they are elected for
those Offices they have more honor given them than ordinary; yet when any are
so chosen there is not any uses to congratulat them, or go to kiss their hands
as was usual when the great Council was risen after the Election; And this is
one of the modernst Laws of Venice, which was ratified and enacted with great
approbation, viz. That when any was nominated to any office of honor or public
trust, none of the Senate should congratulat them, whereas before evry man at the
recesse of the Council would press to take those by the hand who were chosen
Magistrates, protesting with many vows that they were seriously glad in their
hearts of the advancement that had befallen them, yea even those would say so
that had given their suffrages against them by way of complement, which was
adjudgd by the Censors to be a great abuse and unworthy of the Venetian
Nobility, being in all other things so grave and honorable.

The said Censors also are of no long institution, they are created with
great solemnity, their office being to repress the ambition and prodigality of
the Gentry, and to look with severity into their deportments.

The Defects of the Signorie of Venice.
BUt now we have taken pains to recount the perfections and virtues of this
powerful and so well policed Commonwealth, which are so many in number, and
such, that they fill all the world with wonder; It will not be impertinent to
discover what are Her defects and vices, considering that there is no created
body in this sublunary world, either natural or civil, but is subject to
imperfections, and no convenience is without its inconvenience.

The first defect then and the greatest that Venice is thought to be subject
unto, is, that being Lady of so many Countries, She must import nourishment for
Her Children out of other places, and if She had not the Sea for Her friend She
might endure a great deal of hardship, for want of bread (which is the staff of
life) and of all sorts of grain; Therefore it is the principal motif that
induces Her to be very loath to fall out with the Turk, from whose Dominions
She fetches many commodities that conduce to sustenance and well being.

It is another inconvenience unto Her that Candy in the Mediterranean, and
other Isles She has in the Ionian Seas, are so remote from Her, and they so
distant one from the other.

Another is, that She is enforcd in time of actual war to employ Suisses, and
Germans, with other Strangers, who are acquainted with the new modes of
combating; For touching the Italian Infantery, they are softer, and hardly
drawn from their old fashion of fight, and military discipline.

Another may be, that by reason of Her overmuch jelousy and caution She dares
not employ any of Her own Subjects in quality of General by Land for fear lest
he should grow too popular.

Lastly, That She being the next neighbor to the Turk; if any other Christian
Prince or State offends Him or His Subjects, he is ready ever and anon to throw
the Catt at her shinns, to pick a quarrel, and wreck his revenge upon Her, by
setting upon Her skirts either by Land or Sea, and this She has often felt;
Add herunto that this vicinity with so huge a Potentat increases both Her
cares and expenses, for there is no State consumes more in Fortifications.

TOuching Her Vices, She is taxd all the World over for the latitud of liberty
She gives to carnal pleasure, and the large conscience She has under the
navill, though Naples exceed Her in this kind, whence some would derive the
ground of the proverb, That Venice and Naples are two Paradises where Devils
dwell; But She may receave this infection from the Greek and the Turk Her
Neighbors, who hold that the Creator inordred his handmayd Nature to infuse
hott blood into humane veins, and into that blood appetits and motions not to
be a torment unto him, but to be turned into delight and pleasure; To this they
say there be multitudes of reclusd men and women in Venice, who by their austere
course of continency make some compensation for this loosnes in others, and keep
Her City from sinking; for when the last cense was made, there were near upon
5000. Friars and Nunns immurd within the City, who make vows of continency,
and have divorcd themselfs for such sensual plesures.

Lastly, Venice is taxd that Her Children are so mortally revengefull; but this
humor is incident to all Italians, and other Nations besides; who if they
receave a weighty injury from any, they will make sure work with him, and
dispatch him, So that he shall not wrong them twice; which a Duellist uses to
do by exposing his life to equal hazard with his Enemy.

Of the famous and renowned men which Venice has producd.
There are few Cities which have brought forth men more celebrous for all the
Cardinal Virtues than Venice has don, as also more scientificall
contemplative men, and greater Artists; whose names, to do Her a general
right, we thought it not improper to insert here. Venice producd three Popes,
and they were accounted the best of Popes; viz. Gregory the 12. of the Corarian
family; Eugenius the 4. sprung of the Cundelmerians, a man of transcendent
parts of wisdom; and Paul the 2. of the extraction of Barbi, whose virtues
Blondus, Sabellicus, and Platina himself, who was no friend to some Popes, does
blazon forth in a high mesure.

There have bin a great number of Cardinals, as Petrus Maurocenus, Marcus
Landus, Johannes Amadeus, John Baptista Zeno, Dominicus Grimanus who was
afterward Patriark of Aquileia, he was a greater honor to the redd hatt than
any, both for learning and all virtu; his Library had above 10000. Volumes of
Greek and Latin Authors; There was also Marcus Cornarius, and Marinus Grimanus,
Gaspar Contarenus, Petrus Bembus who was adopted to the College of Cardinals
by Paul the 3. of whose elegant and learned Writings as well in Greek and
Latin, with other Languages, all the World does ring. Franciscus Cornarius, and
Franciscus Pisanus, Marinus Grimanus a man whom the World admird, who was so
many times employed in quality of Nuntio; he was also Governor of Parma and
Placentia from the Pope, Johannes Grimanus also was a Man renownd all the
World over.

Touching learned men that left Monuments to posterity they are nomberles; there
was Pantaleon Iustinianus Patriarch of Constantinople; Hermolaus Barbarus,
Laurentius Iustinianus Patriarch of Aquileia; Maphaeus Contarenus, Andreas
Bendelmerius, Gregorius Corarius, Johannes Boratius, Maphaeus Gerardus, Thomas
Donatus, Antonius Syrianus, Ludovicus Contarenus; Antonius Contarenus,
Hieronymus Quirinus; Hieronymus Trevisanus, Petrus Monteus, Iacobus Zeno,
Antonius Pisamanus, Aloysius Lippamannus; Andreas Dandalus Duke of Venice is to
be rankd among these learned Authors, who compild a gallant Story, whom
Petrarch, Blondus and Sabellicus mention with so much honor: Leonardus
Iustinianus, Zacharias Trevisanus, Marcus Lippamannus; Franciscus Barbadius,
Daniel Veturius, Franciscus Barbarus; All these, with multituds more of this
kind were Sons of Venice, whose Works have flown through most parts of the
World.

The City also of Venice producd many excellent Lawyers, as Barbonus
Maurocenus, Ludovicus Foscarus, Vitalis Landus, Candianus Polanus, Nicolaus
Canalis, Laurus Quirinus, Johannes Carnalis, Paulus Barbus, Andreas Iulianus,
Bernardus Iustinianus, Petrus Thomas, Ludovicus Donatus, Franciscus Dedus,
Marcus Sanutus, Hieronymus Donatus; all these were great Lawyers and Senators,
whose learned Works are found yet in most of the Libraries up and down
Christendom, with those of Andreas Navagerius.

Besides men of erudition and exquisit learning and policy, Venice has brought
forth a great number of Generals and Captains renowned all the earth over for
their prowess and valor both by Land and Sea, who enlargd the Territories of
the Republic by their exploits and victories; There com in the van of these
Johannes and Raynus Polanus, who brought Corfu or Corcyra under subjection;
Marinus Gradonicus with Dominicus Maurocenus reduced Pola; Johannes Basilius,
and Thomas Falerius did daunt and discomfit the Pisans when they infested the
Seas; Reinerus Dandalus with Rugerius Permarinus, took Metho and Coton after a
stubborn sieg, and with marvailous personal resolution; Johannes Trevisanus
with nine Vessels utterly overcame and took 22 Genoways nere Drepano in
Sicilie; Petrus Thomas, Johannes Grittus, Nicolaus Balestrerius, Marcus Bonus,
and Andreas Thealdus, did oftentimes reduce to obedience the Candiotts in
several Rebellions; Leonardus Quirinus, and Marcus Onissorius brought away two
famous victories from before Constantinople; Reinerius Zeno quieted most parts
of Dalmatia when they mutined: Laurentius Teupolus in the port of Ptolemais
took and sunk 23 Ships of the Genowayes, And afterward being joined with
Andreas Zeno he took 25 of their Galleys and Galeons nere Tire; The Greek
Emperor Balduinus made Mark Gradonico Admiral of all the Seas; Marcus Michael
with a few Galleys put to flight 20 sails of Genowayes, and afterward took
Chalcis. Gilbertus Dandalus, and Iacobus Dandalus in a bloody fight nere
Drepano in Sicilie took 24 of their men of War; Raggierus Maurocenus being
General of 60 Galleys did things beyond belief; Johannes Superantius with 25
Galleys took Theodosia in the Tauric Cherchonesus, and a little after
Benedictus Iustinianus took a great number of Greek Ships. Petrus Zeno was the
first General that was employed against the Turks, and brought home two
victories in one year. There suceeded him Marinus Falerus, Andreas Cornalis,
Petrus and Marcus Canalis, Marcus Iustinianus, who were never beaten in their
life's, but came off always victors in seven navall Expeditions.

The first Officers whom the Republic employed in quality of Proveditors to
accompagnie the General, and concur with him in all counsels were Andreas
Maurocenus, and Simon Dandalus, and afterward Nicolaus Gradonicus, and
Pancratius Iustinianus, which charge and singular trust was delated unto them
for their extraordinary prudence, and fidelity to their Country, which they
made appeer in the Execution of their places, and the triumphant success they
had; Nicolaus Pisanus deserves immortal praise, together with Johannes
Delphinus in that he took away from the Genowayes 50 sails of Ships; Paulus
Loredanus, Marcus Michael, and Johannes Sanutus, deserve no less for their
exploits in the Levant Seas; Marcus Cornalis was not inferior to any of these,
when Duke Falerius being slain the Senate for his high deserts made choice of
him to be Prince with the acclamation of all the Peeple; Bernardus Iustinianus
became glorious over all parts of the Greek Empire for his notable achievments,
and extrordinary valor; The fortitud and wisdom of Victor Pisanus in
overcoming the assaults of sinister fortune was most memorable; for being by
the election of the Senate, and applause of all the Venetian Peeple designd
Admiral of the Gulf, upon some ill successes, and reluctancies of fortune, the
Genewayes occupying Fossa Clodia, was cast into Prison by sentence of the
Senate, and Venice was reduced to such streights, that She sent a blank to the
Genowayes to write their own capitulations for Peace, which they refusing, the
said Victor Pisanus by the cry and pastulations of all the People was demanded
out of Prison, which being obtained, he was by an universal suffrage of the
great Council chosen Admiral again, and launching forth into the Archipelago,
he carried away from the Genowayes, who were then agogg for their great
successes, the most glorious victory that ever was had of them, and so plucked
up his Country out of that deep plunge She was then fallen into; Sabellicus
writes of this noble chieftain, that being sent for by the Senate out of Prison,
he excused himself saying that he had something to do before he would part from
that School of Repentance, therefore staying there all that night, and spending
most part of it in spiritual meditation, he sent betimes the next morning for
his ghostly Father, and after a very penitent confession of his sins, he took
the holy Eucharist, protesting by that holy Sacrament that he freely forgave
all those who had don him injury by their traducements, and that he would be as
true to his Country, and as careful of the glory of the Republic as ever he
was, not doubting but God, and all his holy Angels would accompagnie him.

Dominicus Michael with a Fleet of 24. well appointed Galleys only, reduced the
I Will of Candie to a perfect pass of obedience, when She had utterly fallen off
from her obedience to the Republic being fomented by diverse Princes in that
Rebellion. There succeeded him in the Generallship Cressus Molinus, Michael
Delphinus, Iacobus Maurus, Marcus Iustinianus, Carolus Zeno who in the Clodian
Battle against the Genowayes showed such notable evidences of valor; Michael
Iustinianus, Petrus Hemus, Fantinus Georgius, Marcus Grimanus, Johannes Barbus,
Victor Barbarus obtained eternal glory for their exploits against Philip Maria
Duke of Milian; Franciscus Bembus gaind no less renown by a famous victory he
got of the Milaneses upon the River of Po by a Fleet of Gallifoists as Blodus,
Sabellicus and Corius make honorable mention in their works. Petrus Lauredanus
made all the Eastern world ring of his glory, so did after him Andreas
Mocenigus; Stephanus Contarenus gave three several defeates to the Dukes of
Milan that all Italy sounded out his fame, when Brescia came under the Dominion
of the Republic: Aloysius Lauredanus, in that memorable expedition against the
great Turk, wherein Pope Eugenius, and the Duke of Burgundy were joynd, came
off with admirable success: Victor Capellus a man of clear intellectualls and
solid judgment was Admiral in diverse notable expeditions against the Turk and
never receavd any repulse, in so much that he was honored by his very enemies;
After him Ursatus Iustinianus, Iacobus Lauredanus, Nicolaus Canalis, Petrus
Mocenicus, were famous both in the Greek, the Mediterranean and all the Levant
Seas; Victor Superantius made his name good by his actions, being a man of an
undaunted spirit, yet very circumspect in the conduct of all his actions;
Hieronymus Canalis pourchasd an egregious name by taking Maurus Alexandrinus
after a fierce and bloody combat.

Vicentius Capellus was renowned far and near for his exploits against the
Moors and Turks, who durst not peep out while he was at Sea for many years;
Andreas Trevisanus a Knight though slow in deliberation, yet quick in
execution, brought to the City many prizes which enrichd Her exceedingly, and
had he livd to it he had worn the Ducall Capp. Many other most illustrious
Heroes receavd their birth in Venice, as Antonius Cornarius, Nicolaus Priulus,
Gieronimus Georgius Knight of Saint Mark a famous Orator, who was employed
Ambassador to most of the Kings of Christendom, and was admired for his wisdom
as well as for his eloquence; Marcus Fuscarus, Thomas Contarenus, and
Laurentius Amulius were men admird in their time both for their prudence in the
Senate, and prowess at Sea, where they took that notorious Pyrat Sarbanassa,
who so infested the Archipelago that he became a terror to all Merchants and
Passengers; To these may be added Sebastianus Venerius, who though he comes in
the rere of all the rest, yet may he be deservedly rankd among the foremost,
both for his magnanimity, his rare knowledge in the Art of Navigation, and in
prudent conduct of all his designs, but specially for his notable successes;
In that glorious battle of Lepanto he was the man that did the most signal
piece of service when he rescued Don John of Austria the Generalissimo of the
whole Fleet when he was ready to sink being orepowerd by the Turks, and Don
John did acknowledge it, calling him ever after his Preserver and Father, though
there had happend a little before an ill-favourd clash betwixt them (as has
appeerd in the bulk of the Story) wherein Venieri showed that he was not inferior
to him in courage, though he was an Emperors Son; This brave Sea-Generall was
chosen after to sit at the Stern of the whole Republic, and to be Prince of
Venice, which was don not only by the suffrage of the Senate, but by the
universal acclamations of the peeple; When he died, diverse foreign Princes sent
for his picture, to preserve the memory of so gallant a man.

These, with nomberles more, are those brave spirits which issued out of the
womb of this Mayden-City, whereof some were supereminent for holiness, and high
virtues; others for erudition and learning of all kinds, whose works are yet
extant up and down the Libraries of Christendom as eternal Monuments of their
worth; others excelled in prudence, and prowess, in counsel and courage; Nor
do I believe, if one were curious to penetrat the whole bulk of the Roman
Story, and peruse all Her Annalls, I say he will not be able to produce so many
gallant men; though we know that no City in the world usd to magnify her own
Children more than old Rome, wherein She was sometimes so Hyperbolicall, that
among other things it was imputed to Her as a vanity, whereof Venice was
always free; Nor could Athens, Sparta, or Lacedemon and other Greek
Commonwealths, of whom the Romans seemd to borrow this vainglory, muster up so
many Worthies; which Commonwealths may be said to have bin but Mushrumps in
point of duration if compard to the Signorie of Venice.

Having now glanced here again upon old Rome, and in the precedent parts of
this Discourse made some parallels twixt Her and Venice, in Her way of government,
and political conduct of civil matters; And having in the Historical part
that went a little before spoken of the several kinds of enemies, quarrels
and combatings that She has had, I thought it no impertinency or digression to
make another short parallel twixt old Rome, and the Republic of Venice in point
of Martial affairs.

Another parallel twixt old Rome and Venice.
AS in Magistracy and method of government the Republic of Venice does much
symbolize with old Rome, as has bin declard, so also in their preliations and
quarrels, as likewise in the course and quality of their Wars both by Sea and
Land with several Nations, there is no little resemblance between them; this
only being the greatest disparity, that the Romans destroyed themselfs by one
War, but the Venetian has remaind yet invincible. Let us make some comparisons
betwixt them.

Such as at first the Hernici, Equi and Volscians were to the Romans, such
have the Dalmatians, Istrians and Liburnians bin to the Venetians; The Gauls
under the conduct of Brennus (the Britain) was a destructive Enemy unto them,
having left them nothing but the Capitol; The same Nation (called afterward
French) much molested the Venetians, and once took all from them except the
Rialto; The Cimbrians, Te^tomans, and Ambrons were terrible to the Romans and
to all Italy; the like were the Goths, Hunns and Longobards to the Venetians
and their Neighbors; Carthage was an Enemy to the Latin name, the like was
Genoa to the Venetian; But Carthage showed her greatest fury against the
Romans when She was confederat with King Philip and the Syracusans against
them; In like manner Genoa was never more terrible to the Venetian than at that
time, when in the War of Chioggia She was backd by Lewis King of Hungary and
the Padoans: Pyrrhus was an Enemy to the Romans, but more mild than the
Carthaginians; Pepin was so to the Venetians, but much more tractable than the
Genoways; The Romans had a tedious War with Mithridates; The Venetians with
Philippo Visconte; Antiochus was a powerful Enemy against them, but the
Ottoman a more potent against the Venetian; The Romans maintaind the
Confederat War, the most dangerous that ever was in Italy; and the Venetians
to resemble them in all things, did not only in Lombardie withstand the Forces
of all the Princes of Italy, who envied their greatness, but brake them asunder.

The Romans after their first establishment wanting women for propagation,
invited their Neighbors with their Daughters to certain public histrionicall
shows, where they surprizd and seazd upon all the Mayds, and kept them, whence
issued a War; Such an accident happend in Venice upon Her first erection; For
a great Wedding being to be celebrated, where the Bride being full of rich
Jewels, as also the Bridemayds, with others that were invited, according to
the ancient custom; They were assaulted upon a sudden by certain Pyratts who
carried them all away as prize to Dalmatia; But the Venetians arming those few
Galleys they had then, poursued them so eagerly, and overtaking them they set
upon them with such a resolution, that they not only redeemd the Bride with
all the Maidens, but having made a great slaughter of the Enemy, they took all
their Ships, by giving them an utter overthrow; And this was the first victory
that Venice got.

As in quality of Enemies, and Wars, so Venice has much resemblance with old
Rome in the management of Her Martial affairs, specially in expecting an
exact obedience to Her Commissions and Instructions, which must not be exceeded
under pain of life, or indispensable punishment; for if good success follow,
it will be imputed to the weakness of Her Senators who should have given a larger
Commission, which prejudice is taken off by chastising the party; Hereof there
are diverse examples, but a late one shall serve the turn in the person of
Capello, who notwithstanding that he had performd a most noble exploit by
overcoming the Barbary Fleet some few years since, and carrying away with him
the Admiral Gallie of Algier, which now lies in the Arsenall among the
chiefest Tropheys, yet in regard he transcended his Commission, he was arraignd
as Criminal before the Decemvirat, and, but for good friends, he had breathd
his last, and hanged by the leg betwixt the two Columns in Saint Marks Place.
Moreover, though Rome had usually mighty Armies abroad, yet the City was
always so peaceful as if there had bin no War at all; Therefore when any
General returned it was death for him to pass the River Rubicon with his Army;
So Venice though She have never so many Enemies abroad and Armies in actual
service, yet there is not the least sign of war or disturbance in the City
Her-self, but She is peaceful at home, and when any of Her Generals return
they may not com within 100. miles of Her Walls under pain of death.

Of the advantages which Venice has of old Rome.
HAving made these parallels twixt old Rome and Venice, I will conclude with
diverse things wherein the last may be said to have the advantage, or may
deserve the priority of the former.

1. Rome was born a Pagan, Venice a Christian when She was but an Embryon, and
so suckd far better milk in her infancy. The Romans added still to their
Religion by entertaining new Gods ever and anon from those Countries they
subdued, alleging there could not be too many Gods to support so great an
Empire, though it is true a Decree of the Senate was usd to pass before they were
admitted into the Pantheon, and other Temples, which Decree ran in these old
Latin words, Nemo habescit Deos n^vos aut adve^as nisi public ascitos, Let
none have new Gods or Strangers till they be publicly allowed; Venice was
never subject to such levities.

2. In rarenes of situation Venice is superior to Rome, and indeed to any other
City on the surface of the Earth, for herin She brooks no comparison; for
when any Stranger comes to see Venice evry day will strike a fresh admiration
into him for a long time together, and in this particular, Rome may be said to
be as far inferior to Venice as Tyber is to the Sea, in whom the City may be
said to shine as a pearl in a Muscleshell.

3. In point of navall strength, Rome was never comparable to Venice, for She
never had such a grandeza as Her Arsenall; Her Sea-vessells were but shallopps
compard to those which are now in use; She did but lick the shore, whereas
Venice did launch out into the Main, and rid triumphantly upon Neptune's back.

Old Rome was ever inclined to war, her mud-walls having been embrued with
blood at her first foundation, She still thirsted after more dominions, and Her
ambition was interminable, so that her Republic was made up of Magna Latrocinia
as one said; Venice on the contrary has ever sought after peace both for
Her-self and Her Neighbors, having don the best Offices that way of any state
in Christendom; It was the vainglory of old Rome to brag of the exploits of Her
Children, which Venice never uses to do, but there is a Law to the trary.

5. For extent of Territories it is true that old Rome went beyond Venice, yet
Venice had a title than which old Rome never had a greater, which was that Her
Duke was called while the Greek Empire lasted Protospiter Graci imperii, first
father of the Grecian Empire.

6. Old Rome had never such potent foes, and formidable Armies to cope withal
as Venice has had, She never had such a confederacy as that league of Cambray
against Her; She never had an enemy of such a vast power as the Turk is; It
were a paradox to hold, that old Rome had not brave magnanimous men whom Her
own stories magnify so much, and it is as great a paradox to hold, that Venice
has not had more; though She be far more free from that humor of ostentation.
There were diverse brave spirits in Rome that did murder themselfs in height of
spirit, And there were braver spirits in Venice that did mortify themselfs, as
diverse of Her Princes have don, by shaking off the Ducall robes for a froc, and
so bidding a farewell to the pomp and plesures of the world.

7. In point of duration and longaevity old Rome was not made of so strong a
constitution as Venice, who has almost lasted twice her time, for She hardly
continued a Republic 700 years; yet Venice to this day is plump and buxom, as
if She meant to hold touch with Time himself, and coexpire with the world.

Lastly, Venice has this pre-eminence of old Rome, that she has preserved her
Maydenhead to this day though situated in hot salt waters, and though
oftentimes forced, yet was She never ravished; whereas Rome becam a prostitut
to all Nations, who ridd Her often out of breath, but Venice from the first
moment of Her conception to this very point of time.

Virgo manet medio pura, recensque Salo. To this Latin Pentameter we will add
this English Distic, (for I know Venice will not be displeased if She be told
how old She is) and so bid Her farewell,

Never Maid did bear Her age so well
As Venice, if Her years you tell. -- 1231.
A Cohortation, by way of Corollary, address*d to all Christian Princes and
States to resent the present dangers of the Republic of Venice.
HAving in this large Prospective or Murano Looking-glass more properly,
(though I confess not cut with a Diamond cut) represented unto the world the
true face and Physiognomy of this renowned Virgin, having fetched Her from Her
very Cradle, set Her forth in all Her proportions, and attended Her to that
stature of perfection She is now grown unto, having also dissected Her
government, and anatomized evry lim thereof by pourtraying Her in all her
colors, both inward and outward; Having likewise taken an abstract of the
story of all Her Princes, and felt the pulse of Her courage by showing what
glorious exploits She has performed up and down the World against the
mightiest Potentats on earth, having moreover pryed into Her interests of state
in relation to other Princes, Having also made you know Her defects, as well
as Her advantages, and unvayl'd Her vices as well as Her virtues; Lastly,
having declared in what trepidations, and dangerous condition She stands at
present, by having closed in actual lucation with that great Eastern Giant the
common Enemy, who as the Wolf in the Fable uses to take hold of any slight
ocasion, if the waters be troubled, to quarrel with Her, and there her to
pieces; I take the boldness now to direct this seasonable hortative or alarm
rather, to all Christian Princes, and States, that it is high time for them to
be sensible of her present engagements and consequently to reach her a helping
hand, which as by a general tie of Christianity, so for sundry particular
respects and indispensable obligations they are bound to do.

1. In regard it is known and confessed by all, that She is the main Bulwork of
the principallst parts of Europe against the Turk, for in the bottom of her
Galleys lies the security and welfare of all her Neighbors; It is She that
holds him at the Oars end that he cannot take any sure footing in Italy, as he
has attempted often, and it is known by woeful experience that whersoever he
or his horse once sets his foot, the grass will never grow there again,
Therefore, under favor, they are obliged by the common and mutual tie of
danger to preserve this Republic from sinking.

2. All Christendom is beholden unto this wise Republic, in regard She has
interceded from time to time, and labourd more for the general peace and
tranquillity of Christendom, and by her moderation and prudent comportment has
don better Offices in this kind then any other whatsoever Rome excepted.

3. It is She that has bin the chiefest instrument to keep even the scales of
the great balance of State betwixt the Princes of the Western world, that the
power of one might not so out-poize and be trabocant that the rest should be in
danger to be blown up.

4. There is an extraordinary respect and honor due unto the Signorie of Venice
from the rest of Christendom, in regard that whereas other Princes have made use
of the Turk against their fellow Christians as could be proved by many
instances, yet the Republic of Venice, though fairly offered, and importuned
thereunto, would never make use of him that way in her greatest extremities;
Neither in that mighty league of Cambray, when all the power of Europe was
knotted against her; Nor during the time of the Interdict when the Pope, and
the House of Austria were like to join against Her with temporal and
spiritual Arms, yet She never would accept the assistance of the Turk; though
it be lawful when ones House is set on fire to use foul water as well as
fair, to extinguish it.

5. Lastly, The Signorie of Venice is to be more looked upon then other States,
because they who have had pratic in the world, and observed general
dependencies confess, that her peace has caused the plenty, and her wars the
peace of most Regions of Europe; It was She that opend the Trade, and taught
the Northwest world a way to all the Levant parts, as also into Afric, and the
Southern Coasts of Asia as far as the Red Sea and the Indies; moreover Her Bank
of money, as it has bin the Ground and Rule of all other banks, so it is the
most useful for Merchants or Gentlemen to any part of the world, nor do I see
how Christendom can subsist conveniently without it.

Therefore, humbly under favor, it highly behooves all other Christian Princes
to be ayding and assisting unto this gallant and useful Republic, to preserve
this Virgin from being ravished by that rude Tyrant of the Levant, the common
enemy, who is now actually uniting and banding all his forces both by Land and
Sea, to shoot Her twixt Wind and Water, and utterly to sink Her; having now got
out from between the Dardanelli with a great Fleet to succor Canea, and make
good what he has already got in Candie.

Besides these general ties, there be some motifs of encouragement now more then
formerly that may serve to incite all Christian Princes against the Turk at
this time, in regard that, according to the judgment of the wiser sort of men,
that tyrannical Empire is upon point of declining, or to suffer some notable
change* because the Ianizares of late years have much degenerated from what
they were from their Primitive institution, being now allowed to marry, and to
exercise Marchandizing, which makes them less venturous, and to be more
careful of their wealth, with their Wifes and Children, Besides, they have
lost that godlike kind of reverence they used to bear unto the person of the
Ottoman Emperor, so far, that they have embrued their hands in the blood of
two of them allredy within these twenty years, the one had his brains dashd
out by a poleax, having the day before bin hurried away to prison, and as he
was going a horseback his Turban was snatchd off by a contemptible fellow, who
clapped his own upon the Emperors head by way of exchange; and as he road along
through the Seraglio, his own Court, he beggd a dish of water out of a poor
wenches cruse; but being clapd in prison, the next day a company of Soldiers
went to strangle him, who rushing furiously into his Chamber, he started out of
his bed, and thinking to defend himself a bold despicable slave knockd him
down; and this was the success of that strange dream he had had a few nights
before, when in his sleep he thought he was mounted upon a Camel who would not
go neither by fair or foul means, and lighting down from off him, he thought
to have struck him with his Cimiter, but the whole body of the beast vanishd
away.

Besides, some late Astronomers, and those of the best rank among the Jewish
Rabbis, do hold that the fate and fortune of a Kingdom may be read in the
Heavens; for they have observd that all the Hebrew Letters may be found out
among the Stars; Rabbi Chomer assures the World that it is now a good while
since this has bin observd, for the Hebrew tongue wherein God himself vouchsafd
to speak, and was the first among Mankind, has certainly something of mystery
and excellence in it more than the other that had their beginning at the
confusion of Babel; Diverse of the Chaldeans and Jewish Rabbis, as Rabbi Kap^l,
Abjudan and Chomer spoken of before, have bin curious to spell these letters
into words, affirming that this Celestial writing has bin so from the
beginning: And if a good Astronomer, well versd in the Hebrew, do observe what
Stars are vertical over such a Country, he may foretell the Omens and fate
of it, by observing which of the Hebrew Letters those Stars resemble, and so
compose those Letters into words. Thus, a little before the Temple of Jerusalem
was burnt, and utterly consumd by Nabuzaradan, it was noted that the vertical
Stars which hung over that City made this Hebrew word Hickschich, which
signifies to reject and forsake without mercy. Thus the end of the Grecian
Empire was likewise foreshewd by four Stars which were vertical, that made
this word Parad, which signifies in Hebrew divide. Thus over Athens four
Stars were observd to be vertical a little before her dissolution, which made
this Hebrew word Tsarar, the sense whereof is Angustiis affici, To be troubled;
with diverse other examples which a late curious French Author does produce. But
that something may be instanced to the present purpose, and concerning things to
com, the said Rabbi Chomer does confidently affirm (as the said French Author
has it) that this Celestial writing has pointed out the declining of two
great Empires of the East; The one is that of China, which Country we know by
the Tartars irruption is in a fearful confusion allredy; The other is that of
the Turks, over which there are observd seven vertical Stars, which being read
from the West to the East this Hebrew word Caah is made, which signifies to be
batterd, to be feeble, languishing, and drawing to an end: But now seeing it
may be doubted at which time this Empire shall be reducd to this extremity, the
same Letters do also resolve the doubt, for those Letters being numericall
make up the number of 1025. So that when this Kingdom shall have accomplishd
the number of 1025. years, it shall then be overthrown, and brought to ruin;
Now, if we reckon from the year of our Lord 630. which was the year according
to our vulgar computation wherein the basis of this Empire was laid, we shall
find that it is to last till the year of our Lord 1655. for the completing of
the foresayed number 1025. So that reckoning from this present year 1651. this
Empire is to last but four years by this account. But one will say, these are
but conjectures or curiosities rather, and fancies, yet we know that the
Heavens are called a Book in an uncontrollable text, and in a Book there must be
letters and writing, which may foretell the good or ill omen of a Country; the
first by reading them from West to East, the second from North to West, because
ab Aquilone pandetur omne malum, as poor England knows too well: But as the
Chemists hold that none can com to the Magistery unless he be a perfect good
man, so he must be such a one that can attain the sense of this Celestial
writing.

I will enforce this cohortation or Caveat rather, with a saying which the
Turks have, That Italy is the Gate of Christendom, and Venice is the Key of
Italy; That Candie is a Bridge archd with Zant, Cephalonia, and Corfu, and Corfu
is the chief Watergate of Venice. Therefore it is an easy thing to infer this
consequence, or rather to be a Prophet, That the day when Venice is lost, will
be the eve of the winning of Italy* and, a few days after, of all CHRISTENDOM.

To put a conclusive period to all, there is a saying that carries no less
wisdom than wit with it, when one's Neighbors house is afire, by the light
thereof, he may discern his own danger; The Venetian Flames at this time are of
such a vast extent, that they may enlighten, not only the Italians their next
Neighbors, but all Europe besides, to foresee her future dangers, if the
aforesaid Islands, which are as so many Limbs of Christendom, be cut off, and
that the Mahumetan Moon, increasing by such additions, come to predominat over
those Seas.

An INDEX pointing at the principall'st passages throughout the whole Piece.
A
AN Analysis of the whole work in the Proem. An advertisement to the Reder Page
ibid. The Ambassador of Venice his witty answer to the Pope, Page 2 Another
witty answer to the Pope, Page 2 The Ambassador of Venice his witty answer to
the French King, Page 4 The Arsenal of Venice, Page 5. 35 Ambassadors render
their presents they receave from foreign Princes to the Senate at their return,
Page 6 Of Ambassadors ordinary and extraordinary in Venice, Page 23 Athens and
Venice likened, Page 52 A^hetins Epitaph, Page 54 Attributs of the Towns in
Italy, Page 55 A proverb of Venice, Page 55 Angelo Participatio Duke of Venice,
Page 60 An ancient custom in Venice, Page 60 The Admiral of Greece comes to
Venice for aid, Page 60 Alexander the Pope fled to Venice, Page 68 Acre taken
again from the Christians, Page 73 Andrew King of Hungary comes to Venice, Page
74 The Ambassador does extraordinary penance at Rome, Page 75 Andria Dandolo
Duke of Venice, Page 75 Archduke of Austria, and the King of Cyprus com to
Venice, Page 77 Alphonso Duke of Calabria entertaines Turks in his War, Page 83
An Ambassador com from the King of Tremisen to Venice, Page 85 The Arsenal of
Venice burnt, Page 95 The Ambassador of Venice speech to the Turk about Cyprus,
Page 96 Her Answer to the Turks Ambassdor, Page 97 The Arms of Venice defaced
in the Vatican, Page 171 An Abbot executed in Venice in his habit, Page 17 An
Ambassador sent from Rome to Venice with notable instructions, Page 190
Apologies for the sensuality and revengefullnes of the Venetian, Page 199 A
Catalog of some of the most renowned men of Venice, Page 200 The advantages
which Venice has of old Rome, Page ibid*
B
Of Brescia, Page 25 Of Bergamo, Page 25 The Bergamastro speaks the worst
Italian Dialect, Page 25 The manner of the Ballotations by which the Duke of
Venice is chosen, Page 34 Of the Bucentoro Page 36 A bold motto in St Marks
Tresury, Page 37 A bold Candi^t robbed the Tresury of St. Mark, Page 38 The
books of the vulgar are Images, Page 54 A Battle twixt Pepin and the
Venetians, Page 55 The Bishop of Aquilia taken prisoner by the Venetian, Page
60 Badoairio Duke of Venice deposed himself and turned Monk, Page 61 The Bishop
of Gradus speech to the Venetian for supplies of the holy Land, Page 66 Baldwin
Earl of Flanders, with other Princes going to the Holy Land com to Venice, where
they receave extraordinary entertainment, Page 71 Bologna beaten by Venice,
Page 72 Brescia under the protection of Venice, Page 75 Buda taken by the Turk,
Page 90 Barbarossa the great Pyrat, Page 92
C.
Civil bodies subject to decay as well as natural, Page 1 The Churchmen of
Venice enjoy above two millions yearly rent, Page 2 The clash twixt Venice and
Genoa partly the cause of the l^sse of the Holy Land, Page 3 Change of custom
dangerous, Page 3 Cardinal Ossatts speech touching Venice, Page 5. Cyrus his
revenge of the River Pindes, because she had drowned his horse, Page 5 A
counterprize of rewards and punishmen^s observed in Venice, Page 6 Cadetts
among the Gentry restrained from marrying in Venice with the reason thereof,
Page 7 The Counsels of Venice are mysteries till put in execution, Page 7 Of
Crema, Page 25 How a Courtisan cousned a Gentleman, Page 39 The circuit of
Rome, Page 44 A cheap friend that is got by a complement, Page 44 Candiano chosen
Duke of Venice, who was cut in pieces by the fury of the peeple, Page 62 A
cloak of cloth of gold to be given yearly by Venice to the Emperor, remitted,
Page 62 Centrenico Duke of Venice deposed and turned to a Monastery, Page 65
Corfu first reduced to Venice, Page 67 Cyain Duke of Venice overthrowes Otho
the Emperors Son, Page 68 A comparison of Venice and Genoa, with Rome and
Carthage, Page 74 Ceremonies usd by Verona, Vicenza and Padoua when they
rendered themselfs to Venice, Page 79 A Candiot robbs the tresury of St. Mark,
Page 80 Constantinople taken by the Turks, their respect to the Venetian above
others, Page 80 The ceremonies usd at the Duke of Venice his Burial, Page 84
Cornaris subtle speech to the Queen of Cypus for a resignation, Page 84
Charles the 8. rusheth into Italy, Page 86 A contract twixt the Pope and
Venice, about the nomination of her Bishops, Page 90 Cardinal Charles Caraffi
strangled at Rome, Page 94 The Spaniard a great cause of losing of Cyprus, Page
111 Carmas notable speech to Don John of Austria, Page 106 Captain Tortona a
Spaniard hanged by Venieri, Page 107 A contract twixt Don John and Venieri the
Venetian General, Page 107 Capello the Venetian General defeates the Barbary
fleet at Vallona, Page 170 A clash twixt Venice and Urban the 8. Page 170
D.
Death for any Venetian Senator to receave pension from a foreign Prince, Page 6
The Dukes of Venice old before they be chosen, Page 6 Of the Dukes of Milan and
Toscauy, Page 9 Duke of Venice a head of wood, Page 10 Of the Deceuiv^rat or
Council of ten in Venice, Page 13 Dominico Mongario Duke of Venice he had his
eyes put out, Page 59 The Duke of Venice styled Protospater of the Greek
Empire, Page 61 Dominico Contareno Duke of Venice, he conquers Zara, Page 65
Dalmatia and Croatia added to the titles of Venice, Page 65 Dukes of Venice
have a privilege to seal with lead given them by the Pope, Page 68 A
description of St. Marks Church, Page 70 Duke Cyani makes St. Marks Church his
heir, Page 71 Doria the Admiral of Genoa puts Venice to the worse in the I Will of
Sapientia, Page 77 The Ducall Palace bnrnt in Venice, Page 84 Ubaldo Duke of
Urbin General of the Venetians, Page 91 Trevisano Duke of Venice died at
Mass, Page 93 A description of the Christian fleet before the Battle of
Lepanto, Page 19 Don John of Astrias speech at the battle of Lepanto, Page 115
Don John of Austria rescued by Venieri the Venetian General, Page 127 The
division of the spoils after the battle of Lepanto at large, Page 130 The
Duke of Parma with an Army before Rome, Page 194 A dangerous prophecy of
Holland, Page 180 The defects of Venice, Page 198
E
The Enemies which Venice has had from time to time, Page 2 Ecclesiastics
incapable to sit in the Venetian, and to inherit stable possessions, and the
reason thereof, Page 2 Ecclesiastics dare not tamper with matters of state in
Venice, Page 7 The extent and power of the principalities of Italy, Page 8 The
etymology of Venice, Page 33 Experience the great looking-glass of wisdom,
Page 34 The election of the Duke of Venice, Page 34 The eastern emperor
assisted by the Venetians, Page 60 Emanuel the Greek Emperor perfidious to the
Venetians, Page 68 Ensigns given by the Pope to the Venetians, Page 70 Of
Earthquakes and of their causes a Phylosophicall discourse, Page 75 Eugenius the
Pope a Venetian, Page 79 The Emperor Frederik with Leonora his Wife com to
Venice, Page 8 The Emperor invites the Turk to war with the Venetian, Page 88
F.
Foreign Princes usually entertaind by Venice, Page 7 Falerio Duke of Venice put
to death, because he married a stranger, etc. Page 12 Of Frivili, Page 13 The
first Prince of Venice, Page 58 Freedom from taxes granted to Venice throughout
all the Greek Empire, Page 62 Freedoms granted by Otho the Emperor to the
Venetians, Page 62 Flabenico Duke of Venice, Page 65 Freedom given to the
Venetian through all Syria, Page 67 Emperor Frederiques fast answer to the
Venetians, Page 68 The Emperor Frederiques submission to the Pope at Venice,
Page 69 The first War twixt Venice and Genoa, Page 71 The first excommunication
against Venice without Ferrara, Page 74 The first Ambassador from England to
Venice, 1332. Page 75
G.
Of the Gulps of Venice, Page 9 The Government of Venice has a grain of
Monarchy, a dram of Democracy, and an ounce of Optimacy, Page 10 The great
Council of Venice, Page 16 Gentlemen of Venice great Patrons, Page 23 The
Governors of the two Castles in Corfu never to meet upon pain of death, Page 29
Rare glasses made in Venice, Page 38 Glassmakers much esteemed for their Art,
Page 39 Giovani Mauritio Duke of Venice, Page 59 Giovani Partitiatio put off
the Dukedom and confind to a Monastery, Page 60 The Greeks taught first the use
of Bells by the Venetian, Page 61 Giovani Partitiatio Duke of Venice who
voluntarily deposd himself, Page 61 The Gnoway defeated by the Venetian at
Trapani, Page 72 Genoa vayld to Venice, as Carthage to Rome at last, Page 74
Genoa shrewdly beaten in the pontick Sea by Venice, Page 75 Gallipole in
Calabria taken by the Venetian, Page 84 Genoa held Famagosta in Cypria above
ninty years, Page 98
H.
The habit of the Duke of Venice, Page 11 The habit of the Duke with the
Jewels he wears upon festival days valued at above 100000 cr. Page 11 The
heir of Venice answerable for his Fathers faults, Page 12 A horse a monster in
Venice, Page 54 The high Epithetts which are given Venice above the rest of the
Towns of Italy Page 55 Horteo Hypato Duke of Venice, Page 58 Heraclea utterly
demolishd, Page 59 The Hunns overcom by the Venetians, Page 61 Henry the
Emperor comes to Venice, Page 65 Part of Jerusalem given to Venice, Page 67
Honor don by the Pope to the Venetian, Page 68 Hermolao Barbaro punished for
receaving dignities from the Pope, Page 85 Henry the 8. of England the great
instrument of the French King and the Popes release, Page 89 Henry the 3. of
France comes to Venice, Page 132 How the King of Polands borther interc^ded for
the readmission of the Jesuits to Venice, Page 198 How Venice and Rome, with
the rest of the Princes of Italy carry themselfs in point of political
interest, Page 175 Holland and Venice of a diffring humor, Page 180
I.
Impossible for the Duke of Venice to become Tyrant, Page 6 Inhibition that
Courtesands mingle not with honest Women in the Venetian Churches, Page 8 Italy
the ^y of Europe, Page 8 The Judges of Venice, Page 17 Of Istria, Page 24 Of
the I Will of Corfou, Page 29 Of the I Will of Cephalonia, Page 30 Of the I Will of
Zant, Page 30 Of the I Will of Candis, Page 31 The incredible riches of St. Marks
treasure, Page 37 Iustinianos speech to Maximilian the Emperor in behalf of
Venice, not found in her Archies. Page 73 Justiniano Duke of Venice, Page 60
Justinopoli comes under the Venetian, Page 61 The I Will of Candie under the
Venetian, An inundation, Page 71 Juluis the second incites all the Princes of
Christendom against Venice, Page 87 The Inquisition refused by Venice, Page 94
The Jesuits expelled from Venice with the causes thereof recited at large, Page
163 The Jesuits tenets Page 163 King James his Declaration touching the
quarrel twixt the Pope and Venice, Page 161
L.
Long age argues strength of body, in Epist. Laws the ligaments of a State,
Page Ibid. The Laws of Rhodes and Oleron the Prince for Sea affairs in Epist.
The Lombards Kingdom extinguished in Italy, Page 59 The lamentable end of one
of the Dukes of Venice, Page 60 Lotharius the Emperor endowes Venice with many
immunities, Page 60 Lesina and Spalato reduced to Venice, Page 62 Pope Leo
comes to Venice and endowes with many privileges, Page 65 Lesbos, Sames, and
Andros taken by the Venetian, Page 67 Lemnos yielded to* Venice, Page 80 The
Legate of the Popes answer to the Venetian General, Page 81 The league of
Cambray like to destroy Venice, Page 87 Lodovico Falieri employed Ambassador to
Henry the 8. of England from Venice, Page 90 A league against the Turk in Pius
Quintus time, the substance of it, Page 101 New Laws in Venice, Page 134 Luca
excomunicated, Page 171 Lep anto battle at large, Page 118
M.
The manner and majesty how the Duke of Venice sitts, Page 14 St. Marks
Proctors, the high dignity of their place, Page 20 The Magistrates of Venice in
general, Page 16 Of the mark of Treviso, Page 24 St. Marks place, Page 37 The
Magistrates of old Rome, and Venice, paralleled, Page 45 Mariello Tegaliano
Duke of Venice, Page 58 Maaritio of Heraclea D. of Venice Page 59 St. Marks
body transported to Venice from Alexandris, Page 60 The Moors defeat the
Venetian under Saba their General, Page 60 The Moors ransack Rome, Page 60 St.
Marks Church burnt, Page 62 Meniro Duke of Venice turns Monk^ Page 62 Matilda
restored to her Duchy of Ferrara by the help of Venice, Page 65 Michaeli Duke
of Venice goes with 200 Vessels to Joppa, and frees her from the siege, Page
66 The Marquis of Monferrat restord to his territories by the Venetian, Page 79
Mocenigos speech to the Popes General, Page 81 The manner of Marriages and
Christnings in Venice, Page 187
N.
Nothing discovers the wisdom of a peeple more than the form of their
government, Page 9 Nothing so difficult as the Art of government, Page 10 The
neatnes of Venice, Page 35 A notable speech against the Tribunitiall power,
Page 57 The Narentines debell'd by the Venetians, Page 62 The Normans give a
great overthrow to the Greeks and Venetians at Darazzo, Page 65 A mighty defeat
given to the Venetians by the Genowayes near Corfu, Page 72 A notable speech of
Philip the second touching his Fathers resignations, Page 93 A notable speech
of a Turk before the battle of Lepanto, Page 116 A notable speech of another
Turk Page 116 A notable speech of the Turkish General, Page 124 A notable
answer of the Turkish Ambassador to King James, Page 131 Nova Palma built in
Friuli, Page 135 A notable invective against Urban the eighth and his Nephews,
Page 172 The Navall strength of Venice reviewd, Page 197
O.
Of the three Republiques of Italy how they differ, Page 9 Of the several
denominations of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Page 9 The Office of the Duke of
Venice, Page 12 Cardinal Ossatts opinion of Venice, Page 183 Of the College of
Sages in Venice, Page 14 The Officers of Venice, Page 15 Of the great
Chancellor, Page 15 Original of the Venetian, Page 33 D. of Ossuna no friend to
the Venetian, Page 38 An old prophecy touching Venice, Page 40 Old Rome and
Venice, Paralleled, Page 44 Of one who would have preferred a Spurrier to Q.
Eliz. Page 54 Obeserio Duke of Venice, Page 59 Otho the Emperor comes to
Venice, Page 62 Otho Urseolo Duke of Venice, he marries the King of Hungarie's
Daughter, banished afterward, Page 65 Otho the Emperors son taken prisoner by
the Venetians freed upon his Parole, Page 69 Otho's wise speech and advice to
the Emperor Frederic his Father, Page 69
P.
Peace always preferred before war by Venice, Page 4 The private Arsenal of
Venice, Page 6 The Press and Pulpit strictly regulated in Venice, Page 7 The
Pope a great temporal Prince, Page 8 The Pope fittest to be umpire of
differences in Italy, with the reasons alleged, Page 8 Paulutio Anafesto the
first Duke of Venice, Page 11 The pastimes of Venice, Page 188 Of Padous, Page
26 A speculation upon the sight of the Bucentoro in Venice, Page 36 The
Portugues trade into the Indies prejudicial to Venice, Page 39 Of rare
Pictures in St. Marks Church, Page 54 Pepin wars with Venice, Page 59 Pietro
Tradonico Duke of Venice, Page 60 Pietro Candiano Duke of Venice, slain in
fight against the Narentines, Page 61 Pietro Tribuno Duke of Venice, Page 60
Pietro Badoairio Duke of Venice taken prisoner in Slavonia, Page 61 Phalerio
Duke of Venice, first entitled Duke of Dalmatia avd Croatia, Page 65 Peter the
French Hermits vision, Page 65 The Pisans beaten by the Venetians, Page 65
P^olemais and Sydon taken by the Venetians, Page 65 Phalerio the Duke of Venice
killed in battle, Page 66 Pietro Polano Duke of venice chosen Arbiter twixt
the Western, and Eastern Emperors, Page 67 A prophecy touching Venice, Page 68
Paleologus the Greek Emperor beaten by the Venetians, Page 74 Padoua putts
Her-self under Venice, Page 79 Paleologus the Greek Emperor has conference
with the Pope at Ferrara. Page 79 Paehalis Maripietro Duke of Venice, he ruled
36 years, Page 80 The Popes Legates speech to Mocenigo the Venetian General,
Page 82 Philip of Comines comes Ambassador to Venice from Charles the 8. Page
86 The passage by the Cape of good Hope to the East Indies hurtful to Venice,
Page 87 The Calender reformed, 1581. Page 134 The Pope and Duke of Parma at
variance, Page 171 The Pope flies to the Castle of St. Angelo, Page 194
Q.
A question whether wars or trafic with the Turk be better for England, in
Epist. An odd question of a Zantois to an Englishman, Page 31 The Queen of
Cyprus modest reply to the Venetian, Page 85 The quarrel twixt Paulus Quintus,
and Venice, demonstrated at larg, Page 137 The quarrel and fight twixt Sir
Ken. Digby and the Venetians in the Bay of Scanderon, Page 169 A quarrel twixt
Pope Urban and the Duke of Florence, Page 171 The quarrel twixt the Pope and
the Duke of Parma, Page 178 The quarrel twixt the Pope and Luca, Page 177 The
querulous expressions of a Nunn, Page 184 The querulous remorses of a dying
Cardinal, Page 182 A quaere what opinion Spain has of Rome, Page 190 A quaere
what opinion France has of Rome, Page 190 Quaeres how the Greeks esteem Rome,
Page 190
R.
Resemblance twixt England and Venice, in Epist. Rome still esteemed by Venice,
Page 3 Reasons of the lastingnes of Venice, Page 3 Rules observed by Venice, in
the removal of her Ambassadors, Page 4 Riches puff the mind, Page 6 Restraints
that none may grow over-rich in Venice, Page 7 Riches, reverence and dece^cie
the main supporters of Religion, Page 8 Resons why Venice did choose one
S^verain head over her, Page 12 Rome become her own Tomb, Page 44 Rome in
Vopiscus time 50 miles in compass, Page 44 The Revenues of the Republic of
Venice, Page 53 Ravenna taken by the Venetians, Page 58 A remarkable speech of
Mocenigo the Venetian General touching Cyprus, Page 82 A restraint for
building Convents and Churches in Venice, without the Senats leave, Page 135
Requiseus speech to D. John of Austria Page 104
S.
Sannazarius his famous Hexastic of the City of Venice, In Proem. Secrecy
wonderfully used in the Counsels of Venice, Page 7 A speech against the
tyranny of Tribunes Page 11 The style of the Duke of Venice, Page 12 The salary
of the Duke of Venice, Page 12 Of the Senate of Venice, Page 13 Of the Syndiques
of Venice, Page 22 The Spaniards large offer for the port of Suda in Candie,
Page 32 The Spanish Ambassadors speech upon the ^ight of St. Marks tresure,
Page 38 A strange complement which a Gentleman put upon a Lady, Page 39 A
Shepherd the first founder and present preserver of Rome, Page 44 The
Sextaries of Venice, Page 50 A speech of a Venetian Nobleman, Page 61 The
Saracens orecom by the Venetians, Page 62 The speech of Pope Urban at Clermont
for a Holy war, Page 65 Smyrna taken by the Venetian, Page 65 Smyrna taken
again by the Venetian, Page 75 Steno Duke of Venice his speech to Verona and
Vicenza, when they yielded themselfs under the Dominion of Venice, Page 78 A
speech of the Turks General to the Venetian army remarkable, Page 81 Seleucia
taken by the Venetian, Page 81 A speech of the King of Cyprus to the Venetian
General, Page 81 The Senats wise Answer to Pope Sixtus, Page 83 The second
Excomunication against the Venetian, Page 83 Sanseverino the Venetian General
routed and drowned at Trent, Page 84 The Senats sage Answer to Philip de
Comines, Page 86 The Senats grave Answer to Pietro Bembo the Popes Legate, Page
88 Sir Sackvill Crows timely advice to the Venetians not regarded, Page 195
T.
Thuanus his saying of Venice, Page 3 Another, Page 4 The tresure of Venice,
Page 5 Tumults in Venice, always suddenly suppressed, Page 8 The Territories
of Venice, Page 24 Twelve Dukes of Venice slain or put to death, Page 34 The
three remarkablest things in Venice, Page 35 The Tresury of St. Mark, Page 37
Theodato Hypato Duke of Venice, who had his eyes put out, Page 59 Tradonico
Duke of Venice murdered, Page 61 Twelve Bells sent for a present from Venice
to Constantinople, Page 61 Tire conquered by the help of Venice, Page 67
Tenedos yielded to the Venetians, Page 77 The Turk offers Venice aid which she
refused, Page 87 The Turk subdues Egypt, Page 88 Trent Council begun, Page 94
The Turk fedifragous to Venice, Page 95 The Turk arms for Cyprus, and invades
Her, Page 98 The Turks barbarous usage toward Bragadini in Cyprus, Page 104
Turks opinion of Christianity, Page 189 Thuanus opinion of Venice, Page 183
V.
Venice comands 700. miles of Sea, In Epist. Venice the fittest to be imitated
in point of government, Page 1 The Prerogatives of Venice, Page 1 Her wit more
sharp than her weapon, Page 2 Venice has often felt the fulminations of Rome,
Page 2 Venice had a great hand in the Conquest of the Holy Land, Page 3 She had
a share of Jerusalem given Her, Page 3 Venice Eternal, Page 3 Constant to
Her-self, Page 4 Venice a great Mediatrix for Peace, Page 4 The Venetians great
Patriotts, Page 5 Venice loves to be magnified, Page 7 Why named in the plural
number, Page 9 Venice as dextrous in ruling of men, as rowing of a Gallie, Page
10 She has turned Policy to a Science, Page 10 Venice has large fardingalls,
Page 24 Of Verona and her Precincts, Page 25 Of Vicenza, Page 27 Venice
uncharacterized, Page 32 Described at large, Page 33 Built in the Spring, Page 33
Venice has borrowed of the Greek as well as the Roman, Page 52 Venice can make
Knights and Poetts laureat, Page 53 Venice free from the Western or Eastern
Emperor first declared, Page 59 Verona assisted by Venice grows victorious,
Page 60 Urso Participatio Duke of Venice, Page 61 Vitalis Candiano Duke of
Venice resignd the government, and cloistr'd himself, Page 62 Venice contributs
200 Vessels for the wars of the Holy Land, Page 65 Venice married to the Sea,
Page 69 She helps the Pope to suppress the tyrant Eccelin, Page 72 Venice
defeats the Genoways in the port of Prolemais, Page 72 Venice almost quite
depopulated by an Earthquake and a Plague, Page 76 She beats Genoa in the port
of Carista, Page 76 She beats her again hard by Sardinia, Page 77 She beats
her again near the Morea, Page 77 Venice is Godmother to a Daughter of France,
Page 89 A vision at Rome, Page 94 Venieries gallant speech to Don John of
Austria, Page 105 His wise Answer to him, Page 107 Venice takes the strong
City of Clissa from the Turk, Page 196 She makes the Turk fly at Foggia, Page
197 Venice and Rome paralleled, Page 204 Venice superior in diverse things to
old Rome, Page 260 Her Vices, Page 199 Venice born a Christian and independent,
Page 205
W.
A wise saying touching Sparta, Page 5 The wonderful sagacity of Venice in
detecting tresons, Page 6 Why Clergimen are incapable to be Senators in Venice,
Page 7 Why the Spaniard terms not himself Kiof Naples, but Utriusque Siciliae,
Page 9 Why mankind more hard to be governed than other Cretures, Page 10 Wars
twixt Otho the Emperor, and Venice, Page 62 War twixt Venice and Padoua, Page
66 The wars of Cyprus. Page 98 Wars with the Uscocchi, Page 135 Wars twixt
Pope Urban and the Duke of Parma. Page 172
(...)


