THE BEAST That was, and is not, and yet is, looked upon: OR, The Bo-peeping
Beast POINTED AT: OR, He that hides himself hunted, because of whom Truth
complains, and is spoken to by Pope and Prelate, by Presbyter, by
Independent, by Quaker, by Baptist: TOGETHER With her several Answers to them
all.

ALSO One DESCRIPTION of the BEAST.

ALSO The coming forth and progress of the BEAST hitherto.

ALSO An Epistle to Magistrates and Lawgivers, likewise, to take off Prejudice
if any be.

Two Epistles, one to the Reader, and another to the Christian Reader.

WITH A true Reproof to W. S. a Quaker, who in his Book called The Lying
Spirit in the Mouth of the False Prophet, wherein he endeavors to make Men
believe that he had answered H. H. his Book, called The Doctrine of the Light
within the Natural Man leading to Eternal Life, examined by Scripture Light.

London: Printed for Daniel White, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard.
1659.

Truth speaks.
I Have been despised and banished from one place to another in the world, ever
since Adam entertained a lie for self-exaltation sake, and so fell from me his
covering, unto Fig Leaves, and brought his posterity under Excuses and May-bees
for their souls food and comfort; so that a Tabernacle has been ever since
more proper for me then a settled condition.

When the true One, the sent One was upon the earth under scorn and sufferings,
he did exalt me, and gave Apostles and Prophets for Master Builders of me upon
the chief Cornerstone, viz. Himself, his Death, his Burial, Resurrection,
Ascension, sending down his Spirit, which formerly inspired Scripture-Writers
and Believers to join his in one Spirit, by which he is present in the heart by
faith, keeping life eternal in them, and hiding it in God for them, Col. 3.3.
He, I say, and his Apostles, left my Testimony in Scripture-writ, under a
terrible charge that none should add to it, nor take from it.

But as Christ and his Apostles did, so to this day all that will have me
without mixture of man's inventions, must be sure to suffer; for whosoever will
closely walk in my ways, he shall lose friend after friend, as he attaineth to
more and knowledge of me: if he be a way faring man, and follow his knowledge
heartily and sincerely, the harder he presses after the mark, Phil. 3.14. the
more he increases in knowledge, to the loss of all or most of his friends whom
he dearly loves, to the rending of his soul; so that he who increases
knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccles. 1.18. Yet notwithstanding, this sorrow
could not stop the love of Christ in the hearts of multitudes from keeping his
commandments for some hundreds of years together after his Ascension, Joh.
14.15. though few or none now dare look at me, because there is so many of mine
enemies that have put upon themselves a dead image of me under forms of
godliness.

And also another sort of mine enemies have received the spirit of Satan as an
Angel of Light, to cry down forms of Godliness with; so that I cannot appear
beautiful in form and power jointly, as I did in the time of Christ and his
Apostles, and for hundreds of years after: The one of these sorts being
offended at my life, because they think to enjoy me coldly, carelessly, easily,
only in form; and when that is obtained, they think they may sleep under the
covering of May-be, and other excuses, without disturbance of self-exaltation
or lusts.

The other, exalting a spirit of deceit to the outing of all, yea the very form
of godliness, in which the distinct order and commands are, That Christ and his
Apostles taught, practiced and recorded in holy writ for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. that there may be As it is
written, to reprove sin and Satan with, and all reproveable spirits and things
with, to comfort the distressed with, to reprove ruleless walkers with. This
form and record being cried down, this spirit of deceit may rule without
examination or reproof; and whatsoever he dictates in the children of
disobedience (for disobedience is a denying of Gods order) he may call it the
moving of Gods spirit.

At the first, (before the depths of Satan was known) there was no other grief
upon the sincere ones for Christ's sake, but the worlds sore persecution; but
now this is the worlds woe, they can no sooner look toward me for conversion,
but one of the two foresaid stumbling blocks or offenses puts themselves in the
way, Mat. 18.7.

Now follows the speech that may be aptly spoken by Pope or Prelate.
Truth, I hope you will not out me of my honorable order that has continued
about thirteen hundred years, and has been settled by the approbation of so
many learned and reverend Bishops and Doctors, who have gone on to choose an
universal Bishop as Christ's Vicegerent, resembling the high Priest under the
Law, and being Peter's successor, and have settled an attendance of eminent
Cardinals that are all Princes, and are able by Authority of our holy Father to
control Kings and Kingdoms. That has converted diverse Counsels, and in every
Counsel has brought forth some holy Law or Ceremony, or more that makes for
the honor of the Church, and fast binding her together in strength and riches,
so that now she is become greater and stronger then any Prince, yea, then all
the Princes in this part of the world called Christendom.

And she has invented such Inquisitions, Racks, Fires, Tortures, etc. and has
so absolute a power, that both the greatness of Kingship and Nobility, and also
the baseness of Whores and Harlots, and all lustful people; yea, the very
Thieves in Jayl, and Bawdes in Bridewel, have love to my Order; yea, and great
reason they have, for I can (for money or love, if they be obedient to their
Mother holy Church) grant pardons (that will quiet their consciences if they
will believe me) of all their sins past, present and to come: so that (safely
be it spoken) saving the honor of the Church, they have a petty license to
vaunting pride and youthful lusts, being but venial sins; and all this honor
and greatness is the fruits of learning and study, which (as Mr. Baxter
writes) is very laborious It is not the sweat of the brows that God appointed
man to get his living by.
.

By my wisdom I have provided away for younger Brothers of Noblemen and
Knights to creep under my wings for honor and greatness; therefore all the
greatness in this part of the world, will hold me up, and help me to jerk any
saucy fellow that shall hold an Argument (though never so true) against me;
yea, and if we were cruel (as I hope you will not say we are) I have made such
provision of candor to lust, honor and greatness in me, that all the honor,
strength and multitudes are at my command, to tear the limbs as with their
talents, and to bill out the brains (as with my Peak) of all contradictors;
insomuch, that none can open his eye to discover my vanity, but a Sword lies
on it. Zac. 11.17.

I beseech you also take notice of the good I have done for this part of the
world who are my Vassals: I have builded their Churches, and dedicated them to
Christ, or one Saint or other, that they may be holy; I have divided their
Lands into Parishes, settled Tithes upon them, left no means unthought out that
may dignifie or distinguish them, but have made all conveniences for ease,
pleasure and safety that the wit of man can invent. Tell me now, am not I a
better Master to mine, then Christ was to his? Who suffered his to be under
cruel mockings, scornings, bonds, imprisonments, savings asunder, temptings,
being slain with swords, and wandering up and down in sheepskins and
goat skins, Romans 16.33. Heb. 11.37. And no marvel; for he had no Kingdom of
this world as I have, But w^ilst thou look on the Sa^^s outward condition,
thou feel not his (...) of ^t, Prove. 1.10.
nor whereon to lay his head; he was never born to that honor and riches that
I and mine are, for he was fain to make shift with a Manger at the time of his
birth: though we arose from out of his Charts, Act. 20.30. we have attained to
greater riches and intailments, and strong settlements in this world, then he,
or any of his had or will have.

Truth speaks.
Prelate, what I say to thee, I shall say to all thy issue, viz. If thou be not
found in the Scriptures of truth, I cannot own thee; for then thou must be of
man's invention of lies, and must be outed for ever having share of me; your
Antiquity cannot maintain you, you are not older then the Epistle of Jude,
verse. 4. who wrote of your old Ordination, and your coming in; neither can the
approbation of Bishops and Doctors justify you, for Christ Jesus thanketh his
Father that he has hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed
them to babes. It Is not honourableness that will help you, for God will stain
the pride of all grory, and bring into contempt all the honorable of the
earth, Isa. 23.9.

Whereas you plead your Councils, I cannot own them* for the Scripture of
truth concludes them under a woe ( Isai. 30.1.) for taking Counsel, and not by
Gods Spirit. One thing wherein your Councils are point blank against the
Scriptures of truth, is, A Bishop (the Scripture proves) must be the Governor
of a natural family consisting of wife and children, where the spirit of
Government must be fruitful in governing his own house well, in these words, A
Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife, etc. 1 Timothy 3.2. One that
rules well, having his Children in subjection with all gravity; for if he know
not how to rule his own, how shall he take care of the Church of God? Even so
must their wives be grave, etc. verse. 4, 5. And in Titus, If any man be
blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not accused of
riot or unruly, etc.

But your Councils are so shameless, that they give out their Must be against
the Scriptures Must-be; for you say, That a Bishop must be unmarried, and so
are all your Priests to be by your Councils Order: Therefore let all men look
upon thee as one that vieth it with God himself; and indeed, if the Scripture
had not spoken of a false-dealing shameless Clergy, Jer. 13.15. I should have
more admired your impudency: your daughter Presbytery is not altogether so
shameless, for she puts her May-be against the Scriptures Must-be; for she
says, A Bishop may be unmarried.

And as for your fixing your self in the joints of honor, riches, strength,
cruelty, multitudes, etc. I must by the Scriptures of truth tell thee, That the
stone, the tried stone, the precious cornerstone, when he shall lay judgment
to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, the hail shall sweep away all
your refuge of lies, then your contract with hell and death shall not stand,
Isai. 28.16. viz. All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship
me. He that contracted with you, will then prove but a bad Play Master.

And as concerning the people that is with you in concord, this very thing is
the curse that is upon them, viz. There shall be like people like priest, and
both in love with lies: if sometimes the Nation that is called Gods people were
in this condition, it is easily believed that Rome and England may be so; It is
said of them, The prophets prophecy falsely, the priests bear rule by their
means, and my people love to have it so: but what will you do in the end
thereof? These things considered, I have done with the Prelate.

Now follows the speech that may be aptly spokenly some of that Presbitery,
that is the Prelates Daughter.
Truth, (it is a folly to lie before thee, though I may cozen the people with
sophistical Arguments, my learning being very useful to me for that purpose) I
have not shaken off my Mothers foundation, but have kept her Baptism, her
sticking to man's Ordination to preach, though not wholly in her Order; for I
tell you truly, herein lies my pomp, my riches, my benefice, my parish-livings
that my Mother Prelate provided for me, and is the very Saddle upon which I
ride the Beast, by the help of my brother Lawyer, (which Beast some have
interpreted to be the great powers of the earth) for I know, the same spirit
that caused the Hierarchies successors to ordain me, will cause them to
maintain me, and all my honors and greatness; for indeed, I have all the
Rulers and great ones power, (for few or none of the Rulers believe on poor
Christ, and his poor despised people) and therefore I flatter them in their
powdered locks and new fashions, Romans 12. gives you no such warrant.
and their wives in their long trailing Gowns, naked Breasts, and spotted
Faces; or if I flatter them not, I make my reproofs so soft and so thin as the
Tiffany they wear. And for their filth of meat and vain talk, I smile at them,
whilst I formally reprove them, and I call it not Gluttony and Drunkenness,
neither do I charge it so strictly upon them to face them with bold reproofs,
telling them, That for every idle word they must give an account at the day of
judgment, as the poor silly followers of poor Christ do.

Alas, poor souls! for their plain dealing, the world judgeeth them accursed,
and turns them out of doors; whereas I can be welcome to great persons, and
we can call on another godly; lying, till we think we say truly: and both of us
together fall upon the back of the poor silly followers of poor Christ; by
which means it is no disgrace to me upon the earth, before the great ones, and
the lustful ones, and the common people; though the foresaid poor people by
plain proofs cut of Scripture make me naked.

My Mothet Prelate has provided for me an example, viz. to flee to the
Authority of Fathers; which (though they will not clearly serve my turn) yet my
Rhetoric and Learning, together with the help of my brother Lawyer, who is my
Companion in Learning, and a good Orator both in Courts and Country, yea
before Princes he will plead for me. The Scribes and Pharisees ( viz. Priests
and Lawyers) were ever Companions, and Enemies to Christ and his poor Flock.
However, in these two particulars my Brother Lawyer and I differ; they (though
as Learned as I) let down themselves to speak as plainly and homely as may be,
that the Country Juries may understand them, and so do justice: But I, for
maintaining my Livings, Dignities, and esteem amongst men, am constrained to
hide my self in the words of Art, and abstruse Phrases, as Divinity, and Habits
of Grace, etc. that I may be as slippery as an Eel, when plain Country
understanding would catch me, and have a hole to creep out when the plain
simple wisdom and the truth of these Nazaerites has enclosed me.

The second thing wherein my Brother Lawyer and I differ. They may be in their
callings, and Disciples of Christ, too, (provided they be not instruments of
cruelty, but use honest Laws, honestly) as Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus
was, etc. but I (if I should be of the Sect of the Nazarites, every where
spoken against) must lose both my Honor and Greatness, (what great men
purchased by flattery) and by silence at their vanities, and all my fat
Livings: and let the World judge whether it were wisdom so to do. (...)


And the truth is (though I be not altogether so honorable in name as my
Mother, yet) I think my self stronger among Hypocrites, and self-seeking
Professors; for by how much I am esteemed Godly, by so much those are esteemed
ugly that cannot join with me. And upon this account I have more reason (in the
eyes of all our Fraternity, that seek honor one of another) to persecute any
saucy Jack, that upon pretense of Scripture-plainness is dare reprove us, or
cast contempt upon our Rhetorical Tropes or figures, which are as silk Gowns to
honor us, before an ignorant Multitude, especially if we can foi^ out a little
Latin, which (though this our learning, together with Man's Ordination, makes
us to stand to it, that we are to be preferred before Mechanics, and so are
holier then they, Isa. 65.5. though we be a stink in Gods Nose, and a fire that
burns a^ the day) makes us a sweet sent in the nose of an ignorant
multitude; for because we are Learned, they think they may be hold to trust us,
and so by this very means, they think they need not rave into what we say, as
the Bereans did, but take all upon trust, and so are kept ignorant, and dwell
at ease still. And now tell me, Truth, if thou can approve of these things, I
shall live bravely both here and hereafter.

Truth speaks.
As I say to thy Mother Prelate, so I say to thee, Except thy Image or
superscription be found in the Scriptures of Truth, thou art but of man's
invention, which God hates, Isa 66.3. and also the refuge of lies, which must
be swept away: Thy Mothers name is MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF
HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE WHOLE EARTH, Rev. 17.1. It is notorious, that
she bears her name in her forehead; which proves, 1. She is ashamed of
nothing. 2. That every one may apparently behold her Abominations in her
Forehead. And now let us see how like thy Mother thou art.

1. Thou and thy Mother have all one baptism, which pass from one to another by
the Proclamation of Princes, but not by Gods word; which proves you both to be
of Man's Generation and Maintenance; whereas a Proclamation had power to make
you both the Religious legitimate Children one of another: All thy Children
were made thy Mothers, by Queen Mary's Proclamation; all thy Mothers Children
were made thine, by King Edward's and Queen Elizabeth's Proclamations. The
truth is, you are of such a Brood, and so near of Kin, that you cannot be
converted one to another by preaching Faith, Repentance and Baptism, but being
both of a nature, and depending both upon Man, a Proclamation can command the
one to be a Christian Protestant upon the Papists Baptism, and the other to be
a Christian Papist upon the Protestants Baptism.

In your Infancy, when you were Cozened instead of Christened (as you call it)
you were proclaimed Regenerate and born again, made a Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, when you could neither understand Doctrine
with your hearts, whereby Man believes unto Righteousness; nor with your
Mouths confess unto Salvation, Rom 10.10. for you could not speak to confess
any thing. Is any of your Laws like the Law of God in this, which proclaims
Faith comes by hearing? How shall they believe on whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a Preacher? The aforesaid brazen-faced Act stands
by thy Mothers Canon Law, and all thy oldest Priests that took Degrees in the
Universitie, though godly in thy esteem) are sworn to observe all the Rights
and Ceremonies of holy Church; which Canon Law intends the Church of Rome,
then consider whose sworn servants thy priests are. And now consider (I pray
thee) whether thou have not a brow of Brass, in not being ashamed, though all
the world (that are not Members with thee) behold thy Whoredoms, and thy
Abominations written in thy forehead.

Now out with thy Learning, thy Rhetorical Tropes and Figures; call for thy
brother Lawyer, and all the power of the Magistrate, and all the lustful
Multitude, that loves to hear and believe lies (thou have nothing else to feed
them with, but what is mixed with lies: and indeed, Truth would be so bitter,
that neither thou nor they could bear it, if you did not sweeten it, or rather
fit it to your palate with lies) and see if they all can cover from reproof out
of Gods word, by the mouth of poor mechanic despised Christ, and his poor
mechanic despised Apostles and Disciples.

Also thou forcest thy maintenance by man's Law, from those that thou sowest no
spiritual seed in their hearts: if there were spiritual things betwixt Priest
and People, it would make such a product of love, that the Royal Law of Heaven,
Christ's Church, Saints, Angels, Christ, and God the Father, as would procure
the Priests maintenance from their Converts, they need not go to man's Law to
get it, if thou had some few Converts. Thou do like him that sows two or
three Lands in a field only, and yet challenges the whole field; though there
be hundreds of Lands upon which none of thy seed is sown, and suest and undoest
thy poor neighbors if they will not yield thee their increase out of the whole
field. Do thou look for fruit when all thy seed is rotten under the Clods,
and brings up none? Is not this thy Mothers name written on thy forehead?
etc. Will the Scriptures own thee in this? Is it fit that thou should reap
that fruit by violence, that came not of thy seed?

Again, did not Jeroboam carry all the ten Tribes from Gods Worship to the
calves at Dan and Bethel, only to save his honor, kingdom and standing? Does
not Edward, George and Richard, and all the godly Priests in England, know.
That no Scripture-reproof can lie upon the Baptizer or Baptized, where Faith
and Repentance is sincerely professed before the performance of that Ordinance?
And also that there is never a word to say (in Scripture) for their Infants
Baptism but a May-be? Upon such an assurance they will not venture to buy
twenty pounds worth of Land: And this their May-be is but imagined, and without
all warrant of Scripture. Do they not now cast the Anchor of their Rhetoric
and Learning into any Lie or May-be, to keep their Kingdom their Mother Prelate
prepared for them by Pope and Councils, they having never a word of God to
prove Gods Must-be or commandment for their practice? And does not all their
May bees arise from Popes, Councils and Fathers, whose beings would fall, their
honor cease, and none would buy their wares any more, Rev. 18.11. compared
with the last words of verse. 13. if they did not ( Jereboam like) hold the
People from the worship of God recorded in the Scriptures of Truth?

Have they not procured the Armor of the Magistrates Power to protect them,
that none may speak in their public places, nor speak to disturb them? Oh!
what a License is here to tell lies without reproof, while they are going to,
or coming from thence! but their own Learned Rhetorical, by man ordained
Members; that are fast tied, not by Truth, but by the bonds of their own
Livings and greatness, having entertained that Temptation, which Christ
refused, viz. all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof; therefore
His Servants are not paid for His Work out of the world's common stock, of
Honor, Greatness, and Livings of a hundred, etc. a year; nor has Christ's
Servants the flock of Knights, Ladies and Gentles, in their silk Gowns trailing
on the ground, to seek them for their good esteem, as thou have, even as thy
Mother Pope and Prelate has, for their blessings: But Sion is an outcast in
this world; This is Sion whom no man seeks after, Jer. 30.7. It is the
supposed knowledge of the learned Pharisees, together with the countenance of
his brother, and the supposed ignorance of Christ's Flock; Does any of the
Pharisees or the Rulers (who are Lawyers) believe on him, but this people who
know not the Law, and are accursed? Whilst thou art overcome with the
aforesaid temptation, therein being an enemy to all Righteousness, in not
ceasing to pervert the right ways of God, Act. 13.10. The very thing that
becomes Christ, and all that he calls us to fulfill, Mat. 3.15. which are
plain Scripture-Precepts; and in setting thy May-bees in the room thereof.
These things considered, I leave thee, Presbyter, to judge thy self by the 13
Chapter of Ezekiel.

Pr^sbyter may thus Reply.
I strange at your reproof, being my name is recorded in the Scriptures, 1 Timothy
4.14. I confess that is a proper name, and a name fit for Disciples, made and
baptized by Christ or His disciples. I judge thee not for the name thou
bear, but for thy Nature and Generation, as thou art Pope and Prelates
Daughter; those that are called by the foresaid name in c^pe^re, had the nature
of the name* thy nature is of (...) M^^^er, Mystery, Babylon the great, the
Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the whole earth; my confederates are
VVarriors against the Lamb, the place where thou fittest i^ Peoples,
Multitudes, etc. the name aforesaid to thee is the sheeps clothing, that thy
wolvish nature is covered with, Mat. 7.15. this nature of thine appears
cruel, in that thou art a^ enmity with thy Mother Prelate, and thy Mother with
thee; like two Boars with their Tushes in each others sides, whilst both of you
desire to lay Gods Vineyard waste; like two wild Beast that are destroying one
another, and all that com^ (...) you: as if you did resemble the two paws of
that B^ar, sacken of in the Scriptures of Truth, that had three ribs in her
m^uths Dan. ^ 5. whose ribs they were, is not named intimating, that it
mattered not to her whose sides she tore in pieces, so she might devour much
flesh; the three ribs something resembling the treble damage that forces men
to great distress, (...)
this beast being resolved to tear ^ll in pieces, rather then to want her Prey.

These sheep of Christ (whose clothing you have put on in that Name) look in
their mouths, there is no tooth in their heads that can draw blood of their
fellow creatures; their food is that which they can eat without hurting their
fellow creatures: a beast, a horse and a sheep may feed in one (...) u^e
without hurting one another: Their shepherd did not teach them to persecute men
for conformity ^^though they had to do with a false deceiving and deceived
people, blind leaders of the blind, Mat. 15.14.) that differed from them, but
directs them to let them alone; and when there was men casting out devils, and
followed not them, forbid them not, says their shepherd, Luke 9.5. Mar. 9.39.
As it is against the nature of a sheep to run after a wolf to worry him, so it
is against the nature of the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, to run after Errors
and Heresies with Fire, Sword Death, Prisons and Whips in their hand; there is
no such tools in Christ's Kingdom; of the increase of his government and peace
there shall be no end, Isa. 9.7. Here, here in this place, I say, is the food
and joy of their souls! whilst this brood of Mystery Babylon have no soul-food
or content, except they may have a whip and other tortures in their hand to
drive their neighbors into conformity. Thus going about to build up Sion with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, Mic. 3.10. and the chief reason of this
their violence, is, their heart is so fraught with pride and covetousness, that
they cannot endure any Mordecal who will not give them honor, nor any piece of
husbandry that will not yield them tenths or composition; and this makes them
( H^man-like) to run to the Magistrate when they conceive themselves wronged in
this case. Look to thy self, Presbytery, I may not own thee for the body of
Christ, because thou art not recorded in the Scriptures of Truth.

Now follows the speech which some Independ^nts, Grandchild to Pope and
Prelate, and daughter to Presbyter, may aptly speak.
I have called my mother Harlot, and have left her as such a one; though she be
a well favoured-one, she is the destruction of all Nations and Families where
she is, through her witchcrafts, Nahum 3.4. bewitching people upon a religions
account, Gal. 3.1.

I have none of her priests compelled maintenance, though some of us think our
selves happy for having a Levite to our Priest, viz. one of those the Clergy
were wont to pray for, viz. the whole Tribe of Levi, by what name or title
soever they were dignified or distinguished, Judge. 17.13. But because we would
not be too far separated from our Mother, we love her a little; she may
strengthen us, and we her; we would have a little of her worldly esteem: though
the rude Multitude own us not, in time we may be as much honored for Godliness
as our Grandmother and Mother is, for their ability to prefer to settled honor
and riches, and for their flattery, ease and lusts: but we doubt we have a
little of our Mothers pride, and willingness to save our skins, therefore we
will be modestly Godly; and that with so much wisdom as may keep as much of our
mothers love, and our Mothers friends as we can: Also we have Pastors of our
own choosing, and some of us have Pastors that have no Authority from man, nor
descent from man's Authority; yet we have our Grandmother and our Mothers
baptism, by virtue of the Popes Decree, it was given to our Mothers Mother, and
so we have that from Antiquity and Succession: If we should by denial of that,
tear our selves from our Ancient Worship, and deny the worlds Baptism, and
unchristian them all at once (...)
, we should lose (all at once) our relation and hopes of worldly promotion.

Truth speaks.
To have a near Relation to me only in similitude, will not make thee in Union
with me; to be almost a Christian (like Agrippa) is to be no Christian, Act.
26.28. To be almost in heaven, and go no further, is never to come there; there
is many who undertake to counterfeit me, but there is no likeness in all things
of me, but my self: but the Counterfeits are in something lame, or in something
superfluous: I agree with all and every command of God in Scripture, and there
is room for nothing else in me, but what Scripture will own.

The Scriptures of Truth does not clearly own you, the Scripture clearly
owneth, that, upon believing, men and women ought to be, and were baptized, and
walk together in Church Order; of this there is many witnesses throughout the
new Testament, as Act. 8. and Act. 2, etc. but not one witness that unbaptized
persons walked in Church order, or that Infants was commanded to be (or was)
baptized: of the first there is certainty, neither thou, nor all the Learned
Rabbis in the world can deny it; of the second there is but a May-be, and that
from man's inventions.

I charge you all, and all that reads this writing, as you fear God, to search
the Scripture, and see if in this particular you can attain to a better proof
then a May-be; if thou can not, be ashamed, and repent, for I look at thee to
have more shame in thee, then either thy Grandmother or thy Mother, and presume
not above what is written: you need do no more then Scripture warranteth you,
it has enough in it (if observed in Letter and Spirit) to furnish the man of
God thoroughly to perfection and all good works, 2 Timothy 3.17* then lay aside all
your Ordinances that are grounded upon May-be, though the wisest men that ever
were in the world invented them; O consider God will take Vengeance on
inventions, though they be of Moses, Aaron and Samuel, Psalm. 99.6. to verse. 8.
Consider also that man's inventions diverteth him from his Uprightness, Eccles.
7.29.

And whereas yon tell me of choosing Pastors your selves, let me tell you,
Pastors and Teachers are given by God, and not chosen by men; and except it be
found in Scriptures of Truth, that man is directed to choose any such Officers,
take heed lest thou erect an Idol of thine own invention in so doing, instead
of following Gods direction. God knows well thou can nor choose as God
chooses, for man looks at the outward appearance ( viz. a man that delivers
well-composed words) but the Lord knows the heart; take heed lest those that
thou have chosen (building upon their choice) silence those Pastors which God
has given, and that are gifted by God: Thou art no more able to choose a Pastor
for thy self, then a company of School-boyes are to choose a wise, learned
Master: therefore God no where in Scripture put the choice of Pastor into thy
hands: I advise thee, take it not: It is true, that a company of men who have
followed Christ in the Regeneration, in Faith, Repentance, Baptism, and (in the
Form) have the Spirit and Life, have heard and learned of the Father, and have
the Son revealed in them; even as the outward skin of the body, and the
inwards, as Heart, Mind, Members, are all imbodied, and presented to our
Understanding in one Body, so Form and Power, living Faith, and Repentance, and
prevailing Prayer, which makes us as Israel, viz a Prince prevailing with God;
like as the Tree and Fruit, the Sap and the Rind, so Gods Order and Life are
not to be separated, but are one in another brought forth: The Form obeyed
being the Creatures Duty, Life in the Form being Gods owning or acceptance in
the Creature, like a golden Scepter stretched forth by God, and like a seal of
God, set upon the creatures heart, which makes his heart merry, the joy of the
Lord being his strength, Ephesians 1.13. Eccles. 8.10. A company of such men (I
say) that so have entrance into the Kingdom of God, viz. that have submitted to
his Government, receiving the new birth of water and the Spirit in baptism, and
all the following commands recorded in the written word (that great Charter
being their Law, without mixture of man's inventions, and thereby owning Christ
to be their Lord, and themselves to be inchartered Citizens, he ruling over
them (not like those recorded in Luke 19.14. by the same Charter) have
authority to choose two sorts of Officers for ordering of the outward man: but a
Pastor is a higher thing, it is a gift of God, a heart-feeding gift, viz
Bishops and Deacons, the one to keep the Church in order, the other to take
care of the poors necessities to relieve them; whose bowels of
tender-heartedness have appeared to their natural Relations; whose wisdom has
been fruitful in governing by love; these may be chosen by man's Election, if
there be any that have the qualification the Scripture lays down, not else;
as in Tit. 1.6. If any be blameless. etc.

There is no haste in choosing what God has not marked out; If God has not
given thee men of such qualifications, as he approves on, thou had better be
without Governors longer, then to set up Antichrist in Christ's chair: In this
sense, He that believes makes not haste, Isa. 28.16. viz. to act without his
Guiders rule. The name of a Bishop has the nature of his Office included into
it, which is ruling and oversight; aptness to teach is but a qualification,
that any other Member may have, in whom the Spirit of God does or shall breath,
being a truth-evidencing, and forceable constraint, and cannot stay for leave
of Election by man to utter it self, which indeed is a gift of God, or Pastoral
Spirit; as Marriage is another qualification wherein the spirit of government
must appear fruitful both in wife and children, and that from conjugal and
natural love to the Yoke fellow, and procreated (in which affections Faith
appears, and for want of them, infidelity, 1 Timothy 5 8.) so that children
cannot be wanting to a Bishop, in whose government, the Royal Law (Love) of
Gods Church is resembled, Marriage being the Type of Christ and his Church; and
it is certain that a bachelor, or one that has no children, or one whose wife
and children are not qualified according to the word, cannot be chosen, except
man will set his May-be against Gods Must-be: And so I leave thee Independent,
warning thee to take the counsel of Christ to the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea, Rev. 3.17.

A Speech that may be aptly spoken by these Quakers who hold forth a stupifying
Spirit, denying plain Truth, and right Reason, under the Notion of a higher
Mystery and Spirit then plain Scripture and right Reason will admit of; which
plain Scripture they call Letter, and right Reason they call Flesh, in
contempt; notwithstanding that the Spirit of God is promised to be poured into
him that turns at Gods Reproof, Prove. 1.23. which Reproof convinces Reason,
or else man could not return: into Reason, among the rest of the Souls Members,
the Spirit was poured, and is wrought upon to order Man's Affairs by Judgment,
and does receive wise Counsels, when the man of Understanding attaineth to
them, Prove. 1.5.
Truth, though we may not talk with thee, we are not capable to receive
directions by any that is called by thy name, nor by the writings called
Scriptures of Truth; for what directions soever we have from without, can be
but man's teachings, and the natural man understands not the things of God; we
are taught by the Light within, we are to stand in the will of God, and observe
the movings and commands of his Spirit.

Truth speaks.
(...) resembling God's people (...) great humility, Psalm. 17.^1.
As in the vision of Esdras, the Eagles heads slept until her Feathers had
reigned, as in 2 Esd. 12 25. These are they that shall accomplish his
wickedness, and finish his last end: even so in Babylon the great, the Mother
of Harlots, and abominations of the whole earth, the heads, and subtilest, and
strongest of her delusions she has kept until her last end (which I hope is
approaching) that thou who would not receive the Truth in the love thereof,
might not hear the reproof of thy walking in false forms any longer, in so
much that thou could not deny, that if forms must be owned, thou must come
out of them, and come into the form of godliness: Satan has now cozened thee
another way, and thy AS GOD, he has persuaded thee that all forms must be cast
off, and the Law of the Spirit of Life entertained.

O cunning and subtle, (but false delusions) the words of the Prophets, and
the Commandment of the Apostles were set in opposition formerly to lusts, 2
Pet. 3.1, 2. but never to the way of Righteousness by any but these last
members of Babylon. Peter, in Chap. 2. 1. and 2. has these words, And many
shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of Truth shall
be evil spoken of. Wherein we may perfectly see, that their ways and the ways
of Truth, stands in flat opposition one to another. Also in the first verse it
is testified, that to bring in these damnable heresies, is to deny the Lord
that bought them: but he himself is so far from that opinion in verse 21. of
the said Chapter, that he charge the way of Righteousness, and the holy
commandments as the very Center from which Apostates fall; so that you may
behold clearly that it is not a Righteousness they are charged for falling
from, for that is the secret issues which is betwixt God and the heart; but the
way of Righteousness, which is visible to the understanding of Man.

Many of their Leaders, whilst they were able to hold the Antichristian form,
they were in the esteem of godly Priests, whose infants Baptism, and learned,
specious Pastoral care, so much applauded by wise, sober, rich, silken-coated
Professors, then (I say) not being able to resist the clear evidence that the
true form of Godliness has, because they did not love to be disquieted out of
the woman Jezabels bed, Rov. 2.22. where they lay in pleasure of imagined
Godliness, amongst a company of wise, sober Professors, they were then so far
from receiving the love of the truth, that they grew into disquietness of mind,
and hatred of that form of Godliness that Christ and His Apostles, and their
Disciples walked in for many years; even (till the time that Antichrist grew
popular) in so high a measure Satan being ready with this Temptation) that they
struck hands with this strong delusion, and so believed the lies thereof, 2
These. 2.11. that they cried down all forms, that they might be shut of (yea and
avenged of) that form, the thoughts whereof so much troubled them: if they knew
their own hearts, they would ingeniously confess this.

Therefore, whosoever desires further satisfaction in this matter, is referred
to a Book that the Author has written, called The Doctrine of the Light,
within the natural man, leading to eternal Life, examined by Scripture Light.

Baptist speaks.
The Spirit of God having instructed me by the Scripture, I fell into a course
of reasoning, which (though Mystery Babylon cries down in this her last
dispensation) being the very thing that Isaiah cries up, and reproves the
neglect of, Isa. 44. on this manner. There is no word for baptizing Infants in
Scripture, not no regular account from which that invention can arise; it is
the very door that the god of this world makes all this part of the world
called Christendom, of one supposed Faith by: leaving no man at liberty to
choose his Religion, but makes the instruments of his generation to be that
which gives him right to the Instruments of his Regeneration; and as for the
new birth, he will have his to presume that from imagination; and all this to
be done when the party supposed to be baptized could neither assent by
understanding to what was done, nor dissent by doing any thing but crying,
which he would have done, if they had gone about to kill him, as to have
christened him, as they call it. Also herein those err (that have schism'd from
Popery and Prelacy, but hold their baptism of Infants) saying, That Infants of
godly Parents may be baptized; by which words, they acknowledge in effect that
the fleshly copulation of godly Parents gives right to the children of their
natural Body to be instruments of Regeneration* so that it must needs follow
that there is no need of conversion to make them Christians, who are Christians
born by the natural flesh of their godly Parents, and so the god of this world
who has b^inded their eyes, makes them esteem it a great privilege to have a
perfect dead Act of his supposed Regeneration to be done by force upon their
children; for they can have no means to know or guess that the Spirit is
joined with water in their baptism, which is the Instrument or outward Act of
their Regeneration.

Consider how fast the poor Infant is locked to presumption, when they have
either presumption or nothing for the Foundation of their Order, or rather
Mystery Babylon's Order; the god of this world knew well that none could be
admitted into the Kingdom of God, or government of the Gospel without
Regeneration of water and the Spirit; and his business in Mystery Babylon is to
bring man to invent a form in imitation of God, and so keep men, that when they
come to be capable of believing, they should not look after Baptism or
Regeneration of Water and the Spirit, John ^.5.

As Christ has His Disciples made and baptized, so Babylon Mystery has hers,
supposed to be baptized too: and in this the man of sin exalts himself above
God, for God is merciful in forgiving sins, and receiving into grace and
favor, upon Repentance, every penitent sinner; and therefore has given Order
to His Disciples, upon confession of Faith, and Repentance, to baptize; but
this man of sin will make men believe that he has more mercy then God by His
word holds forth; for he receives all in Infancy, and needs neither Faith
nor Repentance in receiving his subjects: the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom have
heart-pricking Truth to convince them, and bring them to Repentance; but
Babylons Members are so easily made, that they neither knew nor felt when it
was done: And thus the way is broad and easy that leads to destruction.

Also considering that the keeping of Christ's Commandments is a proof of our
love to Christ, and that the receiving of the Spirit is an effect of obedience,
Joh. 14.15, 16. and knowing that the written word is more surely to be taken
heed to, then an Act of the Spirit in Transfiguration, though Christ Himself be
present, 2 Pet 2.19. to the end; because Satan being a spirit can dissemble a
spiritual Act, but his mouth is stopped, and he reproved with It is written.
And further, knowing that Christ taught duty from the written word, and it to
be believed and practiced, rather then the words of one which should rise from
the dead, Luke 16.22. I stayed not for Revelation to teach me my duty; although
I expect Revelation to convey unto us, and evidence in us Christ our life; but
turned at Wisdom's reproof, expecting (after) obedience Wisdom's promise, Prove.
1.23. And now hating every false way, knowing, They that err from thy Statutes,
their deceit is falsehood, Psalm. 119.118. and esteeming thy Precepts concerning
all things to be right, ver. 128. I cannot but say of Scripture record, Thy
word is very pure, therefore my soul loves it, verse 140. and upon this
account I took the directions of that Scripture which Paul writes by
inspiration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. and proves it by Isa. 52.11. viz.
I came out from Babylon Mystery the great, her Daughter and Grandchild, and
touched none of their precedent manners, Deuteronomy. 12.30. But I say, laying aside
man's learned mists of darkness, and his precedent Examples, I took the Doctrine
of Christ and His Apostles for my Foundation, and their Ensamples for following
of Christ for my imitation, Ephesians. 2.20.

Truth speaks.
I tell thee Church of Christ, as thy name is the house of God, the Church of
the living God, the Pillar and Ground of the truth, thou art not in thy order
reproveable by Scriptures, 1 Timothy 3.15. And if any Enemy whatsoever undertake
to reprove thee, and has not Christ's weapon he fought Satan with, v^z. it is
written, though he tell thee of standing in the Will of God, or being led by
the Spirit, or of an inward Teacher, or of Light within, as if there were some
secret thing that passed by peeping and muttering, which right Reason cannot be
used about the understanding of, they are no better the* VVizards or Familiar
Spirits; To the Law and to the Testimonies, if there they miss any thing ( viz.
in that they hold forth or teach) and speak not according to this word, though
they talk of Light within, it is because there is no Light in them, Isa. 8.19,
20. and their light is darkness, Mat. 5.19. fear thou no such Enemies, but live
in the nature of rejoicing, there meet thy God, there work Righteousness, Isa.
64.5. viz. That which Christ began and showed us, when he said, Thus it
becomes Us, etc. Mat. 3.5. Take thou notice o^ the continuance of Gods ways,
though the Enemy would tell thee they are ended: and so expect thy Salvation.

And against the fear of those that would set a Spirit which teaches not to
obey Scriptures, and follow the examples of Christ and His Disciples in
opposition to a Spirit that teaches to live in obedience to Scriptures, and to
follow the Examples aforesaid, Romans 15.4. Comfort thy self by Faith in
Scripture, and there with patience cast the Anchor of thy hope, Phil. ^.4.
Rejoice always, yea, again I say rejoice.

And that thy rejoicing may not be in vain, take these Cautions.

First, Take heed that thou miss not of a way within a way, if thou bless thy
self in the high way, without the way which is called holy, Isa. 35.8. which
holy way is recorded in Job 28.7, 8, 9, 10. Is the turning up all things by the
roots, cutting forth rivers among the rocks, discovering every precious thing,
binding the floods from overflowing, bringing forth hidden things to light. The
high way being thy duty to walk in, the holy way being the laying of Gods hand
upon Christ thy Covenant, and doing all thy works for thee, Isa. 26.12. holding
thee that thou can not depart from him, and quickening the desires of thy
soul, Psalm. 18.17, 18. In all thy acts of obedience, thy Faith must be in the
operation of God, Col. 2.12. through which our Duties are living Ordinances
performed by two co-workers.

Secondly, Take heed whilst you walk into the way of God, that your great
business be to seek God, His Face, His strength evermore, Psalm. 105.3, 4. where
the Psalmist makes this the ground of his joy; therefore (if you fail herein)
your joy is groundless. In which search love kindles more and more, as thou
come nearer God; so as the soul grows sick of love, and cannot cease to
press hard after God, Psalm. 63.8. because it is upbeld by Gods right hand, till
thou know thy self to be set as a seal upon Christ's arm and his heart for ever,
Cant. 8.6. and then also will thou follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3.

Thirdly, Take heed thou be not defiled in the way, Psalm. 119.1. for it is less
offense to bring a beastly Creature into a hogstie, or any filthy place, then
to bring it into a Princes presence chamber, or a bed of love, where there
ought to be nothing loathsome, but all to be lovely, and love provoking
Objects: So is it less wickedness to have a mind and conscience defiled, in
beastly profaneness, then to bring such a mind into the House of God, the
Church of the living God, Tim. 1.15. That thy soul may be deeply engaged, take
notice of the whole Order of persons and things wherein thy communion lies with
the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3, 4. The whole Order is the
innumerable company of Angels, the General Assembly of the firstborn, that are
written in heaven, unto God the judge of all, unto Jesus Christ the Mediator of
the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things
then the blood of Abel.

In the first place consider, whether the Father and the Son can have communion
with thy sins, thy worldly pleasures, or pursued honors? in a condition where
right and strong and pure Objects of eternal love, forces the heart to a
strong purgation, 1 John 3.3. No, no, all thy pleasures, honors, etc. must be
thrust from thee, as a menstruous rag.

Secondly, Consider, whether such company can delight to talk with thee of good
bargains, the honor thou have from great persons, the delicates wherewith thy
feasts are furnished, and thy new fashions: No, no, I tell thee, the mind that
can feed on these things, is too defiled for Gods ways and can take no pleasure
in Heavenly food; a pure mind is capable of remembrance of the commandments of
Christ and his Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.2. of the enjoining the commanded loving
kindness of God, which has such warmth and power, that it makes them become
one new heart with this new wine, and Gods Song with them in the right, when
God uses their heart, their joy, and their and his own delight to sing his
songs with, and their prayer with the God of their life, Psalm. 42.8. As if it
were said, God the life of his childrens prayer is with them in their act of
praying. They need not travel hundreds of miles to present (their Petitions on
pilgrimage: the marrying of his body together, and the rejoicing over them, as
a Bridegroom rejoices over his bride, Isa. 52.4.5. proves Gods presence at
their heart-working-life. Here, here, I say, is perfection, when God in a
perfect way visits a perfect heart: the living man is as well able to lay
aside his breathing, as these are able to forbear pressing on toward the mark,
Phil. 3.14. or to follow after God, having no pattern but the Heavenly Fathers
perfection to imitate, Psalm. 36.8. being under the laver of that Blood which
was shed by this eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. Our perfection is in the life a
working, it is yet perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. and
whilst we draw our natural breath, the blood of Christ in cleansing will do its
work, the fear of God its work, and our Heavenly Father will stand for our
Pattern, and our Christ will be our life, 1 John 1.7.

There is nothing but it may be yet a perfecting in us, only our purchase by
the blood of Christ is perfectly paid, and in that sense it is finished, and
our salvation undertaken: if either the Tempter were dead, or we our selves
stronger then Adam was in his innocence, or the evil day and hour of our
temptation past, Gal. 6.1. we might speak of such a perfection as admitted of
no imperfection; but whilst the Scripture is of use, let him that thinks he
stands take heed lest he fall; and we may (as the case now stands with us)
with Paul speak of perfection and imperfection both in one Chapter, Phil. 3. If
thou be undefiled in the way, thy soul will be in this frame: 1. Thou will
not endure to see the least defilement in thy self, without loathsome
apprehensions of thy self, and running to that fountain which is set open for
sin and iniquity to wash in, Zech. 13.1. And 2. If undefiled in the way, thou will be always a running, and not carelessly sleeping, Heb. 12.1. but rather
weeping with thy face thitherward, Jer. 50.5. either for joy, shame, desire, or
all these; so strongly will thy heart be engaged to seek the Lord, Jer. 30.21.

A fourth caution. Take heed that every one of you strive by watching, begging
of God, beseeching one another to keep from among you Egyptian bondage; this
ruling one over another with rigor, Exodus 1.13, 14. which might not be one
brother over another in the time of the Law. Reason first, because that love
which procured the shedding of Christ's blood, has caused his poor Members to
be set as a Seal on his heart and upon his arm, Cant. 8.6. and owned them for
his people, Isa. 51.16. Therefore if thou have Gods love shed abroad in thy
heart to constrain thee, afford it them out of thy breast.

A second Reason why we should not rule over our Brethren with rigor, is, we
are, and so was Elias, subject to the like passions that any feeble, brother
is, Jam. 5.17. and thou may come to be remoted, Gal. 5.1. and it is possible
thy temptation may be this, that Satan may move thee to have low, contemptible,
yea. (it may be) hateful thoughts of thy brother, and thou may have a Spirit
of putting away, and covering violence with a cloak, Mal. 2.16. therefore take
heed of this temptation.

The third Reason, why not with rigor, etc. Because thou art not godly or
Godlike in so doing: for he did not take thee at advantages when he might
justly have cut thee off, but waits for thee that he may be gracious unto
thee, and will wait upon all to that purpose, Isa. 30.11. He cut none off
suddenly, in a few days or a week, etc. nor pressed thine offenses to all
advantages, that he might break thee off; he has given contrary rules to that,
to his Apostles and Disciples how to move toward their Brethren, Luke 17. the
five first verses.

Let my fifth caution therefore be, That for no supposed advantage sake, or
fear of disadvantage to the truth, thou dare step from the Rule that Christ
laid down, one jot; for if thou do, it is a judging of the Lawmakers wisdom
and foresight; as if he did not foresee and provide in his rule for all
following effects.

Secondly, It is an exalting of thine own wisdom, in that thou think thou
see cause to be a ruler further then he has left a rule to guide thee by.

Thirdly, Thou may assay (in so doing) to prevent the fruit that God
brings forth by contrary means. In this case how far might Abraham's
imagination have fought against Gods command? He might have said of Isaac, he
was the son of the Promise; and the Promised seed is in his loins, etc. Amongst
other Scriptures, I offer to thy consideration, Luke 17. the 5. first ver.
where after the position laid down in the 2 first ver. in the 3 following ver.
he thus applies, Take heed to your selves (as if he should say, Here will be a
dangerous temptation) If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; if he
repent, forgive him; if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and
seven times in a day turn again to thee, and say, It repents me, thou shall
forgive him. Where note, that the offenders heart is not to be judged by the
offended. God allows thee nothing but his tongue to judge of in this case; it
may be his heart may more melt afterward then at the first turning, by the
offended's tenderness or other means: and the offended ought (from bare
judgment) to forgive him, if he do it as his duty, observing Christ's rule; his
heart may be opened with more love and tenderness to the Offender afterward
also, then at the first turn. However it is better to walk in self-denial in
this case, and observe Christ's rule, then to satisfy thine own offended
spirit; however, if thy brothers heart and tongue should not agree in his
repentance, God has not made thee a judge of evil thoughts, Jam. 2.4. And the
Apostles answered, The Lord increase our faith: which answer proves they had
great need of help to strengthen their faith to this purpose.

A sixth Caution. Take heed of this Doctrine, That Saints do not serve God for
salvation, but from the knowledge of salvation. This Doctrine not being rightly
divided, has been a stumbling block to many. Man since Adams fall is corruptly
so proud, that nothing but the top of excellency will serve his turn, and
therefore to be as gods knowing good and evil, tickled his mind. You shall
hardly find one in a society (men are in this point so heightened by the
Tempter) that will acknowledge he comes to God for salvation, though it be at
the first hour of the receiving into society. Men under this temptation are not
willing to begin to stand without till the good man of the House be risen up,
Luke 13.25. but all judge themselves finders from the self-flattering conceit,
before they have enjoyed the Lord Christ by manifestation. Few will own that
there may be a condition of darkness in one that fears God, Isa. 50.10. They
had rather in this temptation compass themselves about with sparks, ver. 11, as
if all had right to baptism only upon that account that is recorded in Act. 10.
viz. Who should forbid water that these should not be baptized, that have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And those that enquired, What shall we
do to be saved? had no right, Act. 2. Though it be certain they received the
Holy Ghost after Baptism, and also it is certain, that at the first the
Disciples served Christ as servants, though after they were owned by Christ
upon a more full account, Joh. 15.15. There was a time when Paul knew Christ
after the flesh, which must needs be for self ends, or good that might come to
himself thereby; but after that, he knew neither man nor Christ any more after
the flesh, but wholly having his spirit of love and delight exercised upon
them, to rejoice in Christ, and to serve the creature, with the love of Christ
shed abroad in his heart.

I would that all who are in Church Fellowship, upon account of Faith and
Repentance, and have not as yet attained to assurance, would (with
understanding) own their condition, it would make them give all diligence to
make their calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Therefore lest Members
should split themselves upon this stumbling block, show your selves workmen
that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15.

Caution 7. Whereas Disputes has been formerly, viz. about that time the
Ranters and Quakers first sprung up; some holding it to be their Privilege (but
not their Duty) to serve the Lord; I advise thee to abolish this Dispute from
thy Societies, and from your particular spirits: for it is the greatest
Privilege that can be, to have a heart united to fear God's Name, whilst they
walk in God's truth, being instructed in His way, Psalm. 86.11. Here is no
liberty from Duty, to walk in God's ways and in his truth, and yet a heart
united by God, and that to fear His Name; and from this very act is David set
at liberty to praise God's Name, Psalm. 86.12, 13.

I demand whether it be not a Saints Privilege to have a heart enlarged by
God, and yet it is then to run the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.32. viz.
enlarged and set at liberty from the pit of corruption, Isa. 38. from the
horrible pit, Psalm. 40.1. to be bound to Gods love and wisdom, who has
provided Commandments that he knows serves to unite thy heart to God; he has
commanded nothing but righteous things, which are according to the Divine
Nature, that thou art (or art to be) partaker of, 2 Pet 1.4. and thou art (or
art to be) joined to God and one Spirit, that is to say, the breathings, love
desire, delight of God is to be thine, and thy souls delight to breath in them,
and thus thou art in union with God, in Christ Jesus; so that the same things
are now commanded by the Law of the spirit of Life, Romans 8.2. which was by the
Law of Sin and Death, viz. it had been Sin and Death to thee, if thou had not
done those Commandments which the Law of the Spirit of Life has enabled thee
to do; but they are a Law still, and now having a heart set at liberty, the
Commandments which were before a burden, is now not made grievous by love: and
if the love of God be a Saints Privilege, it is nothing less then to bind us
to our Duties; for this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and
His Commandments are not grievous to us, 1 John 5.3. Lo, here is no freedom
from Duty. Christ Jesus, who said, If the Son make you free, you are free
indeed, Joh. 8.36. said also, If ye love me, keep my Commandments. Here you see
that love binds the freest people in the world to their Duty of obedience,
Joh 14.15.

And when Christ proclaimed his yoke to be easy, and his burden light, He did
not alter it from being a yoke and a burden, Mat. 11.30. but it is a sweet
burden, when there is nothing save a constraining love upon thy heart; it is a
sweet yoke when thou art fastened to Christ Jesus and his Saints, to tread one
trace by love in keeping such Commandments, as that the things commanded
Christ, and his Saints, and thou in the unity of spirit loves, upon account of
the Commanders love and wisdom, how can such Commandments be grievous? 1 John
3.4. But if any should further still contend for liberty in this Case, let them
know, that sin is the transgression of the Law, verse. 8. and whosoever
commits sin is of the Devil, 1 John 2.4. and let all who think they know God
(whilst they despise that which He and His Disciples commanded and practiced)
let them remember this word written in 1 John 2.4. He that says he knows
God, and keeps not His Commandments, is a Liar.

As from this opinion that was sometimes in the Church, (I desire it lurk not
secretly there yet) the Ranters and Quakers sprung, so also do now those who
are zealous in decking their bed of Love, which they (poor deceived ones!)
under pretense of peace offerings and reconcilement to God, in performing the
very Vows of their souls, Prove. 7.14. seek to draw Proselites in a bed of
solace with love, being so enabled (as they think) and covered sufficiently,
and beautified as with gifts and graces, verse. 16. that they can hide
themselves and others from the reproof of Truth, whilst they are workers of
iniquity; though they say they preach and cast out devils in Christ's Name, etc.
He that knows their works will call them so, Mat. 7.22, 23.

And also they have perfumed their bed with diverse spices, Prove. 7.17. and it
is too too true, they hold forth the likeness of some of those spices, but not
all; that Jesus Christ in his Visitation of His Spouse, comes perfumed unto
His Spouse-Bed, Cant. 3.6, 7. and these in the good Man's absence will have
other pleasures and lusts then to obey their Lord; they have contracted a
hatred in His absence to his Rule and Government, and will not have it, Luke
19.14. and thus these poor deceived ones will be cut off, for making a perfume
and smelling to it, in other places then where God and his People meet, Exodus
30.35. to 38. which is in God's ways, while they rejoice in working
Righteousness, Isa. 64.5. viz. in ruleful obedience, where love to Christ is
proved by keeping his Commandments; and the love of God and Christ, together
with their manifestation, is promised.

These Libertines, tell them of walking in the ways that Christ and His
Disciples walked in, and they will reply, If God let them see it, they will
obey. May not Solomon's harlots say as well (when the good Man of the house is
come home) who will instruct her? for that is Christ's practice with His Spouse,
Psalm. 32 8. she will forsake all her wooed Proselites, and cease to heal,
defend and cover them, and will no more counterfeit a perfume to persuade them
that Christ's favor of his ointments is amongst them, but but will come to the
good man, and walk with Him in obedience to His Commandments, and abide in His
love, is He has kept His Fathers Commandments, and abides in His love, Joh
15.10. So that if it be truth (as surely it is) they refuse to obey; when the
good Man of the house is come home, they must then see it, though they shut
their eyes, and blame his absence for their disobedience, whose presence would
let them see, and with this excuse fall fast asleep in the arms of him who
rules in the children of disobedience; whilst he furnishes them with all
counterfeit evidences of good, as if God were in their hearts all this while, 2
These. 2.4. the words are these: So that he, AS GOD, sits in the temple of
God, showing himself that he is God.

And the first evidence that he furnishes them with may be this, viz. That
Christ has put His beauty upon them: for the beauty of Christ may be put on
one, and that by Christ, and yet they play the harlot with it, Ezekiel 16.14. here
is the work of the Prince of the air, in a disobedient heart, to find ways for
Israel to disobey God, and give up a soul to Lust, and so play the harlot, even
as if she were opening her heart or her legs, for Christ to take His pleasure
in her, and she in Him.

A second evidence of him who rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, is, in the pleasure of the Plant which is but a strange slip; It
must needs be a strange slip, if your ways be not those ways which Christ and
His Disciples walked in, for three hundred years after Him: your ways must
then be your own, and of your own choosing, and strange from Christ's, Isa.
36.34. viz. The teacher with pleasure to thee and himself, may plant in thy
heart with thy consent, or with thy soul, a disobedient slip, strange to Gods
word, it being not there to be found; and for all thy delight, thy portion will
be desperate sorrow in the end, Isa. 17.11, 12. here is a deceitful work of the
ruler in the heart of the children of disobedience.

3. He can make you lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no
evil can come to us, Mic. 3.11. he can make thee bless thy self in the name of
God, with confidence of freedom from evil.

4. Whilst thou art asleep, he can furnish thee with a flattering spirit, that
causes thee to dream, and heals thee in thy disobedience; and so in your
preaching and hearing one another, you have nothing but healing and pleasure,
and love to tell one to another in disobedience: whereas he who has Gods word,
will preach it faithfully, Jer. 23.28. and for his pains shall be cast out of
your Societies: so unwelcome is the thoughts of obedience (to Christ's
Commandment) to those who dream they shall be saved without it: Although the
true Saint be not only moved to obedience for salvation sake, but for loves
sake; and thus by maintaining that which Christ neither taught nor practiced in
his worship, or at least, by gathering of what Christ taught, by pieces and
snatches, and leaving the rest, viz. by taking that which will, and leaving
that which will not serve the lusts of a proud Society, that thou may hold
some union with them, thou fightest against the Lion of God, and at the best
(in this thy dream) do but think thou eatest; when Truth it self shall awake
thee, and thou be convinced of thy disobedience, thou will find thy self
hungry, Isa 29.7, 8.

And if any strive to awake them out of this their dream, wherein they have
neither Truth nor Reason for their practice, they will say, Let me alone with
my Religion, and I will let you alone with yours. Whereas if they would not
thus harden their hearts, but let Judgment come forth to Victory, what violent
wrestling would there be in them? what asking and enquiring would their hearts
be filled with? what weeping with their faces toward God and his ways would
melt their souls? Jer. 50.5. and not asking (as now they do) with their hearts
set against Gods ways, to see if they can find any word (which if it do meet
them) it must be by the spirit of delusion, mis-interpreted, to defend them
from obedience to God and his ways. Is it not just, that these should have
strong delusions, that they may believe lies? 2 These 2.11. Will not this
properly one day be said unto them, Bring forth the blind people that have
eyes? Isa. 34.8.

Therefore I advise all men to disclaim any thing in Religion, that judgment
cannot give thee to understand and hold forth to others, (when though shall be
asked a Reason of the hope that is in thee) to be truth, though a Spirit should
offer to teach it thee.

The tongue cannot move beyond the ear, being both natural, and these can both
be but ministers of the natural Understanding; pen and eye are servants to the
same, and can show but utterable things: take but away the use of these under a
pretense of a Spirits teaching, and the natural understanding and his servants
are useless, and cannot glorify God, which was the end of their Creation.

Written by H. H.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE BEAST.
IT is to be premised, That the Whore and the Beast, and the false Prophet,
being that they are all appertaining to one Babel, or Members one under or in
another, all of one spirit, all of the refuge of lies, to which men flee from
truth, and are to be swept away together, and all at agreement with Hell and
Death, Isai. 28.15 to the 19. and all come to an end by one power, when the
Whore shall be judged, and the Beast and the false Prophet cast alive into the
lake that burns with fire and Brimstone, Rev. 19.20.

That this Description may the better appear, we are first to observe that this
Beast is settled by the Dragon, who is the Devil and Satan, and that this
settlement is his invisibility: he has the subtilty of the old Serpent
employed to hide him, that he might live. And

First, Let us observe that he is like a Leopard, in which sense he is
beautiful; and his beauty appears most to the mind and intellect, because
the spirit of Satan, that is, his father, his Setler, yea, and his Life, is an
applyer of himself to the soul, being an inward worker; for his deceiveableness
of unrighteousness, is in them that perish, where he causes delight and glory,
and seeming happiness, to fill the mind; but consulteth with Truth and
Righteousness.

Secondly, His likeness is never seen nor understood in his tearing actions,
but as if something else had done them, for then he uses a Bears foot, and a
Lions mouth, Rev. 13. verse. 3.

Thirdly, Consider that when the Scripture speaks of his mouth being like a
Lion, it does not speak of the Members thereof, as tongue and teeth, (for his
teeth has another likeness where they are described, as in Daniel, they are
called Iron teeth) but mouth, which includes all the acting powers therein,
whose invisibleness is set forth by the supremeness in dominion and strength
that the Lion has over all Beasts; and that this best resembles the Lion most
in his mouth, where his lordlyness, strength and victoriousness lies in the
month: in the mouth is first a preparing of food for the stomach, and the
second, utterance of the voice: by the stomach, the minds satisfaction may be
meant; and in this, his prosperity is great; for their eyes stand forth with
fatness, they have more then their heart can wish, Psalm. 73.7 to 11. Being that
this Beast is the imbodyed power of Satan, whose name is Abaddon, we cannot
think that his stomach can digest any thing but destruction and cruelty, and
all hellish food; and, Satan-like, desiring the destruction of all men: and to
this purpose this strong mouth works. Note that his strength in voice cannot
be any thing else but Eloquence (which is the enticing words of man's wisdom, 2
Cor. 1, 17.19. 2 Pet. 1.26.) and Lies, which is the very strong way they
prevail in, to the destruction of the people, Jer. 17.10. Zach. 10.2. (take
heed Clergy that this word be not a witness against you) in this lies great
strength to keep his dark hidden settlement, viz. in Eloquence and Lies, of
which he wants neither.

Look about you, to see if you can see him when he is a working and present,
but with Eloquence and Lies he will be hidden from you, for he is always hid in
the present tense, that is to say, though he yet is, he is not, (which must
needs be understood whilst he cannot be seen) but it is apparent enough he was,
then men may see plainly what he has done in the Preterperfectense, for he
brings all his blind ones to had-I-wist. The words that are written in Rev.
(...) was and yet is, being there is no Scripture that can show when this
Beasts Creation was, or when he was not, can admit of no other sense, but the
very plain words as it is written: the words is not, being a plain
contradiction to the words yet is, for one of the twain must needs be a
contradiction to the other, except expounded. Then [is not] is well understood
to mean [is not visible,] being that he is always hid from seeming what he is,
when he teareth, and destroys, and deceives, with his Bears foot, and his
Lions mouth: for if he were known to be what he is, the very knowledge of him
would take away his strength, for then neither Magistrates nor People would do
his works: his appearings are several; one when the confession of Christ's Name
caused him to rage to the destruction of the Confessors, when there was no
division of Papists and Protestants, being hunted our there, the very opposing
of the Papists Transubstantiation and other innovations, caused him to rage to
the destruction of them that engaged against them, though both of them
confessed the name of Christ; and then the Papist might have said unto the
Protestant, Yea, if your sufferings had been for confessing Christ's Name, as
the Primitive Martyrs were, then your sufferings had been right; and now here
in England, being hunted thence by dayspring valiant Truth, he rages against
those that would have Christ's Baptism, and all His Gospel Order, so that as
Light breaks forth, he follows that, roaring with Lions mouth, and tearing
with Bears foot all the children thereof, as Truth begets them, he being
spirited by the same Satan or Adversary to Truth that was under the Law. So
that a man may best know him by the bloody sides he has torn the ribs out of,
Dan. 7. and by his past acts of cruelty. When Mr. Love was present with his
fellow Traitors, in the glory of a godly Clergyman, who would have thought
that they had a heart, to the overthrow of many thousands, to raise War and
Bloodshed, only to advance a Scottish Presbytery, which Beast had then a
bloody face, but now it is hid again under a supposed learned Godliness? and
how blind was poor England, that could not see it to be the cruelty of this
Beast, when Pulpits provoked their Natives in her own Bowels, for Religion to
murder one another? in which horrid drunkenness, Jer. 13.13. Isa. 23.33, 34.
the (esteemed) godlyest men (because they were most believed) sent forth most
men to this slaughter.

Let us again look upon this Lyon-like mouth, that can be stopped with nothing
but the blood and flesh of the flock of the slaughter, Zach. 11.3, 4. where the
howling of the shepherds, and the roaring of Lions are mentioned both together;
where Isreal's Clergy are reputed pitiless, slayers and fellers of the flock,
and hold themselves not guilty, saying, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; (ah
poor England! how dangerous are acts of cruelty amongst thy shepherds, when
they are laborers for license to destroy for Religions sake?) this was the
condition of poor Israel, who was sometimes as dear in Gods sight as England,
when it was at the best, Isa. 22.25. There is a conspiracy amongst her
prophets, in the midst thereof, like a roaring Lion; they have devoured souls,
they have taken the treasures of their precious things, they have made many
widows in the midst thereof. We may also look upon our Clergy, how they band
together, to get, if it were possible, such Parliament Men as might be as teeth
in their heads, (Christ takes no such care to exalt His Gospel by worldly
Magistrates) it is apparent that these Priests took no care how many widows
they made, or of devouring souls; witness our Pulpit-VVar to maintain liberty
for themselves to lead souls blindly, that were blind to destruction: but the
precious things they will bave, or else they will sue and distress him that
dare not for conscience sake pay them for devouring souls, and many poor
laboring men, and widows, and children, that are constrained to fit with
bread and water pottage, whilst their labors and profits are required to feed
them, and cloth them with the precious things of our Nation: Is this love and
pity, the Law of Heaven, where the servants in the Gospel should live upon
giving and receiving? no, no, it is the contending and distressing Law of hell
rather: take heed (good People) of such shepherds, if you once come to have a
glimpse of them, search and look farther, for if you delight in such, hear and
observe, that he that loves as well as he that makes a lie, is without the
City of Salvation, Rev. 22.15. Of the enmity of a Spirit something like this
Beast, I found in the mouths of some of our Lincolnshire Clergy, who (though
they had not forty shillings a year, according to the Statute of Freehold)
were swarming to choose the Knights of the Shire; I desire that any of the rest
when Truth provokes them, and will not be found to serve their turns, be of a
better spirit; for these could better digest lying, then to be reproved for
lying.

About thirty years agon, when I was persecuted by the Bishops, wandering from
my dwelling place, I came to Spalding, where I did remain a little time; where
(being in the company of two or three Christians) I had occasion to look upon
the 139 Psalm. we being only talking together, I did read, I am wonderfully and
fearfully mad, instead of I am wonderfully made, I not at all being preaching
then, as the Liar did report: some that failed in their Duty of taking things
in the best part, reported it; notwithstanding, at the same time I did correct
my self, and own the true reading: and this report being gotten into the nest
of the Clergy, and there hatched by hatred and scorn, brought forth this
enlargement, that I should preach it as a Doctrine: But I know not what. It
came to pass, at the choosing the Knights of the Shire, upon Jan. 10. a great
company of Priests being got together in Lincoln Castle, I coming near where
they were, one of them comes by me with a boy-like behavior, and cries, I am
wonderfully and fearfully mad: to which I said nothing, and he past into the
crowd of them; and another, either a Priest or one of their dear Berns, seeing
the first did not provoke me to speak, accused me (by the name of this fellow)
for preaching of that Doctrine; but what, I could not gather, his words were so
confusedly uttered, only wonderfully and fearfully mad; for there is none of
them agrees in words what the Doctrine was; and so turned his back, to whom I
answered, Art thou not ashamed to maintain the Priests lies, and then turn thy
back, when thou have spoken the words? but he turning his face and averting the
same, the Synod of them turned to me with out-facing countenance, to whom I
said, I stand here to maintain the Truth, against the whole Synod of you: And
whereas I might expect something to be said that might make that which they
said probably appear, first one of them, and then another of them cried, Hout
him, Boys, hout him, all the rest standing silent, approving (for they did not
reprove) what the two spoke. Also Mr. Wood Merchant of Boston told me, That one
that he looked at to be a godly Minister, told him, That when some cried, a
Hall, a Hall, I cried, a Halter, a Halter; which here by my pen and heart, in
the presence of God, I deny, for I did not speak those words, nor any words to
the contempt of Mr. Hall, nor had ever in my Life an offended thought at the
man. Observe, if the supposed godly of them bend their tongue like a Bow for
lies, Jer. 9.3. and the active men among them be so inclined to mutiny, as the
Reader may judge how dangerous such words were, at such a time and place: Are
they not like to be Members of the aforesaid Beast, and like that company of
Priests aforesaid, that muther in the way by consent, (for these sought my
undoing, either by Mr. Hall's hands, or the multitudes, and to stain my repute)
according to the interpretation of Christ, Mat. 5.21. and also guilty of
slander, Psalm. 50.20. and making a man an offender for a word, Isa. 29.20, 21.
and shall according to that word, be brought to naught, consumed and cut off,
if they repent not.

H. H.

The coming forth, and Progress of the Beast hitherto.
THe holy Scriptures foreseeing,
Devourers for to grow.
Amongst and out of church of Christ, Ephesians. 2.2 12 Acts 20.30

Does truly style such so.
As Lion, Bore and Wolf,
And dumb and greedy dogs,
That selfness, honors, beast-like wealth,
Does wallow in like hogs
In mire, yet still filled with fears,
Their only loved prey,
By strength of dayspring valiant truth
Should taken be away.
Their Lepord-like, with Lions mouth do grin, Rev. 13.2

And paw of Bear, with Dragons strength stretched out,
A child of truth, in the act of covering
Their worrying paw, least men should spy,
Their naked, shameless, beastial cruelty.
With Christ sheeps clothing whilst they can deceive Mat. v: 15.

With that, when not, they Magistrate ask leave,
That they may use his sword, and then they are bold,
Though inside wolvish nature men behold,
To tell truth's children that they must not prate,
But put into their mouths, else they will make Mica 3.5

War against them: whom God does love, they hate.
From sometimes Church of Christ
Did Pope and Prelate spring,
From Pope and Prelate, did
This Presbyter begin,
From Presbyter did Independent fly,
Yet members still of one body
Made, ere they knew in infancy,
But Scripture Baptist does them all deny.
For the good old way that Jesus walked in Ier. 7.16.
,
And the Apostles taught repenters to begin Acts 2.38.
,
Hereupon the spirit of the beast rouzeth up himself again.
Yea thinks the Quakers spirit, then will I
All that is called God or worshipped deny 2 These. 2.

For where by order by making false order.
I can have no place,
I must exalt my self to the disgrace viz. in his deceived ones, who exalt the
sound of name, but have (being ignorant of) the nature of the law of God and
Christ.

Of God, opposing order of his face;
Though God be the God of order.
Plainness of truth opposite to the beasts mystical pretenses.
GOD sent his son in flesh to come,
True natural blood to shed,
And did ordain his death to be
In simple man, bake't bread.
And Vine fruit wine that men do drink,
Which God and man does cheer,
When in his ord'nance spirit joynd
The price of Christ's blood dear,
Shown to hold forth his death for sin,
Until he come again,
That is gone up true advocate,
Our cause for to maintain.
Where holy God and sinful man,
By Christ a treaty hold,
Who takes our prayers, and there to God
Our miseries does unfold.
And does return into our hearts,
The fruits of his blood shed,
True pordon, strength, comfort and joy,
By spirit witnessed.
Who does with blood and water join
One witness manifested John 1.5 8.
,
In Gods one way whilst men obey,
Repent and be baptized;
And then expect pardon of sin,
And holy spirit Gods gift 2. Acts 38
,
Whilst that our loves is proved to Christ,
In making it our stri^t.
For to keep all Gods commandments,
Where Scripture comfort dwells Romans 15.4
,
With Son and Father manifest,
Where men are not Rebels John 14 21.
.
Hereupon the spirit of the beast proceeds.
Thinks disobedient spirit, I have
No share in this strong Savior,
I Will cry down Laws and holier be
Then all that forms do favor,
In the eyes of those that have the love
Of simple truth denyde.
I Will serve their lusts and them persuade
They need not to be ti'd.
I strong delusion can command
Affections into tears Ezekiel. 8 14
,
And cause men for to lean on God,
And so free them from fears. Mica 5.11

And cause men to protest to God,
That they will obedient be Ier. 42.6
,
Yet his commandments to deny,
And say it is not he Ier. 43. i, 2
.
For in right steps of humbleness Ps. 17: 11
,
They shall seem after God to press.
And though by Christ's knowledge they escape,
Through lusts the worlds pollution 2 Pet 2: 20
,
Yet Gods commandments turning from,
They Are fast in my possession,
Although that they his way forsake,
They holiness may hold The strength of delusion lies in their seeming to
themselves and others to hold forth their formal holiness:
,
For I will spirit them my self,
Whilst they are fearless and bold,
I can my self transform
Into an Angels light;
And there maintain the light within
The disobedient wight 2 Cor. 11: 14 2 These. 2.
.
Truth speaks.
As righteous they must sure appear,
Whilst they can have the Skill
To seem as Christ's Apostles right,
And preachers of his Will 2 Cor. 11 13.15
:
These were so far convinced,
As to disclaim profaneness;
But love of truth did not receive,
To bring them to obed'ence 2 These. 2
;
Self-love did them provoke,
Lest they should damned be,
Or of salvation be denied,
Profaneness for to flee;
Does it avail (says they)
To save us? let us see:
All other Scriptures they throw by
As useless for to be.
Delusion speaks.
Therefore to them I Am sent 2 These. 2 11. compared with 10 Verse:
,
Such lies they shall believe,
As me their inward Teacher to
Prefer, though God they grieve Genesis 6.6.
;
Before that simple Christ,
That Scripture-writing gave,
That men might read and know his law,
And sure instructions have 2 Pet. 1 19, 20 2 Timothy 3.17.
.
Truth speaks.
The Man of God to make perfect,
And furnish him throughout,
There is a rule to know Gods will,
None need of it to doubt.
Delusion speaks.
In man's imagination
I Will frame a lawless Christ,
And set my self up there as God,
And in his name be hi'st;
I Will cause these to ascribe to me
What ere to God is due,
And to my inward motions,
To fly from Scripture-view.
[ Remember Ahabs case, 1 King. 21.23.]

Truth does, and will conclude.
When beauteous holiness appears,
In sweetned-soul the dew of youth to bring, Psalm. 110

In morning womb, it never fears
To own its Jesus Lord and King;
That God-begotten, Virgin-born,
That crosfide flesh was crowned with thorn,
Has saving power, and law-giving,
In person, place and time,
No true man can deny this thing,
And say he 's without crime.
That does salvation to himself apply,
Whilst that obedience he does clean deny,
Though faith and bapti'm in one book be writ,
Yea in one Chapter, and in one Verse too,
Delusion says he can the faith out pick,
And leave the bapti'm for some else to do.
Thus self-love his salvation minds
Whilst love of righteousness thinks fit,
To hate iniquity betimes.
The Oil of gladness with his Christ to get Psalm 45.7
,
And thinks nothing for himself to embrace,
To be too low, carnal or base.
That his Jesus to his Apostles gave
For Church direction; but will tread the trace,
With Christ and his Disciples to his grave.
And knows when is left his body, then that he
From 's bodies worship, not before is free.
If our great God by such a lowly thing,
As blew in fringe would Israel mind
Of their obedience to their Lord and King Number* 15 38
,
That they might not to their own heart,
Nor to their eyes be seeking,
With spirit of disobedience dark,
(Though light called) go a-whoring,
Then think not baptism and breaking bread,
Mean Laws, by Christ b'ing uttered;
Flying to holier spirit they think, then Christ,
That does and will exalt himself the highest,
Within the disobedient child,
That is by spirit, but not by God beguiled.
To all Lawgivers and Magistrates.
WIth the submission of a poor worm that is under your feet, (that you may
behold what God has given to my heart to write a warning to men, and that you
may avoid all provocations to that horrid sin of building up Sim with blood,
Micah 3.10.) I tender this treatise to your view, hoping that you will not
despise the words of him that is as much your underling, as any maidservant to
her Master, (though they may Contend with some of you, Job 11.13.) Being I am
heartily engaged by Christ Jesus my master, to dissuade all men from adhering
to man's inventions, or devices, in and about the worship of God, because they
are so dangerous to prince and people in the land of my nativity, as is proved
in the 106. Psalm, and the 29. Verse. and Psalm 99.8. Isa: 66.5. and many other
Scriptures.

And from declining the exact rule of Christ and his Apostles laid down in the
books of the New Testament only; under which grace we are, and not under the
Law of terror, Heb: 12: 21.

This poor Supplyant of yours, to whom God has given grace to be faithful, is
willing (I hope) amongst many others, to stand in the Gap, by showing to you
and all England, and praying to God for you and it, Ezekiel. 22.30. compared with
the 28. Verse, the very way, by which an end must be put to the proceedings of
the resisters of the truth, 2. Tim. 3: 9: Viz. by the discovering their folly
to all men; to which purpose, this poor-servant of Christ Jesus has written
this treatise against this first Beast that arises out of the Sea, viz. the
Church that has his power maintained, and his worship exercised by the second
Lamb-like horned beast, that is more like a Lamb then the first, and arises
out of the eatrh, viz: the world, and yet he holds up the first beasts power
and worship by Magistrate sword, the place that the first arose out of yields
no such power, his Lamb-like horns being the strength that prevails with the
Magistrate to uphold him, viz: a repute of holiness and innocence, in which he
exceeds, therefore as a Lamb, or as one in sheeps clothing, and in the
pretended name of the Lamb Christ, he takes power by the Magistrate to
constrain rich and poor, small and great, bound and free, to worship, etc.
Revelations 15. therefore where there is a constraint upon all into one
worship, we may well suspect that it is the power of that beast, who is the
very powerful life-giver to the bare Image of the first beast which Image, if
it had not the Magistrates power to constrain it, it were life-less, and
therefore called the Image, because it has neither Scriptures authority to
provoke, nor power to constrain, so that this beast is but a D^agon at the
best, that cannot stand without man's art or power to uphold it, and shall
certainly fall when God's ark of testimony is brought to it, and this is the
last beast that shall be at enmity with my Master Christ Jesus, and this is the
same spirit with the first, who is the old Serpent, and Satan, whose whole body
consisting of beast, whore, and false Prophet, as head, body and tail, shall in
the end perish together, Revelations 19.20.

The beast was once wounded by my Masters providence and power, when he died
upon the Cross, where he spoiled principalities and powers, and made show of it
openly, Col. 2.15. the virtue whereof is his deadly wound to this day, and no
Salve that the beasts healing flatterers has (though for a time it gives ease
to the blind sleepy conscience) can make this deadly wound unmortal, viz. those
Prophets spoken of in Ezekiel 13.9

But when triumphant truth, the beasts mortal foe, shall appear, to make
manifest what this wounded beast is, that can never look upon Gods word to
examine his own standing, but he so much feels there the soarness of his
mind, as that he dare not in it prosecute his examination, he shall be dead by
that act, and taken out of the way, 2. These. 2.7. and by how much truth looks
forth, by so much this beast is sick of his wound; ask your selves when truth
appears; where is lies? are they not all dead and gone; then impudency and
out-faceing of lies must needs cease, when God shall destroy the face of the
covering of all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations, Ezekiel.
25.7. the very discovery of him is his wounding; therefore let those of the
Clergy that loves to be Masters of all people, upon the account of godliness,
contrary to Christ's counsel, Math. 23.10. look about them, for Christ Jesus
wounds the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation
to the neck, Selah, Hab. 3.13. for then their standing will appear whether it
be of God or no; then their begging for liberty to persecute those that dare
not feed them, and honor them, will be at an end, when Gods outcasts are
visibly provided for, and the oppressor cease, Esa. 16.4. then those that
made lies their refuge, when they fled from the written word to men's invented
may bees will be utterly undone, when the patient, Heb. 10.36. not hast-making
beleivers, Esa. 28.16. is upon their sure foundation, then the Hail shall sweep
away all the refuge of lies, and the water shall overflow the hiding places,
Esa. 28.17. So that it must needs follow, that the weapons of our war-fare are
not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. but mighty through God, so that the sword of the
Magistrate has no such strength against this beast, as mighty truth has;
therefore be wise O ye Kings and Rulers of the earth, as it follows in the
second Psalm 10.11.12. Verses, take heed of persecuting any for Gods sake,
although they be presented to you as deceivers, Mat. 27.36. and seditious, Acts
24.5. For was not Christ and his Apostles so presented to their persecutors, it
is better to take Christ's counsel, viz. let both grow together till Harvest,
then that the blood or distress of any one persecuted Saint should lie at your
door; Christ disclaimed any intrest in your kingdom in the days of his flesh,
and set an example of obedience to God, in being under your authority: and his
Apostles commanded submission to you, and to pray for you, and we are yours,
subjected to you in all civil obedience; so do you refuse to have authority in
Christ's Kingdom, and be you there subjected to him; and as he says, My
Kingdom is not of this world, so say you, that your Kingdom is not over his
Church, and let his Laws be in your eyes as they are in truth, so wholly, by
which he governs his Church, that man cannot add to them, or amend them; it
is possible to help forward a delusion by persecution, making the erroneous
presume that they are martyrs for Christ when they perish in prison upon
religious accounts, (and then if you do that to them for Christ's sake, or for
Religions sake, for which you have no rule in Gods Word, it will be then (if
God give you not repentance till the day of Judgment) that he will come to
say to you, Who has required this at your hands?) but never to provoke them to
love the truth, or make them willing by man's, but by Gods power, Psalm. 110. Yet
if you go about to drive them that Christ is a wooing and beseeching them by
the mouth of his Apostles, 2 Cor. 5.20. you may come at the trouble of your
conscience in the hour of death too too late to repent; but we as our duty is,
do pray and endeavor that no such thing may fall upon you

And in the words of the Apostle, We beseech you to be reconciled to God, and
not opposite to his gracious pardoning mercy, in going about to take from man,
or to make useless the forgiveness of that blasphemy against the Father and the
Son, by the lips of Christ, now in the dispensation of his Gospel granted and
proclaimed, Mat. 12.31. for without repentance there is no forgiveness; and how
can any repent when the sword of the Magistrate has cut him off? [Concerning
this there has been something in a former Parliament] Paul took not that
course, he did not fly to the Magistrate to have Hymenus and Alexander cut
off, but he took a course that made them capable of learning to amend, 1 Timothy
1.10. which had not been lawful for Paul to have done, had not Christ in his
Gospel taken away the rigor of that Law which is written in the 24 of
Leviticus, and the 16. And upon this Gospel account Christ told James and John
they knew not of what manner of spirit they were of; For the Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.55, 56. when they of
Samaria would not receive Christ; therefore if any sort of men like these
company of Priests, that murder ^n the way by consent, that are spoken of in
Hos. 6.9. (for it cannot be thought these Priests took away temporal lives, by
temporal weapons) should tempt you to mend those Laws that Christ and his
Apostles left for Church Government, and give punishment for breaking them
(exceeding the severitie of the merciful Lawgivers Edicts) which tend to the
peoples destruction; when Christ the wiser then Solomon (and therefore wiser
then any prince or Synod that ever was, or will be in this world) gave only
such punishment for breaking his Laws, as tended only to man's salvation,
neither hurting their persons, estates, nor liberties; The Lord strengthen your
hearts, and give you courage to resist them who care not that much people
perish by you^ hands, yea and by war and bloodshed, rather then their Honor and
easy fatt-conditions should go down, and they should miss to be Lords over
men's consciences, and Gods inheritance, Witness Love's treason.

There is no foresight like Christ's, nor nothing shall come to pass even to
the end of the World which he fore-knew not; and upon this account he left
sufficient provision for the being and wel-being of his Church: The very seed
of the Devil when it sprang up, Christ would not have his Disciples pull it up,
lest they should pull up the Wheat also, thinking it safer to let many wicked
Imps grow, then to venture the destruction of any poor child of God; Then be
not overcome to let any be destroyed for Christ's sake by the petitioners for
destruction, though those they would have destroyed are preseneed unto you for
the Devils Ims, being you have Christ's directions in the case, Matt. 13.28, 29.
I do hereby earnestly supplicate you to consider, that England is not more dear
in Gods eyes then sometime Israel was, and may come to be (if it be not
already) as far fallen from grace as Israel was, when there was four hundred
prophets for one Micah, 1 King. 22.6. When the zeal of Jezabel was such, that
she maintained four hundred and fifty prophets, and four hundred prophets at
her table all at once, 1 Kings 18, 19. and these false prophets that would
flatter, face-painting Jezabels and wicked Ahabs, bare all the sway in Israel
at that time, when as prisons and threatenings of death for the truths sake, was
the portion of all the Micah's and Eliah's, and to be hid in a Caves, and fed
with bread and water; it is good to have such a holy jealousy, as may provoke
all that fear God, to pray for the Land and the Rulers thereof, and to warn our
great ones that are Preist-feeders, to look to it, least their zeal deceive
them not, and that they be not found of that number, that prepare a table for
that troop, and furnish a drink offering for that number, that are spoken of
in Esa. 65.11. to 16. and when Christ makes this great discovery, their zeal be
found no better then Jezabels was, it must needs be thought that her Priests
were confident, else they durst never have joined issue with Elias about the
trial of their God, and his God; therefore let the truth advise you not to
trust, for there is both learned Papists and learned Protestants, and one or
both of them must needs be in an error, but bring all to the law and to the
testimonies, Esa. 8.20. and if they deviate one jot from Scripture, and give an
invented may be in the room of it, believe them not, but take notice that the
Scripture is able to furnish a man of God thoroughly, 2. Tim. 3.1.6. and there
is no need of man's invented (may be) to be joined with it; and least our great
ones way, and their Priests way, or peoples way, should be a way of wickedness,
they are entreated to follow David's example, who was as right as any King or
great man can come to be now adays, yet he was earnest with God to try him,
least his way was a way of wickedness, Psalm. 129.23.

It is undoubtedly true, that when the Prophets cry out to the Magistrates for
harms to their neighbors, for religion sake, they are not of that spirit of
Christ Jesus that came not to destroy, but to save men's lives, and if poor
England or the rulers thereof be willing to hear this complaint, then those sad
words may bespoken of it, as was spoken of Israel, Ier. 5.31. viz. The Prophets
prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love
to have it so, but what will you do in the end thereof?

And so it is, that we being under another spirit then Elias was, desire no
harm to those destroyers from the Magistrate; No no, he might be quiet in his
civil employment, if our enemies would trouble him about matters of religion no
more then we do, but we desire that none may be welcome to you, that tempt you
to keep us from the free and plain use of the Scriptures of Christ, in the
simplicity thereof, without spoiling us by Philosophy or learned troops of
figures, which are vain deceit when they are used against the truth, Job 2.8.
to which Scriptures we appeal utterly, and that by the help of the same spirit
that wrote them from all inventions of men, whether brought forth by Synods or
Assemblies of Divines, or any others, and according to my duty in the name of
Christ my Master, I warn you in the love of God (who is love) that you suffer
the word of God to run and be glorified in the same uncompoundedness, that
Christ and his Apostles left it, without changing the Laws thereof, or giving
any other punishment for breaking the Laws thereof, then Christ and his
Apostles left order for in the Scriptures; man can as harmlesly endeavor to
change the Orgins and light by which the natural eye sees, as to amend what
Christ and his Apostles left for his church government throughout all ages to
the end of the world.

O ye Lawgivers and Magistrates, as my soul is a pitying your inevitable and
dolorous danger, whilst you or any of you are meddling with the apples of Gods
eyes, or whilst you are tempted to endeavor to mend the perfect Law of God
Psalm. 19 knowing the tempter is so hidden under Christ's name, and has so
prevailed with former Magistrates, as that they by the then Clergies present
persuasions, have been as it were the slaughter men of Christ and his Apostles,
and all his suffering Saints to this day, it being the word of Christ to take
away trouble from the sufferers hearts; when they know whilst they are under
your hands, they are under the alsupporting and comforting power of God also,
who least that these things should come upon them at unawares, foretold them
that they should be had before Kings for his names sake, and whosoever kills
them shall think he does God service, John 16.4. Lo here, is not here a
prophesy suitable to a seeming godly Clergy for Gods service sake, to bring to
pass by temptations? take heed Magistrate, and know that it is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God, and for your help in this case,
consider that there are many and sweet directions in that new Testament, that
is sealed with Christ's Blood, how sufferers should behave themselves, but not
one how persecutors of Christ Laws should behave themselves, in bringing either
the body or estate of any Heretic to distress for Christ's sake, which proves
that there is no Plaintiffes but all Defendants, or rather Passives for Christ's
sake, in Christ's flock, the sheep have no means nor strength to commence one
action against the Wolf.

Also consider how it would please you, if your servants should for their
honor, riches and wealths sake, by their inventions only, bring forth as your
mind, another rule to govern your house by (and that stated only upon
arguments) then you had left by plain express commands in writing, without any
difficulty; and the Lord make the dutiful and loving endeavors of this poor
servant, to be one means amongst many others, to hold you in a sweet
apprehension of Christ and his Laws, that you may receive the blessing that is
pronounced out of Christ's mouth, viz: Blessed are they that are not offended in
me.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, thy relation to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, rendereth
thee chosen, and called, Rev. 17.4
and faithful;* so that wheresoever thou behold this subtle beast that creeps
under the pretense of God and Christ, and so hide himself, it is thy duty to
hunt him; for it is possible thou may hunt out some members of Christ out of
him, Ier. 16.16. that are set down in his riches and pleasures, and there
hidden from the feeling of Christ's life in his commands, and bring them forth
to be wayfaring men, that they may travel in the high way, and the way that is
called holy, where the blessing is not more entailed, or not so much upon the
man learned, as upon simple ones, children and fools; ( viz. in the worlds
account) Mat. 11.25. Esa. 35: 8. Prove. 1.4. being that discovering is death to
him; so thou have nothing to fight with, but the lip of truth, which shining
upon him, will melt him as the Sun melts Ice, and is a Cordial heart,
rejoicing life, and creating presence of Christ in thee, whilst thou beleivest
in God, and utters his praises to his and thy enemies confusion, who is made
up of a lump of lies, frozen as it were together by Satan's cruelty, Psalm. 35:
25: when he is made manifest, he must needs be slain, for then no man will as
God or godly, believe or receive a known enemy of God and godliness:

Thou must not follow him with carnal weapons, as clubs, provoking mutenies
against him, and whips, and prisons, and spoiling of goods, those are his
weapons; but thou must be so far from rendering evil for evil, that when any
member of this beast strikes thee on the one cheek, thou must turn to him the
other also, 2 Cor: 10: 3.4: yet the weapons of thy warfare are mighty through
God, as prayer, tears, sword of the spirit, blood of the covenant, the whole
armor of God spoken on in the 6: Ephesians: 11: and in as much as he calls it the
whole armor of God, it proves that God has never a piece of armor but that
for thee to use, in whose name then can prisons, etc. be used by thee, I know
thy heart and thy labor goes both together, thou have a tender regard to thy
Christ's honor, therefore if thou discover any countertfeit coming forth in his
name, thou with heart, and pen, and tongue, wilt cry out of him, according to
the measure of the Talent thou have received; and because the love of God is
shed abroad in thy heart, thou will be an eye of discovery to, and a hand
pointing at this beast, for thy weak brethren, that they fall not into his pits
and snares, and as God loved the world, so thou being God-like, will use the
love of God shed in thy heart to love it also, yea thy very enemies in it, that
thou knowing the terror of the Lord, viz. against this beast, wilt persuade men
to look to their doings, and standing, (for we must all appear before God)
least they perish with this beast and false Prophet, which false Prophet must
needs be a supposed (but not) godly Clergy, which defends them that receive
the mark of the beast.

The perfect love that Moses had, was to work all the means of salvation by
prayer to God, and instructing the people, yea when they were in acts of
rebellion against God, reviling himself and Aaron; who was but a figure of our
Lord Jesus, who was upon the act of the Jews eternal salvation, and Gentiles,
when they were in the act of crucifying him; they scoffed and peirced him, he
prayed for them; and of the like mind must thou be Christan Reader, to those
that are taken Captive of the Devil to do his will, thou art to recover out of
his snares, 2 Timothy 2.26. though their hearts be enraged against thee, they make
ready their hearts as an oven, Hosea 7.6. when the darts that comes out of
their souls, ( viz. terrible words and devouring actions) though poisoned with
Asps envy and rage, and self-tormenting agonies, they being shot at thee, fall
into thy soul (thou receiving them by faith) all quench Ephesians. 6.16. by the love
that faith works by, thy quieted mind, returns prayer for them and glory to
God, rejoyceing that thou art counted worthy to receive the rage of men, which
in thy soul turns to Gods praise, but can do thee no further harm, Psalm.
76.10: be encouraged for thou must overcome, thy heart must not be inslaved,
thou must hear thy testimony for thy Lord and savior, Rev: 15:3: if thou mean
to sing his praises in heaven; and thou have no other weapons but the word of
thy testimony, and the blood of the Lamb, (and woe will be to them that sight in
Christ's quarrel with any other weapons) the one is to keep out subjects and
spirit of Abaddon; who fight with carnal weapons, and provoking temptations to
destroy one-another, (which you will easily see if you compare the 38: of Ezekiel:
10: with Rev: 20:8:) thy heart being sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, they
would destroy thee too if this blood did not ke^p them out, but no child of God
can be destroyed, though his body perish, when his heart is held up in its
rejoicing delight in God; prisons, and enemies, and all persecution, being but
keys to open the hear to God more abundantly, and messengers to bring Gods
presence into it, to keep his heavenly court there; then thou will not be
provoked at thy enemies further then to pity them, and pray for them, and do
them good; the other is the Scriptures, which is the word that Christ thy
Captain fought this beasts spirit with, when he bare testimony against him with
it is written, and that is the word of the testimony, it is written, will find
all his members out, it will approve the proved perfect way of God, and
discover every false way; and that thou and I may walk in the fear of God, and
comforts of his spirit, with the Churches of Christ, Acts 9:31. and also in the
comfort of the Scripures, our way being there recorded, Romans 15:4: we behaving
our selves wisely in a perfect way, waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus to
us, Psalm: 101: 2: may walk with a perfect heart is the desire of thy companion,
in the faith, and under the cross of Christ:

H: H:

To the Reader.
REader, if thou have a desire to take him in a snare that reproves in the
Gate, Esa: 29:21. and endeavors to make ie matter for thy hating or
persecuting spirit to work upon, that these things are written against thee, as
the Pharisees did against my master Christ, (unworthy I to call him so, yet he
having given me grace to be faithful, and commanding his loving kindness into
my heart, and opening my heart to receive his father and himself, and owned
me, and caused me to own him) I am bound to tell thee that thou may show
thy self of the Pharisees spirit, and as one of them by so doing.

But the children of truth follovving the example of their Lord and Lavv-Giver,
endures contradictions of sinners, Heb. 12.3. without heart-rising-malice, or
procuring evil, or persecution to them, but their rule is to love their
enemies, and pray for them that persecute them; the Scripture cannot show any
Disciple that ran to the Magistrate for help against any disputant; the
Disciples of Christ have all one spirit, even the same that Steven had, that
the gainsayers could not resist the wisdom of it, and not the Magistrates
svvord at their call, neither dare they lay it upon the right eye of their
enemies, that they neither dare look upon nor speak truth because of it, Zach.
11.17. though it be the gainsayers portion, yet it is not from Christ's
Disciples, if they should not be inslaved that are fed, and maintained by the
Magistrate, they could not be idle shephards, but would break through all
difficulties, to look upon the light, though it cost them whatsoever harm the
svvord that lies upon their eye could do them.

Truth and those that are of it begotten, are vvilling to come to the light, to
have their practices and opinions manifested, for it delights to be exactly
searched and examined, and the more contradictions are endured, and the current
of them not stopped the more it shines.

I advise thee to understand that this little book is not written against any
persons, but such as are ticntured with the spirit of that beast, it is a
hunting to discover for, this spirit cannot be attributed to Presbyterian, or
Independent, or Quaker, or Baptist, no not to Pope and Prelate alone, or at all
except they have the acts and instruments of cruelty mentioned by them, which
are the cognizance of the fourth beast, that has no certain creatures form,
Dan. 7.7. as the other of the three had but was dreadful and terrible, to show
it was a persecutor, it had great Iron teeth, ten horns, which are instruments
of cruelty; it brake in pieces, devoured and stamped the residue, viz. all but
it self; here is acts of cruelty indeed; O how like this beast is those
religious people that would destroy all religions but themselves, by the
Magistrates hand for non-conformities sake to themselves; but this beast is in
every place, yea in the very Temple of God, 2. These. 2.1. and wheresoever there
is either power, of man spirited to be Abaddon, and Apollons subjects, or of
spirit that opposes either spirit or form that agree together in the true
witness and worship of God, or wheresoever that opposing spirit maintains his
breath, there will some time or other appear the Tallands or the ten horns, or
the stamping power, or some deceivableness of unrighteousness, that is in them
that perish, yea though it be the very subtilty of him that can transform
himself into an Angel of light, and these are all members of that self hiding
beast.

Wheresoever or among what people soever this beast has lost his honor in one
form, he takes up another, yea and rather then fail of his purpose denies all
forms, so that it may be said he was, and upon his hiding himself, he is not
there where he was as visibly and formally the same, and yet is the same spirit
of that beast that rules in the children of disobedience, that always either
opposes the plainness or the spiritualnesse of Christ's commands, one while
saying they are too low or foolish, or carnal as (water baptism, etc.) for
those that look after spiritual light to one, another while exalting a false
form, another while added form without either spirit or life; and thus he
plays bow-peep, appearing on the one side and on the other, here and there,
when and where, he is discovered changing his form, or peeping out without any
form, and it is apparent that he ascends out of the bottomless pit, because
no rule that Christ has given in his word can measure him, he dsiclaimeth that
when it would discover him, and then tells you that the place he comes from
is the movings of a spirit, and in this it is bottomless, because no right
reason nor measuring line can declare, where or what, or when this spirit will
make his progress, or try his work that refuses all trial but himself.

These things considered, let not the Clergy be enraged, that this writing
hunteth after this beast, if it be not amongst the Clergy or Presbitery in
England, it may be it will be found in Rome and some other land, let them help
me to hunt him out. If they do not rather compel by the Magistrates sword into
conformity, then convince by sound doctrine; the gainsayers, T^tus 1.9. 2 Timothy
2.25. and not desire them to be rooted out of their dwellings, to be cast into
prison, to have their goods spoiled for want of conformity to them, if they be
content not to be chief of all that come forth in the name of God; viz. not to
give Laws to all, so that none may preach without their authority, and let Gods
authority without man's serve the turn, if they can be content that any man cast
out Devils, Mark 9.39. if they can be quiet in mind to see others preach
Christ, that have not authority from them, and rejoice in it, though he be
preached of envy, Phil. 1.15 if they be without all the forenamed instruments
and acts of cruelty, nor have no heart to desire, nor sue for power to force
conformity to them by the Magistrates sword, then they are no members of the
Beast that this book points at.

Howsoever none can deny but that some Presbyterians and Independants are held
in their forms, upon account of riches and honor, or for some self-engagements
sake, although most or all may not be so (which I am afraid are) there is now
so much light abroad according to Daniels Prophecy Dan. 12.4: that if there
were such a power upon them as could make their hearts manifest, as one day
there shall be, some of them must needs own some part of the speeches that are
spoken in this book to be the very thoughts of their hearts, and that they take
comfort and have their standings maintained from the causes inserted there, and
other-some the rest, and some all; hovvever I am excuseable, because the spirit
of God out of the mouth of Jesus Christ my master, in the undvidiing expression
said, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, although some of them proved
believers they were then the guides (though blind ones) and teachers of Jsrael,
a people that God loved sometime as well as ever he did England; also Christ
reproving Lawyers, spoke woe to them in general, Luke 11.46. though some of them
proved good men, as Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, etc. then it is
possible that England may be as blind led, as Israel then was, for the
Pharisees and Lawyers was as learned then as ours now are; therefore Reader
take heed that thou let not thy heart rise against this book by unconsiderate
prejudice, read it, ponder it to this purpose.

1. Take heed of retaining that spirit that thinks himself wise enough to
control plain commands of Christ in Scripture.

2. Also if the plains and simplicity be that that offended thee in Christ's
Laws, read Mat. 11.6. and seriously consider whether the practice of the
Apostles and Disciples for 300. years after Christ be not a good expositer of
the Law, and that thou need not go to spirits or Angels for a higher
exposition, against their plain practices.

3. Consider in thy mind whether any Statute recorded in the Scripture can be
repealed, but by a Statute there also recorded, and then take heed of changing
Christ's Laws upon man's authority.

4. Do not believe because the falling away is great, that therefore the Law of
baptising beleivers is cancelled, for if the command were not yet in force
there could be no falling from it, 2. Pet. 2.21

5. Understand that whosoever falls away, and yet are religious, must needs
have some inventions of man by Satan's inward working, either that the Rule is
not exact enough, then meditate Eccles. 7.16. or that it is too strait, then
carry thy meditations to the written Word, Isa. 8.28. and there pitch down thy
Standard for truth.

6. If truth of God stir thy mind to trouble, and the Word carry a sharp edge,
rightly applyable to thee, take heed that Satan work thee not into the rage of
revengeful persecution, Psalm. 76.10. and then thou may come to approve thy self
to be a Christian Reader, which is the desire of the servant of Christ, who is
a well-wisher to the whole Creation.

H. H.

A true Reproof of W. S.
SIR,
HAving known your discretion in other things I cannot but wonder that you
should seem to suppose that you have any thing like an Answer to H. H. in your
Book; but much more should I marvel that you should say, It is hard to draw
Wine out of thy Lees; Which is as much as to say, It is hard to answer that
which you go about to answer. And though you see your self blundered in what
you are about to answer, that you would go on (viz) to heal those that Truth
wounds, but that I consider that when once your heart comes to engage in
error, then wilful ignorance tempts God, and hardens your hearts against
evident truth of God, then yours cease to be an outward single disobedience,
but it is an inward heart working, God-tempting (though ignorant) Error, which
is not charged in this place of Heb. 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. with ignorance of God
but of his Ways, and in this appears a heart of unbelief, in departing from
the living God, when men are wilfully ignorant, and have a heart set against
his Ways: Wherefore herein you prove your selves to be of the shameless
generation spoken of in Ier. 6.10. your spirit is not ashamed to take the Name
and Title of God, and you are not ashamed to say you are moved by God, when
indeed you are moved by the Evil One, you giving, and he taking the Name of
God; or rather the using your lips to exalt himself above God, with 2 Thessalonians.
2. and also in that he makes you his voice by his own Authority to proclaim
null the Laws that God made by Jesus Christ, and without any Warrant from
Christ or his Apostles, crying down that which they taught and practiced,
either they or you must needs be of Satan, being that the Scripture says, If
we, or an Angel from heaven teach unto you another Gospel then what we have
preached to you, let him be accursed, Gal 1.8. You say in your Book, (I deny) I
am made to stand a witness against thee in the power of the Lord, whilst I
hold up that Gospel. What self-exaltation is here! What proof is here of your
matter? Here is great swelling Words; do you think your Spirits Authority
enough, so that he need not to use Scripture to prove his matter by when he is
questioned? Then he seems in this, as in other things, to be above Christ by
his own exaltation, for Christ when he met with your spirit in temptation,
though he be the Son of God, yet used Scripture, saying, It is written; and in
his Word by the mouth of John, appealeth to Record, saying, There are three
that bear record on earth, the Spirit, Water, and Blood, and these three agree
in one; but your Spirit is so far from agreeing, that it opposes two of them,
wherefore it cannot be the Spirit of God; your Spirit comes forth in its own
single Witness, and denies to be tried by Scripture, or any thing else but it
self. You try all your matter by that you call the light within, the natural
man, etc. of which light your spirit is the transfotmed Angel, 2 Cor. 11.14
and things are like to go on in his side in his own Court. We acknowledge the
light within the enlightened man, which agrees with the Scriptures, Heb.
10.32. compared with 2 Timothy 3.17. but not before illumination; this is the
light that enlightneth every man; but we must not acknowledge it but where it
is: It is good to answer Tempters by seeing the image or superscription, though
Tempters are more general. It is certain, there is something called a light by
Christ, that is in the unregenerate man, and may be darkness, Matthew 6.23.
Surely this must be yours; for you own yours there, and would have all judged
by that, and neglect Christ and his Apostles rules in Scripture. And now to be
short, Friend, you have not found out one particular in all my Writings,
whereunto you might apply your self as a just matter of your reproof, therefore
you fell upon me with many foul revilings, only there is a mistake in the
quotation, I not being at the Press my self to correct it, the place should
have been 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. for which mistake you take him in a Snare that
reproves in the Gate, and makes a man an offender for a word, Isa. 29.21.
yea, and that a word mistaken only; and that you do with most foul
insultations. In matters of the World he that should prosecute his Neighbor for
witnessing the truth, when he only mistakes ^he place and ^and upon that
point, would be known amongst men as a cunning Knave.

As for the matter you made show to answer, you have given it all the go by,
yet you will be in Print; Well, according to Solomon in Prove. 26.5. I have
answered you; and according to his counsel in Verse 4. I shall not answer you
except you show more Wisdom; you have asked me no question but what are plainly
prevented in my Writings, if you had eyes to see it, you might see it,
therefore I refer all to the judicious Reader that shall read both Books.
Again, you make something of the word [Carpenters Son] but that is your
mistaking ignorance; for it was he that the Jews vilified by that Name, who is
the Savior of the world, and Lawgiver to Saints; and as they reproached his
meaness by that Name, so you reproach the meaness of his Laws by the Name o^
outside Law, carnal, unspiritual things, as not high enough for him that
exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped. Therefore the
Word is a proper allusion to you, you and the Jews both vilifying Christ and
his Laws as too mean for you.

Again, you play upon the word, [Taking it upon me as my duty] you need not,
for it is a Scripture phrase, Genesis 18.31. and whosoever is a VVitness for the
Truth, takes up the Cross, and upon him Christ's burden, which to do is my
duty; the word you see will warrant the phrase, and that is more sure then your
As God his movings.

I write against a Spirit and People in disobedience, and I bended my writings
against the thing wherein the deceit lay; I did personally asperse no man, but
thou have missed the point, though thou come forth as a man provoked, and one
in union with that Error I reproved, and have brought forth my Name and
dewlling place, that thou might reproach me with railing terms, upbraiding
me with what men had done unto me, and art to be reproved by Psalm. 50 19* 20
and Jude 8, 9, 10. Is not this personal animosity? Have you not need to plead
for perfection that do such things? Do you think your Spirit that has set you
about this, is the spirit of God, or no: You must needs call this either envy
or malice, or both: Is this any proof for your matter, that you give folks to
think you answer? This is as impertinent as all the rest, even so is thy
calling that light in the natural man (of which Christ says, Matt. 6.23. How
great is that darkness) the light of Christ, and averring that I speak against
it; the Lord will uphold my good Name, though thou would blast it, and make
me content to go through thy evil report, and be glad to see thee penitent and
obedient to God, that thou and I may enjoy that one life and truth together
with the Apostles and Disciples, and that God-man that dyed upon the Cross (and
is now with his Father, and our Father, in heaven) which he gave in the days
of his flesh, and now maintains.

Written by an unworthy Servant of God, who in Gods perfect way waits for
visitations of that Spirit that is sent from the Father and the Son, by that
Man Jesus who is in Heaven in his eternal and unchangeable Priesthood, Heb.
7.24. H. H.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4 line 5. for talents read talands, l 6. for peak r. beak, l. 2^. for
Charts r. Church P. 12 l. 4 after the word Disciples, r. truth speaks, l. 20.
after the word mou^hr when that Statute is as the mouth of some invetera^e
Clergymen, to hold men's estates in at their pleasure, P. 16. l. 15. for
Ecclesiasies r: Nehemiah.


