ASILIDI DOPON: OR, The Royal Present.

As it was Delivered in a SERMON, In the Parish Church of BOSTON, October. 9.
1663. at the Archi-Diaconal Visitation of the Reverend and right Worshipful
RAPHAEL THROCKMORTON, D. D. and Archdeacon of LINCOLN.

By OBADIAH HOW, A. M. sometimes Student of Magd. Hall Oxon. now Vicar of
BOSTON in Lincolnshire.

Because of thy Temple at Jerusalem, therefore they shall bring presents unto
thee,

Psalm. 68.29. The Daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, the rich among
the people shall entreat thy favor,

Ps. 45. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for A. Seile over against St. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet, 1664.

To the Right Reverend Father in God BENJAMIN, Lord Bishop of the Diocese of
Lincoln.
My LORD,
I Sometimes find an Apologue which the Jews have in their Talmud, of the
Grapes in Babel sending to the Vine-leaves in Judea, to cover them with their
shadow. I must make my way to your Lordships hands by this humble Petition,
that your Goodness may act the Mythologist here, and cast your shadow over this
immature and indigested fruit: I know I may justly fall under a severe censure,
that such an empty present from so an unknown and worthless hand; should covet
so high, as to thrust it self into your Lordships hands: But (my Lord) it is
your ennobled Candor which makes me thus presume and press, which I hope will
find cause from it self to accept, what I should from my self find no
confidence to offer, and make the pardon easy, where the error is out of
Reverence; and the end not to give any thing to your worth, but to gain
something to the work. Abigail her modest Apology for her slender Present of
Figgs and Raisins to David, 1 Samuel 25.27. must be mine to your Lordship. This
slender and worthless piece, as being much below your higher Speculations, Let
it be for the young men which walk at your Lordships feet Yet I know not to
whom upon better account either of Reason or Duty, I should apply my self upon
such an occasion, and such a subject, than to your self; whom Providence has
raised to stand as a tall Cedar in our Lebanon: These Conceptions, such as they
are, were by command delivered at a Visitation, where your Lordship is present;
though not in Person, yet in Power: And thus they yet pursue their main end, in
lying at your feet, with this earnest and humble Prayer, that you as a Cedar,
and we all as the Fur, Pine, and Box, may make the place of his feet
glorious. I conclude with this craving Impress or Motto of him, who setting
down only Ciphers in his Roll, wrote this, add vel unum.

These following pages I have Impressed as so many Ciphers: if your Lordship
will please to add this one thing, your acceptance and patrociny, they will
thence gain both number and weight; and Crown the opportunity, which (as one
that is under your Episcopal care and government) I gladly lay hold of, to let
your Lordship know, that I am, and do in all humility subscribe my self

My LORD, Your most humble and obliged Servant, in all Duty and Service,
Obadiah How.

THE ROYAL PRESENT.
Isa. 60. v. 13. The Glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, the firr, the pine,
and the box, together; to beautify my sanctuary, and to make the place of my
feet glorious.


TO reconcile the Text, and the Time, a word must be spoken of the Praphesie, a
word of the Chapter, and the rest of the Text. As to the Prophecy, we must
know that Prophesies and Promises are in their predictions, as Maps and
Land-skips are in their descriptions, present things contracted, and at a
distance: In the one we say as the Queen of Sheba of Solomon's glory, half was
not told me, 1 King. 10. or as the Apostle 1 John 3.2. It does not appear what
we shall be. And in the other, as of the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.13. (...), they
saw them afarr off. Yet all are not equally short and distant, some more to the
life, and bring things nearer us by much. Of which sort this of the Prophet
Isay is; whose work we find to be, to set forth the glory of the Kingdom and
Church of Christ. And he does it so exactly, and to the life, as if with S.
Paul, he had been wrapped up into the third heavens, or caught up into Paradise,
2 Cor. 12.2, 4. or with S. John, in vision had seen the new Jerusalem coming
down from heaven as a Bride adorned for her husband. In those legal
administrations Evangelium was sub velo, the Gospel was under the vail, that
glorious pearl was locked up in its Cabbinet, and this royal pair lay behind
the Curtains. But this our Prophet has almost quite drawn them, and in all, he
so speaks, as if he had been John Baptists contemporary, or as one of those ear
and eyewitnesses, 1 John 1.1. declared what they had heard and seen: ut non
tam de futuris vaticinari quam de praeteritis historiam texere videatur, ideo
non Prophetia est, sed Evangelium; so that he appears not so much a Prophet as
an Historian, and the whole rather a Gospel then a Prophecy. Alapid. in los.

The Chapter is the Prophesies Epitome, those scattered Rays of glory all over
the whole, are here contracted, so the more strong. The Chapter may be well
termed, an Act for a free, voluntary, and Royal Present to the King of Kings;
that is, to his royal Queen, whose relation, and representation, interests
Christ himself, in all those services which are done to her. Hence it is that
in Psalm. 45. what is spoken of her, v. 12. The daughter of Tire shall be there
with a gift, is Psalm. 98.29. spoken of Christ himself; Because of thy Temple at
Jerusalem they shall bring presents unto thee.

This royal present is full and free. It is full, we have it in the total sum,
v. 5. abundance of the Sea, and the wealth of the Gentiles: what Earth and Sea
can contribute, must fill her Treasure. If we look for a more distinct
Inventory, we find it afterward, Midians Camels, Epha's Dromedaries, Seba's
Gold and Incense, Kedar's Flocks, Nebaioth's Rams; and in the Text, Lebanons
Glory: Kings to minister, Isles to wait, Ships to waft, and sons of Strangers
to build her Walls: Whatever conduces to the Beauty or Being of the Church,
must be brought.

And it is as free as full. Kings shall come, Riches shall flow and fly as a
Cloud, flock as Doves, Isles shall wait, Flocks shall gather themselves
together, and the glory of Lebanon shall come, as if all were acted by the
impulse of an ambitious emulation, who should first court this royal Queen.

The Text is the Compendium of the whole; wherein we have presented to us, 1.
The Cui. 2. The Quid. 3. The Quare.
or 1. The Treasury. 2. The Treasure. 3. The Tributaries.


1. The Cui, or the Treasury; that is to thee. 2. The Quare, or the Treasure;
whatever may make Glorious. 3. The Quid, or Tributaries; the glory of Lebanon,
firr, pine, and box.
1. The Treasury-or the Thee in the Text, set out in a double expression, 1. My
Sanctuary. 2. The place of my feet.


2. The Treasure, or the Quare, in a double expression, 1. To beautify. 2. To
make glorious.


3. The Quid, or the Tributaries, in a double Classis. 1. The glory of Lebanon.
2. The firr, pine, and box together.


The one to lead the other to follow, but all to concenter in Sions glory.

To consider all these parts by themselves by way of Gloss and interpretation
of the Text.

First, The Cui, or the Thee in the Text.

The Text shows us who it is, to save us the labor of enquiry, v. 14. tells
us it is Sion, the City of the Lord. And that this is the Church in
Gospel Times, the Apostle is our warrant, Heb. 12.22, 23. where his own
Paraphrase upon Sion is the Church of the firstborn; and this is called in the
Text by a double name, sanctuary, and the place of his feet.

My sanctuary, because of thy temple at Jerusalem, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
68.29. and its needless to enquire why the Temple was called the Sanctuary,
though it was but (...), Heb. 9.1. a worldly Sanctuary i. e. temporaneum and
caducum, and with the rest to vanish, yet it was relatively holy, holy to the
Lord, and was called the holy place. Or why the Church of Christ typed out by
it, should be called the sanctuary, is as needless to enquire, the Apostle is
so express in it, 1 Pet. 2.5. it is (...), a spiritual house, they (...), a
holy Nation; and there we find (...) too, a holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices to God: So that a Temple they must be, and an holy one
too. Thus says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2, 21. they grow up (...), to a holy temple:
and 1 Cor. 3.17. The temple of the Lord is holy, which temple ye are. But The
place of my feet.

This is something more obscure; and look not awry upon this expression, or
upon the Church, by reason of it, thereby to stay your hearts and hands, and
lessen your Present, to her treasury, because she is called here the place of
his feet.

The phrase indeed is sometimes used in Scripture, as importing shame,
dishonor and contempt; in which respect Conquerours used to have their
Captives under their feet: as it was the greatest indignity that Bajazet the
Grand Seigniour ever suffered when Tamerlain had him under his feet; or
Valerian that Tyrant, when Sapore: the Persian King trod upon his neck,
according to that of the Poet, Qui Constantini toties perterruit urbem
Sub Tamberlano, sella, canisque fuit.


And true it is, that the members of Christ are under the head, the sheep of
Christ in his hands, the lambs of Christ in his arms, the Spouse of Christ in
his bosom, but the enemies of Christ are under his feet. Yet think not that
when God is thus commanding our bounty, that he thus detracts from her beauty,
as to bespeak her in this sense, the place of his feet.

This phrase is therefore to be observed, and that not rarely importing love,
familiar, converse, and delight; and thus an expression of honor and dignity.
Locum pedum meorum dicitur ut coelum seeds and terra scabellum ejus, says
Lyra, Its the place of my feet, as heaven is his seat, and earth his foot.
stool. But this I think is much too short: For I would not render or paraphrase
that phrase, the place of my feet, by that other, my footstool; but rather his
Garden where he will walk, or his Galleries wherein he will take and make his
delightful recesses, as he is said to walk in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, Rev. 1. And so its no more the place of his feet, then the place
of his heart, his house to dwell in, his throne to rule in, his temple to be
served in, the place of his feet to walk in: And thus they are put together,
Ezekiel. 43.7. And if it be Sions glory, when our feet stand in her gates, (a
thing now too much neglected) as Psalm. 122.6. much more must it be when she is
made the place of Gods feet.

Secondly, For the Quare, or the Treasure; its here set down in a double
expression, Beauty, and Glory,(...) a double word in the Text, and in the
Translation; the first to beautify(...) is decorare, to adorn or make
beautiful; (...) the substantive is decor, nitor, inherent beauty or
comeliness: and this is in honorate, as the Church is the fairest among women,
whatever men judge of her. The other word (...) is gravare, or honorare, to
load with dignifying titles and honors; this is in honorante, in the person
honoring. Thus all must come to contribute whatever may tend to inward and
outward glory, to make her to be truly so, and to make her to be publicly
acknowledged so, to make her the excellency of many generations, and the praise
of the whole earth, that as in Psalm. 76.4. she may be more excellent then the
mountains of prey: and as Psalm. 87.3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O
thou City of God.

Thirdly, For the Quid, or the Tributaries, what or who must come. To this end,
we have them in a double Classis, the glory of Lebanon to come, and the firr,
and pine, and box together. But what are these? In the letter its very clear,
they were those trees which Solomon fetched from far to build and beautify
the Temple of old; but what these are in the mystery, deserves a melius
Inquirendum. It argued the imperfection of the blind man's half restored sight,
but it will be the perfection of ours to fee as he, Mark 8.24. men walking like
trees to Sions glory. Our Prophet Isaiah doubtless looked beyond the material
Temple to another, whose glory should exceed the former, as Hag. 2. not in an
outward splendour, and pomp, but a more spiritual glory. The Apostle Peter jumps
right with our Prophet; and calls it (...), 1 Pet. 2. a spiritual house, and so
must have more spiritual materials; and he tells us of those (...), living or
lively stones, so here, we must look out some lively or living trees for timber
for this spiritual house, she needing no Cedar, Firr, Pine, nor Box, to patch
up an outward magnificence: and yet to this the glory of Lebanon, the firr, the
Pine, the box, must come, and all in a mystery. And here Lyra will help us, who
tells us, per tales arbores possunt intelligi personae notabiles ad ortum
Ecclesiae per fidem venientes; by these trees are signified some eminent and
notable persons coming to the rising and growth of this Church. But to make a
more particular enquiry after these comers to Sions glory.

The glory of Lebanon; This phrase if it had been set alone, must have been
taken for complexum quid, all those trees of renown wherewith Lebanon was
adorned; but being put, (as here) by way of distinction, it must be taken for
the Cedar, which is ever accounted the glory of Lebanon: and so the Cedar and
Lebanon are so joined in Scripture together, as if Lebanon would be known by no
other trees then the Cedar, as Lebanons chief glory. For thus, in respect of
their height and beauty they are called, Psalm. 80.10. the Cedars of God; and if
thus? then a mystery. Cedars do set forth high ones of stature, and power in
the earth; which are (...), the glories of the earth, Jude 8. as Isa. 10.33.
The high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and Lebanon shall fall. When the
Scepter of Israel was to veil to a foraign power, and for support for 70 years,
to be pinned to Babylons walls, it was fitly compared to a Vine; but when to be
restored to its primitive power, and to become a power of it self, it is said
to become a goodly Cedar, Ezekiel. 17.22. (...) est Cedri genus and significat
principes and magnates, quia Cedris comparantur, says Pagnin, the Cedar
signifies Princes and great ones, they being compared to Cedars. Hereupon
Jehoash told Amaziab, that he being but a thistle, himself was a Cedar in
Lebanon, 2 King. 14.9. and thus is this in the 13. v. The glory of Lebanon
shall come, expressed in other terms, but the same in sense, v. 10. Kings shall
minister unto thee. And its said of Solomon in type, and of Jesus Christ as the
Prototype, each of their power being to empty it self into the Churches
treasure, Psalm. 72.16. Thy fruit shall shake like Lebanon, and the earth shall
be filled with his glory: In the whole we may easily epsy the glory of Lebanon
coming. But because Solomon was a Prince with his civil power, and Christ who
was typed out by him, is King too; but with something a more spiritual power,
we may more then conjecture that this Cedar imports not only Civil but
spiritual prelation; those that are over the House of the Lord are Cedars also;
and bear a share in this glory of Lebanon: Whence Zach. 11.1. the Prophet
cries, Open thy doors O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy Cedars; these
Cedars the Prophet himself being his own Comment, tells us, are the
Shepherds; thus verse. 3. The voice of the howling of the Shepherds, for their
glory is spoiled; thus the glory of Lebanon is spoiled: And all Interpreters,
ancient and recent, take these Shepherds to signify praefectos politicos ut
Magistratus, et Ecclesiasticos ut Sacerdotes, both Civil and Spiritual
Governors, and where it is said, verse. 8. I will cut off three Shepherds in
one month, Principes, Prophet as, et Pontifices, its Princes, Prophets, and
Priests, say Alapid, Daneus, Piscator, Gualter, and many others; and in verse.
17. he closes the Chapter with a vae Idolo Pastori, Woe to the Idol-Shepheard,
which none scruple at all, the taking in, if not the chief meaning to be, the
Priest and Prophet, who were their Leaders, and caused them to err.

And this glory of Lebanon is more then half attested, Isa. 22. where the
Prophet tells us, that Eliakim had the Government put into his hand, he
should be a Father to Jerusalem, and upon him should hang the glory of his
Fathers house, and Shebna should be cut down as a tall Cedar and fall: And
Alapid, upon the Text says, Non tantum Reges et Principes, sed etiam Apostolos
et Apostolicos viros intelligit; that it signifies not only Kings and Princes,
but also Apostles and Apostolical men: And the Text it self when it says, The
glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, it tells us what is meant by this glory
of Lebanon, in verse. 17. he gives it us thus, I will make thine officers peace,
and thine Exactors righteousness: By Officers and Exactors, the current of
Interpreters understand both Civil and Sacred, or, Spiritual Governors; and
that not upon any pretended ground, for the original Text reads it, (...):
ponam visitationem tuam pacem, reads the vulgar Latin, I will make thy
visitation peace, but that is, visitationem tuam for visitatores tuos thy
visitors: and the Septuagint brings it yet a little higher, and reads it
(...), thy Bishops or Overseers; whose office it is, carefully to oversee the
Flock, to be inspectores morum, who have the Government in their hand; not
Sceptrum Regale, but pedum pastorale; not a Kingly Scepter, but a Shepherds
Staff; those who are (...), Heb. 13.7. which have the rule over us,(...), are
set over us, verse. 17. whose office it is to superintend the Flock, and to
visit it, not out of Courtesy only, but Charge and Authority, to redress
abuses in manners, and whether by Epistle, or presence, as St. Paul in his
Apostolical visitation with his (...), and his (...) too; to set things in
order; so he was the Cedar, and as so he was to come also; hence he says, I
will set things in order when I come: and when all powers, whether sacred or
civil direct their Authority toward Sions glory: when Kings are Nursing
Fathers and Eliakim a Father to Jerusalem, when she sucks the breasts of Kings
and the other Minister to her, when the two sons of Oil Zerubbabel and Joshua
empty their golden Pipes into her Lamp, when those that have the oversight of
her, do not overlook her, Shebna like, making themselves great, making the
Chariots of their glory, become the shame of their Masters house, but as St.
Paul having the care of the Churches upon them, spend themselves and are spent
in the procuring the true and genuine glory of the Church, when they that rule
as 1 Timothy 5.17. (...) well, and so act as acknowledging (with St. Paul) that
their Authority is given them, (...), for edification, not destruction, 2 Cor.
13.10. then are they the lively Comments upon this first part of the Text, the
glory of Lebanon comes to thee.

The Fur, and Pine, and the Box together, this the second, and here, the
wisdom of a Solomon would supply, who could read of all the trees from the
Hysop upon the Wall, to the Cedar in Lebanon: Then should we be reduced out of
all those uncertainties, intricacies, contradictions, in which both
Interpreters and Linguists are involved, about the names of these trees (...)
reads the Original Text, Berosh, Tidhar, Teashur, the three words in the Text,
which our Translation renders the Fur, Pine and Box; if we consult Linguists,
Interpreters, and all the Oriental Versions, we shall find, there is no
agreement in their names; nay we shall find that every name mentioned in our
Translation, is given to every word singly in the Text: Berosh est Cedrus,
Abies, et Buxus, say both Shindler and Pagnin, the Cedar the Fur, the Box:
For the second, Tidhar, Laurus, et Cedrus, says Shindler; Cedrus et Ulmus
says Pagnin; thus is this called the Cedar, the Laurel, the Elm: And the
third, Teashur, Myrtus, Buxus, Abies, says Shindler: Cedrus, Abies, vel Buxus,
says Pagnin; this is also called the Myrtle, Box, and Fur, and Cedar; nay
they will leave us in a very great uncertainty; what they are, when they tell
us, that (...) is, Omnis arbor quae ad Dei honorem plantatur; any tree that is
planted for the honor of God; and that from (...) (via) ant (gressus) it being
in use of old, to plant trees of eminency, by the places of public worship,
populo ostendentes viam, cujus rei vestigia in nostris coemeteriis adbuc videre
est, says Shindler: To direct the people in the way, the footsteps of which is
yet to be seen in our Churchyards frequently: So that could my time, or your
occasions give leave; yet all our curiosity herein could never satisfy: And
the less reason we have critically to determine in this case; because the
Spirit of God does not confine himself to any thing mentioned in this Text; not
to the glory of Lebanon, for Isa. 35.2. he tells us, the beauty of Sharon,
and the excellency of Karmel, as well as the glory of Lebanon shall be given to
it, and not only the Fur, and Pine, and Box, but Isa. 41.19. he tells us,
he will plant besides these the Shittah, the Myrtle, and the Oyl-tree: As if he
would tell us, that, as many trees with their various uses were brought to the
Temple, so he would bring many persons, with their various offices, capacities,
and endowments, to give being, and beauty to his Gospel Church; and then these
trees appear to be, as Lyra his personae notabiles ad ortum Ecclesiae
venientes; eminent persons coming to the rise of the Church, or, Quicquid
excellens in Ecclesiam invectum iri significat, as Lyranus, whatever is
excellent must be brought to the Church; or, as Alapid upon the Text, Quicquid
ad decorem aut stabilitatem Ecclesiae pertinet; Whatever conduces to the
beauty or stability of the Church; and upon Isa. 35.2. he says, Omnia
ornamenta opes, delicias spirituales, copiosas frondes, stores, fructus novarum
virtutum, et novorum fidelium: All Ornaments, riches and spiritual delights,
the flowers and fruits of new Graces, and new Converts: And thus St. Gregory in
his 12 Homily elegantly expatiateth himself to this purpose: There shall be the
Cedar whom no secular cares shall corrupt, the Thorn who can prick their
hearers at the heart; the Myrtle who can temper others passion with their
compassion; the oyl-tree, who can with the Oil of the promises heal the
brokenhearted; the Fur, who for their height shall contemplate heavenly
things; the Elm, who by their strength bears up the tender Vines, being strong,
support the weak, and bear their burdens: But that of Brentius is most
pertinent, Brentius.
and shall be conclusive, who tells us, Altissima Cedrus Petrus; Cedrus etiam
Paulus, et Cedri Apostoli, qui sunt Columnae Ecclesiae, sunt alii Ministri
Ecclesiae, et membra, qui sunt abies, pinus et buxus: That is thus, Peter was a
tall Cedar, Paul a Cedar, and the rest of the Apostles were Cedars; and there
are other Ministers and members of the Church, which are as the Fur, and Pine
and Box: And this comes up to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11.
He has set in the Church says one Text, he has given says the other Text,
some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for
the edifying the body of Christ; some to oversee, others to build, and others
to be as lively Stones, laid up in the Fabric, and all with their particular
powers, offices, endowments, and graces, all to make a glorious Church; and
thus the glory of Lebanon comes, the Fur, Pine and Box together: And thus you
see the whole; and yet there are six several particulars to be observed in the
Text, as the various modifications, of these coming materials or tributaries.

1. Behold them in their excellency, its not the Hysop upon the Wall, or the
Shrub in the Desert, but the glory of Lebanon that must come; to tell us, that
it is not the Peasants drudgery; but the Princes, and the Prelates dignity, to
minister to her, and to intend the Churches glory.

2. Behold them in their universality and number: Cedar, the Box, and Fur,
and Pine, synecdochically taking in all the rest; it was the grand Charter
confirmed to the Church, that all things and persons should be for her sake,
and every Kingdom and person that would not serve her, should perish, Isa.
60.12. Which Charter is renewed in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 3.21.21. all things, all
persons, Paul, Apolle, Cephas, things present, or things to come, all are yours.

3. Behold them in their variety, every one paying his proper service to the
Church, the Cedar, the Fur, Pine and Box: some with their height, others with
their strength; others with their sent and smell; others with their permanence
and duration; but all for her glory: the variety of the materials in the
universe makes up the beauty of it; so in the Church. In the first Tabernacle
and Temple, there was the Wood of Shittim, for the Ark, Altar and Table; Cedars
for the sieling and inward ornaments; the Fur for windows, doors and floors;
Goats for their hair; Badgers and Rams for their skins; Egypt for Linen and
Silk, as Seba for Gold; all this variety did make up but one Temple, some for
ornament, some for security, but all for service: In a house, the vessels of
honor, and those of dishonor, as well those of wood and stone, as those of
Silver and Gold, are for the Masters use, 2 Timothy 2.20. In a body natural those
members that are more feeble, and less honorable, as well as those that are
our more comely parts, (God having so tempered the body) are for the service of
the same body, 1 Cor. 12.23.24. and its no less in the body Mystical, the
Church; all those diversities of gifts, administrations, and operations, 1 Cor.
12.5.6. as they come from one and the same Spirit, so they tend to the edifying
of the same body; all those dona regalia, Princely gifts mentioned Ephesians. 4.
those persons, and offices, considered either in their subordination,
ordination, or variety, tend to the same end: Every gift, whether it be (...)
or (...), Grace or Gifts, with their variety or diversity, they are given to
profit withal. In that great Text for this purpose, 1 Cor. 3.21.22. Glory not
in men, all things are yours, whether Paul, Apollo, or Cephas: Every one had
his proper gift, and excellency, whereby they did captivate their disciples, so
that one said, I am of Paul, another I am of Apollo, a third, I am of Peter;
the Apostle urges elegantly, that their scattered excellencies, should not
produce Schism, rather Union; because all that variety tended to the common
advantage: Whether Peter with his (...), or liberty of speech, or Paul with his
learning, being brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, or Apollo with his
language, being an eloquent man; whether Peter with his power, pricking to the
heart so many thousands at one Sermon, or Paul with his prudence, catching of
them with guile; or Apollo with his potency in argument convincing them
mightily that Jesus was the Christ; whether Peter to break the ground, Paul to
sow the seed, or Apollos to water the field, all things are yours, or as Romans
12.6, 7. Whether prophecy with its proportion, or the Minister with his
waiting, or the Ruler with his diligence, all comes up to this in the Text,
the glory of Lebanon shall come, the Fur, the Pine, and the Box together.

4. Behold them in their regularity and order, the glory of Lebanon: First, to
come, to lead the way to Sion; the Box then, and Pine to follow, and all to
come, to make up her glory; God is the God of Order, not of Confusion, he loves
regular motions, not praeposterous praecipices: Philosophers tell us, that the
Celestial bodies observe the motion of the primam mobile; and the Planets are
not so called, because they move irregularly; for though they have a seeming
erratick, and various position as to us; yet their revolutions are strict and
certain: In that great work, the raising of our bodies, when we might conclude,
multitude must usher in confusion; yet even then, (...), every man in his own
order, 1 Cor. 15. and then shall be the (...) and the (...), the order of first
and last: The men of War which came to enthrone David, were such as knew how
to keep their ranks, 1 Chronicles. 12.38. St. Paul intended his practice, our
imitation, when he said, (...), and its then with joy when a man fulfilleth his
own course. It was no unnecessary Query of the Adversaries to the building
Jews, Ezra 5.3. Who has commanded you to build this Wall? and their only
retrieve from irregularity was thus to answer, The King Cyrus made a decree to
build the Wall, and since it has been building, ask and see, and send us the
Kings pleasure in this thing, verse. 17. Hence our learned Davenant determines,
Quest. 12. Non licet subditis reformationem moliri renuente Magistratu. The
Apostles rule is, Quieti estote et res vestras agite: Be quiet, and do your
own business: a seeming Paradox, Agere et quiescere; to do business, and yet
to be quiet; but the truth lies here, to do another man's work, is not so much
action as commotion: God expects that the Cedar should have so much piety, as
not to come behind, and yet that the Box and the Pine should have so much
prudence, as not to go before their guides; the tardy motion of the Cedar may
produce obstruction; but the preposterous haste of the Fur and Pine must
produce confusion: It Is no auspicious nativity where the feet comes first,
though a man-child be born; its not without difficulty to the birth, and
danger to the mother: It Is here as with Zarah and Pharez; we find as in the
Text, there are twins in the Churches womb: though Za^ch pull back his hand, if
the younger be born first, his name must be Pharez, because its not so much a
birth as a breach, Genesis 38.29. we must fill the Churches Treasures, but not by
tumult; when Zerubbabel and Joshua, the glory of Lebanon, lead the way to lay
the foundation, and the rest help to build, and to cry grace grace unto it;
when the Cedars are (...), Leaders, and the Fur and Pine become (...),
followers of them, when the Cedars afford themselves (...), a Copy and Example,
and the others appear as a Transcript from that Original, when the glory of
Lebanon yields direction and encouragement, the Box and Pine, obedience and
imitation; then this order is fulfilled; the glory of Lebanon shall come, the
Fur, and Box, and Pine, together.

5. Behold them in their spontaneity and freedom, (...), the glory of Lebanon
shall come: It Is metus voluntarius, a free and voluntary motion, they shall
come to Sion as they came from Babylon with rejoicing: The Chaldee Paraphrast
reads it, Introducetur gloria Lebani ad te; the glory of Lebanon shall be
brought to thee, but this is too short of the sense of the Text; for so were
the trees brought from Lebanon in Ships: But these living trees must act more
like rational creatures, they are to be the Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. 6.12.
the motion of a willing people, not pressed, but Volunteers in the Churches
service; true Votaries to Sions glory; such a principle indeed crowns the
sacrifice and service; God will say as Deborah sung, Judge. 5.9. My heart is
toward the Governors of Israel who offered willingly among the people; all
must say as that Emperor, Solutis legibus, legibus tamen vivo; freely offer as
if there was no act for this Royal present; what we do, must not be so much an
imposition, as a Legacy, the Apostle gives it us fully and clearly, 1 Pet. 5.2.
(...), Cedar, Fur, and Pine, must both rule and feed, (...), not by
constraint, or out of filthy lucre; but (...), willingly, and of a ready mind,
because we delight in her, then does the glory of Lebanon come.

6. Behold them in their Unity; they shall come (...), they must come together,
many must sweetly conspire; as if it was the work of one man; otherwise Babels
confusion will be the sad fate of Sions glory: Joint consent and unanimity, is
the strength and glory of every good work, as 2 Chronicles. 24.12.13. when Joash the
Prince, and Jehoiada the Priest, the Cedars in Lebanon, the Levites to collect,
and the people to contribute, the Masons and Carpenters, and other artificers
to work, and repair the house and all come together, then (...), in working
they wrought, and healing went up upon the work, they set the house of God upon
its Basis, and perfected it: The Apostle as to this spiritual house, knits this
unity in every Epistle, if we be trees, then he would have us to be (...), Romans
6.5. planted together; if materials in that Temple, Ephesians. 2.21.
then the building must be (...), a building fitly framed together; if we be
builders in that house, then we must be (...), workers together, 1 Cor. 3.9. if
they as Cedars in all, lead the way, others must follow, and that with joint
consent, hand in hand, and heart in heart, and be not only (...) but (...),
followers together of them, Phil. 3.17. that all that admirable variety may
concenter in as admirable an unity: that as that ancient Father said of the
Churches garments made up of diverse colors, Varietas multa, scissura vulla,
great variety but no rent, in that coat; then and thus will the glory o^
Lebanon come, the Fur, and Pine, and Box together, to make the place of his
feet glorious: And thus you may behold these willing tributaries come in their
glory to Sions glory; thus we shall come as the Spouse made her addresses to
her beloved, as some read that Text, Cant. 1.4. (...), in rectitudinibus, in
her right and commendable motions.

All which several particulars as so many rivulets, seem to be willing to run
back into this general consectary or Conclusion, which I might have named
first, but I have reserved till last, as the result of all which has been
spoken, which is this, That all men, with all their power and parts, and
variety of gifts and graces, and several capacities, should tend to the glory
of the Church as their proper end.

And having so distinctly and largely treated of the Quid and the Cui, the
Treasury and the Tributaries; I have left this only to be treated of, the
Quare, or the treasure which we are to present her with, and that is glory, or
to make her glorious: this therefore remains inquirable, what it is which makes
Sion glorious?

The glory of the Church when she shall be triumphant we may admire, but never
describe, as eye has not seen it, nor ear heard it, nor heart conceived it, so
no pensel can draw it forth; the Apostle gives as much of it, as can be given
by pen of men or Angels, on this side the possession of it, in that elegant
expression, 2 Cor. 4.17. a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: But
where the glory of the Church militant lies, we have the Scripture to direct
us, and I shall not wander far for my discovery, only from this very Chapter
borrow five several particulars as the expresses of that spirit, who best
knows wherein the true glory of Sion lies, and they are as follows.

1. From v. 1. Arise and shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee: Light is the Churches glory; for that says the Wise
man, is beautiful and pleasant to behold, Eccles. 11.7. The black veil of
darkness stains and eclipseth any glory; that first matter was without form and
void, so long as darkness was upon the face of the deep: the first dawnings of
glory upon the unshapen universe was light, as a good eye makes the face
beautiful: But what is this light? we have the concurrent suffrage of
Interpreters to direct us here, with this distinction of Lux quae, and Lux qua
illuminat, the light which enlighteneth us, is Jesus Christ, who is the true
light; but the light with which he does enlighten us, is the Gospel, that great
engine of man's salvation, which brings Immortality and life to light; and gives
both light and eyes: Lumen hoc est verbum Evangelii de Christo crucifixo, says
Lyra: and, per lumen Christi presentiam, doctrinam et universam Evangelii
gloriam exprimit, says Alapid upon the Text; and so a whole cloud of witnesses
leads us to this truth, that this light is the glory of the Gospel: But what
need we appeal to humane testimony, when we have divine so clear: those duskish
prophesies in the dawnings of the Church are called a Light shining out of a
dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. St. Paul's turning to the Gentiles with the Gospel,
made him the living Comment upon this very Prophecy, Acts. 13.47. So has the
Lord commanded us, saying, I have made thee a light to the Gentiles: this is
that (...), the true light, and that (...), that mavelous light, 1 John 2.8.
1 Pet. 2.9. and of this light, the Church is (...), the Candlestick, 1 Rev. 20.
and (...), pillar and ground of this truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. as being her glory;
it is also called the glory that excels, 2 Cor. 3. and the glorious Gospel, 2
Cor. 4.4. and so glorious, that it bespeaks their feet beautiful who bring it,
Romans 10.

And then the Cedar of Lebanon shall come, etc. some to lay the foundation,
others to build, and all to tend (...), to the furtherance of the Gospel, Phil.
1.12. She shall such the breasts of Kings, Isa. 60.16. the Prophet tells us
of the breasts, but the Apostle tells us what the milk is; (...), the milk of
the Word, 1. Pet. 2.2. it is the Churches glory when she has no dry breasts;
when the Cedar in Lebanon comes to protect, the Fur, and Pine comes to
propagate, the one by power, the other by pains; the one by license, the other
by labor in the Word and Doctrine; when there is no Embargo lies upon those
Ships which should bring Sions sons from far; when this Light is neither
blown out, not put under a bushel; when no Philistines to stop up these Wells
of water of life, as Genesis 26.15. when the one with St. Paul is for the defense
of the Gospel, the other for the increase of it, Phil. 1.17. the one to give it
free course, the other life and motion, (...), 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. its most glorious
when it runs fastest; when the one makes it room, and the other makes it run,
when all in their several stations are cautelous, as the Apostle, (...), lest
we should give any check to the Gospel of Christ, that by the rod of his mouth,
his rest might be glorious, then the glory of Lebanon comes, etc. to make the
place of his feet glorious.

2. From v. 4, 5. Thy Sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be
nursed at thy sides, the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee: a
numerous Issue, and increase of Converts, are the Churches glory, when as she
has no dry breasts, so no barren Womb, it is then like such a glorious couple,
as Isa. 54.5. thy maker is thy husband: when the measure of their Issue, is the
dew that falls from the morning womb, Ps. 110. glory is contracted in one
individual; but dilated in many: this Law, crescite et multiplicamini; increase
and multiply, is that whereby nature preserves it self; and so in the Church;
numeration, multiplication and addition she owns: but substraction and division
are strangers to her Arithmetique; It was an indeleble obloquy in Israel, to
dye childeless; and by children born again, the Churches reproach is taken
away; Filii corona senum, says the Wise man, Prove. 17. Children are a Crown,
and the Apostle calls them his glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. and if so to the Father,
they are no less to the Mother: this is the sum of the divine promise, Isa.
54.1. The children of the desolate shall be more than those of the married
Wife: she should forget the shame of her youth, and the reproach of her
widdowhood, v. 4. It is the matter of the Churches exultation and triumph, Isa.
49.20. The place is too strait for me: this is the subject of all those
Encomiastique Elogies, when glorious things are spoken of her, Ps. 87.4. to
mention Rahab, Babylon, Phylistia, and Tire, that this and that man was born
there: It was the glory of the Primitive Church, that there were daily added to
the Church: and that there was (...), a multitude of them that believed, Acts
4.32. this is truly, (...), Ephesians. 4.12. The edification of the body, and this
is either, edificatio totius, or edificatio partium; edification of the whole,
or of the parts: that of the whole, is the daily accretion of new materials, to
that spiritual house: daily adding new Converts, until the body be complete in
members: that of the parts, is the growth and increase of grace in every part,
until it come to the perfect man: so that every part shall be fat and
flourishing in the Courts of our God, Ps. 92.12. being satisfied with the
fatness of Gods house, Psalm. 36.8. when they suck the breasts of her
Consolation, and their bones flourish like an herb, Isa. 66.14. so that there
shall not be an Infant of days, but a child shall dye an hundred years old,
Isa. 65.20. this will be Sions glory, when her retinue thrives in the family,
and those that are nursed at her side grow up apace: the Queen of Sheba will
have no more spirit in her, to behold the meat at Solomon's Table, 1 Kings 10.
Then I have a word ad Clerum, to my Brethren of the Ministry.

The Apostle tells us, that (...), is (...), the edification of the body, is
the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.12. The glory of our Fathers house, the
Offspring and the issue is hung upon our shoulders, Isa. 22.24. The Minister is
to be the Father, and Mother, and Nurse too: and therefore we find St. Paul's
(...), 1 Cor. 4.15. his (...), Gal. 4.19. his (...), 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. I have
begotten you: in the first, I travail again in birth: in the second, and as a
nurse cherishes her child, so we have you. in the third: I have therefore
license from St. Paul the great Visitor of the Churches, Col. 4.17. to tell
Archippus, and say to him, Take heed to thy Ministry, that thou have received,
to fulfill it: And to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved
unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed: Those Offices which are
divided in others, are united in us, so that our work is great, and calls
amongst many things, for these two from us.

1. Our knowledge and skill had need be great, a Minister must be (...), with
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.6. and (...) with our Savior, Math. 13.52. nourished up
in the words of Faith: and a Scribe well instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven:
we should be able Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. Viri virtutis,
Men of spiritual strength, as Apollos, (...), mighty in Scriptures, able to
divide the Word of Truth aright, and to stop the mouths of gainsayers:
Ministers as the Prophets of old are called Seers, Eyes to the people, but if
the Eye be darkness, how great is the darkness of that body? is Christ's own
Problem: Where no Vision is, the people must needs fail and perish, Prove.
29.18. If Ministers be (...), Clouds without water, how shall Doctrine distill
like the dew upon the tender herb? The Priests lips cannot preserve knowledge
in the hearers, when it is not at all in the Speaker: but where the blind lead
the blind, both must fall into the ditch.

2. Our diligence and activity, must be great: me thinks the Apostles (...),
especially those that labor in the Word, 1 Timothy 5.17. and his (...), and
(...), 2 Timothy 4. Be instant in season and out of season, should awaken us. A
Minister is a Feeder as well as a Seer; he is Promus-Condus, that is, Condus to
lay up, but Promus to lay out; Aaron as he had his Urim on his breast, so he
had his Bells round his skirt, and they wanted not their Clappers, if they
sounded not, he was to die for it. Ministers are Stewards in Gods household,
Luke 12.42. and a Steward says the Text, must be (...) and (...), both wise to
know how to do it, and faithful in the doing it; to give them (...), both meat
and measure; they must be neither quite starved, nor lean fed, Lessius his diet
in spirituals Christ allows not; the one will keep the Spirit as low as the
other the Flesh; God has a controversy both with the people and the Priest,
for their spiritual theft; with the people for robbing God of his Tithes and
Offerings, and so the Minister of his food, Mal. 3.8.9. and with the Priest,
for stealing the Word of God from his neighbor, Jer. 23.30. to force the sheep
to bring the fleece, and to seek for their food, is unequal: In the Parable,
Math. 25.26. (...) is (...), the slothful is the evil servant; a Minister
never wants work, and if he work not, he shall never want woe, so the Apostle,
1 Cor. 9.16. Woe to me if I preach not the Gospel, like that of the Prophet,
Zach. 11.17. Woe to the Idol-Shepheard, which may be the idle Shepherd without
a quibble, but that its something more comprehensive; the Shepherd that has
neither eyes to see withal, nor arms to work withal; so says the Text, his
right eye is utterly darkened, and his right arm clean dried up: whereby the
Prophet would tell us, that neither an Ignorant, nor a lazy Ministry, the one
without his eye, the other without his arm, come as the Cedar, Box, or Pine, to
make Sion glorious.

3. From v. 7. and the 15. they shall come with acceptance upon mine Altar, and
I will glorify the house of my glory: whereas thou have been forsaken and
hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency,
the joy of many generations: frequency and uninterrupted exercise of Public
Worship, is Sions glory; as Gods presence there, makes her an eternal
excellency, so our presence there, makes her appear the joy of many
generations: here runs the current of divine Promises, Isa. 66.20. They
shall come from New Moon to New Moon to worship before the Lord of Hosts: Isa.
2.2. Come, let us go up to the House of the Lord; all Nations shall flow unto
it: Zach. 14.16. All Nations shall go up from year to year to worship the
Lord, and keep the Feast of Tabernacles: and Ps. 122.2.4. Our feet shall stand
in thy gates, O Jerusalem, whither the Tribes go up to give thanks unto the
name of the Lord: Sions glory is most ecclipsed, when her ways are most
unoccupied, and then the ways of Sion mourn, when none come to her solemn
Feasts, Lam. 1.4. I have here a word ad populum, to the people, who come in for
a share in the Box, and Fur, and Pine; here is some work for you, and you
must come; the Apostle tells you how, 1 Cor. 11. (...), when you come
together into one place; thus may you come together to Sions glory; and here
the Prophet brings in his (...) Israel shall come, and Judah together, to seek
the Lord, and ask the way to Sion, Jer. 50.4. the Apostle, Romans 9.4. joins the
service of God, and glory together; and the Prophet Isa. 4.5. Assemblies and
glory together, as if they would tell us, that concourse, and multitude of
Sions Worshippers, make her glorious, as the conflux of Stars makes the glory
and the beauty of the Galaxy or milky way in the firmament: then was Sion
glorious when David could say, Ps. 42.4. I went to the House of God with a
multitude; and as if the Emphasis of the Text; and the brightness of Sions
glory lay here, he ingeminateth the express, with a multitude that kept
holy day; then are the Tabernacles amiable, when men go thither by troops, and
every one appear before God in Sion, Ps. 84.7. when men appear not as single
Stars, but as Constellations, in her Horizon, then Sion shines bright; the
Text tells you, the Fur, Pine, and Box must come together, then St. Paul's
to the Hebrews, must be mine to you, Heb. 10, 25. (...), Forsake not the
assembling of your selves together, and as Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us
offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, etc. If Sion be the place of
Gods feet, she may well be the place of ours; if he dwell there, our feet may
well stand there; if God come down, the Tribes of the Lord may well go up
thither: It is a Lamentation, and may be for a Lamentation, that our unhappy
Divisions have mouldred us into such uncomely separations, that Sion seems to
be forsaken of her Sons; such thin and slender Assemblies as we see daily
within Sions walls, seem to bespeak her not worth the owning; and her glory
must needs be under a cloud, when her Solemn Assemblies become a reproach; as
Zeph. 3.18. flock thither as Doves to their windows: Let her be no more
termed forsaken and desolate, but let us, as well as God himself give her her
name, Hephzi-bah and Benlah, as Isa. 62.4. to show, that as the Lord, so we
delight in her; then shall she be as a Royal Diadem, and Crown of glory in the
hand of the Lord, and you shall, as in the Text, as the Fur, Pine and Box,
come to make Sion glorious.

4. From v. 21. Thy people shall be all righteous, the branch of my planting,
that I may be glorified; and as further explained, Isa. 62.12. They shall call
them the holy people: here lies the true glory of God, in that he is the Holy
One; the glory of the Temple lay here, in that it was the holy place; of the
new Jerusalem in that it is the holy City; and so of his Church, in that they
are the people of his holiness; this made the Spouse the fairest among women,
in that she was without spot, Cant. 4.7. and then Christ presents her glorious,
when without wrinkle or blemish, Ephesians. 5.26. Holiness becomes his House, his
Priests, his People: Here I have a word both ad Clerum, and ad Populum, as
those that jointly come to Sion; being called by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. (...), a
holy nation, and (...), a holy Priesthood: God calls for holiness to make
Sion glorious; as the Prophet, Zach. 14.20. In that day upon the Bells of the
Horses, and every Pot in Jerusalem, there shall be holiness to the Lord: But
chiefly this directs a word to the Clergy, in whom holiness is most required,
and all impurity most visible: Aaron had his garments for glory and beauty; so
God will have all his Saints, but chiefly his Priests clothed with
righteousness, Psalm. 132.9. (...) is Sacer, and (...) is Sacerdos; and the
Hebrews observe, that (...) and (...), the one signifying a Priest, the other
a Bridegroom, come both from the same root, as teaching us, that a Priest in
his service should be adorned as a Bridegroom for his nuptial solemnity; Aaron
had his Thummim as well as his Urim, and a plate of gold upon his breast
inscribed, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28.26. under the Law, the Levite was to
be (...), and the Gospel-Minister is to be (...), without rebuke: Vessels of
Honor, if fit for the Masters use, must first be sanctified, 2 Timothy 2.21. they
are Lights, and with John Baptist they must be burning and shining Lights,
their Lives must be visible Sermons, and their practice Comments upon their
Preaching: Suadet loquentis vita non oration, says the Poet: Its the Life, not
the Language of the Preacher, that persuades most: the Jews have a saying fit
for us, to this purpose: Semper homo doce at discipulos suos via brevi: Let
every man teach his Scholars the shortest way: What that is, the old Adage
will tell us; Per precepta longa, per exemplum breve; the shortest by example.
But when Sions Watchmen degenerate, and her Gold becomes dim, the Sons of Sion
that should be fine Gold, become like Earthen Pitchers, or the very scum of
men, as to their morals; her Nazarites that should be whiter then snow, their
visage is blacker then a coal, not with suffering but sinning; those that
should have wings tipped with silver, and feathers with yellow Gold, are as if
they had lain among the Pots, with the tincture of a debauched looseness upon
them, when God may complain, as Jer. 23.11. The Prophet and the Priest are
profane, and from them Iniquity is gone forth into all the Land: So that they
become Populi odium et Ministerii scandalum, a bait to the people, and a
blemish to their profession: in this case the Cedar, Box, and Pine, come not
together to make Sion glorious.

5. From v. 4.5.7.13. its the burden of the Chapter. They shall be gathered
together; they shall flow together; and they shall come together. A blessed
Peace and Unity is a great ingredient into Sions glory: This is the good crasis
and temperature of the body mystical; this is both (...) and sigillum, the
flower of Sions glory, and that which seals all the rest, and makes them
sure; this peace, and unity, was all that David prayed for, for Jerusalem,
Psalm. 122.6. because in praying for that, he prayed for all, Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, peace be within thy Walls, and prosperity within thy palaces: If
peace be an Inmate, prosperity cannot be a Forreigner. This was the glory of
the Tabernacle, that all the parts of it were coupled together with Rings of
gold; God he takes this for his name, Jehovah-shalem, Judge. 6.24. Jehovah is
peace, Christ is King of Salem, Heb. 7.2. King of peace; the Gospel is the
Gospel of peace, Romans 10.15. Jerusalem is Visio pacis; and she loses the right
to her name, if she be not the Vision of peace; and the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace, is the beautiful Rule of our walking, (...), worthy of our
calling to one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: It was the glory of the World to
be of one Lip. until the curse of Babel divided their Languages: Its a
Promise that runs parallel with this, Jer. 52.39. I will give them one heart
and one way; and Zeph. 3.9. They shall serve the Lord with one consent, which
the Primitive Christians made good, Acts 4.32. there was (...), one heart and
one soul; as if by a pious Metempsuchosis, one soul had successively animated,
and informed so many bodies: It was said of Jerusalem, as one of the glorious
things spoken of her, that she was built as a City compact together, Ps. 122.3.
Cujus societas concors, says the Arabic Version, but the Text is more
elegant, (...) and in the Interlineary Quae juncta est sibi simul, a firm
agglutination of every part each to other, and all to the whole; so that every
one can pay his tribute to Sions treasure without schism or fraction. It was
some blemish to the Churches glory, when they begun to divide either in
judgment, or affection, when one said of Christ, Ecce in Deserto, another, Ecce
in Penetralibus, or of the Apostles, one to say, I am of Peter, a second, I am
of Paul, a third, I am of Apollo, when there were those sharp Paroxismes and
contentions, betwixt or among the tall Cedars, as Peter and Paul; and Paul and
Barnabas; so hot as that they must part. And is it not so now? I fear if St.
Paul was our present Visitor, he would charge us as he did the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 11. I hear there are divisions among you, and I believe it: What distance
in judgment, and heats in affections; as if Opinionum varietas et opinantium
unitas were(...), whereby the Church comes to be martyred by her own Sons, it
may be said of our time as Forerius said of his; Juvat magis deflere quam
describere; For so indeed it rather calls for a Sea of tears to wash off the
guilt, than a pensel to perpetuate the memory of them: were I worthy or able to
interpose in an Irenicum or Expedient for Peace, I should think it my honor:
However at this time I may be St. Paul's Manual, to hand to you that caution of
his, Romans 14.19. Follow the things that make for peace; be of one mind, love
as Brethren, the Cedar, Firr, Pine, and Box all intend that which may tend to
Sions peace; St. Paul cries, Be ye followers of us as dear children, here the
blessed Apostles, and the Primitive Disciples all concentred in levelling both
their power, and obedience at this mark: the Apostles as Cedars, eyeing only
things necessary and expedient; and others, as Pine and the Box, eyeing those
things which were lawful; the Apostles things necessary and expedient to
command them, and others all things lawful to obey them; St. Paul as a Cedar
says of himself and therest, Acts 15.28. We lay no other burden upon you than
things necessary, 1 Cor. 9.12. We used not this power lest we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ: And he said also of the rest, that he glorified God for their
professed subjection, 2 Cor. 9.13. and that they had always obeyed not in his
presence only, but in his absence also, Phil. 2.12. according to the rule, Obey
them that have the oversight of you. St. Paul as a Cedar did not proceed as we
find spoken by Tacitus of some, Liberius quam ut imperantium meminissent,
acted more freely then, as if they remembered the Office of Governors: nor the
disciples and other members of the Church, as the same Author speaks of some in
his time, Erant in Officio sed tamen qui mallent imperantium mandata
interpretari quam exequi, who had rather dispute the Commands of Superiors,
then obey them: the Apostles, as Cedars did not command every thing: the rest,
as the Firs, and Pine, and Box, did not act as if they would obey nothing; so
that every one might (...), seem to be contentious; lovers of Victory rather
than Verity, pursuers of their own wills more than the Churches weal, this the
Apostle gives a check to with a (...), We have no such custom, nor the Churches
of God. To close up all, by what has been spoken, it appears, that we owe
all, our Esse our Posse, what we are, or have, to the Church: This was Gods end
in all that he bemusted Christ himself with, he made him head over all thing,
but its (...), he gave him so to the Church. It is the end of all that Christ
does, of all his mediatory transactions, he gave himself for it, and does all,
that he may present it a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5.25.26. It is the end of all
the offices and gifts, and graces, in the Church, Ephesians. 4. Work of the Ministry
and edifying the body of Christ. Let us consider, what the Church is, to God,
to Jesus Christ, and what she is to us, she is the place of the Fathers feet;
she is the Sons Spouse, and his Body; and she is the Mother of us all: I shall
therefore make that of St. Paul my close in Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise: And Phil. 2.1. If
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, think upon these things: So speak,
and so do, that we may make the place of his feet glorious, that we being trees
planted here, in the Vineyard of God, when we come to be transplanted, we may
be all Trees of Renown in the Paradise of God; having Sions glory, turn to our
good account, and glory, in the New Jerusalem, we may inhabit there, where the
Foundations and Walls are Pearls, and the streets fine gold, having the Tree of
life in the midst, and the Crystal River running through the City: Which that
we may both do and enjoy, O thou great God, who walk in the midst of the
golden Candlesticks, so rule, and direct our hearts, so bless our labors and
endeavors, that our hearts may desire, our heads project, our hands effect,
and our eyes see, the good of Jerusalem all the days of our life, and peace
upon Israel; and this for the sake of Jesus, who so dearly loved her, and so
dearly bought her, to whom with thee, O Father, and the holy Spirit, three
Persons, and one God, be all honor and glory now and for ever.

FINIS.

