PSALM. 4. Verse. 7. Thou have put Gladness in my heart ( or Thou have given me
Joy of Heart) more then when their Corn and their Wine increased.
AS it has in all Ages discouraged some from being Christians to see some of
our Professors holy but on one side, and Religion only hung out; so it has
always offended narrow and earthy minds, to see Christianity happy but on
one side: and to observe that whilst it promises its followers Thrones and
Scepters, it leaves its Disciples oftentimes to Shackles and the Cross. So
that Religions Bills and Undertakings* have been always thought by some to
exceed her Powers, bringing men to the condition of those ships which Plutarch
says the Stoiques were like, which after their valiant names and Inscriptions
of Lion, Elephant, Invincible were notwithstanding torn by common Tempests,
and made the sport of an ordinary wave: But through the Dull Eye or the Evil
Eye of the looker on, it has been the frequent Fate of things Excellent, to
be Things mistook; God cannot thunder down a Church, and suffer some Robber of
that Church to live and survive the storm and Bolts, but the Epicure straight
will say God sits with his Back toward the World, and sees nothing. And if He
shines out upon a wicked man, and looks on upon the ragged virtues of a poor
Saint, his mercy shall be called his Sleep, and his Providence said to be
away: Half of that being true of the most eminent things which the Stoiques
said of the best men, That they can neither quickly be, nor quickly be
understood. Hence is it, that Heaven and Happiness proposed as removed and
future things, make so shallow impressions upon carnal hearts: as spiritual
substaunces are of so fine and subtle an essence, that to them the Eye it
self is but a lid: so spiritual promises, evident only to spiritual minds,
are wrapped and undiscovered to a Natural and an eye born but once. Thus
Afflictions which to the wicked are Miseries, to Gods Children appear a kind
of severe and not prayed for blessings, and the rougher sort of Love: and since
they are meant only as Cures, and are at once both Wound and Balsam, the
faithful are taught to number their favors by their stripes, and call whips
Affection. David sometimes a man of so sad and thrown down a condition, that
he wept his own Meals, ( I have made my tears my meat: Psalm. 42) Yet is
often found awaking his Lute; his different days were so divided betwixt the
Coal and the Chalk, that in one David there seems to be above one man: and
for the Variety of his condition we may look upon the Prophet, as we did on
our Savior that was of his Line, not as a Man but Mankind: Yet through an even
chearefullnesse he will never let his sufferings be sufferings, but seems to
look down upon the properity of the wicked, and reckon all delights that are
showrd from the Spirit, among those things which are to be pitied, saying to
God himself, Thou have put Gladness in my heart, more then when their Corn
and their Wine increased.

The words are David's acknowledgment of a double bounty: first, of his being
favored; Thou have given me Joy: Secondly, of his being preferred, Thou have
given me more Joy. Call them (if you please) David's Triumph. (Thou have given
me Joy) And because in Triumphs there is usually some Insultation, some
Captivity and sadness, here is Joy, more then theirs; Corn and Wine They
have, not Perfect Gladness, which is the Oil within, and Wine to the Wine;
That without which Corn and plenty is only had, not enjoyed; and a full
harvest is no more the Masters then it is the Barns; The godly has massy lights
of gladness cast from the contemplation of Gods private favors; The
prosperous villain has some dilute rays of Blessings, but not his
Countenance; So that as the Earths best and upper parts are Enlightened, but
it is Riches, it is Mines lie below and shaded; So the Best men receive from
heaven the most Comforts, though not the most of those Influences which make
men rich. The Text then (as those Schemes which are made to represent the body
of the Earth) has two sides, A light one, and a shaded. The light side
contains the Godly man's condition here in this life, Joy, [Thou have given me
Joy.] Joy Positively, and Joy Eminently, More Joy; The shaded side has the
condition of the flourishing wicked man, (if it be flourishing to grow up and
thrive to the fire) Some Gladness or shadow of Gladness they have from their
Corn and Wine. Lastly, the Pencill that draws both these sides, Gods favor;
Thou have put into my heart, great and more gladness, Into theirs, Thin and
Narrow and some Gladness, when their Corn and Wine Increase. I begin with the
Godly man's Condition in this life, positively considered, it is a Joyful
Condition.

self, is a rich satisfaction to it is owner, and he that nourishes Goodness,
reapes it; Such a serenenesse and Calm of thoughts, (pardon me if I say) such
a prospect within, there is in an innocent and swept Breast, that as Origin is
said to have thought Hell no more then a gald and eaten conscience, So some
wise Heathens have thought Happiness nothing but a clean one; and therefore
they have sent the virtuous no further for their Happiness then to their
virtues, and bid them only look into themselves and be paid. So that Heathen
who said, Drunkenes rewarded virtue, meant mirth and Content, and was but a
Divine of a course Metaphor; for if he understood a serenity arising from the
Contemplation of an humble and harmless soul, he might easily be corrected
to this Christian Truth, that a good conscience is a Perpetual Feast, and the
Prophet might have found in the righteous what he incourages them to (in the 32
Psalm. verse. ult.) Rejoice ye Righteous and shout for Joy, all ye that are
Upright of heart.

But this is too unconfined, too common a Joy to be the Godly's Portion. This
is an Alms of mirth, and a Gladness given at door; those of Gods Family have
better Provision, holier and less humane Comforts; Virtues looked upon may
cheer a heart, but Graces contemplated anoint and crown one; Christian Joy
the earnest of that to come being of the same metal with the whole sum, and
as Heavenly as what it represents: God says not to the Temperate man, Thou
have held out against the Nets and Traps which that Painted woman looked,
therefore thou shall stand fair and clear in men's Memories and Reports; Thou
have refused so many Bowls, therefore thou shall escape so many fits, and in
flying Taverns have only abstained from the Dropsy; Nor says He to the
Loyal man, Thou have in an unperjur'd Obedience always lived under the
Crown, Thou have not made thy Humor nor thy Fancy thy Scripture, nor tied thy
faith to the Ignorance and devout Bad faces of the Seditious Lectturer,
therefore the discerning part of the nation and the Kingdoms Judgments shall
crown thee with the brave name of Good Subject, and that is thy Comfort; Nor
says he to the Liberal man, Thou have feasted me in the Poor, therefore all
the Bread thou have given me in the Porch, I will send thee back in full
Harvests, and all thy Water in Balmy and desired showers, and that is thy
Gladuesse. God has reserved richer comforts for his servants. What a Treasure,
what a Mine is that Text? The Lord is my portion, (Lamentat. 3.) How much
weightier then all those lower half Solaces, which stooping Souls and Minds
that obey their Bodies, can call Delights; And that is the second ground of the
Godly Man's Joyful Condition, a grounded confidence of Gods Favor. That a just
man should expect Protection and Smiles from his God, is the whisper of
natural reason, it being congruous to the Divine nature (whose Image we are in
this too) to affect and cherish what is most like it self. So that every Good
man is the care and charge of the Almighty, by whom he is looked upon, not with
that public love which he allows his whole mass of creatures, but with a
peculiar countenance, such as we cast upon Alliance and Kindred; Now what an
extracted comfort is it, to look upon ones self as the darling of heaven, one
whom Devils only aim at, cannot hit; and whilst All things work together
for his good, (Romans 8.) to be the man on whose side his very Enemies Rage and
Afflictions serve under. To behold ones self as a thing armed with integrity
as a holy kind of Magic, and see ones self as 'twere enchanted with Gods
favor to a state secure from all that malice can dart. There is a malignant
delicacy, by which, dangers and sufferings are made things of delight; and it
has been a perverse pleasure in men, to stand unconcerned lookers on upon a
Perishing Army, or a sinking Fleet; I do not say that the righteous man is
glad so cruelly, that his delights are so much his Crimes, and Ruin his
Recreation; Yet certainly (without loss of innocence) he does rejoice with a
Kind of Pity at the Judgments that fall only about him, not as they are his
Enemies, but as they are not his own: and devout persons are read to have sung
their Enemies destruction, ( Then sang Deborah Judge. 5.) Not out of an
ungoverned and Woman's Insultation, but a Violence of Joy for the favor of a
delivery. If the Roman Conquerours could scarce stand under their own
Laurells, and Joyed so vehemently over a fired Town or two, or a few chained
Germans, that their Triumphs were not their least dangers; So that there has
been an Officer by, to tole them some cold and sad sentence to keep them
within themselves, and hinder transportation, Can you think a Good man can
triumph less over his fetterd Flesh, and Corruptions. And when he shall see
Himself, the Devil, and the World stand conquered, and bound with distinct
shackles, which his Graces and Integrity have fyled. Believe it, for Joy
there is no Throne to the neck of a Lust; No Triumph to a subdued affection.
Think then what an unmeasured felicity it is to be absolute, and ones own, not
commanded by a Vice; of a soul smooth and without a wave; and then to be
smiled upon by that God, without whose leave nothing can hurt, who must consent
before Poison can be more fatal then Cordials, who is so far Master of all
that pretends power, that all punishing Evil is but his Commissioner; and
Afflictions are Afflictions under Him, to have the Affection of Him to whose
love the Best and Patterns of Mothers compared are cruel ( Mothers may forget,
says he himself) and the most natural Heart a Rock, that has bid his little
flock not fear; and since he has died for his Children, certainly he will not
sleep against them, ( He that keeps Israel does not so much as slumber.)
Lastly, to be not only of Gods Pastures, but his Hall too, so much more then
his sheep, as to be his Son; His Son, all whose children are Eldest, and
with whom the whole Family inherits; This is so transcendent a Comfort that
what Seneca said, was a brave thing, is here in some degree attained and
compass't, To have the Infirmities of a Man, and the Security of a God.

But here, because some unholy lips and mouth of flesh, in one that measures
other men's Comforts by his own want of them, or because some shaded soul may
object, That it is often times foul weather in the cleanest Breast; that the
Godly man's Graces make a state compounded of sun and storm; That David cries
out often for his Lost or Hid God, and the Spouse in the Canticles mournes for
her Christ, in the Clifts of the Rock; Therefore God carrying himself to his
children as a remote and distant God, the state of the Godly is not so Joyful,
and their Condition no otherwise comfortable then seasons in Almanacks may be
said to be fair, when they are divided betwixt Shining and Snow. And then,
because some Worm and no man, one so much slave to his false Gain, that he
calls God only Good as he does Fortune for being the richer by him; that He is
Bountiful only by the Ox and Sheep, and favored Job in the Camells alone,
not in the Patience he gave him for their Loss; And such a man when he sees a
stripped Christian, and so much Piety in Fetters, may say, Is this the man of a
Joyful Condition? Call ye Hunger and Rags Felicity; and are we to think our
selves so much nearer Happiness as we are nearer starving? I shall therforee
conclude this Point by endeavoring satisfaction to both these Opposers; First,
to them which deny the Blessings of Gods Right hand, Divine Comfort: And
secondly, to them which allow not those of his Left (Temporal ones) to be
frequent enough to make a Godly Condition a Joyful one. For the First

It Is true, Spiritual Joy is a Feverish Sun and a Shield, in one verse of
the 84 Psalm; in this a Sun; that he rises and goes down, Enlightens and is
clouded from his Faithful; In this a shield, not only that he is so to them
for their defense, but to himself too to be covered from them.

1. But take it thus. To prevent wantoning with his Comforts, and avoid
Pampering, God dispenses his Love and Favors by Proportions, not by Floods of
Comfort; He gives us not Cordialls by the Pound, we are not always allowed a
standing Omer of this Manna, the Merciful God denies us himself Physically,
and diets us with his Spirit. What then God means Remedy, call not thou Anger;
Slander not his Cure with any jealous apprehension; 'Twas Care of Humane Bodies
first brought the Lance and Probe into Surgery, and when God sadds thee with
retiring, say not he wounds, but severely provides for thee.

2. Next, let Bonaventure say, why God sometimes Frowns and withdraws; God
(says he) throws a Cloud over, lest we should lie idle and sleep in the
sun. Our Prayers and Endeavors are things he aims at, not our Tortures; His
Favors ascend as his Son did, that procures them only to draw us and our
devotions after them. So then a Pious man looking on himself with natures Eye,
must needs view himself with jealousies and sadness; as finding in his Soul
Vice and deformity, and all that can offend a sight; but then eying himself as
a Repenting; a washed, and died for Soul, must needs be cheered with seeing
his Actions in Refined shapes and his soul of other Colors; Penitent Tears
being the only Waters through which things looked upon appear straight.

man's Joy, who urges the wants of the lesser Accomplishments which grow here
below, Riches, Liberty, Honor, and whatsoever Heathen Altars smoke for; It Is
true, The Good man does not always Blaze and Glitter in the world, Oftentimes
counts his years by other men's Harvests, and looks upon the Sun as a thing
does nothing for him but warm him: We Christians are not Crowned with Roses,
employ no Wreaths or Chaplets, says Octavius in Minutius. For Answer; Were
Christianity but a better Kind of Revells, this were an objection; or did God
so glue Comforts to Riches, that so much Pasture must go to the making of so
much Joy, and men could not be merry but by the Acre, then to be Poor and to be
sad were all one; But Wideness of Possession is not a dilated and spread
heart; And truly it is not a Smooth Forehead, a Bright Eye, a Resolved Look,
that makes Gladness; Joy is a Thing within, and the Heart only Laughs; A
Persued Lion may Eat, he cannot Feast; Every Bit tastes so much of Fear and
the Hunter, that what he devoures is only Prey, no good cheer; So in the
middle of an unmeasured Estate, I may have sorrows as unbounded, as that I may
be heavy in Purple; and obtain only this by a full fortune, to be a man of a
Rich Sadness, and sigh with more Revenue then my Neighbor. Therefore the wise
man (in nothing more the wise man) makes it his Prayer not to suffer under an
over-weighty Plenty; Give me convenient Food; that he might stand in the safe
Point between Pining and Surfeit; and in a just supply of necessities, neither
be starved with Poverty, nor break with Fulness. God perhaps has not showered
upon thee Grapes and Olives, or if he has, has suffered them to be called back
by Tempests, by Robbers, by some Vote or Ordinance (that is, by Printed and
Enacted Robbery;) But then withal, God has denied thee those Vices and Humors
which Wine and Olives might have been abused to; For the Great Disposer of
things lets down Riches as Timber to our Qualities, which we may either hew to
Vices, or Carve to Virtues and better shapes; being equally disposed either to
make Ladders to climb to heaven by, or Stairs to carry us downward. But
then, Riches advantaged with our own Corruptions, are proner to become our
Sins; They are wax to Abuses, but Iron to Virtue, they will melt and flow to
Vice, but must be beat and labored to Goodness. So that God in denying his
Children these (...), these Things of the World, things within a Syllable of
Nothing, and that deserve but one Single Article in Saint Paul: He only gives
them less, to forget them, and should he allwaies allow a flowing estate, we
should perhaps so sink in the bountiful stream, as to forget the Fountain;
and in a swinish not considering who sheds the favor, what He sends Grapes and
Olivs we should make our Akornes. Have then some men numbered Wealth among the
Feared things, prayed against Prosperity, and thought it a Kind of Daring to
Venture being Rich; and shall a Christian think himself forsaken, in the
loss of these slender outside things, which some Moral Philosophers have
thrown away? Say then in the first place, that when God denies the Godly man
Plenty, He is noe harsher then if he denied him Pinacles and Quicksands; He
that murmurs that he is not made rich, complains that he is not allowed a
Danger; and is sad that he is cast into the wretched condition of being likely
to go to heaven with more ease then Camells pass through Needles; So that
Riches frequently becoming nothing but kneeled for mischeifes, and Begged
Evils, Things (at Best) of so doubtful a Condition, that Tacitus could not
tell whether 'twas the Anger or the Bounty of the Gods that denied them to the
Germans; we may not measure a Christians comfort by these uncertain and
scarce-good things; Poverty may attend a bless't and good man as Thistles a^e
Bad things, but signify Good and Rich Ground.

The Godly are not always the great Instances Content: A name in whose thrifty
size (as in Jewels) plenty is wrapped up; that which Saint Paul had learnt to
make his Wealth, I have learnt in what estate soever I am, therewith to be
content. This performs what Riches only pretend, Sabbath to our desires, and
makes wishing cease; To have no Desires is to have all bestowed that Desires
can reach at, and he that gives thee no appetite to the World, gives thee all
the World, only not in Kind.

When God does not open himself in outward Call not then the Righteous man's
wants Miseries, but Hard Breeding. The Almighty loves with a masculine and
strenuous Affection; Hugging and dandling are not the softness which the Lord
of Hoasts practices; He favors not the Mothers way. Afflicting with him is but
Reducing; David had wandered, if he had not suffered (in the Psalm) and S.
Jerome has delivered it observingly; that there is not a more infallible
symptom of his being angry, then his not discovering it.

Grace, Peace, Gods Countenance, and whatsoever is map of Heaven here below.
Quarrel not then (whosoever thou art that valuest these things highest) that
thou art not favored to Purple and good Cheer every day; this is to complain
that thou art not fatted to the Altar; Thy Pleasures cannot flow into
Pleasures, Saint Ierom tells thee, thou can not Transire a Deliciis in
Delicias, Pass from Paradise to Bliss, from a Haven to a Port. And in another
place, Thou can not enjoy two Heavens: Murmr not that these under-boughs of
Comfort are not indulged thee, if thou have Christ (in an holy sense) that he
is thine, thou have the whole Tree: Thou art to receive an inheritance, stand
not with God for farthings; As thou lookst upon thy Savior not as on a single
man but as Mankind (because he represented it in the flesh) so view him not as
a single Comfort but as Comfort-kind, because he comprehends them all, and then
thou will confess the Godliest man is the Merriest man, and that there is no
dancing equal to dancing before the Ark; which mentions to me the Godly's Joy
considered Eminently, or in its degree of Comparison, More Gladness -- Thou
have put more Gladness, my second part.

a short and merry Madness, as much might have been said of all those brittle
Joys which carnal minds call delights: For what are worldly Iollities but
certain one-day Vanities, borne this light and not seen the next; Things of
so swift and dispatching a frailty, that they last just long enough to have it
pronounced of them that they have been; The Joy of the Hypocrite is but for a
Moment, having only these two Characters stamped on them by Saint Augustine,
that they make wretched and Forsake; whereas Spiritual Joy is lasting, having
always this Divine thing in it Not to Cease; Corrupt joy that must be answered
for, is but a Song, The pious man is the Music of Orbs, more heavenly and as
lasting: That other, is a Guilty and therefore an unsound and short one: Such
is the bloody Gladness of them at the Great City, whose Accounts run thus, For
so many Loyal Subjects Murdered here, so many Drowned yonder, so many Starved
in Prison: which after a while ends in a sadness made of a contrary List, For
so many Rebels Slain at one Place, so many Sunk at another, so many Famished
in a third: No other Gladness must They expect, that pray for successes with
much Impiety, and Rejoice for them with more; that are devout for spoil, and
kneel only that they may Oppress and ruin prosperously; that like Iezabel
Fast for another man's Vineyard, and then devour that Vineyard in triumph that
they have wickedly obtained it. Such Joy is no more then one Flash made up of
the two Glassy properties, Glittering and Breaking, and to which as to some
Woods that imitate Light, there belong but these two poor Accomplishments to
shine and be rotten; Security may give the Wicked some Truce and Cessation of
Terrors, but what Solid and Compounded League is there betwixt the Wicked and
himself? There is no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked, Isaiah 48.22. Such a
clamorous conscience attends their Iollities, as in Rainebowes, so much thunder
there is next to their most gaudy delights, that their very Mirth is scarce
merry, and their Laughter seems rather to break forth then be consented to.
The Godly man's Joy as himself (in the first Psalm) is planted by the River
side, where there is lasting supply of moisture and freshness; The Wicked are
planted shall I say, or rather stuck in, but by the Brook side, which after a
short hurry of Waters, dry up and are not. When they are Glad they do not
Rejoice but for those minutes only forget to be sad. Stretch then this Prophet
upon that Child, lay this holy Gladness upon that fleshly, and how unequal
will their dimensions appear, how short, how dead, what a Child will that Joy
confess it self that is Weaved of any thing beside Gods Countenance!

2. Next, As unsanctified Gladness does not dwell and continue, so when it is
at all it scarce is Gladness; So mingled it is and compounded of it self and
its contrary, that now for a fresh reason it cannot be said to Last, because
indeed it hardly ever was; it being so twisted with Cares, and Starts, and
Doubtfulnesse, that it is the least part of it self; that it perishes in the
very Embrace, and while it is enjoyed is gone. So that in the Prophets phrase
you may not only compare it to the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot, because
it is short and passes, but because it is half Thorns it self. For either you
shall find it chilled with a fear that 'twill shortly dye and leave off, and
then what forehead so ere it wear, it is but disguised Trembling; Like the
motion of one of the Orbs which they call Music but is Trepidation. Or else
'ts so fretted with Iealousies and suspicion of sharers, that it is not a Severe
thing alone (which the Moralist would have it) but a Cruel. Or lastly, It Is so
flatted with it self, and grows so dull with being enjoyed, that it loades
the Breast that it should satisfy, and cloying the Appetite that it undertakes
to feed, in the middle of Triumph does the Office of a Torment. So that we are
to look upon these inferior Pleasures, as we do on some bright Armory, which
is Pleasant with a kind of Horror, and in the same Eye Pleases and Affrights.

Look now upon the Spiritual Joy of the Godly, and you shall find it solid
and massy, Full only of it self, not stuffed with Scruples, such as is so
Divine, has so much of Bliss and the Blessed Vision, that it whets, and
satisfies, Fills the Faithful, and sharpens them: Blessed are they which hunger
and thirst (Matthew. 5.) Blessed they are, yet hunger. Survey but one Instance of
a man of the Worlds making; Haman (in the third of Esther) a Man within a Name
of being great as the Prince that made him such, and yet one poor surly Jew
can leaven all the sweetness of his honors, one Private coverd head corrupts
the Pomp of a whole City of Bare ones, and Mordecai's frown sowrs all the
Content the King of Babylon can raise him to; If Mordecai mutter, the Trumpets
sound harsh, Give him the Royal Robe, if one crawling Captive do not put off
to it, it is to the wearer but so much Sackcloth, and they can be no Trappings
except the Dogged Israelite rise up when they pass by. See how much Carnal
Gladness was hindered from being such by how little a disturbance. Look next
upon a Righteous heart, how firm and Collected is such a Breast; Nothing more
Serene and Even then a Persecuted David: Job cannot be afflicted out of his
Confidence and Comforts, and after Sores and the Dunghill, and (which are
worse) ^mpertinent Friends and his Wife, is still unshaken and the same lob
that he began.

3. Lastly, the Condition of the Godly is most Joyful because it will be so;
There will be a Time, when the great Divider of Right shall weigh out rewards,
and Justice shall so balance her now questioned Scales, that Righteousness and
Sin shall as easily be distinguished by Enjoying and Suffering as they are
naturally related to it, when God shall shine out to the Good and Blaze out to
the Wicked in eternal Flames; Paying every Faithful Soul with Mercy and
Peace, but throwing Tribulation and Anguish on every Soul that sins; when
popular Ambition gilded with holy Intents, shall drop its disguise, and become
direct aspiring; And Malice which in the Angry breast of a Rebel is miscalled
Zeal, shall be seen through and appear Spleen: when all Hearts shall suffer
the Eye, and all thoughts grow Public; when Pulpit Treasons, tedious vehement
forsaking of Texts shall no longer be called Preaching to the Conscience; Nor
barren Curiosities in Learning any more be Styled Depth; When Madness and
License shall put off the name of Christian Liberty; When there shall be no
Private Villain, no body shall be wicked to himself, when there shall be no
Pompey, who (as Tacitus says) was only a Secreter bad man then Caesar, not a
Less; When the Just shall shine as the Sun, and the Wicked I say not shall
Shine, ('It Is some Comfort to be Tortured in Light) but burn in Flames as
Eternal as that God they have offended. Now when a Righteous man with an
humble and hoping Eye looks up to Heaven as his Reversion, and views himself
a Triumphant Saint (only under Age) he must needs reap Plenty of Joy from his
Faith, which instates a man in that which he expects even while he expects; It
being a Grace which gives what it stays for, and to which nothing is Absent.
Now what horrors must tenter the heart of the Wicked, when he shall coldly and
seriously contemplate Hell fire as his own, and see himself live here only a
Repriv'd Devil. I hope you are all too innocent to understand. You see then,
the Allmighty Places his Comforts here, does not hurl them, and gives him the
Joyful Condition, not that Catches best, but that Lives so: He sets Crowns
and Solid Gladness upon Righteous Hearts in this life, and Coronets of slender
Joy on Wicked ones, which mentions the Shaded side of my Text; The Worldlings
Thin, and Narrow, and some Gladness; Thou have put More Gladness in my heart,
which implies some in Theirs; my third Part.

whole Wedge: It Is so with Temporal Good Things; Riches are meant for
Kindnesses, they may be Corrupted to Curses; and Honors that came down
Favors may be misimployed to things of another name; We may not say that where
God showers a full Estate that he goes only to bait and entangle that Rich
man; and that in the shape of ample Possessions he sends but a Great Trappe: Or
that Esau, when his Father prophesied to him, the Fatness of the Earth and the
Dew of Heaven (Genesis 27.) Kneeled all that while to be Cursed: Certainly as God
forbids us to fall down to Money and worship Wealth, so he will not himself
make Riches so far an Idol as to have the face of Blessings and not be such;
to represent Kindnesses and be only the Statues of Good things. Pronounce not
then of outward Accomplishment, and those things which Aristotle calls Ornament
and Vernish to Virtue, That they do but Act Goodness, that it may be said of
Heathen prosperity that it is little more then a fair evil, as some say (but
why God knows) of Heathen Virtues, that they are but handsome sins; That
nothing which the Wicked have is Good, as some say, Nothing is Theirs (the
opinion of some twice Baptized but never Christened;) Thou may as well say
that the same Crown upon Constantine's Believing head was of Gold, and upon
the Apostate Temples of Julian became Pastbord. For God in these low and
just-good Things is an exposed and every bodies God (as Tertullian calls him)
and these runnings over of his mercies are as common as the Senses by which
they are enjoyd: For as every thing's being Made makes it a Copy of the
Allmighti's Power, so every thing's being bestowed makes it a draught of his
kindness. Corn and Wine then and these poorer Favors have something in them
toward Comforts, and our Savior that was so severe an Interpreter, that he
called A Glance Adultery, A Wish the Act, Pharisees and Doctors Vipers; Yet He
calls Glory the Thinnest of Good things, The Hypocrites reward (Mat. 6.) So
that these Under Mercies are saint Ingredients of a pale Happiness, as Milk and
Honey in Canaan, though they did not compound Blessedness, yet they made a
Good Land.

Though then the haughty Stoique pronounce that he can find richer Pleasure in
Hunger and the Wheel then the Epicure in his Wine and Roses; Yet certainly
(not to envy the Stoique his delicacies) Riches and the governed Contents that
grow from them considered merely and lifted above the Abuses, they may be
Racked to good; and those Thomes which they are, they are so only if leaned
upon; They are Maps at least if not solid Globes of Comfort, and the Liturgy's
Form for Plenty, is a Prayer no Execration. The Rule that Results to us is
this; These Fallings of Bounty are Blessings, and make no wretched state. What
hands then, how clean and how thankful does it concern Us to lift up, that
enjoy God in Graces too, and see Him not only in Plenty and his back parts. But
then they are poor Blessings, and no match for thine immortal spirit, Thou
may not Marry the things of this World, they are too much thy Kindred,
Things of thy Blood, that is, thy Dust; and if they must be Wives, make them
such as those wicked men are said to make theirs in Italy, Use and Contemn
them. Trust not a great Fortune, for it is a Fortune, and Fear not a great
Fortune, for it is a thing sent down from above, which Casts me on the
Penicell that draws both the sides of the Text, Gods Favor Thou have put
Gladness, my last part, to be briefly dispatched.

and therefore supposed in reverence to such glorious Bodies, to be too
excellent for change; So the Christian most roundly evinces all good Things to
flow from God, because they are Good; For as Gods will is the reason of his
doing, so his doing is the reason of any things being Good; Goodness being a
notion of a double face, which looks not only forward to some Will which may
affectt it, but backward too, to the Divine Mind to which it is already
squared; Every good and perfect gift (that is indeed every Gift) says Saint
James, comes from above. All thy Parts are Rays and Beams from Heaven, and
all thy Graces Influences; Thy Strength is dropped down from the God of Hosts,
and thy Wit from the God of Lights; Not thy Acres, but the Blessings upon them
fill thy Barnes, and the fruits of thy ground may rather be said to Rebound
from the Earth, then to Come: Call not thy Exact and measured Shape the work
or Chance of Nature, but a figure of Gods own Geometry: nor thy Wives
powerful Colors, Creatures of her Blood or Parents; The powers that are (even
in this sense) are from above. Call not thy health thy Temperance's health, nox
thy honor thy Meritts honor, nor thy Liberty thy Innocencies Liberty; These
may be Pipes, they are no Fountains of Good things: Through whatsoever God
conveighs his Favors, they are still his Favors; and if the Heathen Prayed
down their Poems, and would scarce attempt an Epigram without an Invocation,
certainly it is no huge Christianity to allow God as general a Bounty as he
has a Presence. Thy Intellectualls are not the Births of thy sweat and
Candles, but God has shed a bigger Talent upon thy Soul, to try whether thou will improve it in a diffusive Communication, or bury it in a sullen and
unactive Contractednes; whether thou will Plant upon thy natural Powers by
Industry, or in a lazy presumption upon thy rich ground, loose thy fallow and
unmanur'd faculties; Nor was it the Noise and Hats and Affection, and all the
tumult of love from the Following and Vnjudging Multitude, that has blown
thee to the Helm, and made thee start up a Senator and Statesman; but the God
of all hearts that has steered thy Countries Votes upon thee, to try whether
thou will study the Kingdoms Peace, or thine own Reign; whether thou will
obey and counsel thy Prince, or else like those Busy Wicked men in a dull
ambition think Knight of a Shire signifies Emperor, and that in some poor
market Village that sells Cheese and Voices, thou wast Crowned a Burgess. Your
honors are given you not for Leaven, to make you sour and swell, but to
reward and inflame your Virtues,; and your Offices are bestowed not to make you
able to oppress the better, but to give you power to relieve and succor: as
upper bodies are created to throw kind Influences upon these lower, and the
Heavens Roll not about for themselves: All you that stand before Princes are
Joseph's raised for the good of your Countrymen. Whether then thy Condition be
to possess the Vineyard or to sweat in it; to make Laws or live under them;
to Prescribe or be Prescribed; of what size soever thy state is cut, thy God,
not thy Care is the Carver; Learn we to acknowledge that the Deity lets it
self down in all Shapes to its creature; That our successess are the Smiles
of a bountiful God and our afflictions the plasters of a Curing God, and from
the bottom of our either Erected or else suffering Souls ascribe to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all Honor, Glory, Might, Majesty, and Dominion*
now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

