AN INSTITUTION OF GENERAL HISTORY, From the beginning of the World TO THE
Monarchy of Constantine the Great. COMPOSED In such Method and manner as never
yet was extant.

By William Howel, M. A. Fellow of Magdalen College in CAMBRIDGE.

(...).

Polybius. N^scire quid antequam natus sis acciderit, id est semper esse puerum.

Cicero. U^de sacilius quam ex Annalium Monumentis aut res bellica aut omnis
Reipub. disciplina cognoscetur?

Idem. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold in his Shop, at
the Anchor in the lower Walk in the New Exchange. 1661.

To the KINGS most Excellent and most sacred MAJESTY.
SIR,
ALthough the quality of this work be truly such, that, considering the
brightness of Royal Majesty, and the obscurity of its own extraction, it
cannot expect a bare acceptance, much less plead any merit in this address,
yet does it find more reason for hope than despair; for as much as the whole
World has taken notice that your Majesty's Grace and Clemency is founded more
upon the transcendent goodness of your own Disposition than the qualifications
of your Subjects. Allowance hereby being made for what is mine, it were
needless to insist upon the Nobility and usefulness of the subject, the
excellency whereof as humane transcendeth not your Orb, and the utmost
improvement of which is within the sphere of your activity. It were a piece of
pedantry to show to your Majesty that History is the storehouse whence
Precedents may be fetched for all sorts of Actions, Public and Private,
Military and Civil; that it is a Mirror of prudence to show both their beauty
and deformity, a Touchstone to discover deceits, an incentive to virtue, and a
terror unto vice; that in it are contained the Prudence of times, imbecility
and strength of Nations, Reasons of State, Councils of Peace, and Stratagems of
War; that in it Monarchy triumphs over the Confusions, Alterations, and
Seditions of Popular Government. And should I go about to instance in the
various helps it affoardeth to the management of Civil matters, I might justly
incur more than the censure that light upon him, who was so impertinent as to
read a Lecture of the Art of a General in the presence of Hannibal. For it may
justly be said that your Majesty has improved History to the utmost; that your
actions have so far imitated ancient Patterns as to exceed them. Others have
wasted and destroyed Nations, you have recovered and restored three dying ones.
Others have raged with fire and sword, have rooted out, overturned, and made
desolate; your Majesty by Mercy and Grace has replanted, settled, and enriched.
Alexander Conquered the effeminate Persians, and subdued other Nations whom
their own unfitness for Military matters helped him to overcome. Caesar tamed
the naked Galls, and painted Britains, whom fool-hardinesse and barbarism had
armed against themselves; or if there be any other Achievements of them, or
others, which seem more glorious, yet the valor of their Soldiers, the
experience of their times, and vicissitude of humane affairs, challenge to
themselves the greatest share of reputation. Your Majesty has subdued those
things which are beyond Mars his reach: You have tamed wild and extravagant
passions of men, Conquered stubborn and perverse dispositions, laid low
prejudice, and convinced such, whom all these distempers had rendered affectedly
ignorant and disobedient. Your Majesty's Conquests therefore so much more
excel the commendations of others, as it is more glorious to cure than kill,
to restore than to destroy, to follow the dictates of Compassion and Mercy,
then of indignation and revenge, to Conquer the mind than the body; and indeed
to overcome one's self than subdue others. That this is no flattery History
will ascertain future times, and both the mouths and hearts of your People at
present do testify, which, though in other matters they may disagree, yet all
unite in this concent, that you are the True Father of your Country. In our
acclamations during those solemnities of your Majesty's Royal Coronation,
seeing there is no need of wishing you the Goodness of Trajan, we so much the
more pray that the Happiness of Augustus may light upon you, and that those
solemnities may in one part imitate the Saecular ones amongst the Romans, that
though some of us have heretofore seen the like, yet through the length of your
happy reign none of us may do it for the time to come. I for my part, though a
vvell-wisher to History, unfeignedly desire, that not till after very many
years so great an accession of glory may come to it, as will accrue from the
passages of your Majesty's Government; and that in the mean time your Majesty
may be as happy in the love and loyalty of your People, as they are in your
Princely clemency and care. To this, both a sense of merit and duty binds me,
being

Your Majesty's most loyal, and most humble subject and servant, Will. Howel.

PREFACE.
THe French (who first Introduced this custom into the World of writing
Prefaces before the works of others) have used that liberty with so much
excess in the commendation of their friends, that they have rendered it not
only suspected to the Reader, but prejudicial to their repute whom they
intended to honor by it. But as I cannot approve the indiscreet zeal of those
persons that would rather abrogate a good Office when abused, than endeavor to
reform it, I would neither wave an employment which gave me the occasion of
hinting to the Reader some such things as may be of concernment to him in the
perusal of this work, and which the modesty of the Author would not permit him
to communicate, neither on the other side would I willingly recede from the
strictness and severity of truth. So that whatsoever shall fall from me to his
advantage shall not need any favorable construction to make it pass, nor
shall I take that freedom to mix fiction and History together: The use of this
latter is so obvious to every eye, that it is needless to speak much of it, it
shall suffice me in short to say, that by the knowledge of History we are
taught wisdom, and led to virtue, there being n^thing in the Actions or
Fortunes, either of public or private persons, to which somewhat in former
Ages bore not a resemblance, and which by a due consideration of the
circumstances we may not with profit apply to our present occasions. How much
we are excited to virtue by it, they that know the power of Emulation in noble
minds will easily conclude: which is manifest by the famous examples of
Themistocles, whom the victories of Miltyades robbed of his repose, of
Alexander, who was stirred up to the desire of glory by reading the actions of
Achilles, as Caesar by reflecting upon his; add to this, that such persons whom
these Precedents of virtue will not encourage to it, are awed by History from
running headlong into vice, when they cannot but look on the writers of the
present Age to be set as spies upon their Actions, and must expect when they
are dead to be exposed without fear or flattery to the Impartial censure of the
living. For who is there that would so much value the pleasure of a glass of
Wine, as not to abstain from drinking it, if he knew it had been all night
steeped in Antimony.

These, besides many others, are the benefits which accrue to us by the
knowledge of History in general, but that I may inform the World how much it is
acknowleging to the worthy Author of this Institution in particular, and
wherein those excellencies of his consist, which distinguish him from the
ordinary crowd of Historians, Ut possit digito monstrari and dicier hic est, I
must take leave to insist upon these ensuing heads, wherein I shall plainly
make appear to the equal and candid Reader, that History is reduced by him in
this work to such order, and exact Method, as never yet in any Language.

For, first you have here all the Empires in distinct Chapters by themselves,
with the Contemporaries of them distinguished in the same manner from each
other, and from the Empire to which they were Coaetaneous. Whereas both in
Systems and in larger Volumes of General History they are mingled together with
a strange confusion, like the several ingredients of an Olio in the same Dish,
where the variety of the Meats destroy the taste of one another, and he that
would read any History by it self, finds it immediately embroiled and
interwoven with the affairs of other Nations, so that he will not easily form a
perfect Idea in his mind of that which is given him but in parcels.

In the next place this Author has furnished you with a general Description of
Greece, its ancient Kingdoms and Commonwealths, from their first Originals, the
successions of Kings, changes of Government, and forms of the several
Republics, with the power and nature of their respective Magistrates and
Officers, not omitting the most considerable Customs, Laws, and Antiquities of
each of them, deduced from the best Historians, whom you still find quoted in
the Margent; this, as it has never been entirely performed by any Author
heretofore, so ought it to set a peculiar mark of Honor upon ours, who has
been careful to give us an exact account of that Country, which was the
Mother of Arts and Sciences.

After this, if we will turn our eyes upon the Macedonian Empire, and the
several parts and branches of it, as the Kingdoms of Syria, of Macedon, and
Egypt, we shall still have greater occasion to admire the learned diligence of
the Author. The Grecian Monarchy after the decease of Alexander not being more
dismembered and rent in pieces by his Successors, than by those Writers who have
transmitted the memory of it to posterity, particularly, the Asian and Egyptian
Kingdoms under the Seleucidae and Ptolomies have never been compiled in one
History, and I have often wondered in my perusal of this Institution, by what
means the Author of it could arive at so clear a knowledge of those perplexed
successions, it was certainly a work of great labor to compare Historians, and
to weave these several Arguments and loose pieces into one entire Loom, which I
the rather mind the Reader of, because it is not easily perceived by every
ordinary capacity, for the uniformity of the style, and the unbroken order of
the whole is such, that they only who are conversant in Antiquities are able
to judge what travel and study were required to it.

The Roman History next invites our observation; wherein the success of this
Author has sufficiently recompensed his worthy pains: I dare confidently
affirm, No modern Pen has yet carried it on with so great light from the
Original of the City to the time of Constantine. For from the banishment of
Tarquin to the new modeling of the Government by Augustus, you have all the
Intermediate Changes, Alterations, and Seditions of it, while yet a State, as
the contests of the Patricians and Commons, with the several motives of them,
The displacing and restoring of Annual Magistrates, the Description of their
Offices, the Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion; all collected with great
diligence from the Fathers of Roman History, but never given us in one body by
ancient Authors, or by any of later days. I confess I have read a French
Historian, who from the reign of Augustus almost to that of Justinian has
given me the greatest satisfaction of any man; Yet he often amuseth himself (as
some of our bad Chroniclers at home have done) with passages of small
concernment, and below the Dignity of an Historian to relate: and from the
Foundation of the City to Augustus, pays his Readers with a bare Translation
of Florus. Sr. Walter Rawleigh (never to be mentioned without honor) concludes
his History with the end of the Macedonian War, and the conversion of that
Kingdom into a Roman Province: much about the same time we are forsaken by our
best Guide Livy, whose Decads from the Captivity of Perseus to the time of
Octavius Caesar (whose Contemporary he was) are wholly lost: for in the
conclusion of his 45th Book (the last which is left us) he introduces King
Prusias speaking to the Romans, whom he came to visit, in these words; Deos qui
urbem Romam incolerent Senatumque and Populum Romanum salutatum se venisse, and
gratulatum quod Persea Gentiumque Reges vicissent, Macedonibusque and Illyriis
in Ditionem redactis, auxissent Imperium. But as this Author has supplied the
Defects of Livy, and continued the Roman History five hundred years beyond Sir
W. Rawleigh, so in the alteration of the Government from a Commonwealth to a
Monarchy by Augustus, the reasons which induced the Emperor to make that
change, the manner how, and the form of it, are delivered with so great care,
and described with so much life, That I could not but take a particular notice
of it; and (with the civility of those that carve to others where themselves
best like) invite the Reader to a more exact observation of that which has
given me so great contentment.

Neither has he deserved less of Christian than profane History: for from
the Primitive times till Constantine the Great he has deduced the Successions
of Bishops in the principal Sees, with the practice of the Christians, and a
faithful relation of their sufferings in all the persecutions.

For what concerns our own Island, I think he has performed the part of a true
Englishman, and a lover of his Country: for he has vindicated the Antiquity
of its first Discovery by the Phoenicians, and that not only by the probable
reasons alleged by that great person Bochartus for the Etymology of the word
Britannia, but by other indeniable, and convincing circumstances, which as it
redounds to the honor of our Nation, so reflects a part of that glory to our
Author.

One particular of no slight consequence I had almost omitted: That as the
Reader may without any intervening matters impertinent to his present purpose
read the History of any Empire, or Kingdom Contemporary to it, by it self, so
he may likewise observe that the principal passages in all of them are linck'd
together by Synchronisms, not only placed in the Margent, but in the beginning
or end of every notable Occurrence.

Thus I have briefly, and with much sincerity couched together some of those
Excellencies, which amongst many others I have observed in this Institution of
History: of which if I may presume to give my private opinion, (though I am
conscious to my self how little it ought to signify to the World) I think the
work taken all together is for the order of it handsomely and judiciously
contrived, for its style perspicuous, and for the learning in the several parts
of History, Antiquity, and Chronology, uncommon. Those who desire a greater
politenesse in the style may consider, that the florid way of writing, which
has undeservedly acquired so great a name to some of our own Age and Nation,
is nothing proper to an Historian, and that our Author busied himself in
matters more serious, and of greater use, he chose rather the plain but comely
strength of the Dorique Pillar, than the Effeminate, though curious shape of
the Corinthian. For my own part, I confess that plainness and unaffected
simplicity is pleasing to me: and I think no Intelligent Person that goes upon
business, will leap Hedges out of the open and direct Road, to Travel over
Flowery Fields, or painted Meadows.

AN INSTITUTION OF General History. The First Part. BOOK I.
CHAP. I. From the beginning of the world, to the beginning of the first Empire.
1. IN Genesis 1.1.
the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. By Heb. 1.3.
Faith we understand that they were framed by his Word, so that things which
are seen, were not made of things which do appear. Man created.


2. Man's habitation being made and conveniently furnished the sixth day; Genesis
1. etc.
then (and not till then) was he made of the dust of the Earth, and, God
breathing into his nosthrils the breath of life, he became a living Soul. Being
placed in the Garden of Eden, and a meet help wanting to him, Eve was framed of
one of his ribs. Of all the Trees of the Garden, except that of the knowledge
of Good and Evil, they might safely eat; and at such time as they should eat
it, they were surely to dye. But the Serpent beguiled the woman, Falls.
who did eat thereof, and giving to her Husband, he also did eat. Hereby they
rendered themselves guilty of temporal and eternal death; they were condemned
to labor and sorrow; and those not confined to their own persons, but extended
to their whole posterity, involved with them in the same guilt: the
demonstrating whereof might seem the Scope of this present Work; nothing having
succeeded but vanity and vexation of spirit: nothing but labor and travail
under the Sun.

Expelled Paradise.
3. Adam, being expelled Paradise to till the ground, begat of Eve his wife Cain
and Abel; though in what years is not expressed. Abel was a Keeper of Sheep,
and Cain a Tiller of the Ground. By Faith, Abel offered to God a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, and
contracted such envy, that his Brother slew him in the field. Cain kills Abel.
The voice of his blood cried to God from the ground, and drew down this
punishment upon Cain, (besides that of the ground formerly laid upon his
Father) to be a Fugitive and Vagabond in the Earth: Then departed he from the
presence of the Lord, and went into the Land of Nod, where he built a City, and
called it Enoch, after the name of his Son. His Family was propagated to
Lamech, the fifth in descent from himself, by whom the Jews Vide Mererum in
Genesis 1. and Pererium.
have thought him to have been slain, by reason of Lamech's words to his two
wives: that he had slain a man to his wounding, and a young man to his hurt: if
Cain should be avenged seven fold, then Lamech Seventy and seven fold. Seth's
birth.
After the death of Abel, Adam begat Seth, in the hundred and thirtieth year of
his Age, as Moses Genesis 3.
makes express mention; neglecting the account of time in the Family of Cain,
because his wicked race perished in the Flood: the Church of God being to be
continued in the posterity of Seth, of whom also (as to the flesh) his Son
himself was to proceed.

And posterity.
4. In the race of Genesis 1.
Seth, is laid down the account of years from the Creation to the Deluge. For
Seth, being born when Adam was 130 years old, begat Here the word begat, is to
be understood in the same sense as the Hebrew (...), the Greek (...), and the
Latin gignere, which are applied to Mother as well as to Father, and betoken
birth rather than conception. The Latin word genitus and natus, signify the
same thing. Tune ille Aeneas quem Dardanio Anchisae Alma Venus Phrygiae genuit
Simoentis ad undas? Vide Genesis 40.20. Mat. 11.1. Luc. 1.47. 1 Pet. 2.2. Vide
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Enos at the age of 105; Enos being 90, begat Caixan, and Cainan when he was
70, begat Mehalelec. From the birth of Mehalelec to that of his son Jared
passed 65, from Jared's to Henoch's 162. and thence to that of Methusalah 65.
Methusalah when he begat Lamech, was aged 187 years; Lamech when he begat Noah
was 182, and Noah at the time of the Flood had lived 600 years, all which
amount to the sum of 1656; each year of the Father's age being supposed
complete at the birth of his Son. All these by divine providence, for the
propagation of Mankind, obtained a very long time upon the Earth. Though Enoch
had the shortest, yet he never died, being taken up by God, after he had walked
with him 365 years. Methusalah his son of all others, arrived at the greatest
age, being 969 when he died. Yet, in a certain sense, Adam lived longer than
he; for being created in his perfect strength, and fit for generation, he had
the advantage of 60 years, before which age we read none of them to have had
any children; Nature then requiring a longer time for maturity. If 60 now be
added to 930 years, which he lived, the number exceeds that of Methusala's age
by 21. Seeing the World required it, it cannot but be presumed, that each of
these begat other children, and some of them before these here mentioned. But
such being but collateral to that line, Gen 5. A. M. 1656.
which was to be brought down to Noah, (who was to continue the generation of
Mankind, and to re-people the Earth) Moses upon that account, had no occasion
to make mention of them.

Man's wickedness causes a Deluge.
5. In the 480 year of the life of Noah, God seeing all flesh to have corrupted
it self, and as well the posterity of Seth, as that of Cain, to be given up to
all wickedness; it repented him that he had made Man. He resolved not always
to strive with him, yet gave him the space of 120 years to repent in. If no
amendment appeared in that time he fully determined by an universal Deluge to
destroy Man and Beast, with the creeping thing, and the Fowls of the air. Yet
Noah a just man found grace in his sight, Noah and his family preserved in the
Ark.
and being a Preacher of righteousness to the wicked World, the Lord was
graciously pleased to make choice of him and his family to be a remnant and a
seed, out of which Mankind and his Church might be propagated and repaired. He
commanded him to build an Ark of Some interpret it Cedar, others Cypress, than
which no wood is stronger; of which the doors of the Temple of Ephesus were
made, the coffins of those that died in the service of their Country, Jupiter's
scepter, and ships in Babylon and Assyria.
Gopher wood, into which he was to take his wife, his sons and their wives,
with some of every living thing of all flesh; of the clean by seven, and the
unclean by two. On Vide Ludov. Capellum. in Chronologia sacra.
the tenth day of the second Month, he commanded him to bring the living
Creatures into the Ark: The order of the Deluge.
On the seventh after, he entered it; and on the same day, the rain began to
fall, and so continued for 40. days, and as many nights. For 150 days the
waters prevailed upon the Earth, (reckoned from the first fall thereof);
insomuch that fifteen Cubits upward the Mountains were covered, and all flesh
died that moved upon the Earth, both of Fowl, and of Cattle, and Beast, and of
every Creeping thing that creeps upon the Earth, and every Man. But God
remembering Noah, and every living thing, and all the Cattle that was with him
in the Ark; after the forty days, the windows of Heaven were stopped, and the
rain from Heaven was restrained, and at the end of 110 more (which make up the
150) the waters were abated. This fell out on the 29th day of the 7th month,
and the 196 of the year consisting of Lunar months; or the 17th day of the 7th
month, if they were Solar.

The Ark rests on Ararat.
6. On the 17th. day of the 7th. month the Ark rested upon the Mountains of
Ararat, according to the Hebrew; if, in this place, the version of the 70th.
and Hierome in the vulgar, be not rather to be credited (which have the 27th)
seeing it is not probable that the Ark should rest the same day, or two days
before the waters began to decrease. On the first day of the 10th. month were
the tops of the Mountains seen, and forty days after, Noah sent forth a Raven
which went to and fro until the waters were dried up from off the earth. The
Raven returning no more unto him, seven days after he sent forth a Dove to see
if the waters were abated, which finding no rest for the sole of her foot
returned unto him. He stayed yet other seven days, and again sent forth the
Dove, which in the evening brought in her mouth an Olive leaf; so that he knew
the waters to be abated. Then, seven other days passed, he sent her out the
third time, and she returned not to him any more, the waters being now so much
fallen, that the ordinary Hills might be uncovered, wherein she might continue
and feed; although the Plains and Valleys were still overwhelmed. On the first
day of the first month of the 601 year of Noah's life, the waters were dried
from off the face of the earth; yet so, as it still remained moist and dirty,
having been so long a time soaked with such quantity of moisture. Therefore he
stayed yet 55 days more, till the 27th. day of the second month, before he
went out of the Ark; so much time having been requisite for drying the ground
(especially in low places) and for the growth of grass, and other things
necessary for the sustenance of living Creatures, which had now continued in
the Ark 365 days, or a full solar year, which exceeds the lunar eleven days.

Where Ararat is.
7. The Ark rested upon the Mountains of Ararat; Vide Bocha^ti Phaleg. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
by which place most understand Armenia, rejecting the pretended Verses of
Sibylla, which place it upon a Mountain of Phrygia, near to the City Celaenae,
and out of which the two Rivers Marsyas and Meander do issue. Some will have it
to have rested about Araxene, a Plain of Armenia, through which the River
Araxes runs, by the foot of the Mountain Taurus. But the far greater number
consisting both of Heathens, Jews, and Christians, pitch upon the Mountains of
the Gordyaans, otherwise called Carduchi, Cardiaei, Cordyaei, Cordueni, Gordi,
Cordaei, Curdi, etc. the Hill it self being variously named Kardu, Cardon,
Kurud, Kardynus, Cordyaeus, etc. What Hill soever it was, it must have stood
Eastward of the Country of Shinar or Babylonia, and the Vine must have
naturally grown there; upon which, and other accounts these Gordyaean Mountains
are rejected by a learned Sir Walter Raleigh. lib. 1. cap. 7. Sect. 10.
Writer of modern times, who affirms that Ararat named by Moses is not any
one Hill, so called, no more than any one Hill among those Mountains which part
Italy from France, is called the Alps, and will have the same ledge of Hills
running from Armenia to India, to keep the same name all along, and even in
India, to be called Ararat. For that the best Vine naturally grows on the
South Side of the Mountains Caucasi; and, because of other excellencies of that
soil, he thinks it most probable that Noah there settled himself and planted
his Vineyard. And he allows best of the opinion of Goropius Becanus, The
Testimony of the Heathen concerning Noah's Flood.
who conceived the Ark to have rested on the highest Mountains of that part of
the World.

8. Of this Deluge a tradition remained amongst the Heathen. Josephus Antiqu.
lib. 1. cap. 3.
Berosus the Caldaean, Priest of Belus, and contemporary with Alexander the
Great, wrote of the Ark's resting upon the Cordyaean Mountains of Armenia, and
how those that came to see the Relics of it (which yet were to be seen in his
time) plucked off some pitch which they used to carry about them, as an
Antidote against infection. Hierome the Egyptian, who wrote the Antiquities of
Phoenicia, related the same; besides Mnaseas, and many others: amongst whom
Nicolas of Damascus is considerable, who in his 96 book spoke of the Hill
Baris, in the Country of the Mynians, (a people in Armenia) upon which many
saved themselves in a Deluge, and one being carried thither in an Ark, there
rested; who might (says he) be the same man concerning whom Moses the
Lawgiver of the Jews wrote. Xisythrus by one Abydeaus apud Eusebium,
praeparat. Evangel. lib. 9.
is related, being forewarned of a Deluge by Saturn, to have fled by Boat into
Armenia, where, the waters decreasing, he sent out Birds to discover dry Land;
which, finding none, returned to him again. He is said by Alexander Polyhistor.
apud Cyrill. contra Julian. lib. 1.
a second to have escaped a great Deluge which happened in his days, (being also
forewarned by Saturn thereof), by providing an Ark, wherein, with himself,
birds, creeping things, and beasts were preserved. Plato in Timaeo.
A third brings in an Egyptian Priest declaring to Solon, out of the monuments
of Antiquity, that before the particular Ogygian and Deucalionaean Deluges,
there was an universal one, by which the Earth was much defaced. Lucian. in
lib. de dea Syra.
Another yet tells a story like in all things to the History of Moses, but
that Deucalion is placed in the room of Noah. The particular Deluges which
happened afterward in Greece, and other places have by the ancients been
confounded with this; and Vide Gerard. Johan. Vossii. Chronol. Sacr. Isagog.
Dissert. 4. cap. 3. Vide cuadem Dissert. 5. c. 1.
some think they did not in reallity differ from it.

Noah's progeny.
9. Noah, before the Flood, begat three Sons, Sem, Ham, and Japhet; of which the
last in order seems to have been the first in Nature, although the contrary
is defended; and yet so, as Cham is never accounted the eldest. Bochart.
Phaleg. lib. 1. cap 1.
Noah is, with great probability, thought to be Saturn, so much talked of by
the Heathen; He is compared with Saturn.
for many things concur to persuade us to it. He was the common father of all
mankind after the Flood, which thing is by Orpheus attributed to Saturn. Not
only a just person, as Saturn Diodorus lib. 5. and Aurelius Victor. de orig.
Romans
was, but a preacher of righteousness. From the time of the Flood to the
division of the Earth, he had a natural Dominion over all mankind, which space
fitly answers to the Golden Age under Saturn. In that Age, there was but one
Language, which Mythologists Plato in Polit.
so far extended as to make men and beasts to have spoken in the same Dialect.
Noah is called an husbandman, (or, in the Hebrew phrase, a man of the Earth);
and Saturn's wife, Rhea, is the same with the Earth: he Servius in Virgil.
Aenead. 8.
being also said to have taught Janus the use of the Vine and sicle in
imitation of Noah, who planted a Vineyard. From Noah's once being overtaken
with Wine, the liberty of the Saturnals might proceed; and from his cursing of
Cham with servitude, the custom Athenaeus lib. 14.
observed amongst the Romans during that solemnity, of exercising servile
Offices. The occasion of the Curse was Cham's seeing his father's nakedness,
and making a jest thereof; and the Poets Callimachi Hymni.
feigned a Law made by Saturn that none should see the gods naked and go
unpunished. Saturn and Rhea are said Plato in Timaeo.
to have been begotten of the Ocean and Thetis, and thence the ancient Romans
would have Vide Aurelium Victorem de orig. Gentis Romans ad initium.
the badge of Saturn to be a ship; which things much accord with the History of
Noah. Saturn devoured all his Children but these three, Jupiter, Neptune, and
Pluto, who divided the World amongst them, as did Sem, Cham, and Japhet. Cham
is Jupiter.

Japhet Neptune.

Sem Pluto.


Of these, Cham the youngest agrees with Jupiter, being named Jupiter Hammon.
Japhet with Neptune, for that he had his portion in Islands and Peninsula's.
And Sem being for his goodness hated by idolaters might by them be condemned
to Hell and termed Pluto.

The posterity of Sem.
10. Two years after the Flood, Sem being an hundred years old begat Arphaxad,
who is rationally Jacobus Cappellus in Hist. sacra and Exotica. p. 34.
thought his eldest Son; although Elam and Assure be named before him, the
Scripture in Genealogies not always observing the order of birth. Arphaxad at
the Age of 35 years begat a Son called Selah, according to the Hebrew; but the
Greek Translation of the 72. makes him at the Age of 135. to have begat
Cainan, which is followed by Luke in the Genealogy of Christ. Much is said on
both sides for these several readings; but most likely it is that this Cainan
was neither thought of by Moses, the 72 Interpreters, nor St. Luke; but that by
a mistake of the Transcribers he crept into the Copies of Luke, and the 70.
Beza had a Copy of Luke very ancient, and now in the public Library of the
University of Cambridge, wherein he is not found; and, what is more, he was not
acknowledged by the primitive Church, as appears by Lib. 3. cap. 33.

Vide de hac re Jacob. Capell. Hist. sacr. and erotic. page 35. and.

Gera^d. ^ohan. V^ssi^n i^ D^ss^rt. (...) genere Jesu Christi ad a^or. 5. Et
Chromel. sacr Isagog. D^ssert. 5. cap. 2. Gregorium Ang^m in Opuscu^s.

Bocharti Phaleg. lib. ^. c. 13. Usserii Chronicl. sacra. c. 6.


Irenaeus: That the Version of the 70. most anciently had him not, is probably
inferred from Josephus; who, though he wrote in Greek, and usually follows
that Translation, names him not; neither does Epiphanius against Haeresies,
nor Hierome in his Hebrew Traditions, though he there discourses of the
differences betwixt the Hebrew and Greek Copies. Neither is he read in all
Copies of the 1 Chronicles. 1. In Moses he is no where to be found, either in the
Hebrew Text, or the Cha^daean, or Samaritan Versions. Selah (or Schelach) at
the Age of thirty years begat Heber, from whom many think the Hebrews and the
Hebrew tongue to be so named. Heber being 34 years old begat Phaleg, so called
because in his days the Earth was divided.

The building of Babel.
11. The division of the Earth was occasioned by the confusion of Languages, and
this by building of the Tower of Babel. Antiquit. lib. 1. c. 4.
Josephus tells us that God had several times admonished men to separate
themselves, and inhabit the Earth: which they impiously taking in an ill sense,
as though he did it upon design to destroy them; at the instigation of N^mrod,
the son of Chus, and Nephew of Cham, (who now ambitiously affected dominion
over them) agreed to build a stately City, and a Tower which should reach to
Heaven, to defend them from danger, in case another Deluge should overwhelm the
Earth. They came from the East into the Land of Shinar, and there began their
work. Some put no other distinction betwixt the City and Tower, but will have
it only a City adorned with Towers. Others place them at a great distance
from each other; but it Vide Bocharti Phaleg. lib. 1. cap. 9.
seems evident, that some one notable Tower was begun, and that in the City,
which was situate upon the River Euphrates. Confusion of Languages.
To put an end to this design God confounded their Language, that they
understood not one another's speech, and hereupon the City was called Babel,
signifying confusion, and the Land of Shinar, afterward known by the name of
Babylonia, sometimes called Babel it self, and the City Babylon, in several
Languages. Of this great passage a tradition also remained amongst the Heathen,
Mentioned by Heathens.
as appears by Apud Joseph. qus prius. Et Eusebius. praeparat. Evangel. lib. 9.
Abydenus, Histraeus, and Sibylla, who made mention of it, the Land of Senaar,
and of Babylon, which they acknowledge was so called from Babel, in the Hebrew
tongue signifying confusion. The fable raised thereupon by the Poets.
Hence also the fable arose concerning the Giants fighting against the gods,
and their making a way to Heaven by heaping up Mountains one above another;
which attempt was blasted by Jupiter his Thunderbolts.

12. What the sons of men (in opposition to the people of God so called)
labored to prevent in the building of Babel was thereby brought upon them; the
Lord scattering them abroad upon the face of the Earth, and yet doing them more
good then they intended to do themselves. The division of the Earth.
Some will have the three sons of Noah to have divided the Earth by Lot, which
as yet could not be sufficiently known, and at such a City (namely
Rhinocoluca) as was not built till many Ages after, by Diodorus lib. 1. page
38. in margin notata.
Aclisanes, King of Egypt and Aethiopia: Nay, one Philastrius. Haeres. 70.
proceeds so far as to brand him with Heresy whosoever does not believe it.
Cham, though the youngest, was advanced by the Heathen above the rest, and
named Jupiter: Japhet, as the eldest, had the prerogative of birthright; Sem's
inheritance.

His five Sons. 1. Elam.


but Sem for his piety was preferred by his father, through Gods dispensation,
and obtained the choicest inheritance which extended to this, and a better
World. He has five Genesis 10.22.
Sons mentioned in Scripture, Elam, Assure, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram. Of Elam
descended the Elamites, or Elymaeans, Neighbors to the Medes, and whom Luke
places betwixt Media and Mesopotamia; from whom also the Neighboring Regions
were named. For Susan the Metropolis of the Susians is by Daniel placed in the
Province of Elam; and, besides that, De his omnibus, vid. Bocharti Phaleg. lib.
2. etc.
Gabriana, Carbiana, Massabilica, and Susiana, as far as to the River Eulaeus;
near the mouth of which also upon the Persian Gulf, Pliny and others place the
Elymaeans.

2. Assure.
13. From Assure descended the Assyres, called afterward Assyrians, Vide Eundem.
and from him was named Assyria, properly so called, (which was the Country
lying about Ninas, or Ninive), named also anciently Strabo lib. 16. page
736.737.
Aturia, and Dio in Tra^ano.
Atyria, and in latter times Suidas.
Adiabene. In it Sirabo places the Babylonians, Elymaeans, Paratacans,
Gordiaeans, Mesopotamians, Arabians, and Syrians (from Aepypt to Pontus, where
the Leuco-Syrians dwell) called also Assyrians. Syria and Assyria were of old
time promiscuously used; but at length custom obtained that Euphrates, 3.
Arphaxad.
or Tigris, parted them. From Arphaxad, Josephus would have the Chaldaeans
issued, which as he and others say were anciently called Arphaxadaeans; but in
Scripture they are constantly read Chasdim from Chesed, or Chased son to
Nachor, the brother of Abraham, and therefore owe their Original rather to him;
and from Arphaxad seems to have received it is appellation a part of Assyria,
called Arphaxitis, and named Arrapachitis by Ptolomy. 4. Lud.
From Lud came the Lydians anciently also known by the name of Maeones, Lib. 1.
as we have it from Herodotus and others; the Carians and Mysians also, who
inhabited the South part of Asia, beyond the River Maeander, being reckoned of
the same Original by him. 5. Aram.
Of Aram descended the Aramaeans and the Arimi, called Syrians, after the
growth of the Assyrian Empire. Four sons of Aram are mentioned by Moses, which
1 Chronicles. 17.
elsewhere are reckoned amongst the Sons of Sem, viz. Huz, Hull, Gether, and
Mas, or Mesech.

The four Sons of Aram. Huz 1.
14. Huz, or Uz, by general consent of the ancients built Damascus. There being
two besides of the same name; this has made a confusion amongst Writers. One
Genesis 22.21.
was the Son of Nachor, the brother of Abraham, whose seat is called Ausitis
Job 1.1.
in the Greek, and his posterity Ausitae, a people of Arabia the desert,
mentioned by Ptolomy. Genesis 36.28.
Another of the posterity of Esau, or Edom; who fixed in Arabia the stony, on
the Borders of Canaan, from whom Idumaea is Lam. 4.21.
called the Land of Uz. Hull 2.
Hull (by Josephus named Otrus) as they say, inhabited part of Armenia. Gether
3.
Gether was the father of the Bactrians, according to Josephus; according to
Hierome, of the Carians and Acarnanians; and Mercerus strangely joyneth all
these Nations so far distant in place, together in Original. Mas. 4.
Mas (called also 1 Chronicles. 1.17.
Mesech) is thought by Josephus to be the founder of the Mesanaeans, a people
near the Camp of Pasinus, about the mouths of Tigris. Hierome makes him the
father of the Maeones; being the same with the Lydians, whom he himself
deriveth elsewhere from Lud. Junius Bochartus.
Others will have him to have given Original to the people, inhabiting the
North part of Syria, between Cilicia and Mesopotamia, near the Mountain Masius;
or to the inhabitants of this Mountain, called Masieni and Masiani. Joctan the
second son of Eber had thirteen Sons.
Eber the Son of Selah, besides Phaleg, had another Son named Joctan, whose
thirteen Sons Moses relates, as the founders of so many Nations; Almodad,
Sheleph, Hazermaxeth, Jerah, Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. Their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou go, says
Moses, unto Sephar, a Mount of the East. They inhabit, says Josephus, from
Cophenes, a River of India, that Country of Syria which lies upon it; as now
the Text is: which cannot but be false Geography. And for Syria, Aria is rather
to be read, which, as Pliny says, according to the judgment of others,
included three other Provinces of the Gedrosi, Arachotae, and Paropamasidae,
being terminated with the River Cophetes.

15. But neither in this place is there any thing to be met withal like Mesha,
or Sephar, or any people thereabout of the same name with Joctan, or his Sons;
neither could that Ophir, to which Solomon sent for Gold by Sea, and which they
also will have denominated from one of the thirteen, be near Aria, which lies
at the foot of the Mountain Paropamisas, at a vast distance from the Ocean.
Their seat.
Great Bochartus therefore places them in the Mediterranean parts of Arabia
the happy, the inhabitants whereof, if they may be heard, challenge Joctan for
the founder of both the Arabian Nation and Language, calling him otherwise
Cahtan. Almodad. 1.
From Almodad then, descended the Almodaeans, by the Greeks called Allumaeotae,
whom Ptolomie places in the middle of Arabia, near the head of the River Lar,
which emptieth it self into the Persian Sea. Sheleph. 2.
From Saleph the Salapeni, who lived more remote upon the borders of Arabia
Desert, not far from the spring of the River Betius. Hatsarmaueth. 3.
From Hatsarmaueth (which word is variously written, and by the Arabians called
Hadramauth or Chadramauth) were named the regions Adramyta, Chatramis,
Chatramitis, and the Inhabitants Athramotitae, Chatramotitae, Chatramotae,
A^ramit^ae, and Adramitae, whose Metropolis was anciently called Sabota,
Sabbatae, Saubata at this day Sebam. From Jerach came the Alilaei, Jerach. 4.
a people inhabiting near the Red Sea: Jerachaei in Hebrew, and Alilaei in
Arabic, being the Sons of Jarlach, Hilal, or the Moon.

Hadoram. 5. Uzal. 6.
16. From Hadoram issued the Drimanti placed by P^iny upon the Persian gulf,
near the Macae. From Uzal, the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Alieman (in the
eastern part of Arabia) seem to be descended, Sanaa the Metropolis being by the
Jews still called Uzal. Dicklah. 7.
Dicla in the Chaldaean and Syrian tongues signifying a Palm; from him must
that part of Arabia have been called, wherein that Tree most grows, inhabited
by the Minaei. Obal. 8.
Obal (in the Arabian tongue Aubal and Abal) seems to have passed over the
gulf into Arabia Troglodytica, and to have given name to the mart-Town and Bay
of Abalites or Analites. Abimael. 9.
Abimael was the Father of the Malitae, whom Theophrastus makes to have
inhabited one of the four Regions fruitful in spices. Shebah. 10.
Of Seba came the Sabaeans properly so called, named also Sabatae, who dwelt by
the Red Sea, betwixt the Minaeans and Cat^banes, which Nations also together
with the Chatramotae, are by Writers often included amongst the Sabaeans.
Besides this Seba, there were three others of that name and founders of
Nations. As Genesis 10.7.
one the Son of Chus, another his Nephew by Ragmah, and the Genesis 25.3.
third the Son of Jockshan and Nephew of Abraham. Seba the Son of Joctan joined
to the Arabian Sea; the rest to the Persian; so that the Sabaeans (of whom the
Greeks and Romans know no distinction) are said by Pliny, to live from Sea to
Sea. The Son of Joksan lived on robbery; but the rest by Commerce with other
Nations. Ophir (in Arabic, Ophir. 11.
Auphar, signifying most rich) gave name to that part of Arabia near the
Sabaeans, which was inhabited by the Cessanitae, Casandres, or Gasandrae, so
called from the Treasures; gold, for it is plenty, being here in little request.
Another Ophir there was also in India; in the Island Taprobane, as most
probable; the Phoenicians being accustomed to give old names to newfound
places. Hauilah. 11.
From Chauila the Son of Joctan (for there was another of this name* Son to
Chus) descended the Chaulonitae, called otherwise Carbi, and Cerbani, the most
warlike of the Arabians, whose seat is yet called Chaulan. Jobab. 13.
Of Jobab the last of the thirteen, came the Jobabitae placed by Ptolomy next
to the Sachalites. This was the habitation of the Sons of Irelan from Mesha,
called otherwise Musa and Muza a famous port upon the Red Sea, as one goes to
Saphar a mountain Eastward, where was a City of the same name; both Port and
City being well known to the Egyptians and Aethiopians, who used to trade into
these parts. This was the inheritance of the Sons of Sem, the choicest of all,
though contained only within Asia.

Japthet's portion.
17. To Japhet fell a very considerable part of Asia, and all Europe, the least
of the divisions of the Earth, but better improved than the rest, and far more
populous; of later times the seat of learning, of two Empires which extended
their power to the inwards both of Asia and Africa; and in an especial manner
blessed with more than worldly prosperity, since Japhet dwelt in the tents of
Sem. The Greeks acknowledged him for their Founder, by the name of Iapetus,
Iapetus.

Japhet's 7. Sons.

Gomer. 1.


than whom they thought nothing more ancient. Moses reckons seven of his
Sons, and as many* Nephews. The Sons are Genesis 10.2.
Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech and Titas. Josephus makes Gomer
the Father of the Galatians, which if so, the same Original must be extended
to the Gauls, of whom the other were but a colonie; and to some the names of
Cimmerii and Cimbri, whereby the Inhabitants of the Western parts have been
known, as also those of Kumero, Kumeri and Cymbro, which our ancient Britains
(of the same stock with the Gauls) called themselves, seem to own no other
original. Bochartus lib. 3. cap. 8.
But another thinks the Land of Gomer to be that part of Phrygia called
Catecaucemene, lying upon the rivers Cayster and Maeander and the City
Philadelphia; the Plains of which consist of a burnt kind of Earth like to
ashes, and the hilly parts are all stony, the whole Country being brittle,
adust and easy to be inflamed. This he gathers from the signification of
Gomer and Phrygia, both which import burning; Moses, (according to his
judgment) not always calling the Founders of Nations by their true and proper
names, but by the names of the Countries which they planted. Ever when the word
is of the plural number, as of the Sons of Javan, Citthim, and Rodauim; and all
the Sons of M^scaim and Canaan (except Sidon and Heth) must needs be names of
peoples, nor of particular Men. Hatsarmaueth he proves to be the name of a
place only, for that it signifies the region of Death; as Dikla, a place of
Palm Trees, Ophir a rich, Jobab so called from the desert, and several others.

Gomer's three Sons.

Askenaz. 1.


18. Gomer has three Sons mentioned by Moses; Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
From Ashkenaz those descended, according to Josephus, by the Greeks called
Rhegines; which who they were, is not to be understood. Most probably, by
Ashkenaz is signified Bithynia, in which is the Bay Ascanius, besides a Lake
and River of the same name; or Troas and Phrygia the less, in which were
Ascanea, both Country and City, and Island Ascaniae. Form Riphat, Riphath. 2.
Togarmah. 3.
Josephus deriveth the Paphlagonians, a people of Asia the less, near Pontus,
and neighbors to the Phrygians. Togarma is variously expounded by Writers. It
appears out of Ezekiel, chap. 58. and chap. 27. v. 14.
that Gomer and Togarma were not far distant; both North of Judaea: and that
from Togarmah came Horses and Mules to be sold at Tire. Hereto well agrees the
opinion of Josephus, who places Togarmah in Phrygia, to which Cappadocia was
near adjacent, North to Judaea, and excelled in the breed of Horses and Mules.

2. Magog.
19. From Magog, Japhet's second Son, descended the Scythians, according to
Josephus and others; Gog and Magog, being that part of Scythia about Cancasus,
which the Colchi and Armenians (whose language was half Chaldaean) called
Gog-hasan, (i. e. the Fort of Gog) and thence the Greeks, Caucasus: The same
with Prometheus.
to whom also Gogarene was known, which Stephanus describes to be between the
Colchi and Eastern Iberi. Magog seems to be the same with Prometheus. For as
Prometheus was the Son of Japetus, so Magog of Japhet. Prometheus was feigned
to be fixed to Caucasus, and Caucasus was the seat of the Scyhians of old time,
till they expelled the Cimmerii, and succeeded them; Prometheus brought down
fire from heaven, which might take Original from Magog his finding out of
Metals in Colchis and Iberia. And the Fable of his Heart, or Liver, being eaten
by an Eagle, may be found in Vide Bochartum. lib. 1.
the word Magog, which signifies to be dissolved or to decay. Hierapolis a
City in Syria, seems to have been called also Magog from him; seeing
Deucalion the Scythian, and Son of Prometheus, is by Lucian said to have
consecrated the Temple there to the Syrian Goddess. 3. Madai.
From Madai it is generally granted, that the Medes are issued; the Medes and
Persians being constantly in the Books of Daniel and Esther, named Maedai and
Paras. From Javan descended the Jones, 4. Javan.
(or all that inhabited Greece, from Thrace to the Isthmus of Corinth, the
Macedonians being included) Homer calling them Jaones, and Alexander being
signified by cap. 8. v. 21.
Daniel under the name of the King of Javan.

His 4 Sons. Elisa. 1.
20. The Sons of Javan were Elisa, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim, from whom four
Provinces took their names. From Elisa Aeolis, according to Josephus, but
rather Elis (the most ancient and ample region of Peloponnesus, part whereof is
by Homer called Alisium) to be taken for the whole Peninsula. From Tarsis, 2.
Tarshish.
Josephus and others derive Tarsus, the great City in Cilicia, some Carthage,
another Tunis; but Eusebius and Bochartus understand the Iberians or Spaniards,
amongst whom was a place called Tarlessus. Besides this, there was another a
Chron. 20.36.
Tarsis in the Indian Sea, whither ships went from Esion-gaber; and indeed,
whatever the word originally signifies (whether Cilicia or any other place) it
is secondarily applied to the Mediterranean Sea, which reaches unto Phoenicia,
and sometimes seems to denote the Ocean it self. 3. Kittim.
Josephus will have Cittim to have possessed himself of the Island Cyprus,
where was a City called Citium, the native place of Zeno the Stoic; and hence
he says the Hebrews called all Islands and maritime places by the name of
Chethim. Others will have the Chians, some certain Nations of India, others
Cilicia, some Macedonia to be understood by this word. The Romans are by Daniel
signified under this name, and in Italy were of old the Cities Cetia, Echetia,
and the River Cetus; and Chittim imports the same thing with the word Latium,
betokening to lie hid. The opinion therefore of Josephus is very probable, that
these Islands and Coasts of the Mediterrenean might be known to the Hebrews,
Chap. 11. ver. 29, 30.
under the name of Chethim. 4. Dodanim, or rather Rhodanim.
Dodanim (omitted in Josephus) by some is interpreted Dardanians, by others
Dodanaeans. But most anciently it was read Rhodanim, which the Greek renders
Rhodians, though the name of Rhodes is later than Moses his time. Bochartus
therefore places this people in Gaul, about the River Rhodanus (now Rhene)
which he proves, not to have been so named from Rhoda, a Town there founded by
the Rhodians. Rhodanim, he says, signifies Yellow or Saffron-coloured, which
agrees well with the color of the hair of the ancient Gauls, either natural
or affected; wherein also the Britains showed themselves descended of the same
stock, as Jornandes judges.

5. Tubal.
21. Tubal and Mesech (the fifth and sixth Sons of Japhet) are joined in
Scripture, most commonly, together; as near to each other. Josephus from them
deriveth the Iberians, 6. Mes^ch.
and Cappadocians, who had a City in his time known by the name of Mazacha.
Bochartus understands by Mesech and Tubal, the Moschi and Tibareni, which are
so joined together by Herodotus, as Mesech and Tubal in the Scripture. The
Moschi (besides Moschica properly so called) possessed all from Phasis as far
as Pontus of Cappadocia; the Moschian Mountains reaching so far. Then next
succeeded the Tibarens, according to Strabo, who extends their borders to
Pharnacra and Trapezond, the Moschian and Colchian Mountains; so that they lay
betwixt the Trapezuntians and Inhabitants of Armenia the less. Tubal and
Mesech are noted by Ezechiel, to abound in Slaves, and Brass, which, Chap. 27.
v. 13.
by the consent of Authors, fitly agrees with the regions of Pontus;
especially Cappadocia. From Thiras most Authors derive Thrace, 7. Tiras.
a woman of which Country was called Threissa; and many names there, both of
places and persons, persuade the same thing. This was the portion of Japhet,
answerable to the blessing of his Father; that God should enlarge him. For unto
it belonged all Europe how big soever, besides Asia the less, Media, part of
Armenia, Iberia, Albania, and those vast Tracts toward the North, inhabited of
old by the Scythians, and now by the Tartars: To say nothing of the new World,
into which it is probable the Scythians passed by the Straits of Anian. To his
Posterity belong the Northern parts, which by Jornandes, an Historian of the
Goths, are deservedly termed, The workhouses of people, and sheaths of Nations.

Cham's portion.
22. Cursed Cham was not excluded from Earthly blessings. To his lot fell
Egypt, and all Africa, a great part of Syria and Arabia, besides Babylonia,
Susiana, Assyria, and other Countries, which his Grandson Nimrod possessed
himself of. David very often calls Egypt the Land of Cham or Ham: the
ancient Inhabitants themselves Chamia or Chemia. Plutarch in Iside.
In Arabia and Africa the name of Ammon (the aspiration being taken away) was
universally known, as appears by Ammon a River in Arabia, the promontory
Ammonium, and the people called Ammonii. In Africa, the City Ammonis upon the
River Cinyphus. The Chapel of Ammonis in the Island Meroe. In Marmarica, the
City Ammonia vulgarly Paraetonium: And the Ammonian Country, where was the
famous Oracle of Ammon. Nay all Africa was called Ammonis or Ammonia. Ham
signifies hot; in which respect it agrees well with the Greek word Zeus, the
name of Jupiter. Ham was Noah's youngest Son; so was Jupiter the youngest of
Saturn. From Cham's living in Africa, the hottest part of the World, Jupiter
may be counted the Lord of Heaven. And Saturn his being made an Eunuch by his
Son Jupiter (or Caelius by his Son Saturn, as Macrobius has it) seems to
relate to that fault, for which Cham received from his Father a curse instead
of a blessing. Of these things Bochartus gives abundant satisfaction, to name
no more.

His 4. Sons.
23. Four Sons of Cham are recorded by Moses; Chus, Misraim, Phut, and Canaan.
From Chus, by a general mistake, the Aethiopians in Africa have been thought
to be descended; Chus. 1.
whereas by the land of Chus in Scripture is meant Vide Bochartum lib. 4. c. 2.

Raleium l. 7. c. 8. sec. 10.


part of Arabia, inhabited by the Chusaeans, called also Cuthaeans; of whom
were the Madianites, and Sephora the wife of Moses, who did not fly into
Aethiopia and there marry her. They inhabited above Egypt upon the Persian
Gulf, in part of Arabia the stony and the happy; thought by some to be the
same with the ancient Scenites, and the modern Saracens, being called Scenites
from dwelling in Tents, and Saracens from their robberies. Chus has six Sons
mentioned; His 6. Sons.
viz. Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, Sabtecha and Nimrod. Raamah has two,
Sheba and Dedan. All these inhabited about the Persian Sea. Their Seat.
Except Nimrod, whom Moses affirms to have fixed his seat at Babel. By the
name of Mizraim is to be understood the Father of those who inhabited Egypt,
thrice in Scripture called Masor (the singular number of the word Mizraim) as
it is thought, 2. Mizraim.
from the straightness of it, being extended out in length from the Sea
toward Syene. From Mizraim, Moses deriveth seven People or Nations: Ludim,
Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim, Pathrusim, Castuhim (out of whom came Philistiim)
and Caphtorim.

Misraim's 8. Sons.
24. Antiq. l. 1. c. 6.
Josephus will have the eight Sons of Misraim to have possessed all the Country
lying between Gaza and Egypt, though Philistin only gave name to it, from
whom the Greeks called it Palaestina. Lybis, he says, led a colonie into Libya
which he named after himself; but as for the rest, he confesses both their
names and affairs to be obscure, their Cities being overthrown, as he says, in
the Ethiopian War made by Moses, concerning which he brings a mere Fable,
taken out of Artapanus, and the inventions of the Hellenists. Ludim. 1.
As for Ludim, Bochartus by ten Arguments proves the Aethiopians to be meant
thereby, whom he will have also a colonie of the Egyptians. Anamim. 2.
By Anamim the Nomades of Africa, who inhabited about Ammonis, and in
Nasamonitis, and for Anamians might easily be called Amonians and Ammonians;
they being also a colonie of the Egyptians and Aethiopians, as appears out
of Herodotus. Of the same Original he makes the Nasamones, Amantes,
Hammanientes (who Solinus c. 31.
made their houses of salt) and the Garamants. Lehabim. 3.
Lehabim or the Lehabaeans are thought to be the same with the Libyans
bordering upon Egypt, from whom this denomination might pass to those that
inhabited the greatest part of Africa. Naphtuhim. 4.
Naphtuhim he places in Marmarica upon the Mediterranean Sea; Pathrusim in
Thebais, a Province of Egypt, called Pathros, Pathrusim. 5.
and by many distinguished from Egypt, though peopled from it.

Casluhim. 6.
25. Casluhim he makes to signify the Colchi, though so far distant from
Egypt, out of which they descended, and from Palestine, the Inhabitants
whereof descended from them; both their Language and life in all particulars so
absolutely agreed with the Egyptians, of whom by the Heathen also they have
been thought a colonie, left there by Sesostris in his expedition, though they
be of more antiquity then he. Caphtorim. 7.
The Caphtorim seems to have been Neighbors to him, from whom also together
with them, the Philistines descended, as appears from Jerem. 47.4. Amos 9.4.
Scripture. They are therefore to be placed in that part of Cappadocia, which
lies next to Colchos about Trapezond. It is probable that, upon the report of
the richness of these places, the Egyptians sent out a Colonie (for this drew
thither Phrixus, Jason, Sesostris, the Medes and Persians, and of later times
the Saracens out of Arabia): which finding the Climate too cold; or the Country
not to answer expectation; or perhaps molested by the Scythians and others;
part thereof resolved to return home, and in their way seated themselves in
Palestine, after they had expelled thence the Deuteronomy. 11.23.
Anims. The Captain of this Expedition seems to have been Typhon, reported by
the Greek Poets to have made War against the gods, and to have peirced as far
as Caucasus; but, after many battles, being stricken of Jupiter with a
thunderbolt, to have fled into Palestine, where he dyed at the Lake of Serbonis
and there still lies buried.

3. Phut.
26. The third Son of Cham was Phut, who divided Africa with his Brother
Misraim. To Misraim fell Egypt and most of Africa, as far as the Lake of
Tritonis, which divides Africa into two equal parts. To Phut, all from the
Lake as far as the Atlantic Ocean, as may be gathered from Lib. 4. c. 186, 187.
Herodotus. As far as the Lake, he says, all the Africans used the customs of
Egypt; but those beyond them toward the West, a far different kind of life.
Some names retained a memorial of Phut; as the City Putea; a River of
Mauritiana; Tengitana, called Phut; and the Haven Phthia, mentioned by Ptolomy,
Pliny, and others. 4. Canaan.
Canaan is the fourth Son reckoned in order by Moses. He begat Sidon his
firstborn, and Heth, the Jebusite, the Ammonite, His Posterity and Seat.
the Girgasite, the Hivite, the Arkite, the Sinite, the Arvadite, the Zemarite,
and the Hamathite. By Canaan was inhabited the Land, which thereupon bore his
name, and was afterward conquered by the Hebrews. His Family was propagated as
far as the Sea, the Phoenicians being descended of him, as Eupolemus an Heathen
Writer, in his Book of the Jews, bare witness, saying, That Saturn begat
Belus, and Chanaan; and the later begat the Father of the Phoenicians: besides,
Eusebius. praepar. Evang. lib. 9.
one Cna is said by Sanchonia^hon (a most ancient Phoenician Writer) to have
been the first Man that was called Phoenician; whence by Stephanus, Phoenice is
called Cna, and the Phaenicians Cnai. But, what is more, the Scriprure calls
Phoenicia the Land of Canaan.

Sidon 1.
27. Sidon the firstborn of Canaan, was the Father of the Sidonians, or the
builder of the City Sidon, which was more ancient than Tire, and the Metropolis
to it; the Sidonians having led a Colonie thither, and founded Tire, according
to Trogus Lib. 18.
before the destruction of Troy; 240 years before the building of Solomon's
Temple, Heth. 2.
as Josephus counts. The children of Heth dwelt in the Land of Canaan, about
Hebron and Barseba toward the South; Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2.
and from them the Anakims descended. The Jebusite. 3.
The Jebusites held Jerusalem, and the Castle of Sion until David's time. The
Ammonites passed the Mountains of Judaea, Ammonite. 4.
and passing over Jordan made War upon the Moabites and Ammonites; seized upon
Basan, Hesbon, and all the Country lying between the Rivers Jabbok and Arnon:
in memory whereof, one of their Poets wrote a Poem which Moses Number. 21.27.
has inserted into his Writings. Gergasite. 5.
The Gergasites seem to have continued about Geresa or Gadara, over against
Galile, beyond Jordan, Mat. 8.28. Mark 5.1. Luke 8.26.
till Christ's time. Hivite. 6.
The Hivites dwelt in Mount Hermon, toward the East of the Land of Canaan,
from whom descended the Gibeonites, living nigh to Jerusalem, and the
Sichemites dwelling near to Samaria, more toward the West. Arkite. 7.
The Arkites inhabited Arca, or Arce, a City in Libanus, mentioned by Josephus
and Ptolomy. Sinite. 8.
The Sinites had a City called Sin, not far from Arce, according to Hierome:
but Bochartus places them at Pelusium; Sin signifying mud or clay, as Pelos in
Greek. Arnadite. 9.
The Arnadites or Aradites, seized upon the Island Aradus, on the Coast of
Phoenice, at the motuh of the River Eleutherus, and part of the neighboring
Continent, where was Axtaradus, Marathus, and Laodicea. The Zemarites,
Zemarite. 10.
or Semerites, dwelt as it is thought about Finesa a notable City of Caelosyria,
upon the River Orontes, and built Semarajim in the Tribe of Benjamin. And the
Hemathites were seated about the City of Syria, Hemathite. 11.
called Epiphania, and not at Antiochia, which is at too great a distance. This
was the Inheritance of the Sons of Canaan, whose border was from Sidon, as thou
come to Gerar unto Gaza, as thou go unto Sodom and Gomorrah, and Admah
and Zeboim, even unto Lasha; which some interpret Caesarea Philippi, others
Callichoe; but Bocharius thinks it to be Lysa, a City of the Arabians, in the
midway between the Dead and Red Seas.

Thus was the Earth most anciently divided and possessed after the Flood. How
it has since, in the several parts of it, changed it is Inhabitants, shall be
discovered, upon occasion, as the Work will bear.

CHAP. II. Of the Babylonian Empire, from the first founding thereof to it is
utter subversion by Cyrus.
The beginning of Nimrod's Kingdom.
1. AFter the division of the Earth; Nimrod, as we said, the Son of Chus and
Nephew of Cham fixed his seat at Babel, and therein first began a Kingdom;
having joined to it Genesis 10.10.
Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the Land of Shinar. By Erech, the ancients
understood Edessa; and by Ac^ad, Nisibis: But neither the names nor situation
of these Cities do agree; they being in that part of Mesopotamia which lies
toward Armenia, and very far from Babylon. Therefore Erech is rather to be
taken for Arecca a City of Susiana upon Tigris, mentioned by Ptolomy, which
also seems to be the same with Arderica or Anderica Lib. 1. c. 185.
in Herodotus; Ard in the Persian tongue signifying great. And well Arecca
might so be called, which was so long, that sailing up the River one should
meet with it three several days, one after another; as the Historian
relates. Bochartus thinks Accad (called also Archad) to have given name to
the River Argad, which ran through Sittacena a Province near to Babylonia, and
since called Apolloniatis. By Calneh (which is also Calno and Cauno) is to be
understood that City, by the Parthians, rebuilt and called Clesiphon. It stood
upon Tigris, three miles from Seleucia, being the Metropolis of Chalonitis, a
Province denominated from it, and mentioned by Strabo, and others. Babylon was
exhausted by the building of Seleucia, as Pliny Lib. 6. c. 26.
tells us; and the Parthians built (or rebuilt) Clesiphon in Chalonitis,
three miles off, to drain Seleucia.

The beginning and duration of the Assyrian Empire.
2. The duration of this Babylonian or Assyrian Empire till Sardanapalus is
variously assigned; the cause of which seems to be, for that some derived the
Original thereof from the birth of Chus, as Cappellus Ad A. M. 1822. p. 45.
thinks, and so Herodotus might assign 1520 years to the continuance of it.
Others from the beginning of the Babylonian Kingdom, as Diodorus, who reckons
1400 years to the death of Sardanapalus. Some from the building of Ninive, as
Clesias, who has 1360. And lastly, others from the death of Belus, as Trogus
and Eusebius, who give to it 1300 years. That Nimrod should begin his Kingdom
within an hundred years after the Flood, is not very probable, as neither that
the building of the Tower of Babel happened within that time; which would have
been too short a space for the propagation of mankind to so great multitudes.
An hundred years after the Deluge, A. M. 759.
Phaleg was born, in whose days it was that the Earth was divided. Some make
the division to have been at the same time of his birth, and thence his name
imposed, as from a thing already done, or in doing. Others assign it to the
latter end of his days, and will have his name prophetically given by his
Father: Lege Vossii Isag. Chron. Dissert. 5. c. 5, 6.
But there are not wanting, who take a middle way betwixt these two, and think
the division made, when he was come to ripeness of age; or in the middle of
his years; the number of which amounted to 239. When Alexander the great had
conquered Babylon, which fell out about the 3675th year of the World;
Callisthenes the Philosopher, who followed him in his Wars, Porphyrius apud
Simplicium in Aristot. de coelo. lib. 2.
at the desire of Aristotle his Kinsman, inquired into the Antiquities of the
Chaldaeans, and could find no observations of any longer date then 1903 years;
which being cast back from the foresaid years, fall in their beginning, into
the 1772 from the Creation, the 116th* from the Deluge, and the 16th. of
Phaleg's life.

Nimrod named Belus.
3. Nimrod, the founder of this Empire, was by his subjects named Be^, or Belus,
which signifies Lord, or Sovereign. That he was the ancient Belu's, is thence
proved; that Semiramis eam co^diderat, vel, ut plerique credidere, Belus, cujus
regia ostenditur.

Curtius lib. 5. cap. 1.

Berosus apud Joseph. contra Aptonem lib. 1. Abydenus apud Eusebius. praep. Evang.
lib. 9. Dorotheus, Sido^is ^o^ta apud Julium Firmicum.


most of the old Writers accounted Belus the builder of Babylon, although some
attributed it to Semiramis, herein relying upon the credit of Clesias, which
now is deservedly suspected by learned men, and in no case worthy to stand in
Competition with that of Berosus the famous Babylonian Priest (who, as Pliny
says, had a Statue erected to his memory at Athens with a gilded tongue) nor
with that of Abydenus, who also collected his Histories out of the Chaldaean
Archives. After Moses has spoken of the four Cities, which were the beginning
of Nimrod's Kingdom; we read that out of that Land (of Shinar) Assure went forth
and built Niniveh and the City Rehoboth, and Calah, and Pesen, between Niniveh
and Calah. Some, according to this Translation, will have this Assure to have
been the son of Sem, who having built Niniveh, Whether he built Niniveh.
and founded the Assyrian Kingdom, Nimrod dispossessed him, or his; or some
manner of way obtained, and joined it to the Babylonian, as Julius Africanus
has delivered. But others contend that this Assure is the name of the Country,
and not of a Man, and that it is to be read: And out of that Land went out
(Nimrod) into Assure, ( i. e. Assyria) and builded Ninive, etc. Otherwise they
think it would be out of the way, for Moses to mention the son of Sem in this
place, where he is in hand with the Genealogy of Cham; neither could it be
peculiar to him to go out of this Land and build Niniveh, seeing all mankind
almost, at the division of the Earth, went out of it. The last reading only
makes the sense entire; for how else could the four Cities properly be said to
be the beginning of Nimrod's Kingdom, except he added more unto it? Lastly,
this seems very urgent that, in Scripture, Assyria is called the Land of
Nimrod. Mich. 5.6.


4. He was a mighty Hunter before the Lord, or, therein none was to be compared
with him; things being said to be such before God, as were so indeed, or in an
eminent manner; He judging not according to outward appearance, but as they are
in their own natures. By the means of Hunting it is probable that he made way
unto his Monarchy. Made way to his Kingom by hunting.
For under pretense of what was very necessary at this time (when men were few,
scattered, and lying abroad, without defense against wild beasts, which ever
especially abounded about Arabia and Babylon) he might gather a band of men,
and by such exercises (which the Heathens Xenophon. de venatione and in
Cyropaedia.
by their practice, as well as opinion showed to be convenient for breeding of
Warriors) train them up, till he converted their force from beasts to men.
What was performed by him seems to have been attributed to his successors.
Ninus is Diodorus l. 2. p. 64. A.
said to have gathered an Army of Arabians, and therewith to have subdued the
Babylonians; which seems to have related to his Conquest of that Country.
For being a Chasaean, and consequently an Arabian, he might by the assistance
of his own Contrymen and Kindred effect it; whom he Bochartus l. 4. c. 12.
rewarded with that Region beyond Tigris, which thence was, by the Hebrews,
called Chus, by the Caldaeans, Chuth; Cissia, by the Greeks; and Chuzestan (i.
e. the Province of Chus) by the Persians. From his usurping the right of Noah,
some think the Fable to have sprung, of Saturn being cast out of his Kingdom by
Jupiter; the word Nimrod signifying a Rebel, and answerable to his carriage.
He is also judged to be the true Bacchus; The true Bacchus.
this word being little changed from Bar-Chus, that is, the son of Chus.
Bacchus was the son of Jupiter, and he was the Grandson of Jupiter Hammon. The
most ancient name of Bacchus was Zagre^s, which signifies a strong hunter,
answerable to the Epithete given to Nimrod. He undertook an expedition into the
East, wherein seem to be contained the Facts of Nimrod and his Successors.
Bacchus was feigned to be born at Nysa in Arabia; and Nimrod was also an
Arabian. And not unlikely might Nimrod be thought to be over the Vines, who
first reigned at Babylon, where was that most excellent kind of Wine, dignified
by the Ancients with the name of Nectar. To the reign of Belus, or Nimrod,
Athenaeus.
65 years are given by Julius Africanus.

Ninus.
5. Ninus his son succeeded him, and canonized him for a God, which gave, as
it is said, the first occasion to Idolatry. He made a confederacy with Arieus,
His Conquests.
King of Arabia (which Country withstood most Conquests); and then invading
Armenia, forced Barzanes the King thereof, to submit to his Vassallage. Next he
entered Media, where he took and Crucified Phamus the King; and then, being
pricked on by desire of glory, and encouraged by his success, he subdued all
the people of Asia in seventeen years, except the Indians and Bactrians;
Biblioth. l. 2. p. 65. ex Ctesia Cnidio. Justin. lib. 1.
the latter whereof under Conduct of their King Zoroastres (or rather Oxgartes,
for Zoroaster the great Magician lived many ages after) stoutly opposed him,
and yet at length were brought under, as we have it from Diodorus, who
reports also that Ninus built Ninive, which he so named after himself. Ninive.
Whether he, his father, or any other built it, A City it was of great
bigness, strength, and ornament, being in compass sixty miles; of a
Quadrangular form, encompassed and fortified with a Wall a hundred foot high,
and of such a breadth as three Charriots might have been driven together
abreast upon it; adorned also with Towers, 200 foot in height. The place of it
is not agreed of, and Lege Bocharti. Phaleg. l. 4. c. 20.
some think there were two Cities of this name; one upon Euphrates in Comagena,
and another in Assyria beyond Tigris. As for Ninus, many things done both by
his father, and successors seem to be attributed to him, He reigned 52 years;
and the manner of his death is diversely related. Orosius.
One says, he was shot with a Dart as he lay before a Town. Dinon apud Aelian.
var. Hist. l. 7. c. 1.
Another writes that Semiramis his wife (whom he had chosen for her admirable
beauty and now doated on) obtained leave to wear his Royal Robe, and reign
over Asia five days; and then, when she had got the power into her hands,
commanded one of the Guard to kill him: But a Diodorus ubi supra. p. 76. D. ex
Athenaeo and aliis.
third, His death.
only relates him to have been secured in prison.

Semiramis his wife counterfeiteth her son.
6. He left a son by Semiramis, named Ninyas, who being but young, she put on
man's Apparel, and counterfeiting his person as well as Sex is reported to have
done very great things; part of which might rather be challenged by the two
foregoing Kings, and by some that followed her. Justin. ex Trogo. lib. 1.
Diodorus, ut prius.
The resemblance of her son in all the lineaments and proportion of his body
took away suspicion; for the further prevention whereof, she commanded the same
kind of Garment to be worn by the people. At length, when she thought she had
got fame sufficient, she made her self known, which detracted not from her
glory, Her acts.
but added to the luster of it. She re-edified and enlarged Babylon,
incompassing it with a Wall made up of Brick, Sand, and a certain Clay, or
slime clammy, like Pitch, which there abounded: and Herodotus. lib. 1. cap. 184.
restrained, by new works, the violence of Euphrates which formerly was wont to
overflow into the Town. Not content with the Empire as her husband left it, she
enlarged it by the Conquest of Aethiopia, and made War upon India, though
without success; in which undertaking she only had Alexander the Great her
Aemulator, as Justin affirms. But, after she had reigned 42 years, either for
that she would have had to do unlawfully with her son (being reported exceeding
vicious of her body), or because he was impatient of her so long retaining the
power, he slew her; although some say, she voluntarily resigned the Kingdom.
After her death she was feigned to be turned into a Dove, and worshipped for a
Goddess under that shape; the occasion of which seems to have been the
bearing of that bird pourtraited in her Ensign.

Ninias.
7. Ninyas, or Ninus, (as Justin calls him) succeeding, imitated neither
Grandfather, Father, nor Mother; but giving up himself wholly to an effeminate
course of life, would be seen by none except Concubines and Eunuchs. Yet to him
is ascribed that politic ordering of the Militia, which was imitated
constantly by his Successors. Diodorus. l. 2. p. 77. A.
A yearly choice was made of Officers and Soldiers out of each Province, to
lie in Garrison in the City, and to be ready at all Essays, there to continue
for one year; at the end of which they were succeeded by new Levies. Hereby*
the subject was contained in obedience; and yet, by suffering the Soldiers no
longer to continue together, all conspiracies and plots were prevented, which
might else have risen amongst such multitudes; the space of a year not being
sufficient for such through and intimate acquaintance, as might produce any
considerable stirs. Those that followed Ninyas for thirty Generations trod, for
the most part, in his paths; nothing either memorable, or certain, remaining of
them, except of Teutamus the 20th. from Ninyas, Teutamus.
to whom Priamus King of Troy, when he was besieged by the Greeks, sent for
aid. This Teutamus is said to have sent him a supply of 10000 Aethiopians, and
as many of the inhabitants of Susiana, with 200 Chariots, under the Command of
Memnon, who bearing himself very valiantly against the besiegers, was at length
by the wiles of the Thessalians, circumvented and slain. From the beginning of
the Assyrian Empire, to the destruction of Troy, Eusebius reckons 943 years,
Cappellus from the building of Nineveh 995.

Sardanapalus.
8. The 30th. in order was Tonos-Concoleros, A. M. 3166.
by the Greeks and Romans called Sardanapalus, ennobled only above the rest,
for his excess in effeminatenesse, and his ruin caused thereby. He spent all
his time amongst women; with whom he would sit and spin, imitating them in all
things possible, so as scarce ever in his whole time was he seen of the other
Sex. This extraordinary corruption of manners gave occasion to two of his
greatest Officers to compass his destruction. Belesis and Arbaces conspire
against him.
For Belesis (or Belochus) the Governor of Babylon, a great Magician and
Astrologer, out of the Doctrine of the Stars, foretold to Arbaces Governor
of Media, (otherwise called Justin.
Arbachus, Strabo.
Orbachus, and Gaterculus.
Pharnaces), that one day he should obtain the whole principality of
Sardanapalus, and excited him to attempts suitable to such an achievement.
Arbaces herewith puffed up, promised him the possession of Babylon, if his
Prediction should take, and labored to ingratiate himself with the Captains of
the several Provinces. Then, having a great desire to see what manner of life
the King lived, he hired an Eunuch to bring him into the Palace, where
beholding with his eyes his dissolute carriage, he despised him, and much more
encouraged himself in the hope given him by Belesis. They now resolved, the one
to draw the Medes and Persians, and the other the Babylonians to revolt; and
Arbaces communicated his design and purpose to the Governor of Arabia his
great friend.

9. These things being as diligently put in practice, as readily undertaken,
Diodorus.
the next year an Army of 400000 men coming up to Niniveh, where the King then
lay; under pretense of relieving the former year's Guard, resolved to employ
their force in the ruin of the Assyrian Kingdom. Sardanapalus, having timely
notice of the revolt, drew out such forces as were in the City, and falling
upon the Rebels in the Plain, put them to the rout. They flying to the
Mountains, and recollecting their courage, came down again and engaged; but
with the same success: after which they retreated to the same place. Hereupon
Arbaces calling the Officers together to advise what was to be done, all of
them were for disbanding the Army and departing home, except Belesis, who
urging them with what the Stars portended, prevailed with them to stay; but
to no other purpose than that the King might gain the third victory, He
obtains three victories over them.
which shortly happened. Now they fully resolved to be gone; when Belesis, his
credit being deeply engaged, spent the whole night in viewing the Stars; out of
the mystery of which he was bold to affirm, that help would come of its own
accord, and great changes follow, if they would have patience but five days
longer. They being yet prevailed with, for this once; before the five days
were expired, news came that great forces were coming from Bactria to the aid
of the King. To them Arbaces sent, and easily persuaded them to join with the
Conspirators.

10. Sardanapalus knowing nothing of this, and puffed up with his success,
returned to his former course of life; which Arbaces understanding from certain
Fugitives, and how his Army lay in a secure and careless posture, drew down
upon it in the night, made a great slaughter, and drove those that escaped into
Niniveh. Is worsted twice.
Hereupon the King committed the conduct of the Army to Salaemenes his wives
brother, and took upon himself the defense of the City; but the Rebels twice
in the field overthrew his forces, and killed the General with most of his
Soldiers. Then was the City closely besieged, and many Nations revolted to
the conspirators; which the King considering, and sensible of his condition,
sent out his three Sons, and two Daughters, with a great treasure, to Cotta,
the Governor of Paphlagonia, and, dispatching Courriers into several
Provinces, took what care he possibly could for the making of new Levies.

11. Neither was he behind hand in providing all things within, that were
necessary for resistance. There being no fear of storming the Town, by reason
of the wonderful strength and height of the walls. He considered the main
danger to lie in the affections of the inhabitants; to whom, that they might
have no cause to attempt any new thing, he supplied all necessaries in a
plentiful measure. Two years and above he held out, and doubted not but to be
able to do it, till relief should come; and the rather, for that they had an
Oracle that Ninivie should never be taken, till the River first proved an enemy
to it; The River swelling with rain breaks the wall.
which he never could suspect. But in the third year fell such rains, that
Euphrates (or Lycus, upon which some conceive that Strabo places the City, and
not Euphrates, nor Tigris, as others) swelling with abundance of waters, made a
breach in the Wall twenty Furlongs in length. At this the King utterly
discouraged, Sardanapalus burns himself in his Palace.
as judging the Oracle to be fulfilled, lest he should fall alive into the
hands of his enemies, he built a pile of wood in his Palace, upon which he
heaped his treasures, and rich attire; and, making a little room in the midst,
wherein he bestowed himself, his Concubines and Eunuchs, set fire to the heap,
and so perished with this Company and the Palace. Such was the end of him, who
placed all his felicity in his sensual appetite, which he would have also
recorded in his Athenaeus lib. 1.
Epitaph, and advised the Reader to imitate. He is reported to have built (but
rather he restored) two Cities of Cilicia in one day, viz. Tarsus and Anchiala;
in the later of which was his Strabo l. 14. Edit.

Causab. p. 672. A.

Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exsaturata libido Hausit, at illae jacent, multa
and praeclara relicta. Epitaph. a Cicerone versum. Tusc. l. 5.

Quid aliud, inquit Aristoteles, in Bovis, non in Hominis sepulchro incideres?
Haec habere se dicit, quae ne^vivus quidem diutius babebat, quam fruebatur.


Monument to be seen, being a Statue of stone, with the finger and thumb of the
right hand joined together as about to give a fillip. Upon the Monument was
written in Assyrian Characters: Sardanapalus the Son of Anacyndaraca built
Anchiales, and Tarsus in one day. As for thee, Friend, Eat, drink, and play:
for all things else are not worth this, viz. that fillip. In him this line of
the Assyrians failed, the Empire being divided into two Principalities, after
it had continued about 1400 years, reckoned from the building of Babylon. This
fall of Sardanapalus happened about the year of the World 3186, 43 years before
the first Olympiad.

12. The Diodorus l. 2. p. 81. A.
besiegers understanding what was become of Sardanapalus, presenly entered in at
the breach, and took the City. Then, investing Arbaces with a royal roabe,
Arbaces made King.
they created him King; who rewarded them according to their deserts, and
allotted the Provinces to their several Governors. Belesis, according to
agreement, having received the principality of Babylon, Grants Babylon to
Belesis.
and understanding from an Eunuch how great treasure Sardanapalus had burnt
with himself, begged the ashes of Arbaces, under pretense of having made a
vow, in the heat of the War, to carry them to Babylon, and therewith to raise a
lasting Monument of the destruction of the Assyrian Empire. He, being ignorant
of his covetous design, granted his request; but when the matter was
discovered, referred his judgment to a Council of Officers who condemned him
to death. Yet, being desirous to begin his reign mildly, he not only remitted
this punishment, but permitted him to enjoy all the gold and silver already
transported; and, what remained, which amounted to many talents, he conveied it
to Ecbatane the chief City of the Medes. L. 2. p. 816
Diodorus and L. 6. p. 737.
Strabo tell us how he levelled Ninus (or Ninive) with the ground. Some Jacob.
Cappellus Hist. Sacr. and Exotica. p. 170. Simson in Chronico ad A. M. 3187.
think it was only the Castle; seeing the City had afterward Kings, if not
comparable to the rest, yet great and powerful, which they think might descend
from Belesis.

What kind of Government was in Media.
13. Herodotus Lib. 1. c. 95.
writes how the Medes, having freed themselves from the Assyrian yoke, lived
for many Ages without a King, in way of a popular government. But Vide Droderum
ut supra. p. 84.
Ctesias of Gnidus an Author of something a later date (who served Cyrus the
younger, in his expedition against his Brother Artaxerxes, and being taken
prisoner in the Battle, was for his excellent skill in Physic, which he
professed, received into favor by the King, and lived in good esteem in his
Court 16. years, pretending to transcribe his History out of the Records of
Persia, reported that Arbaces, after the overthrow of the Assyrians, Kings of
Media according to Ctesias.
reigned 18. years: and as he left the dominion of Asia to the Medes, so also
the Sovereignty over them to his Son Mandauces. That Mandauces, having reigned
50. years, left the Kingdom to Sesarmus, who reigned 30. Him followed Artias,
and reigned 50, then Arbianis 22, Arsaeus 40, in whose time the Cadusians
revolted through the procurement of Parsodas the President of his Council,
whom he had offended. Artynes 22. Artibarnes 14 (in whose reign the Parthians
revolted, and gave up themselves to the Sacae). And last of all Astyages his
Son, who being overthrown by Cyrus, the Empire was thereby devolved upon the
Persians.

14. That Ctesias out of design wrote things contrary to Herodotus, is probable
enough, and that he is fabulous cannot be denied; yet have we a succession of
Kings elsewhere Eusebius. in Chronico.
recorded, though such an one as scarce in one name agrees with that of his.
According to Eusebius.
Sosarmus is said to have succeeded Arbaces, and continued 30 years, then
Medidus 40, Cardiceas 13, and then Deioces, whom Herodotus will have to have
first obtained sovereignty over the Medes. For having, as he Lib. 1. c. 9, 7,
98, etc.
writes, an ambition that way, he made himself popular by pretense to the
love of Justice, which then ran at a low ebb amongst them, for want of
authority. He first took upon him to decide the controversies of his own
Village, which performing with much equity and conscience, thence became known
to other parts, and at length became so famous, that few would bring their
causes before any other Judge than him alone. Being aware of this, he withdrew
himself, giving out that no longer could he undergo such a burden, and thereby
neglect his private affairs. Hereupon, robberies, violence, and oppression,
returned throughout the Country; insomuch, that the people, gathering together
from all quarters, after a serious debate, concluded there was necessity of
having a King, under whose protection every man living, might the better mind
his domestic matters. Deioces how he got the Kingdom.
Deioces was chosen by universal consent, who, having got the power into his
hands, caused them to build a City for his residence, which he called Ecbatane,
and having ruled with abundant severity 53 years, left the Kingdom to his Son
Phraortes. Phraortes.
He, after he had reigned 22, left for successor his Son Cyaxares, who having
long strugled with various Fortune, (as afterward will be seen) gave place to
his Son Astyages, Cyaxares. Astyages.
Father to Mandane the Mother of Cyrus.

15. Belesis obtained Babylon, as was said; but how long he held it, or who
succeeded him immediately, is not known. About 71 years after, Belesis his
successors.
Nabonasar, or Nabonassar, obtained the Kingdom there; from the beginning of
whose reign, that famous Era, or Epoche, known by the name of Era Nabonasari,
Nabanasar.
is derived. It is counted from the first day of that Egyptian month Thoth
(Febr. 26.) which fell out 746 Julian years, and 310 days, before the Era of
Christ, as Cappellus and others reckon; 424 years before the death of Alexander
the Great, according to Ptolomy Magn. Syntax. lib. 3. c. 8.
the Prince of Mathematicians, Ptolomie's Catalogue of Kings.
in the 8th Olympiad. This Author has preserved the names of such as succeeded
Nabonasar, in his Catalogue of Kings. He reigned 14 years, after him Nadius 2,
then Chezirus or Porus 5, Jugaeus, or Hulaeus 5, and then Mardocempadus 26. In
his time happened the Idem lib. 4. cap. 6, 7.
three most ancient Eclipses of the Moon, observed by the Babylonians. The
first of them in the first of his reign, and the 28th of the month Thoth, the
27th year of Nabonasar. The second in his 2nd year, on the 18th of Thoth. And
176 days, 20 hours and an half after this, the third Eclipse fell out, on the
15th day of the month Phamenoth. Scaliger and others, think this Mardokempad to
be the same with him, who in the 2 Kings. 20.12.
Scripture is called Merodach-Baladan, the Son of Baladan. But Cappellus
conjectureth there were two Merodach's, Sons of Baladan and Nephews of
Nabonasar, whereof the one was called Merodac-Kempad, and the other
Merodac-Baladan.

16. Mardokempadus, having reigned 12 years, was succeeded by Arkianus, who
ruled 5. Then followed an Inter-regnum for two years, after which Belibus
obtained the Kingdom for 3, then Apronadius 6, Rigibelus one, Mesessimordak, 4;
after whom another Inter-regnum insued for 8 years, he being also written
Mesessi carduc. Now the Royal Race seems to Usserius in Annal. Vet.
Testament. ad A. M. 3323.
one, to have failed, and Esarchaddon the King of Assyria to have again
subjected the Balylonians to his Kingdom; and his reason is, for that he who
followed at the end of this Inter-regnum is by Ptolomy called Assaradinus,
which he thinks to differ only from Esarchaddon in the sound of several
Languages. If so, this is he, who brought out of the East Country, Strangers to
inhabit Samaria, whence Salmanesser had, 40 or more years before, transported
the Ephramites. He is also, by the posterity of this new Colonie, called the
great and noble Asnapper. But how this Assyrian Kingdom had sprung up again,
during these two Principalities of the Babylonians and Medes, is to be
considered.

The arising anew of the Assyrian Kingdom. How, when, and by whom.
17. It is not probable that the vast Empire of Sardanapalus was all (nor
perhaps the greatest part) subject to Media and Babylon; but that, although
Arbaces left not the Medes to their liberty, yet several people he did, for
want of power to keep them under: Hence in some time the people beyond
Euphrates, weary of that anarchie and confusion, under which they labored,
might be willing to admit of a Prince again, though not of the old stock of
Belus; whose successors having far excelled in power and dominion, the Greeks
accounted Sardanapalus the last King of the Assyrians. Who this new Prince
should be, remains very obscure. One Jacobus Cappellus ad A. M. 3236.
thinks him that same Phul, Phul.
who made an incursion into the Land of Israel, in the time of Menachem, fixing
the beginning of his reign, in the 4th Olympiad, 17 years before that of
Nabonasar. Another Usserius ad A. M. 3257. Hist. Anim. lib. 12. c. 21.
will have Tiglah-Pileser (or Thilgath-Pilneser, or Theglath-Phalassar) to be
the man (in Aelian, he says, called Thilganus) whom also he accounts the
same with Ninus Junior, mentioned by Eusebius In Chron. ex Cestore Rhodio.
having assumed the name of the first founder of the Assyrian Empire. This
Tiglath-Pilesar, Tiglath-Pilesar.
at the invitation of Judah, went up against Rezen 2 Kings. 15.16.
King of Damascus, and killing him transported his Subjects into Kir, a place
(as Josephus will have it) of upper Media. He died when he had reigned 19
years, and was succeeded by Salmanasser; Salmanasser.
to whom 17.
Hosea King of Israel refused to pay tribute, entering into confederacy with So
King of Egypt against him: But Salmanasser besieged him in Samaria, and at the
end of three years, taking the City, carried the Israelites into captivity into
Chelach, Cheber, and Nehar-gesan, A. M. 3273.
Cities of Media, where he, as well as his predecessor, might have power, if, (
Deioces, as yet not having obtained the Kingdom) that Country was still subject
to a popular Government, or rather in a confused Anarchie.

18. After the subversion of the Kingdom of Israel, he overran all Phoenicia
and Syria. He sent an Army against the Tyrians at such time as Elulaeus their
King made War upon the Cittaeans which had rebelled; but a peace was presently
made, and he drew back his Forces. Not long after Sidon, Arce, Palaetyrus, and
other Towns revolted from the Tyrians to him; so that they alone standing out,
he returned, and having a supply of 60 ships from the Phoenicians, engaged
with them in a Sea Fight; but they having but 12, yet overthrew his Fleet, and
thereby obtained great credit. At his return, he set guards upon the River, and
watercourse, and there kept them five years together, which constrained them
to make a shift with Wells and Pits, as Menander Apud. Iosephum Antiq. lib. 9.
cap. 14.
related out of the Tyrian Annals, translated into the Greek tongue, wherein
the name of Salmanasar was recorded. Salmanasar dying Senacherib his Son
succeeded him, Senacherib. A. M. 3287.
called also Sargon in Isa. 20.1. Berosus apud Iosephum Antiq. lib. 10. c. 1.
Scripture, as some think. He infested all Asia and Egypt with War; into the
later of which, as he descended, in his retreat he sore 2 Kings 18.
distressed Hezekiah King of Judah, who making his application unto his God,
obtained deliverance, to the confusion of the Assyrian and his Army. Herodotus
tells a story, How when he came to Pelusium, Lib. 2. c. 141.
Sethes the Priest of Vulcan then King of Egypt, by his prayer to his god,
procured all the habilaments of War to be eaten with Mice; so that being
rendered unable to fight, he was forced to draw back his Army. Esaias 18.
But the Prophecies against Egypt ascertain us that this expedition proved very
dysastrous to it, and that many Captives were thence led away, which the
Priests, from whom Herodotus had his information, hid this, and all other
things that tended to the dishonor of their Country.

19. Returning from Egypt into Palaestine, he besieged 2 Chronicles. 32.

1 Kings 19. Esaias 37.


Lachish, and thence removed to Libnah, where he wrote a blasphemous Letter to
Hezekiah. For hearing that Tirhakah King of Aethiopia (or Arabia) (by Josephus
called Tharsices, by Strab^, Tearkon) was coming against him in behalf of the
Egyptians, he removed for fear, and God sent his Angel into his Camp, who slew
in one night 85000 men, which thing as a plague was also recorded by Apud
Joseph. ut supra. cap. 2.
Berosus. Then returned he (as God had promised Hezekiah) with great
consternation into his own Land, where raging against the Jews that dwelt at
Niniveh (if credit be to begiven to the book of ^ob^) he was after 44 days
slain in the Temple of his idol Nisroch, by his two sons Ad^amelech and
Sharezer, (who fled for it into the Land of Ararat, or Armenia) and Esarchaddon
his son reigned in his stead.

Esarchaddon the same with Assaradinus.
20. This Esarchaddon is thought (and that probably) to be the same with
Assaradinus mentioned by Ptolomy in his Catalogue of Kings, and who subdued
Babylon. It is also thought that 2 Kings 17.
this is he, who when he brought a new Colony into Samaria from Babylon,
Cathah, Ana, Hamath, and Sepharvaim, at the same time making an inroad into
Judaea, (as it is very probable) took 2 Chronicles. 33.
Menasseh the King thereof in the Thorns, and carried him in Captivity into
Babylon; for it appears from both these passages mentioned in Scripture, that
at this time that City was subject to the King of Assyria. After Esarchaddon
(or Assaradinus) had reigned thirteen years, Saosduchinus succeeded him
according to Ptolomy; Saosduchinus.
and not Mero^ach whom the general opinion will have, (being King of Babylon)
to have killed him, and again overthrown the Empire of the Assyrians. For this
succession is founded upon a feigned Pseudo-Metasthenes apud Annium vit.
E^bensem. fol. 221. De cujus fictis Authoribus. vide Joh. Goropium Biblioth.
Hispan. Tom. 2. page 356. Gaspar. Barterium. ibid. page 386. 407. 417. 431.
Seth. Calvis. Isagog. Chronil. cap. 28.29. and Chron. p. 171. A. Non est
germanum opus. Pam. in Tert. Apol. n. 287.
Author imposed on the World, with several others of the same credit, and
therefore deserves to be rejected. The time of this Saosduchinus falling in
with that of Deioces (who according to Herodotus built Ecbatane the Metropolis
of Media) if any credit be to be given to the book of Judith, we may judge him
to be that Nabuchadonosor mentioned there to have overthrown Arphaxad, King of
the Medes, and builder of that City, in the great plains of Ragan. After he
had taken him in the Mountains, he slew him; plundered Ecbatane, and then
returned victoriously unto Niniveh, where he feasted his Army for 120 days.
The year after, entering into Consultation how to subdue the several Nations
about him; he ordained Holophernes his General, who straightly besieging
Bethsara, a Town of Judaea; by the wisdom and courage of Judith, the Widow of
one Manasses of the Tribe of Ephraim, was circumvented, and had his head cut
off in his Tent.

Chuniladanus.
21. Saosduchinus, (or Saosducmus) having reigned twenty years, Chuniladanus
succeeded him, thought also to be the same with Saracus, mentioned by Alexander
Polyhistor. Against him came Herodotus lib. 1.102. etc.
Phraortes, the son of Deioces in revenge of his father's death; after he had
first of all others subdued the Persians, and the rest of Asia. But his good
fortune here forsook him, and he perished with the greatest part of his Army,
in the 22 year of his reign. His son Cyaxares succeeding is said to have been
more puissant then his Ancestors, and the first that distinguished the people
of Asia into several Provinces, and Soldiers into their several ranks of
Pike-men, Horsemen, and those that used Darts. He fought with the Lydians; at
which time so great an Eclipse of the Sun happened, that the day seemed to be
turned into night. Having brought to his obedience all Asia, beyond the River
Halys, he gathered his forces together, and went against Nineveh with
intentions to destroy the City. He overthrew the Assyrians in battle and
besieged the place; but it happened at this time that a great Army of Scythians
having driven the Cimmerians out of Europe, The Scythians obtain Asia 28 years.
under conduct of Madyes, the son of Protothya, (called otherwise Judathyrsus)
their King, still followed them, and from the Lake Mae^is, leaving the Mountain
Caucasus on their right hand, pierced into Media.

22. Cyaxares hereby was constrained to raise his siege, went, and gave them
battle; but was overthrown, and lost the Dominion of Asia, which the Scythians
having obtained, marched straight for Egypt. Psammetichus the King met them on
their way, when they had new entered Palaestine, and by good words backed with
money prevailed with them to go no further. They enjoyed the Dominion of Asia
28 years; after the expiration of which term, managing their affairs with as
great neglect as formerly they had used diligence in polling and rifling the
Country; the greatest part of them being entertained by Cyaxares, were made
drunken and slain, and the King recovered his Dominion. Loose it.
During these things, Polyhistor apud Cedrenum, vide Usserium in Annot. vet.
Test. ad A. M. 3378.
Nabopolassar a Babylonian, and General to the Assyrian King contracted
affinity with Astyages the son of Cyaxares, and Governor of Media:
Nebucadnesar the son of Nabopolassar marrying Amylis daughter to Astyages. The
effect of this alliance was that they jointly set upon Baracus, or Chynaladanus
in Niniveh, and taking the City slew him therein, after he had reigned 22
years. At this time the Prophecies against Niniveh seem to be fulfilled in its
destruction. For in the latter end of the Greek book of Tobia^ it is written
that Nebuchadonosor and Assuerus took Niniveh, Tobias being yet alive, who is
said to have lived 127 years (or, as the Latin has it, 99.) 95 having already
passed from the taking of Samaria; at which time he was carried Captive with
his father into Assyria by Salmanasar.

Nabopolassar.
23. Chynaladanus being dead, Nabopolassar (or Nabulassar) obtained his Kingdom
in the 123th year of Nabonasar, according to Magn. Syntax. l. 5. c. 14.
Ptolomy, whose Canon of Kings also (as to the term of years collected from the
particular reign of each) directly answers to this account. 2 Kings 23.

2 Chronicles. 35.


Against him came up Pharoh Necho, and took Carchemish, a City situate upon
Euphrates, killing Josiah the King of Judah, who attempted to stop his passage,
He holding this Town, the Berosus apud Joseph. lib. 1. contra Apionem.
Governor of Coelosyria and Phoenicia revolted from the Babylonian, who being
now unable to undergo the trouble of War made his son Nebuchadnesar King with
him in his 17th year, and sent him with an Army to subdue Egypt and Syria; with
him joined Alexand. Polyst. apud Eusebius. praep. Evang. lib. 9.
Asibares, King of the Medes, whom some think to be Cyaxares, and others more
probably Astyages his son. In this expedition he made Jehojakin King of Judah,
his tributary and drew him from the obedience of Egypt; which Necho taking in
disdain, came up against him and engaging once more at Carchemi^h was
overthrown and slain, as may be gathered out of Scripture. Jerem. 46.
Whilst Nebuchadnesar was prosecuting his victories, overrunning all from the
River of Egypt to the River Euphrates; in the mean Berosus apud Joseph. ut
pri^s* and Antiqu. lib. 10. cap. 11.

A. M. 3410. Olymp. 46. an. 2.

Romae 159.


time his father being sick at Babylon, died. After he had reigned 21 years, as
it is now in the Catalogue, Nebuchadnesar.
for which some learned men think 29 is to be read. He understanding hereof
disposed of the affairs of Egypt and other Countries, and giving order for the
conveyance of the Judaean, Syrian, Phoenician, and Egyptian prisoners, he
himself made haste through the desert, and took possession of the Government
reserved for him by the Caldaeans.

His great exploits and buildings.
24. He distributed the Captives into Colonies about Babylon, adorned the Temple
of Belus (which Semiramis had built) with the spoils; repaired and increased
the buildings of the City, and fortified the Channel of the River, that the
Enemy should not make use of it against the Town. He added a new City to the
old, and compassed both with three Walls of brick. He raised diverse remarkable
aedifices, built a new Palace, and about it a Garden, or Wilderness, so much
celebrated by the Graecians. His wife being a Mede, and, according to the
nature of her Country, delighting in Mountainous Woody prospects, brought him
to imitate with Art what was wanting in the plains of Babylon. This Garden was
made apiece, Vide Diodor. lib. 2. p. 70. B.
taking up in compass sixteen Acres, in height equalling the Walls, set with
tall and beautiful Trees. It was born up by stone-Pillars; Curtium lib. 5.
upon which a pavement of four-squared stones being laid, Earth was heaped up
in great quantity, and Engines were made for the conveying of moisture out of
Euphrates to water it. The Trees that grew upon it were (many of them) eight
Cubits in compass at the bole; and fifty foot high, bearing fruit as
plentifully as in their Native soil. 2 Kings 23. etc.
Jehojakim the King of Judah rebelling against Nebuchadnesar, he came up
against him, wasted the Country, and, taking him, cast him out unburied as the
Prophet Jeremiah had foretold. 2 Chronicles. 36.
Four months after, he also carried away Captive, Jechonias, or Jehojachim his
son, Jerem. 22.
and made Mattaniah his Uncle King in his stead. This Mattaniah, whom he named
Zedekiah, rebelled against him notwithstanding his solemn Oath of fealty taken
at his institution, and therefore in the eleventh year of his reign he was also
taken by the Babylonian, had his eyes put out, and was so carried to Babylon:
the Temple and City were burnt with fire, and the people led into Captivity,
as will appear in its proper place.

His pride.
25. Nebuchadnesar returning home was exceeding proud, and puffed up at his
success. He erected a great Image of Gold; Daniel 3.
in the Dedication whereof all his chief Officers were commanded to fall down
and worship which was obeyed by all except three Jews, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Ab^n^go, the companions of Daniel. For their punishment they were cast into a
fiery Furnace, heated seven times hotter then usual, and so miraculously
preserved from the fury of the flame, that not an hair of their heads was
sindg'd; though it killed those that cast them in. At this, the King
astonished, by public edict acknowledged Gods power, and forbad the
blaspheming of him. Yet repented he not of his pride, and, notwithstanding a
sufficient warning given him by God in a dream, exalted himself in the conceit
of the greatness and splendor of Babel, which he had built for the house of
the Kingdom, by the might of his power, and for the honor of his Majesty. But
the same hour, as he was answered by a voice from Heaven, the Kingdom departed
from him, Punished.
he was driven from men, made to eat grass as Oxen, and his body was wet with
the Dew of Heaven, till his hairs were grown as Eagles feathers, and his Nails
like Birds Claws; and seven times passed over him, till he knew that the Most
High rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. And
this time prefixed being expired (seven years as most suppose, though some
reckon but three and an half, counting for times, Winter and Summer) his reason
returned to him, with the glory of his Kingdom, his Honor, and Brightness,
his Counselors and his Lords sought unto him, he was established in his
Kingdom, and excellent Majesty was added to him. Therefore he shamed not by a
public writing to own the thing; praised, honored, and extolled the King of
Heaven, all whose works he confessed to be truth, his ways judgment, and that
those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

What is found recorded of him by the Heathen.
26. Of these strange passages the Heathen were not utterly ignorant. Apud
Eusebius. praep. Evang. lib. 9.
Abydenus wrote, that, being exceeding proud, and going up upon his Palace, he
was taken with a Divine fury. This he had out of the Annals of the Caldaeans,
who fancied him to have been seized on with a prophetic spirit, and so to have
vanished. Apud Jos^phum, ubi pri^s.
Megasthenes in his fourth book of Judaea, endeavored to show how this King in
valiant exploits exceeded Hercules by far; that he subdued the chief City of
Africa, and a good part of Spain. Diocles, in his second book of Persia, made
mention of him, and Philostratus both in his Histories of Phoenicia and India;
writing that he fought against Tire thirteen years, which it is probable, at
length he took by composition and there placed Baal King in the room of
Ithobalus. What he did against this City, God, taking as service done to
himself, Ezekiel. 29.
promised him the Land of Egypt for his wages, which we must accordingly
believe to have been paid. At length, having foretold that Babylon should be
lost to Cyrus, as Abydenus wrote; he died, after he had reigned 43 years, being
in Ptolomies Catalogue of Kings, called Nabocolassar, which may be corruptly
written for Nabocodolassar.

Evilmerodach.
27. Evilmerodach his Son succeeded him, who lifted up the head of Jehoiakim
King of Judah, in the 37th year of his Captivity, A. M. 3440. Olymp. 53. an. 4.
Romae. condit. 189.
spoke kindly unto him, set his Throne above the Throne of the Kings that were
with him in Babylon and changing his prison garments, allowed him a continual
diet all the days of his life. But for his wickedness and debaucheries, he
continued not long, Neriglissor.
being circumvented by Neriglissor his Sister's Husband, and slain when he had
reigned but two years. Neriglissor after his death, reigned 4. After him came
his Son Laborosardochus, Laborosardochus.

Nabonidus.


who being of an untowardly disposition, was made away by his Relations, after
nine months, and they preferred to his place one Nabonidus a Babylonian, by
Ptolomy called Nabonadius, by others Nabannidochus and Labynitus. [ Apud
Iosephum. lib. 1. contr. Api^em.
Who reigned 17 years, for which some think 27 is to be read.] This succession
we have from Berosus the Caldaean, attested by Ptolomy, who yet leaves out
Laborosardochus, either for his small continuance, or because he reigned
together with his Father. But learned Men do not agree in the manner of
reconciling this History with what Daniel has written of Belshazar. Whether
the same with Belshazar.
Some will have Zabynitus or Nabonodus, to be Belshazar, Nabonodus being the
last of the Kings, which Belshazar also seems to be; at his death, Babylon
being taken by Cyrus, as the interpretation of the writing on the wall hinteth:
Peers, thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. As for
Darius the Mede, he seems to them to be no other then Cyaxares the Son of
Astyages King of Media, and the Uncle of Cyrus, who of his own accord delivered
Babylon to him: and they think this sufficient to prove that Laborosardochus
could not be Belshazar, because he has but nine months assigned him by
Berosus, whereas we read in Daniel of the third year of Belshazar.

28. Others think they have ground enough to deny Nabonidus to be Belshazar,
who is called the Son of Nebuchadnesar; in regard no such relation is mentioned
by Berosus, that can entitle him to so much as his grandchild, which
Laborosardochus was by his Daughter, being called his Son by a common Hebraism:
For the Latin version of Josephus which makes Nabonodus of the blood; it is in
no case agreeable to the Original which plainly relates him to have been of
the (...).
conspiracy. For the 5th year of Belshazar it well enough agrees with
Laborosardochus, because he reigned 4 years, with his Father, and, after his
Father's death, nine months by himself. Now the History of Daniel only
relates Belshazar to have been slain; not that Babylon was then besieged by
Cyrus: it being improbable, say they, that a time of so great danger, the King
and his Nobles should spend in feasting and jollity; but rather likely, that
behaving himself too insolently in that drunken fit, he was knocked in the
head by his Companions, as Berosus (...).
hinteth, and the Scripture rather seems to approve than contradict. As for
the interpretation of the Writing on the wall, it might note what was already
determined* and within a little time was to be accomplished concerning Cyrus
the Persian, who being at that time known to the World, could not be hid from
Daniel, who had met with his name long before in the Prophecy of Isaiah, and
had his mind, without doubt, fixed upon the 70 years of Captivity foretold by
Jeremiah, to which a period should shortly be put by that person. That Darius
Medus was of Median descent appears, but that he was King of the Medes can no
way be evinced; especially seeing that no ancient Greek Historian makes
mention of Cyaxares the Son of Astyages, (whom we read to have had but one
Daughter) except Xenophon; and he either one purpose seems to thwart
Herodotus, or to have written his Cyropaedia, rather Cicero ad quintum Fratrem.
Ep. 1.
to show what a Prince ought to be, than what Cyrus was indeed, and so to have
taken some of that liberty of invention which others As the Grand Cyrus of
George de Scudery Governor of Nostre Dame de la Guard, a Romance of 10. Volumes.
have done of late upon the same and other Subjects. But though Joseph Scaliger
may seem to show more reason for this later assertion, yet Pererius truly
affirms the thing to be obscure, perplexed, and difficult.

29. If Laborosardochus be taken for Belshazar, then Nabonodus must be the
same with Darius Medus; whom further, some would have to be the Brother of
Astyages, not his Son, and yet called Cyaxares. In him the Empire of the
Babylonians ceased, and was derived upon the Persians by Cyrus, whose first
beginnings are to be viewed, with the progress of his actions, Cyrus.
which made way to that pitch of greatness whereat he arrived. Herein
Historians do not relate the same things. That Astyages was his Grandfather is
acknowledged by all, except Ctesias, who will have them nothing akin, and
calls him Astyigas: His Father's name is granted to be Cambyses, his Country
Persia, but his condition is diversely reported of. Herodotus writes how
Astyages dreaming two dreams concerning his Daughter Mandane, The sum of what
Herodotus has written concerning his Birth and Fortune.
(which by the Wizards were interpreted to portend the loss of his Kingdom,
through the greatness of her issue) gave her in marriage to one Cambyses a
Persian of obscure fortune; and not satisfied in this security, sent for her
when she was with child, and as soon as the Boy was born, gave him to one
Harpagus to be made away. Harpagus fearing he might afterward be called to an
account by the Mother, for violence offered to the Babe, delivered him to the
King's Shepherd, to be exposed in the Woods unto the mercy of wild beasts.
This being done, and the Shepherd's Wife lately brought to bed of a stil-born
child; she prevailed with her Husband to fetch him home; nursed and brought him
up as her own Son amongst the Shepherds. At seven years of age being chosen
King of the Boys in their play, he executed the office with severity, toward
such as were disobedient, and for this was complained of by their Parents to
the King. Being sent for and accused of the crime, he would acknowledge none,
alleging he had done like a King; and standing in his justification without
the least change of countenance, Astyages was struck with admiration, and
presently called to mind his dream. Upon examination of the Shepherd, he got
out the whole matter; owned him for his Grandson, because he thought the dream
fulfilled in his boyish reign amongst the Shepherds; only he thought it good
to send him out of the way into Persia.

30. But to punish Harpagus for his disobedience, he invited him to supper, and
caused to be served up to the table his only Son; of which, after he had eaten
heartily, and approved the meat, he let him see his entertainment, by the head,
hands, and feet, reserved in another platter. Harpagus for the present kept
down his passion, seeming to acquiesce in the King's pleasure, until Cyrus
came to man's estate. Then, hearing of his activity and forwardness, he
resolved by presents to make him his friend, meditating a convenient way of
revenge by the means of this Youth, from whom he expected something answerable
to his Grandfather's dream. Knowing Astyages his tyrannical carriage toward
the Medes, he insinuated himself into the chief of them by degrees, and
secretly persuaded them, that it was convenient he should be removed from the
Government; especially seeing they might with some plausibility place Cyrus in
his Seat. Having thus made War, he wrote Letters to the young Man, into Persia,
(which, to prevent discovery, he sowed up in the belly of an Hare) wherein
recalling to his memory what he had suffered from his Grandfather upon his
account, he solicited him to draw the Persians to revolt; then to come down
with an Army into Media, where he might be sure of him or any other the Kings
Generals, and so easily become Master of all.

31. Cyrus considering of a way how to accomplish this business, which now he
made no less than a design, called the Persians together; first gave out that
he was chosen their General by Astyages, and then easily persuaded them, by
laying open, how much Liberty was to be preferred before that Slavery they now
underwent, to close with him and break out into open rebellion. The old Man
hearing of this, sent a messenger for him; but he returned answer, he would
come sooner than he should have cause to desire his company; whereupon he armed
his Subjects of Media, and forgetting how he had formerly injured Harpagus,
committed the Army to his conduct. Harpagus revolting, he lost thereby the
first Battle; yet was not daunted, but threatened Cyrus, nailed to crosses the
Magicians, who had persuaded him to dismiss him, and arming all both old and
young that were in the City, led them out to a second engagement, Cyrus
overthrows Astyages his Grand father.
wherein his success was worse than before, he being taken prisoner. When
Harpagus, boasting of his revenge, insulted over him, he taxed him of
imprudence and injustice: of the one, for that having power to make himself
King he should transfer the dignity to another; and of the other, because, for
to revenge a private injury, he had enslaved the whole Nation of the Medes, out
of which he might rather have chosen one to the Kingdom, refusing it himself,
than him who would now so order the matter, that the Persians, slaves before,
should be Lords and Masters of all. Thus Astyages lost his Kingdom, after he
had held it 35 years, enjoying all things else at his Grandson's hands, till
his natural death: And the Medes became subject to the Persians, after they
had enjoyed the dominion of Asia beyond the River Halys, the space of 128
years, (except that space wherein the Scythians kept them under) in the 2d year
of the 55th Olympiad, of the World 3446.

32. Cyrus having obtained the sovereignty of Persia and Media, A. M. 3446.
Olymp. 55. an. 2. Urbis conditae. 195.
was within a while provoked by Croesus King of Lydia, Provoked by Croesus King
of Lydia.
who at this time was grown eminent, having improved the inheritance which
descended upon him from his Ancestors.

Lydia whence so called.
The Lydian Nation was of great antiquity, so named from Lud the Son of Sem, or
rather descended of him who by Moses is so called; Lege Bochartum. Phaleg. lib.
2. cap. 12.
both he and they having obtained this name from that Country, which from the
crookedness and winding of the River Maeander took the appellation of Lud, in
the Phoenician Language signifying crooked or winding: The Greeks say,
Herodotus lib. 1. c. 7. Strabo lib. 13. p. 586. c. Plin. l. 5. c. 29. Diodorus.
Halicar. lib. 1. Diodorus l. 3. p. 165. B.
that the Lydians were first called Maeones; and Lydia Maeonia, from Maeon, an
ancient King of Phrygia and Lydia, who was thought to have been the Father of
Cybeles, Mother of the gods, and that long after him reigned Lydus the Son of
Atys, and Brother of Tyrrhenus, from whom they fancy the Country to have been
named. Better is the opinion of Stephanus, who deriveth Maeonia from the River
Maeon or Maeander. For, though the Greeks might call them Lydians, yet that
their right name was Ludians, appears from the Latin words, Ludus, Ludo,
Ludio, etc. thence derived; seeing it is granted, that the first Players came
form Tertull. de Spectac. lib. 5. Dionys. Halic. lib. 2.
Lydia into Hetruria, so to Rome, as the Lydians Herodotus l. 1. c. 95.
boasted themselves to have been inventors of those Games, which afterward
were common with them to the Greeks. Hence it appears, that though the
Country might be called both Lydia and Maeonia, from the selfsame thing; yet
most ancient was the name of Lud. After the Posterity of Lydus, reigned the
Heraclidae or those that were descended from Hercules, by his Son Alcaeus. The
first was Argon, says Herodotus, the Son of Ninus, Grandson of Belus, and
great Grandson of Alcaeus; the last was Candaules the Son of Myrsus, by the
Greeks called Myrsitus. Candaules Asheu. l. 12. Plut. Sym. l. 4. Herodotus lib.
1. c. 49.
or Candylos, signified a certain kind of Lydian meat made of Flower, Cheese,
Honey, Bread, and Flesh; the Lydians being accounted the first (...).
of all Nations, that busied themselves in Cookery, insomuch that they became a
Proverb for it.

33. The Antiquity of the Lydians appears further out of the ancient Fables;
Attis, Tamalus, Pelops, Niobe and Arachne, being of this Country: Their
fruitfulness, from the Colonies they sent out into Peloponnesus and Caria,
into Etruria also, as they say. Eusebius. in Chron.
Their valor and power is shown to have been of great antiquity from their
holding the dominion of the Sea 92 years, which they took from the Cretians
about the time of Jepthe, and 1200 years before Christ, The Royal Families of
Lydia.
losing it again and recovering it afterward. But Candaules with his Family
being extinct, and the Kingdom devolved upon the Mermnadae (of whom Croesus
descended) the power of the Nation grew greater also at Land. These Heraclidae,
held it the space of 505 years, through 22 Successors unto this Candaules,
Herodotus l. ^. c. 8, etc.
who so far being enamoured of his Wife as he esteemed her the most beautiful
of all women, constrained his servant Gyges to see her naked. She espying Gyges
whilst therein he only satisfied his Masters will, offered him the choice of
killing her husband, and marrying her with the Kingdom, or of suffering death
himself; one of their two lives being the least she could require in way of
Justice. He, in so great a strait, preferring his own safety before his
Master's life, slew him in his bedchamber, the place where the fault was
committed, and so enjoyed the Queen with the Kingdom; wherein he was confirmed
by the Oracle of D^lphos, to the sentence of which, he and his adversaries had
agreed to stand.

34. Gyges reigned 38 years, in which space he made War upon Miletus, and
Smyrna, and took the City Colophon. Ardys his Son and Successor subdued Priene,
fought against Miletus; and in his time the Cimmerians being expelled their
seats by the Scythian Nomades, passed into Asia, and took Sardis, all but the
Castle. He reigned 49 years. His Son Sadyattes 12, who gave place to Alyattes
his Son and Successor. Alyattes waged War with Vide supra paragraph. 21.
Cyaxares King of Media, and expelled the Cimmerians out of Asia, took Smyrna,
and set upon Cl^zomenae. In the 6th year of the War betwixt the Median and him,
whilst they fought upon equal terms, the Sun was eclipsed, which Thales, one
of the 7 wise men, had foretold to his Milesians. Both the armies seeing the day
beginning to be turned into night, left off fighting and then by the mediation
of Syennesis the Cilician, and Labynitus the Babylonian a peace was concluded;
Ariena the Daughter of Halyattes being married to Astyages the Son of Cyaxares.
From the Tables of Ptolomy (or of Hipparchus) it appears that this Eclipse
happened in the 4th year of the 44th Olympiad, the 147th of Nabonasar, the 4th
day of the Egyptian month Pachon, (which answers to the 20th of September) 3
hours and 25 minutes before noone; 9 digits being eclipsed, and the duration
almost 2 hours. Halyattes pursued also the War left him by his Father, against
Miletus, the Inhabitants whereof received from him two great blows, for that
none of the Ionians helped them, except the Chians, in way of requital for the
aid they had afforded them against the Erythraeans. At length, having notice
that he intended to send a messenger into the City, at the command of
Thrasybulus their Prince, they brought all the provision they had into the
marketplace; which appearing to be much, and as such related to A^yattes, he
thinking himself mistaken in his former belief of their distressed condition,
made Peace with them; and died after he had reigned 57 years.

35. Croesus his Son suceeded him at the age of 35 years. Herod. ubi supra. c.
26, etc.
He made War upon Ephesus, which when he besieged, the Townsmen for their
security, gave up the City to Diana, by a rope fastened from the wall to her
Temple; but for all this he brought them under and subdued all the rest of the
Greek Cities in the continent. He brought into his subjection all the people of
Asia within the River Hulis, as the Phrygians, Mysians, B^thynians,
Paphlagonians, the Mariandyni, Chalibes, Thracians, Thyni, Carians, Ionians,
Dorians, Aeolians, Lycians, and Cilicians. Being grown great, and flowing with
wealth, and flourishing with glory, the choicest wits of Greece flocked to
Sardis, and amongst the rest Solon the Athenian, who being now in his travells,
had been with Amesis of Egypt, and now came to visit Croesus. He kindly
entertained him, and, showing him his treasures, out of a vain conceit of his
own felicity, demanded of him, Whom he thought the happiest Man. He answered,
he esteemed for such, one Tellus an Athenian, who having lived in good credit,
and leaving diverse Children and Nephews of honest and virtuous carriage, died in
the War at Eleusine, after he had first helped to put to flight the enemy; for
which he was honored by his Citizens with a public and stately funeral.
Croesus expecting, if not the first, yet the second place, asked him, Whom he
accounted next to Tellus. He replied Cleobis and ^iton, two brothers of Argos,
who had sufficient to live on, and being very strong, had gotten the better in
trial of Masteries. On a time at the feast of Juno, their Mother being to be
drawn in a Chariot to the Temple, and the Heiffers not at hand, they yoked
themselves, and drew her thither. She being much affected with the piety of her
Sons, prayed the Goddess that whatsoever was best for Man, might be bestowed
on them, who sleeping that night in the Temple, were found dead in the morning,
and honored by the Argives with two Statues, erected to their memory at
Delphos.

36. The King was troubled that his felicity should be so little valued, as not
comparable to that of private men. But Solon plainly told him, that all things
were uncertain in this life, and no man ought to be accounted happy til his
End; for which Philosophy, as strange to the Courtiers, he was dismissed with
small reputation for learning. Croesus, growing exceeding proud and
irreligious; to humble him, had a dream* that the choicest of his two Sons,
(whereof one was dumb) should be slain with the iron head of some weapon.
Hereupon he removed all things of that nature out of the way, looked to him
diligently, and married him out of hand. But at this time it happened, that a
certain wild Boar haunted about the Mountain Olympus in Mysia, which doing
great harm to the Inhabitants, they were in no wise able to master, and
therefore sent to Croesus, desiring him to send his Son, accompanied with a
sufficient train, to hunt and kill the Wild beast. He plainly denied, because
of his dream, to let him stir from home; but the young Man, having a great
desire to the exercise, thereby to approve himself for activity to his new
married wife, obtained leave to be sent, saying, that no such thing would be
used in the game as that of which he had dreamed. He committed him then to the
care of one Adrastus the Son of Gordius (and he of Midas) King of Phrygia, who
having at unawares killed his brother, had been banished by his his Father.
When they came into the field, and had dislodged the Boar, Adrastus throwing a
dart at him, chanced to hit the young Man, and so fulfilled the dream; for
which, offering himself to be killed, upon Croesus his refusal, as done
without any intention, he yet slew himself. Croesus took the accident very
heavily, and kept himself in mourning two years.

37. This mourning was broken off by the prosperity of Cyrus, who having now
overthrown the Kingdom of the Medes, advanced highly the affairs of Persia.
Herein he found himself exceedingly concerned, so as to withstand, if
possible, his success, and make an addition thereby to his own Fortune. For
encouragement in this design, Croesus Haly^ gressus, magnam pervertet opum vim.
he sent to enquire of the Oracles far and near; which answering with one
consent, that he should overturn a great Principality, he was much encouraged,
not doubting but that of the Persians was meant thereby; and much more after
the Oracle at Delphos, had (in answer to his requiry, whether his Empire should
long continue) bid him look to himself, when a Mule should have possession of
the Sovereignty of Media; taking this in a literal sense, notwithstanding the
constant ambiguity of such answers. Now (the Oracle giving way to it) he sent
to make a League with the Lacaedemonians, who being obliged to him, easily
complied; though no supplies do we read of sent to him. For he, being in great
haste, prevented the sending of any; and, with all the force he could make,
invaded Cappadocia, Croesus invadeth Cappadocia.
to revenge, as he pretended, upon Cyrus, the injury offered to Astyages his
Brother in Law; but indeed to lay that fertile Country to his own Dominions.
Having passed the River Hayis, he came into a place of Cappadocia called
Pteria, the most safe of all the Country, near to the City Sinop^, which was
situated upon the Euxine Sea. Taking up his quarters here, he made incursions,
took the City of the Pterians, with all the rest round about, and banished the
Syrians (so were the Cappadocians called by the Greeks, till subjected to the
Persian Empire) though they had nothing ill deserved at his hands.

38. Cyrus coming against him sent to the Ionians, to draw them to his party;
but they standing off, he proceeded, and pitched his Camp against Croesus. After
some skirmishes the Armies engaged, and a very hot dispute continued till night
parted them, many falling on both sides. Croesus, though neither party owned
any defeat, was blamed by his Soldiers for engaging with so numerous an Army;
so that, Cyrus not stirring out against him the next day, he thought it best to
retreat to Sardis, and sent out of hand for aid to Amesis King of Egypt, and
Labynitus of Babylon, whom he had by a League obliged to him: to the
Lacedaemonians also to dispatch their Auxiliaries within 5. month, with which
resting that winter, he would re-invade the Persians the following Spring.
Retreateth to Sardis.
Accordingly he dismissed all his mercenaries standing then in no need of them,
as he thought; which Cyrus hearing, resolved with all speed to follow him to
Sardis, hoping he might utterly defeat him before he could recollect his
Forces: and accordingly marching into Lydia he prevented any message of his
coming. Croesus, though exceedingly perplexed at so unexpected a thing,
gathered his subjects together, as time would give leave, and provided for his
defense; which the other perceiving, and fearing the power of his Horse
(wherein the Lydians excelled all other people of Asia) took off the burdens
from all the Camels, that followed the Camp, and setting Riders upon them,
placed them in the front; the smell of which (when the Armies joined) the
Horses not enduring, turned aside. Overthrown in battle.
Yet were not the Riders thereby deterred from fighting, but, dismounting,
performed on Foot what could be expected, till overpowered rather with number
then valor, they were put to flight, and besieged in the City. And besieged.


39. Croesus thinking he might possibly be able to hold out some considerable
time, sent again to his confederates to hasten their succors. But Cyrus on the
fourteenth day of the siege offering a great reward to him that should first
mount the Wall, one Hyraeades, a Mardian, having taken notice of a place, which
because of its height and precipitancy was held impregnable, and therefore
neglected by the besieged (where yet he had seen a Soldier come down to fetch
his Helmet he had let fall) made means to climb up, and after him more and more
followed, till the City was thereby surprised. Sardis taken.
All places being full of slaughters, a Soldier not knowing Croesus, was about
to kill him; which he neglected, as willing to dye with his Kingdom. But his
dumb son, affrighted at the danger he saw him in, Vide Herod. lib. 1. c. 85.
Aul. Gellium. l. 5. c. 9. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 4. Ext. Exem. 6. Solinum. c. 7.
is said to have broken silence (or dumbness) with this expression; Man, do
not kill Croesus, and thenceforth to have enjoyed the use of his tongue. Thus
Croesus overturned a great principality, as the Oracle had foretold, after he
had reigned fourteen years, Croesus condemned.
and been besieged so many days. Cyrus adjudged him to death, and had burnt
him alive, but that he, almost too late, remembered the words of the wise
Lawgiver of Athens, and cried out Solon, Solon, Solon! Cyrus commanded the
Interpreters to demand of him whom he invocated (thinking it to be some God he
mentioned): to which he answered, when compelled to speak, that he named one
whom rather then any thing, he would have to speak with all Princes; and, being
urged to explain himself, told the whole story concerning the discourse betwixt
him and Solon. His life spared.
Herewith the Conqueror was so affected, that, considering the uncertainty of
his own prosperous condition, though the pile was already kindled, yet
commanded he the fire to be quenched, and receiving him into his most inward
counsels, held him ever most dear, and in great esteem for his wisdom; wherein,
after such manifold experience, he excelled. This happened in the fourth year of
the 58 Olympiad, the fifteenth year of the reign of Cyrus. A. M. 3460. Olymp.
58. an. 4. Cyri 15.
A. M. 3460.

40. When the Ionians and Aeolians heard that Croesus, Herodotus. lib. 1. c.
141. etc.
with so little a ado, was utterly subdued, they sent to Cyrus, offering to put
themselves into his hands, on the same terms as the Lydians were received; but
he returned them no satisfactory answer, because of their refusal formerly to
join with him. All of them then, (except the Milesians, those having yielded
themselves) made their application to the Lacedaemonians, who refused to grant
any aid; but sent some to make discovery how matters went in Asia. The
Messengers finding Cyrus at Sardis, according to order, acquainted him with the
pleasure of that Republic, Not to suffer him to molest any of the Greek
Cities. He enquiring what the Lacedaemonians were, presently slighted them,
and answered, That, if the Gods preserved him, they should have cause to bewail
their own calamities, and not busy themselves with what concerned the Ionians.
He committed Sardis to the custody of Tabalus, a Persian; to Pactyas a Lydian,
the Treasure of Croes^s and others: and so set out for Ecbatane, making little
account of the Ionians (against whom he intended to send some Lieutenant) in
comparison of Babylon, the Bactrians, Sacae and Egyptians, upon all which he
had cast an hungry eye with purpose to invade them. After his departure Pactyas
revolted, Pactyas revolteth.
and drawing into Rebellion the Maritime Coasts, besieged Tabacus; whereat
Cyrus being angry, as esteeming it a plot of the Lydians, Croesus fearing worse
things might come upon them, after an excuse of the generality, advised him to
take from them the use of Arms, and enure them to effeminate courses whereby
they would easily be kept under. Cyrus, according to his advise, dispatched
away with an Army, one Mazares a Mede, who finding Sardis deserted by Pactyas,
put in execution what Croesus had advised. By this course was brought to pass,
that the Lydians, to whom for valor no Nation in Asia could be compared, grew
infamous for effeminatenesse and luxury; so that gluttonous (...) ventri
indulgere (...) voluptatibus deditus.
and voluptuous persons, (...) unguentarius. Lege Athenaeum. lib. 15. c. 12.
such as made it their profession to afford incitements to debauchery, received
Epithets from their name.

41. Pactyas having fled to Cuma, Mazares sent to demand him of the Citizens;
but, they dismissing him, he fled to Mytilene, and thence to the Chians, Taken.
who sold him to Mazares. He then reduced such as had revolted, and harrasing
the Country of Priene, with that lying upon Maeander and Magnesia, fell sick
and died. Harpagus the Mede succeeded him, and out of hand undertook an
expedition against the Ionians. The Phocaeans being first besieged obtained
truce for a day, and then shipping themselves, left their ancient seat and
passed over into the Island Chius, and thence (for that the Chians refused to
sell them the Islands Oenusae, lest they should thither carry the Traffic) to
Cyrnus, where twenty years before, they had built a City called Alalia. Here
playing the Pirates, they were after five years defeated in a Sea Fight by the
Tyrrhenians and ^ar^haginians, and then those that remained passed over to
Rhegium in I^, where they built a City named Hye^a, in the Territories of
Oenotria. The Teians also, after their example departed into Thrace; where they
built up a City called Abdera, the foundations of it being formerly l^id by
one Tem^sius a Clazomenian, whom the Thracians thence expelled. The Ionians
subdued.
The rest of the Ionians stood it out against Harpagus, who yet utterly subdued
and forced them to undergo the yoke the second time, having refused to follow
the counsel of B^as the Prienaean, (one of the seven wisemen of Greece), who
advised them to shun servitude by going to Sardinia, and there planting
themselves in one great and common City; as they had formerly re^ected the
advice of Thales the Milesian (another of that number) to set up one common
Court at Teus in the middle of Ionia. After the Conquest of the Ionians,
Harpagus subdued the Carians, Caunians, and Lycians, and brought all the lower
Asia under the Dominion and Sovereignty of Cyrus, who in the me^n while not
idle, did as much by the upper Provinces; leaving nothing in his way, but
clearing all before him.

42. Having Conquered the rest of the Continent he went against the Assyrians,
who, being aware of him, had furnished themselves in Babylon for a long siege.
And the Assyrians or Babylonians.
Coming to the River Gyndes (which rising in the Mantienean Mountains, runs
through the Country of the Dardaneans, and emptieth it self in Tigris) he
could find no fo^rd to pass it, and a certain white Horse, sacred to the Sun,
boldly taking the water, was overwhelmed in the Floods. Hereat being exceeding
angry, he threatened to reduce it to such a condition, as it should not be
knee-deep, and accordingly setting all his Army on work, derived it into 360
Rivolets, in which employment he spent all that Summer. The Spring following he
marched for Babylon, the King whereof ^abinitus opposed him* but, being
defeated, retreated into the City, to which he then laid close siege. In vain
for a long time did he attempt the taking of it. At length he divided his Army,
and leaving the two stronger parts of it, the one at that side of the Town
where the River entered, the other there where it came out; with the third he
retired into the ad^oyning Fens, and digging great ditches derived the River
into them. Hereby he brought it to such an Ebb, that his Soldiers easily
passing it, became Masters of the City, and he of the Babylonian or Assyrian
Empire. This is the sum of what Herodotus has written concerning the
prosperous fortune of Cyrus.

The sum of Xenophons Cyropaedia.
43. Xenophon, contrary to the former story, will have Cambyses his father no
obscure man; but King of Media: not a word from him of his Grand-father's
dream, or exposing of the Infant. When he was twelve years old, he was sent for
by Astyages into Media, where having tarried till almost a man, and being
admired for understanding and abilities far above his age; he returned to his
father, and entered into the Lege de institutione Persarum, Xenoph. Cyropaed. l.
1. ad i^tium.
College of youth, where he was trained up in all strict Discipline according
to the customs of Persia. Astyages dying, Cyaxares his son succeeded him, at
what time the King of Assyria having subdued all the Syrians, Arabians,
Hyrcanians, and had now fallen upon the Bactryans, promised himself the absolute
Empire of the East; if he could but bring under the Medes and Persians. He sent
therefore to all his Neighbors; to Croesus King of Lydia, the King of
Cappadocia, to both the Phrygians, Casians, Paphlagonians, Cilicians, and
Indians, accusing these two Nations of ambitious designs to enslave them all,
and procured them to join with him in an offensive and defensive league against
them. Cyaxares hearing this, desired of Cambyses his Brother-in-law to send
down Cyrus to him with an Army; Cyrus being accordingly chosen General by the
people, first subdued the Armenians, who because of this combination of the
Princes, had denied to pay their accustomed tribute to Cyaxares, and then
persuaded his Uncle to invade the Assyrians, to keep the War from his own doors.

44. Making then an inroade into Assyria the King thereof, Croesus of Lydia,
and diverse other Confederates came against them, but in the first engagement
were worsted, and beaten back into their Camp, and amongst others the Assyrian
himself ( Neriglissor, if any) was slain. The night following all brake out of
the Fortifications and fled; whereupon Cyrus prevailing with his Uncle to
suffer him to pursue them, with as many of the Medes as would follow him of
their own accord, in his way entered into confederacy with the Hyrcanians
through the conduct of whom he overtook, and again defeated them: they also
slew the Kings of Cappadocia and Arabia. After this, he invaded the Territories
of the Babylonians, went up to the City it self, and challenged the King to a
single Combat, who refusing it, he, after some few skirmishes thereabout,
returned to Cyaxares, upon the Borders of Media, to deliberate about carrying
on the War: He found him greatly discontented at his success (out of
apprehension that he had robbed him of all the glory) and much averse to the
War; but at length he appeased him, and so wrought underhand upon the Officers
of the Army, that they unanimously voted the War to be carried on. Some time
being necessary then for preparation, he chose out a convenient place for the
Army's Quarters; and not long after understood by certain Fugitives and
Prisoners that the King of Assyria was gone toward Lydia with much Treasure.

45. Cyrus, supposing his design to be for raising men, prepared for the main
chance by horsing his Persians, inventing new and more convenient Charriots,
and, to get intelligence of the Enemie's purposes, sent one Araspes into Lydia,
who, under color of a revolt, should insinuate himself into their Counsels.
This device taking, he disposed of his affairs according as he saw behoofefull,
modelled his Army, and marched against the Confederates, whom without any great
difficulty he overthrew, all but the Egyptians. They put him to sore trouble,
and endangered his life; but having fallen in upon their Rear, and thereby
diverted the Front, he so overpowered them both behind and before, as glad they
were to deliver up their Arms, and upon promise of better entertainment,
willing to change Masters and serve him. Croesus now, who commanded in Chief,
fled amain to Sardis, whither Cyrus pursued him, and getting the Castle into
his hands, by the help of a Persian, who had been slave to an Officer in it,
got possession both of the City and its King. He, coming to Cyrus, acquitted
the Oracle of Delphos from all blame, and took the fault upon himself, in that
he, overweening of his own condition, had fooled himself continually in a fond
opinion of happiness. After this the Carians falling into two factions, both
sent unto him: and he dispatched to them Adusias with some Forces, who
overpowering both the one and the other, compounded their differences.

46. Then sent he Hystaspes into Phrygia, who subdued the Country, and took the
King prisoner; at what time the Greeks of Asia submitted themselves, procuring
by gifts, that they should not be constrained to receive any Garrison, but
only pay Tribute, and serve in the Wars. Afterward, in his march to Babylon,
he brought under the greater Phrygia, subdued the Cappadocians and Arabians. He
sat down before that City with a vast Army, the walls whereof after he had
viewed, he concluded there was no storming of it, and resolved the best way was
to pine them out. Understanding then, that they were provided within for a
whole year, he divided his Army into twelve parts, assigning to each a month
to lie in Leaguer, at which the besieged scoffed as utterly out of danger. But
Cyrus taking notice how the River ran through the City, caused deep ditches to
be made, which by dreining, rendered it fordable, and so taking advantage of a
solemn Feast, entered by night, and surprised them all in their cups. The King
was slain by Gobryas and Gadatas, who both, being formerly injured by him, had
revolted to Cyrus. The Inhabitants, commanded upon pain of death to deliver up
their Arms, instantly obeyed. And thus the Babylonian Empire being quite
overthrown, Cyrus assumed to himself Royal Majesty, settling his Court with
great wisdom, wherein Xenophon, in his most exquisite History, makes him to
have excelled, in all things, to admiration.

The sum of that wherein Ctesias dissenteth from other Historians, concerning
Cyrus.
47. Ex Photii Bibliotheca.
But Ctesias will have Astyages (whom he calls Astyigas) nothing akin to
Cyrus; tells us how he fled to Ecbatane, where he was hid by his Daughter
Amytis, and her Husband Spitama: and how Cyrus coming upon them, put them both
to the Rack, to make them confess where he was, with their children Spitaces
and Magabemes. Astyigas, rather than they should be tortured, discovered
himself, and was first bound with fetters, but afterward honored as a Father
by Cyrus, who at length married Amytis, having killed Spitama, because he had
denied he knew where he was. After the marriage, the Bactrians gave up
themselves to Cyrus and Amytis, though formerly they made great and effectual
resistance. He relates also how Cyrus made War upon the Sacae, whose King
Amorges he took prisoner; but Sperethra the Queen gathered an Army of 300000
Men, and 200000 Women, and therewith overthrowing Cyrus, took him with other
prisoners, and thereby redeemed her Husband. With the help then of Amorges he
made War upon Croesus, and besieged Sardis, which City he took by a stratageme
taught him by Oebares; making images of the Persians, and placing them upon the
Walls, at which the defendants were affrighted. But, before this, Vide Julium
Frontinum Stratagem. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Croesus deluded by a Spectrum, gave out his Son, an Hostage to Cyrus, and
delaying to perform what he had promised, procured his death, which the Mother
beholding from the wall, tumbled her self down headlong, and yet was not
killed; but, the City being taken, fled to Apollo's Temple and died there.

48. Croesus being bound in the Temple, by an art he had of deceiving the
sight, three times was loosed, though the place was secured, and committed to
the care of Oebares; for which, they that were bound with him lost their heads,
Then was he brought into the Palace and more strongly fettered, but was loosed
again by Thunder and Lightning. Hereat Cyrus his anger abated, and giving him
his liberty, he used him ever after with great respect, and bestowed on him a
great City called Barene, near to Ecbatane. After this, Cyrus sent Petisacas
his Eunuch to fetch Astyigas from the Barcanians, both he and his wife having a
great desire to see him: But Petisacas through the instigation of Oebares left
him in a desert place, where he was famished to death. The treachery was
revealed by dreams, and Petisacas was given up into the hands of Amytis, who
plucked out his eyes, his skin over his ears, and then crucified him: Oebares
fearing the like punishment, though Cyrus promised him indemnity, killed
himself. As for the body of Astyigas it was sumptuously buried, having been
guarded by Lions in the Wilderness till Petisacas fetched it away. These
improbable things are related by Ctesias.

What Berosus and Abydenus wrote of him.
49. Berosus the Chaldaean left recorded that, Apud Joseph. cont. Apion. l. 1.
in the 17th year of Nabonidus, Cyrus, having subdued all Asia, with a great
Army, turned against Babylon. That Nabonidus meeting and engaging with him in
battle, was overthrown, and betook himself into a Town of the Borsippians.
Cyrus besieging Babylon, and considering it was not to be taken in haste, A. M.
Olymp. 6. an. 1. V.C. 214.
returned to Borsippus, where Nabonidus not expecting a storm, yielded himself;
and Cyrus using him kindly sent him from Babylon into Caramania, where he
allotted him an habitation. Abydenus Apud Eusebius. prapar. Evang. lib. 9.
further added, that Cyrus bestowed upon Nabonidus, now above 80 years old, the
Government of Caramania. This is the sum of what the most ancient Historians
delivered concerning Cyrus his attainment of the Empire of the East; which
happened about the year of the World 3465, the first of the 60th Olympiad, 538
years before the Era of Christ.

CHAP. III. Of Sacred History. Contemporaries with the Babylonian Empire.
SECT. I. From the time of Phaleg, and the division of the Earth; to the
departure of the Israelites out of Egypt.
Phaleg. Reu. Sarug. Nahor. Terah.
1. PHaleg being 30 years old, begat Reu, otherwise called Rehu and Ragau by the
70: Reu 32 years old, begat Sarug. Genesis 11.
He at 30 years of age, had a Son named Nachor. And Nachor, one (when he was
29) called Terah or Their.

Abram.
2. Terah being 70 years old begat Abram, Nachor, and Haran. Verse. 26.
Not that all these were born at the same time, or are to be accounted in age
as we find them in order; What year of his Father he was born.

De istis lege Ludov. Cappellum. Chronol. Sacra. notis ad Tabulam 5. Joh.
Gerard. Vossii.

Isagog. Chronolog. Dissert. 5. c. 6.

Jacob. Cappell. Hist. Sacra and Exotica ad A. M. 2003, and multus alios.


priority in years not being constantly observed in Scripture; but rather that
of piety and true worth. Haran is to be reckoned as the eldest; who died at Ur
of the Chaldees, before his Father departed thence, and left 3 children, viz.
one Son named Lot: and two Daughters, Milcah married to his Brother (and her
Uncle) Nahor, and Sarai (or Iscah) to Abram. The second was Nahor, Father to
Chesed (or Chased;) and so Abram the youngest; because he was born, not in the
70th as has been thought; but 130 year of his Father. For Terah lived in all
Verse. 32.
205 year, and died in Charan. Abram, when he came out of Charran (which Acts
7.^4
Stephen says, was after his Father's death) was Genesis 12.4.
75 years old; which being deducted out of 205, 130 years will remain. But if
he was born in the 70 year of his Father; then, at his death, was he 135 years
old; and having Isaac born to him, when 100, in the Land of Canaan, he must
with him have returned back to Charran (which seems very incredible); or else
he left it not at his Father's death, as Stephen must make us believe he did.

3. Abram therefore was born in the 130 year of his Father's life, A. M. 2008.
and the 2008th of the World; as is clear from the ages of all his Progenitors,
taken at the births of their Sons, and laid together. About the 70 year of his
age, God commanded him to leave his Father's house, SECT. I.
Gen 11.12. Acts 7.
and come into the Land which he should show him; promising to make of him a
great Nation, to bless him, and in him all the Families of the Earth. He,
obeying this command, drew on his Father also with him, He comes from Ur to
Canaan.
and so (together with Lot the Son of Haran, and Sarai Abram's wife) they came
from Ur of the Chaldaeans to Charran and dwelt there. A. M. 2078.
Dwelling there seems to intimate a longer stay than of one year; so that
some probably think 5 years to have been there spent. For Terah, now very old,
might detein them by his weakness; they being unwilling to leave him, till
they saw him either recovered or dead: But after his death, mindful of God's
command, they left Charran, and came into the Land of Canaan. Thence into
Canaan.
This journey from Ur to Charran, was the beginning of the 430 years of his,
and his posteritie's, sojourning in a strange Land; the promise also made to
him being so many years before the promulgation of the Law in Mount Sinai, as
the Apostle Paul has observed.

4. The first place of Canaan in which Abram made any stay, was Sichem; Genesis 12.
where God again appeared to him, and renewed his Promise; another of giving
that Land to his Seed being added to it; and in this place he built the first
Altar to the Lord. Thence he removed toward the hilly Country, and the Eastern
tract of Luz, (afterward called Bethel) where he built another Altar; and so
proceeded into the Southern Coasts, whence a Famine drove him into Egypt.
Sojourneth in Egypt.
There he sojourned, and taught the Egyptians Astrology, which Josephus says,
they were ignorant of, till he communicated to them the knowledge of it, and of
Arithmetic. His wife being beautiful; for fear of his life, he counterfeited
himself her Brother, so that Pharaoh began to cast his affections on her, till,
plagued by God, he was constrained to dismiss them both in peace. Out of
Egypt then he returned to that place, between Hai and Bethel, where he built
the second Altar: Chap. 13.
Now was he and Lot grown so rich, that no longer could they conveniently live
together. Lot being departed to the Plains of Sodom, God again renewed his
promise to Abram, which he more largely explained, both as to the giving of the
Land, and the propagation of his Posterity. After this, as he was commanded, he
went and viewed the Land; then pitched his Tents in the Plain of Mamre near
Hebron, where he built another Altar to the Lord.

5. At this time 4 Kings about the River Euphrates, Chap. 14.
viz. Amraphel King of Shinar o^ Babylonia, Arioch King of Ellasar, (thought to
be Arabia, because of a City upon the borders of that Country, called Ellas)
Chedorlaomer King of Elam (afterward Persia) and ^idal King of Nations
(thought to be many petty Kingdoms, adjoining to Phoenicia and Palaestine) came
and fought against the 5. Kings of the Pentapolis; viz. Bera of Sodom, Birsha
of Gomorrah, Shinab King of Admah, Shemeber of Zebojim, and the King of Bela
(afterward called Zoar); all who, had 12 years served Chedorlaomer; Recovereth
Lot and the Booty from the 4 Kings.
and in the 1^th rebelled. They overthrew these five petty Princes* led away
much pillage, and many Captives, amongst which was Lot, who then sojourned in
Sodom. Abram hearing this, armed 318 servants; and, pursuing them, recovered
Lot, and all the prey, which he restored to the owners. In his return,
Melchisedech (whom some improbably make Sem) King of Salem (or Jerusalem,)
Priest of the most high God, brought forth Bread and Wine, and blessed him; to
whom he gave the Tithes of all. In this story Abram is first called an Hebrew
by Moses (And there came one which had escaped and told Abram the Hebrew) which
word in Scripture, is not found applied to any other before him.

6. Some Vide Bochartum Phaleg. lib. 2. c. 10.
think he was so called from Heber the Son of Salah, and that this appellation
only was proper to his Family, Why called an Hebrew.
because it kept the most ancient or Hebrew tongue incorrupt. But Lege Ludov.
Cappell. Chronol. Sacra. p. 111, etc. (...).
others finding the word to signify one that comes from beyond the water, or
a Stranger; think it was given to Abram upon no other account, then because he
came from beyond Euphrates. None of Heber's Posterity being called so but only
he, and some of his; they think, adds much to their reason. They conclude,
that the Hebrew language was not appropriate to Heber as a reward of his piety,
because those that descended of him used it not always; and to others, besides
his posterity, it appears to have been natural. They instance that Laban
spoke Syriack, and the Canaanites and Philistines the Hebrew naturally; as the
names of their men, places, rivers, etc. do show. Therefore they judge it most
probable that Abram speaking the Chaldaean language before (which only
differs in dialect from the Hebrew) got both the name and language, after his
arrival in the Land of Canaan. The Heathen Artapanus apud Eusebius. and Charax
apud Stephanum.
Writers thought them to have been called Hebrews from Abraham, as corrupted
from Abrahaeans, out of ignorance of the language. Augustine also once inclined
to this opinion, which he afterward renounced.

7. Abram, after his victory over the Kings, Retractat. l. 2. c. 16.
received a more large promise from God, who engaged to become to him a shield,
and a sufficient reward; and (for that it troubled him to go childlesse) to
give him issue, Genesis 15.
from which should proceed an innumerable posterity, that, inhabiting a strange
Land four hundred years, was to return and possess this of Canaan, when the
iniquity of the Amorites would be full, in the fourth Generation. Chap. 16.
This League made betwixt God and Abram was confirmed by Sacrifice; yet, Sarai,
Ismael born.
seeing her self barren, persuaded her husband to go in unto Hagar her
handmaid, of which he had a son born to him, and named Ismael, in the eleventh
year after his coming into Canaan, Chap. 17.
the 86 of his Age and of the World, the 2094. In the 13th year after, A. M.
2094.
God made another Covenant with him concerning the seed of Isaac, who was to
be born the year following, and Circumcision was instituted as a seal thereof.
Abraham and Sarah.
Now, whereas his name before was Abram, or an High-father, it was changed into
Abraham, or Father of a great multitude. And Sarai, which signifies My
Princess, or Lady, (as of one family) was altered into Sarah, or a Princess
absolute; as of many Nations. Not long after, God made known to Abraham his
purpose to destroy Sodom, and the other Cities for their abominable
wickedness. He interceded hard for them; Sodom, etc. destroyed.
but there being not so many as five righteous persons in Sodom, God having
taken care for Lot and his family, rained fire and brimstone down upon the
Cities, which together with the Plain were utterly destroyed; only Bela was
spared for Lot's sake, who fled thither. Of the rest the Dead Sea (into which
the ground was converted) reremaineth a lasting Monument to this day. Vide
John. Bistelium Jesuetam, de Illustribus ruinis.
In this Sea (or Lake) no living Creature is bred, having nothing but a
Sulphurous matter thence taken in great quantities. It is described to be 72
miles in length, and 19 in breadth. Nigh to it fair and pleasant Apples grow,
which being touched, turn into a Sulphurous vapor: and a tradition remained
amongst the Heathen of these Cities being destroyed Lege Tacitum Histor. l 5.
with Thunder and Lightning from Heaven. Lot's wife, after she had got out of
Sodom, looked back, and was turned into a Pillar of Salt. His two daughters,
thinking all mankind to have perished, made their father drunk and lay with
him; from which incestuous copulation came Moab and Ammon, fathers of the
Moabites and Ammonites, two great and powerful Nations. Genesis 20.


8. A little after (in the same year) Abraham having continued in the Plain of
Mamre about eighteen years, departed unto Gerar the Metropolis of the
Philistines; where happened the same thing concerning his wife, A. M. 2108.
as formerly had done in Egypt, Abimelech the King having taken her into his
house, Isaak born.
who therefore was plagued till he restored her with large gifts. Chap. 21.
The year being precisely finished, Sarah bare to him Isaac (so called because
he laughed when God made mention of it to him) he being now an hundred years
old, and she ninety; four hundred before the departure of his posterity out of
Egypt. At the weaning of Isaac, Sarah seeing Ismael mocking, procured him and
his mother to be banished the house, God bidding Abraham fulfill her desire
herein, and promising to make of him a great Nation. When Isaac was grown up
(though of what Age is not expressed, Chap. 22.
some guessing thirty years; others (unprobably) ten, or twelve, because he
must have been of sufficient strength to carry wood) God to try his father's
faith, commanded him to Offer him up for a burnt-offering on Mount Moriah,
where afterward the Temple of Solomon stood. He, out of obedience, went about
to do it; but God accepting his will for a performance, renewed his promise to
him. Sarah dies.
Sarah died aged 127 years, Chap. 23.
and after her death Abraham married another wife, called Keturah, by which he
had other six sons. To those he gave gifts, and before his death sent them away
from Isaac, the Heir of the promise.

Isaac married.
9. When Isaac was forty years old, his father Chap. 24.
procured him to wife, Rebecca the daughter of Bethuel, who was son to Nachor,
A. M. 2148.
the brother of Abraham. She (married at fourteen years of Age, according to
the tradition of the Jews) was barren twenty years; Chap. 25.
but then her husband beseeching God for her, she brought A.M. 2168.
forth twins (Esau and Jacob) which strugled in her womb; the elder being, as
God foretold, to serve the younger. Fiveteen years after Abraham died, Abraham
dies.
being 175 years old, having sojourned in the Land of Canaan a hundred years;
22 after the death of Sem, four before that of Heber; in the days of Inachus
King of the Argives, 1821 years before the Era of Christ, in the 2183 year of
the World. Of Abraham (besides Artapanus and Charan before mentioned) Apud
Joseph Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Berosus the Caldaean had some knowledge, though he named him not. Hecataeus
not only made mention of him by the way, but wrote an History of him. Nicolaus
Damascenus in the fourth book of his Histories, related that Abraham, a certain
stranger, reigned at Damascus; having come from a Country about Babylon, said
to be that of the Chaldaeans. That he departed thence with his people into the
Land of Canaan, afterward called Judaea, where his posterity grew very
numerous; concerning which he should speak in another place. In Josephus his
time the name of Abraham was famous at Damascenus; where was shown a certain
Village, called Abraham's dwelling.

10. After the death of Abraham, God blessed Isaac, Genesis 26.
and made the same Covenant with him. In a time of Famine, he also sojourned in
Gerar, where dissembling concerning Rebecca his wife, the same thing happened
to them as formerly to Abraham and Sarah, from another Abimelech, which name
was common to all the Kings of the Philistines. Ismael dies.
Some years after, Ishmael died, aged 137 years, 48 after his father, in the
year of the World 2231. From his eldest son Nebaioth, His posterity.
descended the Nabathaeans, who Strabo l. 16. p. 779. C.
inhabited part of Arabia, from the River Euphrates to the Red Sea, called
Arabia Petraea, from Petra the Metropolis of the Country; which, wanting
fruits, abounded in Sheep and Cattle. Lib. 19. p. 722. A.
Diodorus describes it to have lain like a Wilderness untilled, as without
inhabitants; without Rivers or Fountains. It was unlawful with them to sow or
plant, to drink wine or build houses, being extraordinary desirous of liberty,
and judging these things but temptations, to such as were stronger, to inthral
them. Some of them kept Camels, others Sheep; some used to convey Spices,
brought out of Arabia the Happy, to the Sea. When they were invaded by an
Enemy, they betook themselves into the Wilderness, which being vast, and
without water, affoarded them sufficient protection. Another son of Ismael,
named Kedar, gave name to a place of Arabia the Desert, often mentioned in
Scripture. It is thought that, though the Chusaeans, Madianites, and Ismaelites
were of several Originals; yet they dwelt promiscuously together, and grew up
into one Nation of the Saracens.

11. Fifteen years after this, Isaac being 138 years old and blind, Genesis ^7.
sent his eldest son Esau to Hunt for Venison, that he might eat and bless him
before his death. But Jacob, by his mother's help, supplanted him, and got the
blessing, having formerly bought his birthright for pottage. Hereat Esau
enraged determined to kill him after his fathers death; which Rebecca knowing,
sent him into Mesopotamia to her brother Laban, that he might thence also take
a wife out of her own kindred, and not make his choice amongst the Hittites, of
which Esau had married two wives. In his journey, Chap. 28.29.30.
God appeared to him in a dream and blessed him; for which cause he changed the
name of the place from Luz into Bethel. Coming to Laban, after a months time,
Jacob flies from his brother into Mesopotamia.
he Covenanted to serve him seven years for his youngest daughter Rachel; which
being ended, Leah, the eldest was given to him in her stead, and presently
after Rachel; for which he agreed to serve him other seven years. A. M. 2246.
Rachel, most beloved, continued barren, and Leah because neglected, obtained
favor of God to be fruitful, which raised such emulation betwixt them, as
Rachel first, and then Leah, gave her maid to his bed, accounting the Children
begotten on them as their own. Within seven years he had by Leah seven sons,
His issue.
viz. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zabulon, and a daughter named
Dinah; by Bilhah, Rachel's maid, two sons, Dan, and Naphtali; by Zilpah, Leahs
maid, also two sons, Gad and Asher. Lastly, by Rachel her self one son, named
Joseph, and born the fourteen year of his service ending. Six years longer he
served Laban for wages (being to have the Cattle of such and such a color)
which his hard master changed ten times; but could not withstand the providence
of God in his growing rich.

His return.
12. Having served his father-in-law and Uncle twenty years, Chap. 31.32. etc.
and observing what envy he had contracted from him and his sons, he stole away
with all he had, and proceeded three days on his yourney, ere his departure
was known. Then Laban with his friends pursuing, overtook him after seven days
in Mount Gilead, which from the event of this meeting had its name. After
several expostulations, they made a Covenant ( Laban being warned by God not to
hurt him) and, in Testimony thereof, laid together an heap of stones, which
Jacob called Galead; but Laban, in his Syrian tongue, Jegar-Sahadutha. Jacob
then, continued his journey toward Canaan, A. M. 2266.
wrestling with God's Angel in his way; from which he received a blessing, and
the surname of Israel. His brother Esau also met him, and lovingly received him
contrary to his fears. The first place he stayed at was Succoth, so called
because there he built an House, and made Booths for his Cattle. Thence he
passed over Jordan, and came to Sichem, where he bought of Hamor, the father of
Sichem, a Field, for a hundred Lambs, or so many pieces of money. How long he
continued in either of these places is not expressed. Demetrius * and Alexander
Polyhistor wrote that he abode ten years in Socot, Apud Eusebius. praeparat.
Evang. lib. 9. cap. 21.
saying nothing of Sichem; perhaps because he made little stay there. Indeed
Dinah seems to have been ravished not long after their first coming thither;
Hamor speaking to his Citizens concerning them, as persons lately come; and her
curiosity to see the women of that Country, probably may be thought to have
proceeded, Dinah ravished.
from the strangeness of it. At the end of these ten years she was ravished,
then sixteen years old; being born a little before Joseph, and perhaps the same
year. To be revenged upon Sichem, who committed the rape, her two brothers
Simeon and Levi slew him, and put the whole City to the sword, coming upon
them when they were yet sore by Circumcision, which he had procured them to
admit of, that he might obtain the maid for his wife.

13. Jacob much troubled hereat, was commanded by God to go to Bethel, having
buried all the strange gods and the earings of his family under the Oak in
Sichem. At Bethel he erected an Altar to the Lord, and here Deborah the Nurse
of Rebecca died. Thence he removed to Ephrath, being 107 years old, Rachel
dies.
and when they had almost reached the place, Rachel died in Travel of Benjamin,
having (as Demetrius and Alexander wrote) lived with her husband 23 years.
Eleven years after Jacobs return into Canaan, Chap. 38.
when he was now 109 years old, Joseph being hated of his brethren, because he
had brought to their father their evil report, and for his dreams (which
presaged his pre-eminence over them) they sold him to the Ismaelites; Joseph
sold.
A.M. 2277.
who carried him down into Egypt, where Potiphar Captain of the Kings Guard
bought him, being now seventeen years old. Ten years he lived with him: till
refusing to satisfy the wanton desires of his Mistress, he was falsely accused
by her of her own fault, and cast into prison. The year after, he interpreted
the Dreams of the chief Butler and Baker of Pharoh, both which were in prison
with him; and accordingly the Baker was hanged, but the Butler restored, who
yet forgot Joseph.

14. At this time his Grandfather Isaac died, aged 180 years, A. M. 2288.
in the 2288 year of the World. He was buried in Hebron, by his two Sons Esau
and Jacob; Isaac dies.
the former having (as some think they have ground in charity to believe)
reconciled himself to his Brother, and joined himself to the Church; not
being estranged from the Grace of God, but only from the special and
particular Covenant, as to the promised Seed; which they have the same reason
to think concerning Ismael: The Funeral past, and the Goods divided betwixt
them, being both exceeding rich, and therefore requiring large room; Esau
departed to his former possession of Mount Seir; Providence so ordaining it,
that when the Israelites should afterward come to inherit Canaan, his
posterity might neither be destroyed, nor displaced. He was otherwise called
Edom, Edom.
and from him Idumaea took it is name, which seems from Strabo to have also
included the Country of the Nabataeans. And likely enough it is, that he who
married the Sister of Nebaioth, might join himself to them and praeside over
them. This is the famous Hero, Vide Fulle^ Miscell. 4. c. 20.
from whom not only Idumaea, but also the adjoining Erithraean, Edomaean, or
Red Sea, (all signifying the same thing) was so called; being known to the
Greeks, by the name of Erythras, the same with Edom.

15. Genesis 41.
But two years after Joseph had interpreted the Dreams of the servants of
Pharaoh, he was called up out of prison, to explain the meaning of one, which
the King himself had dreamed. This, A. M. 2290.
betokening 7 years of great plenty to come, and after them as many of famine;
and it being necessary, as he hinted to Pharaoh, to choose out some wise Man,
who being set over the Land, should gather and preserve the fruits of the
Earth, against the time of want; Pharaoh made choice of him, being about 30
years old, for this purpose: he appointed him next to himself, Joseph advanced.
and gave him in marriage Asenath the Daughter of Potipherah, Priest of On (or
Heliopolis, where Strabo writes, that the Priests of old time had their
habitation) on which be begat Ephraim and A. M. 2297.
Manasses. According to his praediction, 7 most plentiful years ensued, wherein
he gathered into storehouses the Corn that abounded; and after them came 7
other of famine, which praevailed sore both in Egypt and the neighboring
Countries of Canaan and Arabia. Chap. 42, 43, etc.
Jacob amongst others, wanting provisions, in the 2d year of the famine, sent
his Sons down into Egypt to buy Corn. Joseph knowing them, though
undiscovered, accused them for coming as Spies, cast them into prison, and
dismissed them not, till Simeon (the eldest of those which conspired against
his life) was bound, and left as an Hostage, for their bringing down of
Benjamin; that so their story might be confirmed, of their being one Man's
Sons, and that their youngest Brother was left behind. The next year, being
pressed with famine, they returned and Benjamin with them, whom their Father
was constrained to let go. Now, after some further terrifying of them, he made
himself known, and sent for his Father down into Egypt. Jacob understanding of
his Son's life and promotion (whom he had given over of a long time, Jacob
goes into Egypt.
A. M. 2298.
for dead) gladly went down, and with him 66 Souls, besides his Sons Wives; in
the 3d year of the famine, of the World the 2298th, aged 130 years.

16. By Pharaoh's consent, Joseph placed them in the Land of Goshen, Chap. 47.
and there nourished them during the famine. He sold to the Egyptians the Corn
formerly treasured up, and therewith purchased for the King all their Money,
Goods, and Lands, except the Lands of the Priests, which were not alienated.
The grounds he afterward granted to the former owners, Chap. 48, 49.
paying the fifth part of the profit to Pharaoh's use. After Jacob had lived in
Egypt 17 years, he adopted the two eldest Sons of Joseph; viz. Manasses and
Ephraim, of whom the younger he preferred before the elder: He called his Sons
together, blessed them, and told them apart what should befall them in their
posterity. From Reuben his first born he took the pre-eminence, because he had
defiled his bed, and gave it to Judah. A. M. 2315.
He prophesied of Christ's coming, Dies.
commanded them to bury him in the Cave of Machpelah, in the Land of Canaan,
with his Ancestors, and then died at the age of 147 years, in the year of the
World 2315. Joseph caused his servants the Physicians to embalme Israel, and a
mourning of 70 days (or 72), was observed for him, which number in that
Country was only proper to Kings; Then, obtaining leave of Pharaoh, he and his
Brethren, with a great company of Courtiers, carried him into the Land of
Canaan, Genesis 50.
and buried him there, according to his will, where they also mourned for him 7
days.

17. Being returned into Egypt, Joseph forgave his Brethren the fault they
formerly had committed against him (which now they feared he would revenge,
after their Father's death,) and as long as he lived* he nourished them and
their children. This space of time was 54 years after his Father's death, at
the end whereof, having exhorted them to Unity and Concord, foretelling them
their departure out of Egypt, Joseph dies.
and commanding them thence to carry his Bones, he dyed at the age of 110
years, A. M. 2370.
when he had governed Egypt; under several Kings, the space of 80. Trogus
Pompe^us (as appears out of Justin Lib. 36. c. 2.
his Epitomizer) wrote many things concerning him, partly taken out of the
Sacred History, partly mixed with such Fables as the Heathen were not wanting
to invent concerning the Jews. Abram, Moses, and Israel, are made by him Kings
of Damascus, which City took it is name from their Predecessor. Israel had ten
Sons, to whom he committed the Kingdom, and commanded them to call themselves
Jews from Judah, who died before the division, and whose portion was divided
amongst them all. The youngest of the 10 Sons was Joseph, whose excellent wit
his Brothers fearing, they sold him to some Merchants that carried him down
into Egypt. Here learning the Magic Arts, he became very dear to the King,
having skill in working Wonders, and interpretation of Dreams: moreover,
nothing either Divine or Humane was beyond his reach; insomuch, that he
foretold the barrenness of the ground several years before it happened, and all
Egypt had perished with famine, but that the King, by his advice, caused Corn
to be treasured up many years: finally, such was his knowledge, that his
answers seemed rather the Oracles of a God, then the replies of a Man. Then
follows that Moses was his Son, who, being both wise and beautiful, became a
leader to such Egyptians as were infected with scab and itch, and so returned
to Damascus, the Country of his Ancestors. Which lies (with others hereafter to
be mentioned) are to be attributed to the malice of the Egyptians. With the
life of Joseph ends the first Book of Moses his history, called by the
Greeks, Genesis, which contains the account of 2369 years of the World. The
next to it in order of time, the Book of Job is thought to be; of which Moses
also is reputed Author, by the common consent and opinion of the Hebrews.

18. After the death of Joseph, and all that generation, Exodus 1.
the Children of Israel increased abundantly, and grew exceeding mighty; so
that the Land was filled with their numbers. The Israelites oppressed in Egypt.
But a certain King arising, which knew not Joseph; to keep them down, he
pressed them with sore Labor; and lest they should increase, gave order to the
Midwives to drown all the Male Children in the River. At this time (58 years
after the death of Joseph, Chap. 2.
and 41 after that of Levi) Aruram, the Son of Caath, and Grandson of Levi, by
Jochabed the Daughter of Levi (so called by an Hebraism, Vide Pererium in 2
Exodi.
and not Caath's own Sister as some have thought) was made Father of a Son,
whom for his beauty they hid 3 months, Moses born.
not fearing the Kings command, A M. 2428.
and when he could no longer be concealed, put him in an Ark of Bul-rushes,
daubed within and without with Pitch, and laid him on the brinck of the River.
Hither the King's Daughter (by Josephus called Thermutis) coming down to wash
her self, found the Babe; and moved with compassion, sent for a Nurse, which
was Jochabed her self, through the procurement of Miriam her Daughter, which
had watched what would become of the Child, and unknown, had offered her self
for a messenger. Being nursed up, she educated him as her own Son, and called
him Moses, because she had taken him out of the water. Moy in the Egyptian
tongue, as Josephus De nominibus Haebraeis (...) Josepho versis vid. Jacob.
Cappellum Hist. Sacra and Exotica ad A. M. 1719.
says, signifying Water, and Yses taken out, though Mosche in the Hebrew is no
compounded word, signifying drawn out, delivered, or rather a deliverer; not
without a mystery; he being a Type of that great Deliverer of Mankind. He was
learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians, and became mighty in words and
in deeds.

19. But Moses being grown up, by Faith refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, and despised the pleasure of his Court; having, according
to Josephus his history, thrown down his Crown, set upon his head when a
Child, and trampled it under his feet; for which, as an ill omen, the Priest
(who had foretold, that his Nativity would prove dysastrous to the Egyptians)
would have had him slain; but he was spared through the affection of Thermutis.
Being forty years old, he visited his Brethren the Israelites; and looking upon
their burdens, when he saw an Egyptian smiting one of them, he killed him, and
hid his body in the sand. But this coming to Pharaoh's ear, he was forced to
fly for his life, into the Land of Midian, where he kept the Sheep of Jethro,
or Hebab, Priest of that Country, A. M. 2468.
who gave him Zipporah his Daughter to wife. Forty years he continued with him,
Exodus 3, and 4.
till the burdens of the Children of Israel were grown so intolerable, after
above 80 years continuance, that God, being moved with their cries, called to
him out of a burning Bush, as he was feeding Sheep, to send him on a message to
Pharaoh, about their dismission. He labored by all means to make excuse; but
at length, confirmed by promise of Divine assistance by Miracles, and the
company of his Brother Aaron, (3 years elder); he undertook the employment.

Sent to Pharaoh.
20. This message was ill resented by Pharaoh, Chap. 5, and 7. etc.
and greater burdens imposed on the people; no Straw being now allowed them,
for the making of Brick, in which servile work they were employed. Many signs
and wonders were wrought by Moses, in the King's presence, which little
availed; Jannes and Jambres, Magicians, doing the same with their Enchantments.
Ten Plagues also by the Ministry of Moses, The ten Plagues of Egypt.
God inflicted upon the Land. 1. The waters were turned into blood. 2. Frogs
swarmed in the Land. 3. Lice. 4. Flies and other Insects. 5. A Murrain followed
amongst the Cattle. 6. Ulcers in Man and Beast. 7. Thunder and Rain mingled
with Fire, and Hail, that destroyed the Corn with the Trees of the field. 8.
Locusts covered the face of the Earth, and consumed the fruits thereof. 9.
Ensued Darkness throughout the Land Egypt, such as no Egyptian could stir
out of his house, yet the Israelites had light in their dwellings. 10. Last of
all, the Firstborn were slain, from Pharaoh that sat upon the Throne, to the
Firstborn of the Captive in the Dungeon, and the firstborn of Cattle.

The Israelites depart.
21. Exodus 12.
The Nine former Plagues Pharaoh's heart was so hardened as to withstand; but
the Tenth forced him to let the people go. Upon the death of the Firstborn, he
and his Subjects thrust them out with haste, out of the Land, A. M. 2508.
and fogot the Jewels of silver and Jewels of gold, which they had lent them.
For the Israelites were commanded by God, to borrow these things; and, the
night before their departure, to kill a Lamb; with the blood of which they were
to sprinkle the lintels of their doors, that the Angel appointed to do this
execution upon the Firstborn, might pass by their houses, at the sight
thereof. And, in memorial of the thing, this they were to do every year on the
tenth day of that month (thenceforth commanded to begin the year, being called
Abib) eating a Lamb in a traveling posture, with their loins girt, and staves
in their hands. Thus left they Egypt, 430 years after the first promise made
to Abraham, and his leaving Ur of the Chaldaeans, 400 after the birth of Isaac,
210 after Jacob's descent into Egypt, in the 2508th year of the World. This
their departure is also attested by Heathen Writers; but related to have been
upon such grounds, as the Egyptians themselves invented; who, as it seems,
took occasion from the Plague of Ulcers, which they suffered in their own
persons, to feign, that because of Leprosy they were forced out of the Land;
as will largely appear in the History of Egypt.

SECT. II. SECT. II.
From the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, to the death of Solomon,
and the Rent of the Kingdom.
The number of the Israelites at their departure.
1. THe number of the Children of Israel may be esteemed by what is recorded
concerning their men of War, Vide Pererium in 12. cap. Exodus
of the Age of twenty years and upwards. Of these went out about 600000.
besides Women and Children; so that if those of that Age be reckoned as two
parts of five, of the whole multitude, (which is the usual account amongst all
Nations, to reckon men for War, as 40 to 100. in respect of the whole body)
then the total number of all, both old and young, amounted to about 1500000.
To these must be added a mixed multitude; which, having taken up their
religion, went out with them, and is thought by some to have consisted of as
many more; so that the whole sum of all together, at this rate, would arise to
3000000. As for the number of the Israelites, it need not seem incredible, that
from about 70 persons in the space of 210 years, so many should proceed. For if
but one man, in the thirtieth year of his Age should begin to be a father, and
had but in all ten Children, Vide Jacob. Cappell. ad A. M. 2293.
who also with their posterity should beget at the same Age, that one man,
before 200 years, would have descended from him, of the sixth Generation
1000000. of the fifth 100000. of the fourth 10000. of great Grandchildren
1000. of Grandchildren 100. and of Children 10. But that the Israelites began
to be fathers before the Age of thirty is more then probable; nature Mea
memoria, in civitate Lactoratensi Novempopulaniae, puer minor annorum duodecim
genuit ex puella consobrina sua quae nondum decimum annum expleverat. Rem notam
narro and cujus memoria adhuc recens est in Aquitania. Pater hoc ipse de se
patri meo testatus est, quod alioqui tunc ne pueri quidem ignorabant. Scaliger.
in Parei Deuteronomy. 1.
sometimes not requiring half that time, and there is ground sufficient to
think that they often exceeded the number of ten Children. The Scripture
relates Abdon to have had forty sons, Abizara thirty, and as many daughters,
Gideon seventy sons, and Ahab as many. Aegyptus, Danaus, Priamus, and Darius,
are reported to have had fifty Children; Artaxerxes, Justin relates to have
had 115. and Hierotimus 600. These things (to add no more) prove the great
increase of the Israelites to have been possible in the course of Nature,
although not without an especial providence.

2. Moses had gathered the people together, as Josephus writes, about Ramesses
the chief City of Goshen, that they might be in a readiness, and thence they
came to Succoth where was their second station. Here Moses propounded the
command of God concerning the annual observation of the Passover, The
Passover annually to be observed.
and the Consecration of the first born. A ready way hence to the Land of
Canaan would have been through that of the Philistines; but because the
Israelites were born in slavery, and therefore had but low and poor spirits; to
exercise them, to stir them up, and lest, for want of experience, they should
be so terrified as to return, God lead them another and longer way. From
Succoth therefore they came to Etham in the end of the Desert, in two days;
whither God conducted them by a Pillar of a Cloud by day, and Pillar of fire by
night, that never forsook them, till they came to the Borders of the promised
Land. From Etham they journeyed to Pihahiroth, and thence to the Red Sea.
Hither Pharoh pursued them with all his Forces, repenting he had let them go.
They were there exceedingly struck with terror, and murmured against Moses,
for bringing them out of Egypt. In this extremity God divided the waters of the
Red Sea, which being as a Wall on both sides to them, they passed over on dry
ground. The Egyptians essayed also to pursue them in this place; but the Pillar
then removed from before them, and placed it self between them, giving light to
the Israelites, The Israelites pass the Red Sea.
but causing great darkness to their Enemies. Hereupon ensued great
consternation, and a pannick fear amongst the Egyptians, which causing great
disturbance, the Lord also fought against them, and they fled. But then the
waters returned to their place and overwhelmed them all, so that neither
Pharoh, nor any one of his men escaped. This place of the Red Sea being here
not at all fordable, the sole power of God procured their passage; though
Josephus, to gain credit to the story from the incredulous Heathen, Vide
Strabonem. l. 14. p. 666. D.
takes off from the miracle by an unsuitable comparing of it to Alexander the
Great his passing the shore of the Pamphylian-Sea, which at low water was ever
bare, and at other times not very deep.

3. From the Red Sea they journeyed three days through the Wilderness of
Etham; (which, as it seems, stretches forth it self to both the sides of the
Sea) where they found no water. Thence they came to Marah, where they found
water, but bitter, and thence the place had its name; which bitterness was
removed by the casting in of a certain Tree which God showed to Moses. From
Marah they came to their fifth station at Elim, where were twelve Fountains of
water, and seventy Palm Trees, and thence to the Red Sea; which name seems to
be applied to some Bay or Creek thereof. From the Sea they came into the desert
of Sin, where they pitched their Tents on the fifteenth day of the second
month after their departure. Quails and Manna.
Here murmuring for flesh, Quails were rained down upon the Camp at evening,
and in the morning was there found Manna, which continued every morning to
fall, all the forty years they abode in the Wilderness. This Wilderness of
Sin being very large, and reaching as far as Mount Sinai, they had several
stations in it. The ninth was at Diphka, the tenth at Alush, the eleventh at
Rephidim, where the people again murmuring for water, the Rock being struck by
Moses gushed out into streams. Whilst they here continued, Exodus 17.
the Amalekites (descended from Amalek, who was the son of Eliphaz, and Grand
son of Esau) fell in upon their rear, and made slaughter of the weaker sort.
Moses against them sent Joshua the son of Nun, he himself in the mean time
praying to God in the Mount. And as long as his hands were lifted up the
Israelites overcame, but when he let them down the Amalekites prevailed; so
that Aaron his brother, and Hur his sister Miriam's husband, bore them up till
the going down of the Sun.

4. In the third month they removed, Chap. 19.20.
and took up their station in the desert of Sinai, over against the Mountain
Horeh (which it is thought was some part of Sinai) and here they continued
almost a year; to the 20th day of the second month of the next year. Upon this
Mountain, God gave the Law of the ten Commandments in a terrible manner, on the
50th day after their coming out of Egypt, The Decalogue.
as Hieronymus ad Fabiolum: and Leo Sermon. 1. de Pentecoste.
some of the Ancients apprehended. The day after, several other Laws were
promulgated, as it were Commentaries upon the Decalogue, both Judicial and
Ceremonial. Then Moses having Offered Sacrifice, read the book of the Law to
the people, and made a Covenant betwixt God and them, and went up into the
Mount where he remained forty days: six in the lower and cloudy, and 34 in
the highest and fiery part. In this space of time he received advice concerning
the structure of the Tabernacle, the Ornaments and Consecration of Priests,
etc. From this familiar Conversing of God with Moses, the Heathen Lawgivers
took occasion to feign such a privilege to themselves. As amongst the Getes,
Zamolxis gave out he received two Laws from Vesta. Zathraustes amongst the
Arimaspians from a good Doemon. Mneves, amongst the Egyptians, from Mercury,
Minos the Cretian, from Jupiter. Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian from Apollo, and
Numa the Roman from the Goddess Egeria. To this number Biblioth. l. 1. p. 59.
B. in Margin Notat.
Diodorus, out of Ethnic ignorance, adds Moses himself, writing that he
counterfeited conference with the god Jaus.

5. But the people missing Moses so long a time, and not knowing what was
become of him, raised a tumult, and caused Aaron to make them a god that might
go before them. The Hebrews have a Tradition that Hur, opposing this, was
slain; but Aaron, overcome with their furious importunity, made them a molten
Calf of Gold, The molten Calf.
after the fashion of the Egyptians, who Worshipped two Heifers, Apis and
Mnevis, which they accounted gods. Forty days, and as many nights being
ended, God gave Moses two Tables of stone, wherein was written the Decalogue by
his own finger, Chap. 31. etc.
and sent him down, telling him wherein his people were employed. Moses
something appeasing Gods wrath came down from the Mount; SECT. 2.
but seeing them dance before the Calf, in a great rage cast the Tables out of
his hands and brake them. He put the Calf into the fire, and grinding it to
powder threw it into the Brook, and made them to drink of the water: then
commanded the Levites to take every man his sword, and slay his Neighbor; so
that of the people fell that day about 3000 men. After this, going up into the
Mount the second time, he interceded for the people, and at his return, removed
the Tabernacle, or Tent, wherein he used to speak with God, out of the Camp, in
token of the Lords displeasure. He hewed two new Tables of stone like to the
former, and having given order for the making of an Ark of Wood, and all things
about the Tabernacle, according to the pattern showed him in the Mount, he went
up the third time, and continued there forty days and as many nights without
eating any thing, as before. In this time God wrote anew the ten Commandments;
and, being pacified, renewed the league conditionally, and proposed other Laws
to the people. When Moses returned his face shone, so that he put thereon a
vail when he spoke to the multitude, to which he declared Gods commands, urged
the observation of the Sabbath, and the offering for making of the Tabernacle;
in the work whereof, the latter part of this year was spent by Bezaleel, and
his Companions.

The Tabernacle reared.
6. On the first day of the first month of the second year, Chap. 40.
was the Tabernacle reared, and in this month were these things done which are
spoken of in the third book of Moses, called Leviticus. On the fourteenth day
was the passover celebrated in the Wilderness of Sinai. Number. 19.
On the first of the second month God commanded Moses to number all the
Israelites, Number. 1.
except the Tribe of Levi, from twenty years old to sixty; the number of whom
amounted to 603550. just so many as had been found seven months before, when
the contribution was to be made for the Tabernacle. Chap. 10.
On the 20th of the same month, the Cloud which rested on the Tabernacle
removed, and they following it in four Armies came from the Wilderness of
Sinai to that of Para^, where they stayed 23 days in their 13th Mansion of
Kibroth-Hattaavah. Here the people, weary of their Heavenly bread, Chap. 23.
lusted after the flesh of Egypt, and were punished with a sudden fire, which
devoured many, and was at length quenched by the prayer of Moses. Chap. 11.
Here also Moses complaining to God of the great burden which lay upon him;
The Sanhedrim.
the Sanhedrim of the seventy Elders was instituted. In this place, moreover,
God gave the people Quails for a whole month on which they surfeited, so that
a plague arose whilst the flesh was yet betwixt their teeth, and many
perished. Hence the place had its name of Kibroth-Hattaavah, or the Sepulchers
of concupiscence.

7. From Kibroth-Hattaavah they removed to Hazeroth, Chap. 12.
where Aaron and Miriam spoke against Moses about his wife; Miriam struck with
Leprosy.
Miriam for that, was struck with Leprosy, and cast out of the Camp; till
Aaron, confessing their fault, and interceding to Moses for her, he prayed to
God, and she was healed. She being after seven days received again into the
Camp, they removed, Chap. 13.
and came to Rithma, near unto Cades-barnea, in the same desert of Paran. In
the fifth month of the second year, and the time of Vintage, Caleb the son of
Jephunne, Joshua the son of Nun, and ten other principal men were hence sent to
spy the Land of Canaan. The Spies search the Land.
After forty days they returned* bringing with them of the fruit of the Land.
Caleb and Joshuah encouraged the people, but the rest utterly disheartened them,
causing them to despair ever to possess it, because of the strength of the
walled Towns and the Giants which there lived. This raised such a mutiny, that
they not only murmured against Moses, but spoke of making them a Captain,
Chap. 14.
and of returning into Egypt, threatening to stone Caleb and Joshua, who
labored to the contrary. This so highly provoked the Lord, that he threatened
suddenly to destroy them, and being prevailed with by Moses to mitigate his
wrath, denounced that none of twenty years and upwards should ever enter into
the promised Land, but wander up and down till their Carkeises fell in the
Wilderness; except Caleb and Joshua. And this sentence was presently executed
upon the ten, which had caused the sedition.

8. When they had therefore now arrived at the borders of the promised Land,
they were commanded to turn back again into the Wilderness toward the Red
Sea. But to make some amends, as they thought, for their late fear and
cowardice, The Israelites commanded to turn back.
they arose in the morning; and, against the express command of Moses, went up
into the Mountain to fight, where the Amalekites and Canaanites that there
inhabited, smote and discomfited them even unto Hormah. At their return they
wept before the Lord, but were not heard; and upon this occasion, and the death
of those that fell daily in the Desert, Moses, as it is thought, composed the 90
Psalm, wherein complaining of Humane frailty, and shortness of life, he
signifies that Man's age was reduced to 70 or 80 years; and so now the third
time was it, as it were, cut shorter by the half; the two former having been
immediately after the Flood; and again, in the time of Phaleg, at the division
of the Earth.

9. Thenceforth, from their departure from Cades-Barnea, are numbered 17 more
stations in the Wilderness of Paran, wherein they spent 38 years, wandering
about, till all the rebellious ones were consumed. The things which happened in
those years, cannot certainly be fixed upon any particular one, Moses herein
being silent. Yet it is thought, that the History of the Man that gathered
sticks on the Sabbath day, and for it was stoned; of the rebellion of Corah and
his Companions, of Aaron's Rod that budded, etc. are to be referred to the
latter part of the second year; none of the forty, except the two former and
the last of all, being taken notice of by Moses, who records only the 17
mansions which were taken up, during the 37 years that passed between. Their
Mansions for 37 years.
The 17th and the last of these (being the 32nd mansion reckoned from the
beginning) was at Ezion-gabe^, upon the Red Sea in the Country of the Edomites,
whence they came to Cades, Numb. 33.
where they took up their 33 mansion. Hierome and others, account this Cades
the same with Cades-barnea the 15th station, making the Israelites to have
after so many windings and turnings, in so many years, returned to the same
place. But, others finding Cades-barnea in the Southern confines of Canaan,
will have this Cades or Kadesh, a place different from it, and near to
Ezion-gaber upon the Red Sea, (whence they immediately passed to it) in the
Desert of Zin. Whilst they remained in Cades, Miriam dies.
Miriam died at the age of 126 years, Chap. 20.
and was there buried. After this the people murmured, because the water which
had hitherto followed them from the Rock Rephidim, here failed, being, as some
think, swallowed up of the Red Sea. Hereupon Moses and Aaeron were commanded
only to speak to a Rock in that place, to give out water; but Moses, wearied
with the untowardnesse of the multitude, uttered some words of impatience and
diffidence, and struck the Rock twice, so that the water gushed out in great
abundance. Because they did not sanctify God in the eyes of the people, he was
angry with them, and excluded them both from entering into the Land of promise.

10. Moses afterward sent to the King of Edom, desiring leave to pass quietly
through his Country; but, he opposing, he led the people by the borders from
Kadesh unto Mount Hor, Aaron dies.
where Aaron died, some 4 months after his Sister Miriam, at the age of 123;
in the 40 year of their wandering in the Wilderness; and Eleazer his Son
succeeded him in the Office of High Priest. In the 6th month of the 40 year,
the King of Arad, Chap. 21.
who inhabited the southern parts of Canaan, came out against them and took
many prisoners; whereupon, they vowed, if God would deliver his Country into
their hands, to destroy his Cities. Hereunto God assenting, they went up, and
prospering, The King of Arad vanquished.
gave to the Country the name of Hormah, which is the same with Anathema, or
Cursed. Then ^ournyed they from mount Hor, to compass about the Land of Edom
(against which God had charged them not to fight, because of their Ancestors)
and came to the 35th mansion of Tsalmona, which signifies an image. For here
the people murmuring against the Lord and Moses, because of the tediousness of
the journey, and loathing Manna, were bitten by fiery Serpents sent by God (the
Greeks call them Dypsades, and Aelian makes them chiefly to breed in Arabia);
so that many perished without remedy. At length, Moses by God's appointment
erected on a pole a brazen Serpent, upon which as many as looked, were
presently made whole.

11. From Tsalmona they came to Punon, thence to Oboth, Chap. 33, and 34.
and so to Jie-Abarim, on the borders of Moab, in the Desert thereof, toward
the Sunrising. Here runs the Brook Zared, toward which, when they passed,
God commanded them not to make War upon the Moabites, who had formerly beaten
hence Giants called Emmim, as their Brethren the Ammonites had also outed
others, known by the name of Z^mzummim. Thirty eight years after their removal
from Kades-barnea, the Israelites passed Zared, all the carkeises of the
rebellious being in that space fallen in the Wilderness, and came to their
39th Mansion of Dikon-Gad. Thence they traveled to Almon-Diblathaim, still in
the Desert of Moab, and being to touch upon the borders of the Ammonites, God
forbad them to molest these also, because descended of just Lot. He commanded
them to pass over the River Arnon; which having done, they removed to their 41
Mansion, in the Mountain of Abarim, over against Nebo.

Sihon King of Heshbon.
12. Out of the Wilderness of Kedemoth, Moses sent to Sihon, Deuteronomy. 11.
the Amorite, King of Heshbon, to desire leave peaceably to pass through his
Borders; but he refused, and opposed them at Jahaz, Numb. 21.
where he was discomfited and slain. The Israelites thus became Masters of his
Cities and Country, Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 5.
which (as Josephus writes) lay like an Island between three Rivers; Arnon on
the South, Jabock on the North, (which falling into Jordan, loses it is name)
and Jordan it self on the West; being on the East, bounded with the Mountains
of Arabia. As they proceeded by the way of Basan, Og King thereof, Og King of
Bashan.
who remained of the Giants called Rephidim, opposing them, was also slain, and
his Country wholly subdued, with the destruction of it is Inhabitants; and in
like manner all Argob (afterward called Trachonitis) wherein were Sixty
Cities. After these Victories, they removed from the Mountains of Abarim, Numb.
22.
and came to their 42d and last Mansion (taken up by Moses) near Jordan, lying
from Jesimoth unto Shittim or Abel-Shittim, in the plains of Moab, which was so
called, because the Moabites formerly possessed them, till driven beyond Arnon
by the Amorites. Here they continued till they were led thence by Joshua, to
pass over Jordan.

13. When Balack King of Moab had heard all that the Israelites did to the
Amorites; lest under pretense of passage, they might also seize upon his
Kingdom, he consulted with the Midianites, and sent into Mesopotamia for Balaam
the Son of Beor, the Soothsayer, to come and curse them; Numb. 22, 23, 24. Chap.
intending afterward, to fall upon them. Balaam, Balaam.
having the pleasure of God revealed to him, at first feared to come: and
though he came at the second message, and labored all he could to curse them;
yet was he overruled, and his curse turned into a blessing. But although he
had no power to curse, yet he advised the King to that which tended especially
to their destruction; By his advice the people drawn to Idolatry.
To send some of the most beautiful Women into the Camp, to draw them both to
Carnal and Spiritual Fornication; the later of which was committed with
Baal-peor, the Idol of the Moabites. God being angry hereat, commanded the
principal of the Idolaters to be hanged up before the Sun, and Moses gave
order to the Judges, to slay every one his men: A Plague also brake out amongst
them, whereby in one day fell 23000 Men; 1 Cor. 10. Numb. 26.
to which those that were hanged and fell by the Sword, being added, advance
the number to 24000. Phineas the Son of Eliazar the Priest executing judgment
upon Zimri an Israelite, and Cozbi a Madianitish Woman, in the act of
Fornication; the Wrath of God was thereby appeased, and the Plague stayed.

Moses numbereth the people.
14. A little after, God commanded Moses the third time to number the people. In
this space of 40 years all the Men of War were perished, except Caleb and
Joshua, which amounted to the number of 603000. Yet was there by this time such
a supply of young ones grown up, that they almost equallized the number of
their Fathers; there being found 601730, from 20 years old and upwards, besides
23000 Levites, reckoned from a month old. After this, Moses, by Gods command,
sent Phineas with 12000 Men against the Midianites, who had conspired with the
Moabites against them. Chap. 31.
He destroyed them, and amongst them Balaam the Soothsayer, Balaam slain.
who, as it appears, was not yet returned. The Women they brought away
Captives; whereof the Married-ones they slew, and kept the Virgins for
themselves. Now were the Lands of Sihon King of the Ammorites, and Og King of
Bashan, Chap. 32.
divided amongst the Re^benites, The land beyond Jordan divided.
Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses, on this condition, that they should
accompany their brethren over the River Jordan, and assist them in the
conquest of the Land of Canaan, so long as need should require.

15. The time now drew near, that Moses must dye, being not to pass over into
the Land of Canaan. Therefore in the 11th month of the 40th year, he made a
repetition of the Law to the people, Deuteronomy. 1, etc.
related God's benefits bestowed on them, and exhorted them to obedience. The
Law he wrote in a Book, and commanded it to be read every 7th year, at the
Feast of Tabernacles. He also, at the command of God, wrote a Song concerning
the future Idolatry, and afflictions of the Israelites. Joshua being then
ordained Captain of the people in his stead, he ascended from the plains of
Moab to Mount Nebo, part of the Mountains of Abarim, Deuteronomy. Ult.
and whose top is called Phasga or P^sgah, looking toward Jericho. There God
having shown him the Land of Canaan, from the one side to the other, Moses
dies.
A. M. 2548.
he died some 5 months after Aaron, being 120 years old (the third part of
which time saving one month, he spent, as Antiq. l. 4.
Josephus writes, in Government) in the 40 year ending, after he had brought
the Israelites out of Egypt, the year of the World 2548. God buried him in the
Valley of Moab over against Beth-Peor, and no Man knows of his Sepulcher to
this day. Concerning his body, a contest happened between Michael the Archangel
and the Devil; the reason of which is thought to be, because Satan would have
had the place thereof known, that the people might be drawn to Idolatry out of
reverence to so great a person. The Israelites mourned for him 30 days, and
with his life ends the Pentateuch, or his five Books. The Book of Joshua
follows, taking it is beginning from the 41th of the departure out of Egypt,
and the 2549th year of the World.

16. Whilst the Israelites were still mourning for Moses, Josh. 1, 2, 3, 4,
Chapters.
the two Spies were sent over Jordan, (as some think) to search the Land. The
next morning after their return, the whole Host removed from Shittim, and came
to Jordan, where they lodged that night, and the next day passed over the
River. As soon as the feet of the Priests which bare the Ark touched the water,
it fell off on both sides and made a way; so that they went over on dry ground,
the floods not returning to their place, so long as the Ark remained in the
channel. On the 10th day of the first month Nisan, they arrived in the Land of
Canaan, The Israelites pass over Jordan into the Land of Canaan.
and took up their first Mansion at Gilgal, A. M. 2549. ineunte. Chap. 5.
not far from Jericho. Here, (it is thought the next day) God commanded that all
the Males should be circumcised, this Sacrament being omitted ever since they
left Mount Sinai; because they were in constant expectation of travel: upon
which account neither had they kept the Passover since that time. Three days
they rested, and on the fourth they did ear the Passover, and the day
following unleavened bread of the Corn of the Land, at which time Manna ceased,
after it had continued 40 years.

17. The first place they fell upon with War, was the City of Jericho, Chap. 6.
which having compassed with the Ark seven days, on the seventh the walls fell
down of their own accord, the City was taken, and all therein put to the Sword,
except the Family of Rahab (she, having harbored the Spies, had security
promised from them) whom Salmon of the Tribe of Judah married, to whom she bare
Boaz. Jericho destroyed.
All the goods found therein were also accursed, nothing thereof to be made
prey* which Law Achan transgressing, Chap. 7, 8, 9.
caused Israel to be discomfited at Ai, and for that was first stoned, and then
burnt, with all that belonged to him. The Kings of Canaan, startled at Josua's
success, combined against him; but the Gibeonites, fearing the worst,
counterfeited a Message to him as from a far Country, and procured safety to
themselves and posterity; yet such, as slavery was joined therewith. Adonsedek
King of Jerusalem, and the Kings of Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Deber,
enraged hereat, conspired against them and fell upon their City; to the relief
whereof Joshua being called, raised the siege, and prosecuting his victory
against the Kings, at his command the Sun stood still over Gibeon, Chap. 10.
and the Moon in the Valley of Ajalon. The Sun and Moon stand still.
Upon which strange miraculous accident this is observed, that Ajalon being
scarce a German mile Westward of Gibeon, the Moon, as it is probable, was then
decreasing, or in the wane, and, Codomannus.
these two Luminaries standing still and moving together, the Astronomical
account was thereby nothing at all disturbed.

18. Joshua drove the five Kings to that straight that they hid themselves in a
Cave at Makkeda, where after he had utterly vanquished and destroyed their
Armies, Joshua vanquisheth the Kings.
he took them, and killing them, hanged their Carcases on five Trees till
Sunset: then cast them into the Cave and laid a great heap of stones thereon.
Chap. 11. etc.
After their death he warred with many other petty Kings, as with the King of
Libnah, Lachish, Gezer, Eglon, Hebron, and the rest: there was not one City
that made peace with Israel save the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon; all
others they took in battle, and utterly destroyed, except such as it pleased
God to reserve, for a lash and scourge, wherewith to reduce them in times of
Rebellion and for their exercise to be as Thorns in their eyes, and Goads in
their sides. The Canaanites being thus deprived of their ancient habitation by
Joshua and the Israelites; Many of them, as is conjectured, removing to the
Mediterranean-Sea, (where they were known afterward by the name of
Phoenicians) continued not all there, but spread themselves abroad, and sent
Colonies far and wide into many places of Europe, Asia, and Africa, concerning
which that excellent book of Bochartus, called Canaan, is to be consulted. That
is remarkable, which A. M. 2555.
Procopius mentions concerning Pillars erected in the Province of Africa, In
Vandalius.
called Tingitana, with a Phoenician-inscription to this purpose: We are they
who fled from the face of Joshua the Robber, the son of Nane. How long this War
continued till the division of the Land, is not expressed in Scripture; yet is
thence to be gathered. For Caleb being forty years old when with others he was
sent by Moses to search the Land, was at the time of the Division, as he says,
45 years older. Now the Spies were sent out in the fifth month of the second
year, after their departure out of Egypt, or sooner; so that from that time to
the entrance into Canaan, followed almost 39 years; (the Israelites being
forty years in the Wilderness) which being deducted out of the said forty
five, six years and some few remain; during which the War in Canaan must have
continued.

The Clerouchia or division of the Land.
19. The Clerouchia then, or division of the Land, fell out in the beginning of
the seventh year from their entrance into Canaan, and in the year of the World
2555 also beginning. It continued about one year, as some gather from the
story. First of all, an inheritance was given to two Tribes and an half, viz.
the Tribes of Judah, Ephraim, Chap. 14.15. etc.
and the other half Tribe of Manasses. Then met the Israelites together in
Shiloh, because seven other Tribes yet remained undisposed of. Therefore
certain men were sent from that place to bring a Survey of all the Land, which
could not be done in a few days; and then after their return the division was
perfected; for all which no less then the space of a year seems necessary.
So, there are from the beginning of the World to the end of this Division, 2555
years, Vide Ludov. Capellum in Chronol. Sacr.
containing just so many weeks of years as there are natural days in a year,
viz. 365. Or if we make a great year consisting of so many years as the solar
year consists of days; then have we six (or seven) such great years. It is
further observable, that from the beginning of the World, to the entrance of
the Israelites into Canaan may be reckoned so many Jubilies of years (viz. 52.)
as are days in the seventh part of a Solar year, one only excepted. The War
having endured six years, they rested on the seventh, wherein the Division was
made, as in the Sabatical year.

20. The rise therefore, and beginning of the Sabbatical year, and of Jubilies,
some choose rather to fetch from the first entrance into Canaan, then from the
division of the Land. The rise of Sabbatical years and Jubilies.
For though they began not to sow the Land on this side Jordan till after the
division; yet before this had they taken possession of the Country lying
beyond the River, which was divided betwixt the two Tribes and the half;
whereof, though it must be granted that those which were fit for War,
accompanied their brethren over Jordan, according to the charge laid upon them
by Moses, yet is it to be supposed that those which stayed behind were
nourished by the fruits of that soil. For Manna had already ceased, and the
Corn which the other reaped of the Enemies sowing being but gotten by degrees,
according as they Conquered the Country, could scarce maintain them without
sending for supplies to those that stayed beyond the River. When they had ended
the division, the Children of Israel gave for an inheritance to Joshua that
which he asked, even Timneth Serah in Mount Ephraim, where he built a City,
and dwelt therein. Josh. 18.
The Tabernacle of the Congregation was set up at Shiloh by the whole Assembly.
As for the Levites they had no inheritance assigned them, Chap. 20.
but (the Lord being their inheritance) they were to live of Tithes and
Offerings. Only 48 Cities on both sides of Jordan were set apart for them to
dwell in, which were also to be Cities of refuge, whither those that were
guilty of casual homicide might fly from the avenger of blood, and there remain
in security till the death of the High Priest. Joshua dies.
Joshua being very old at the division, is by the Jews said to have lived, past
the first Sabbatical year, but to have died before the next arrived. Some give
to his government twenty years, and some above; Chap. 24. v. 29. Judge 11.8.
but others think he died, not long after the division. There is no certainty
thereof from Scripture; but that he lived a hundred and ten years is expressly
recorded.

The Israelites fall to idolatry.
21. After Joshua and that generation were dead, which had seen the wonders of
the Lord, another arose after them that knew not the Lord, nor the works he had
done; so that the Children of Israel followed other gods, serving Baal and
Ashtaroth. For this cause the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hands of spoilers which spoiled them. He sold them into
the hands of their Enemies round about, insomuch that they could not stand
before them; but whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against
them for evil, as he had said and sworn. Nevertheless he raised them up Judges
to deliver them out of the hands of those that spoiled them; and yet they would
not hearken to their Judges, but went a whoring after other gods, and bowed
themselves unto them. Hereupon the Lord resolved not to drive out thenceforth
any Nations before them, which Joshua left when he died, that by them he might
prove Israel whether they would keep his way and to teach them War. Chap. 3.
There were left five Lords of the Philistines with all the Canaanites, the
Sidonians and Hivites that dwelt in Mount Lebanon, from Mount Baal Hermon, unto
the entering of Hamath. The Children of Israel dwelt amongst the Canaanites,
Hittites, Ammorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites: they took their
daughters to be their wives, gave their daughters to their sons, and served
their gods.

Cushan oppresses them.
22. For this, the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, Verse. 8.
and he sold them to the hand of Cushan-rishathaim King of Mesopotamia. How
long this was after the division, the Scripture expresses not. Lud. Cappellus.
We read that he oppressed them eight years, but some think it should be read
in the eighth year, viz. after the division, or eighth years, because this
servitude ended in the eight. But that it began not immediately after the
division, neither after the death of Joshua, seems evident; because the
Israelites served the Lord as long as that Generation lasted, which had seen
his wonders; which cannot be conceived extinct at the same time with him.
Others think a longer time then seven years to have passed betwixt the division
and this oppression, assigning fourteen years to the government of Joshua after
the division, then ten more to the government of the Elders after his death,
Jacobus Cappellus.
who might very well live longer then so; none that were twenty years old when
they came out of Egypt having entered Canaan except Joshua and Caleb. After
that, as many years they attribute to an Anarchy, in the sixth year of which
they will have the Civil War to have broken out betwixt Benjamin and the rest
of the Tribes, Judge. 20.
wherein all the Benjaminites except 600 were slain. Four years after this War,
and at the end of the 10th. Cushan the King of Mesopotamia afflicted Israel for
its idolatry eight years. But concerning this there is no certainty.

Othniel delivers them.
23. At the end of the eight years, God stirred up for a deliverer, Judge. Chap.
3.
Othniel of the Tribe of Judah, Nephew to Caleb by his younger brother Kenaz,
and his son-in-law. Into his hands the Lord delivered Cushan, and the Land had
rest forty years. After his death (which is set to the end of these forty
years) Israel turned again to idolatry, and the Lord delivered them up to
Eglon, Eglon oppresses them.
King of Moab for eighteen years. At the end of this term he stirred up Ehud a
left handed man of the Tribe of Benjamin, who under color of a message stabbed
Eglon into the belly, Delivered by Ehud.
and gathering the Israelites together on Mount Ephraim, slew 10000 of the
Moabites, all men of War. After this, the Land is said to have rested 80 years,
the words being taken literally; but then some think none of the years of the
Tyrants, or Oppressors, are to be counted severally, and by themselves, but to
be included herein as other years after mentioned; else the account will swell
much larger then the whole number of years, which the Scripture seems to
allow of. If we take-in all the years ascribed to the Tyrants, then they will
have it an Enallage (frequent in all Languages) and instead of 80. Ehud
governed, or the Land rested under him only eight years; but others think they
have as much reason to take them literally.

Shamgar judges Israel.
24. After Ehud, Shamgar the son of Aneth judged Israel, Chap. 4.
but no mention is made of any time. It follows, when Ehud was dead the
Children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord, and he sold them
into the hand of Jabin, King of Canaan, whose General was Sisera, and who had
900 Chariots of iron: Jabin oppresses them.
he mightily oppressed them twenty years. It is most probable that in this time
the Government of Shamgar was included, (he slew with an Oxe-good 600 of the
Philistines, And the Philistines.
who at this time might also afflict Israel): or else it being but short might
fall betwixt Ehud's death, and the oppression of Jabin; there being probability
enough that some time passed after his death, before the Israelites so highly
provoked the Lord as to be given up into Jabins hands. At the end of these
twenty years Deborah, Deborah and Barach deliver them.
the wife of Lapidoth (judging Israel at this time in Mount Ephraim) moved by
God sent for Barak the son of Abinoam from Kadesh-Naphtali, and made him
Captain. He, with 10000 men of Zebulon and Naphtali, overthrew Sisera, who
flying on his feet to the Tent of Heber the Kenite (descended of Jethro,
father-in-law to Moses) Jael his wife killed him by a Nail driven into his
Temples as he lay asleep. So the Land rested under Deborah forty years as we
read it, Usher.
another interpreting it in the 40th year, viz. after the rest restored to it
by Ehud.

25. This time expired, and the Israelites relapsing to idolatry, Jud. 6.
God gave them up into the hands of the Midianites, The Midianites oppress
them.
and other people of the East, which afflicted them seven years, destroying
their Corn, driving away their Cattle, and making havoc of all things. This
made them cry to the Lord, who first reproved them by a Prophet; and
afterward, by an Angel stirred up Gideon, the son of Joash, of the Tribe of
Manasses, to deliver them. He having pulled down the Altar of Baal, and burnt
his grove, Chap. 7.
out of 23000 men chose 300. with which number marching against the Midianites,
Gideon delivers them.
he so affrighted them by a stratagem of Lamps and Pitchers, that he routed
their whole Army. The Ephraimites took Oreb and Zeeb: Gideon following the
Chance beyond Jordan wholly discomfited them, and took, Chap. 8.
and slew two Kings of the Midianites; Zeba and Zalmanna. After so great a
victory the Israelites offered him the Kingdom; but he refused it, and asked
only the earings of the prey, wherewith he made an Ephod which afterward gave
occasion to idolatry (all Israel going a whoring after it) and became a snare
to him and his house. But thus Midian being subdued, the Country was in
quietness under Gideon 40 years, as most read it; but, as others, was quiet in
the 40th year; viz. after quietness restored to it by Deborah and Barach.

Abimelech his Son makes himself King.
26. Though Gideon refused the Sovereignty, Chap. 9.
yet Abimelech his base Son thinking such a thing was not to be neglected,
dealt with the Sichemites, of whose City his Mother was native, to make him
King: and by their help he seized on the Kingdom, having slain his Seventy
Brethren upon one stone; Jotham the youngest only escaping. The Israelites,
after Gideon's death, had again turned after Idols, and therefore God not only
subjected them to the Dominion of this most wicked of all parricides, but to
intestine dissentions, by reason of him. For after he had tyrannized three
years, Gaal with the Sichemites conspired against him, which having timely
discovered, he destroyed them and their City (sowing it with Salt) and burnt
the house of their god Berith, with a thousand Men and Women which had fled to
it. Then went he against Thebez, and took it, the Inhabitants whereof retired
for defense into a strong Tower. Here, as he was about to set fire to the door,
a Woman cast down a piece of a Mil-stone upon his head, and so brake his skull,
that he caused his Armor-bearer to kill him, lest it should be said, that he
died by the hands of a Woman. Tolah judges Israel.
After his death, Tolah, the Son of Puah, Chap. 10.
the Son of Dodo, a Man of Issachar, that dwelt at Samir in Mount Ephraim,
arose to defend Israel, and judged it 23 years. After him Jair a Gileadite 22
years, Jair.
thought to be descended of that Jair, who took the Towns of Argob, and called
them after himself Hanoth-Jair; as his thirty Sons in like manner, after that
example, named so many Cities, which they possessed in the Land of Gilead.

27. Jair being dead, the Israelites returned to their evil courses, Judge. 10.
ver. 8.9.
serving Balaam, Ashtaroth, the gods of the Moabites, Ammonites, and the
Philistines; for which God sold them into the hands of the Philistines and
Ammonites. The Philistines and Ammonites oppress Israel.
It is written, And that year they oppressed the Children of Israel, 18 years
all that were on the other side Jordan, in the Land of the Amorites, which is
in Gilead. Moreover, the Ammonites passed over Jordan, to fight also against
Judah and Benjamin, and the house of Ephraim; so that all Israel was sore
distressed. Some will have this oppression but to begin at the death of Jair;
others think, they had oppressed Israel 18 years before, and now passed over
the River, to afflict the other Tribes. The Israelites cried to God, and being,
reproved, put away their Idols: hereupon, the Ammonites being got together in
Gilead, and the Israelites assembled in Mizpah in the same Country, Jepthah the
Son of Gilead, begotten on an Harlot, was sent for by the Gileadites and made
Captain, Chap. 11.
being a mighty Man of valor: He first sent to expostulate with the King of
Ammon, and to demand the cause of the War. He answered, it was because Israel
took away his Land, when they came out of Egypt, from Arnon unto Jabbock, and
unto Jordan; of which he required restitution. Jepthah replied, that in their
journey from Egypt, they sent to the Kings of Edom and Moab, to desire passage
through their Coasts; but this being denied, they turned aside through the
Wilderness, and compassed about the Lands of Edom and Moab, not coming within
the borders of Moab, and so at length came and pitched on the other side of
Arnon, which was the limit of Moab's Coasts; Then, that Sihon King of the
Ammorites denying them passage, and fighting against them, the Lord God of
Israel delivered him into their hands: and they possessed the Land of the
Amorites from Arnon unto Jabbock, and from the Wilderness unto Jordan.

28. Seeing the God of Israel had dispossessed the Amorites, he demanded a
reason, why he should possess that Country; and whether he was any thing
better then Balack the Son of Zippor, King of Moab, who never strove nor fought
against Israel. Lastly, he asked him, why he recovered not the Land all the 300
years which the Children of Israel had enjoyed it, and appealed to God for
righteous judgment betwixt them. These 300 years, if they be reckoned exactly;
the years of the oppressions, and of the Judges, must all along be counted in
length, without including the one in the other; but if this be done, still many
more than 300 will be found, and 100 years more will arise in the account of
time* from the coming out of Egypt to the building of the Temple, than the
Scripture in another place allows of. Some say, if so many years really
passed, betwixt the last year of Moses, save one, and this time of Jepthah, as
those successions do make; 400 years was rather to have been mentioned, seeing
the number exceeded that of 300; and therefore accounting the other way short
of 300, they allegde, that it is usual, when a full or round number is chosen,
rather to make use of that which most favors their cause; and therefore
Jepthah meant by 300, about, or almost so many. On the contrary, others
believe, that the scripture does not suffer them to omit the years of
Servitude, and contain them under those of the Judges, which they suppose
clearly appears out of those Judge. 11.18.
words before mentioned, which in general describe the condition of the
Israelites, as successively guilty of Idolatry, then punished, and delivered;
after which, falling into an Anarchy at the death of their deliverer, they
again relapsed into the same sin. They will have also the particular accounts
of these things in Scripture, by their order and distinction, to hold out no
less unto us.

Jeptha overthrows the Ammonites.
29. But the King of the Ammonites not hearkening to Jepthah, was overthrown
with a very great slaughter. Jepthah at his going forth, vowed, if the Lord
would deliver the enemy into his hands, that whatsoever came first out of his
house to meet him at his return, should surely be the Lord's, and he would
offer it for a burnt offering. It happened that his only Daughter came out to
meet him with timbrels and dances; and after she had bewailed her Virginity, he
is said to have done to her according to his vow. Some observe that for And in
the place may be read Or, as if, he would offer the thing, if it were to be
offered, or, however to consecrate it to the Lord. And their opinion seems
most probable, who hold she was not offered up as a burnt-offering, but
consecrated to God by perpetual virginity and austerity of life, being
altogether separated from Humane society, except four days in a year, for a
little refreshment; it being said, that he executed his Vow upon her, for that
he did not redeem her with money, according to the Law mentioned in Chap. ult.
Exodus but left her consecrated to God in an unmarried state, lest she should
seem to be another's and not the Lord's. Jepthah, after this, warred against
the Ephraimites, who spoke against, and threatened him and his house. Judge. 12.
He cut off 42000 Men, all being slain in their passage over Jordan, that could
not pronounce Shiboleth. Having judged Israel six years he died, and was buried
in Gilead.

Abzon.

Elon.

Abdon Judges.


30. After Jephthah arose Ibsan of Bethlehem, and judged Israel seven years,
then Elon a Zebulonite 10, and Abdon the Son of Hillel a Pirathonite, after him
eight years. Now the Philistines again vexed Israel 40 years. Seeing neither of
these three are said to have delivered the Land, The Philistines vex Israel.
some think those 40 years, to have included some of their Government. There
are that fetch the beginning of them from the 4th year of Ibzan, and end them
at the death of Sampson, whom they will have the immediate Successor of Abdon.
Of those that are for the lengthning out of the time, some think they are to be
reckoned from the death of Abdon, Usher.
and end at the beginning of Samson's Government, Sampson.
which others again infer, by good arguments, to be included in them, or else
20 of them must fall in with the time of Eli; the Seventy Interpreters
accordingly, giving to Eli not 40 years as the Hebrew Copies, but only 20.
Still there are not wanting, who think Eli to have succeeded Abdon, and
Sampson's 20 years (who was yet unborn) to have been included in his 40. They
fetch the rise of the 40 years of the oppression from 17 years before the
beginning of Eli, and end them so many after his death. Sampson was a Nazarite
from his Mothers womb, no Razor coming on his head, and keeping himself from
wine and strong drink all his time. Hence, as his admirable strength is said to
have layn in his hair, so others have ascribed it to his abstinency, as if it
had not proceeded from the especial Providence and Power of God. He was the
Hercules of the Israelites, really performing such things as the Greeks would
scarce attribute to their's, on whom yet they heaped those things that were
done by many. He afflicted the Philistines much in his life, but much more at
his death, by throwing down the house of Dagon upon the chief of them, being
therein assembled to make themselves sport with so great an Adversary, whom
having got into their power, they had deprived of his sight.

Eli.
31. Had Eli praeceded Sampson, he would have been reckoned amongst his
predecessors; according to general apprehension. The High Priesthood which
hitherto had continued in the Family of Eliazar for five Generations, (viz. in
himself, Phineas, Abisna, Bukki, and Uzzi, according to Josephus) was in Eli
translated to that of Ithamar another of Aaron's Sons. 1 Samuel 2, 3, 4. Chap.
The Sons of Eli being very lewd, grievously abused their power, and he used
not his authority in correcting them, whereby he so far incurred God's
displeasure, that he threatened to destroy his house, as it came to pass. The
Israelites, toward the end of his 40 years, fought with the Philistines; but
were worsted, and lost 4000 Men. To better their success, they then sent for
the Ark of God from Shiloh, promising to themselves victory in it is presence;
but of the next Battle the issue was the same. The Ark taken.
Hophni and Phineas the Sons of Eli were slain, and the Ark taken. This news
being brought to Eli, upon mention of the captivity of the Ark, he fell
backward from a sear, and being 98 years old his neck brake. The Philistines
placed the Ark in the house of their god Dagon, which Idol fell down twice
before it; and the multitude was so plagued with the Haemorrhoids, Returned.
that they were glad to return it back with presents.

Samuel.
32. To Eli succeeded Samuel, both a Levite and a Prophet, to whose Government,
from the division of the Land, passed 450 years, according to St. Paul, (...).
as the text of Acts 13.10.
Luke now has it. But to this place another in in the first Book of the Chap.
6.1.
Kings, expressly seems to contradict, which makes the foundation of the
Temple to be laid in the 480th year after the Israelites departure out of
Egypt. This later number exceeds the other but by 30. although in it must be
comprehended, besides what is in the former, the 40 years of their stay in the
Wilderness, the six years which passed before the division, the time of
Samuel's Government, the reigns of Saul and David, with the three years of
Solomon, that passed before the building of the Temple; all which make up the
number of 129; so that the litterall senses of these two cannot stand together:
Some go about to reconcile them by drawing down the beginning of the 480 years,
lower than the Text will bear; and by removing that of the 450, higher than is
convenient: to whom others join, in attempting the reconciliation both of those
numbers, and clearing up the matter concerning the 300 years ascribed by
Jepthah, to the possession of the Land of the Amorites before mentioned. But
there are, who find a necessity of confessing a mistake, either in the one or
other Copy of these places. These are divided in their opinions, one party
thinking they have better reason to stick to the place of the Kings, which is
not so liable to any corruption (through the great care of the Jews) as the
Greek text, has that, by reason of the similitude of words, might well be
changed from From (...).
one to another, through the ignorance of transcribers. Another will have the
450 years to belong to the division of the Land, and not to the Judges: all
which have been mistaken through the wrong reading of the words.

33. Others, both of ancient and modern times, are very confident, that, all
considered, the fault must fall upon that place of the Kings, which gives but
480 years, to all that time that passed from the departure out of Egypt to the
founding of the Temple; Usserius Chronologiae Sacrae. cap. 12.
and that, instead of 480, 580 was most anciently written. For when any one
place disagreeth with the whole series of History, clearly held out elsewhere,
it is rather to be corrected in its number (which may easily be altered by a
mistake of one word) than many places wrested to a compliance with it. Now all
the times of the Anarchies, liberty, War, and servitude, of the Israelites laid
together, without confusion of years (for which there is no ground at all),
clearly hold out a hundred years more than this place of the Kings; and so
exactly from the several particulars make it up, that it seems to take away
all doubt. From the departure out of Egypt to Moses his death, intervened
forty years; thence to the beginning of Othniel 34. whereof 26 are given to
the Government of Joshua and the Elders, and eight to the servitude under
Cushan. Then Othniel governed forty years, the oppression of the Moabites
followed for eighteen. Ahud ruled 80. The Canaanites Tyrannized 20. Deborah and
Barak governed 40. the Madianites oppressed the Israelites 7. thence Gideon
judged Israel 40. Abimelech reigned 3. Tolah 23. Jair 22. and then the
Ammonites oppressed Israel 18. all which numbers amount to 385 years. After
this Jephthah judged Israel 6 years, Ibzan 7. Elon 10. Abdon 8. the Philistines
vexed Israel 40. and Heli ruled 40. which make up the sum of 111 years. Then
Samuel and Saul governed 40 years (as will be seen), David also 40. and Solomon
3. before the foundation of the Temple was laid, which make up 83 years. Now
all these numbers laid together amount exactly to 579 years, to which if the
fourth year of Solomon be added wherein the Temple was founded, there arises
the full number of 580. Vide Gerard. Joh. Vossii Isag. Chronol. Dissert. 8.
They perceive therefore it was not without reason that so many of the Ancients
dissented from that place of the Kings, which might also be liable enough to
the carelessness of Scribes. According to this account, Students in History and
Chronology are to take notice that a hundred years are to be added to the more
ordinary Era of the World.

34. In the days of Samuel, the Philistines grievously afflicted Israel, 1 Samuel
7.
till such time as by his means, the people being turned to the Lord cast off
their idols, The Philistines overthrown.
and solemnly repented at Mizpah: Hereat God was pleased to spare them, and
thundering upon the Philistines, when they were ready to join battle,
discomfitted them utterly, and so terrified them that they forsook the Cities
formerly seized on, leaving only one Garrison in the Country; and no more
afflicted the Children of Israel so long as Samuel had the chief power in his
hands. When he grew old he made his sons Judges over the Land; Chap. 8.
who perverting Justice by bribery, the people thence gladly took occasion to
desire a King, that in government they might be conformable to other Nations.
Their most urgent reasons were, for that the Philistines yet kept an Hold in
their Country, Chap. 11.
and Nahash the King of the Ammonites threatened them with War; at which they
were so affrighted that neither trusting in God's providence (who hitherto had
been their King, The Israelites desire a King.
and avenger) nor to the Justice and prudence of Samuel, would they be
satisfied, or put off without a King. God therefore gave unto them Saul the son
of Kish of the Tribe of Benjamin. Saul is King.
Hosea 13.


35. In the book of Samuel no certain years are either given to his own
government, or to that of Saul, but it seems probable from Scripture that he
governed about twenty years alone, from the death of Eli to the election of
Saul. For it is said, 1 Samuel 7.2.
that the Ark of God abode in Kiriath-jearim twenty years; and that, the time
being long, all the house of Israel lamented before the Lord at Mizpeh; which
passages are joined unto the serious exhortation of Samuel to move them to
repentance. So then the end of twenty years, the exhortation, their repentance
hereupon, and their moving for a King, with good reason seem to have been about
the same time; so that 20. or 21 years and an half are to be given to his
government, which began at Eli's death. Now Heli died when the Ark was taken;
which staying seven months in the Land of the Philistines was then sent away
and came to Bethshemesh, where the inhabitants losing 50610 of their number,
for their curiosity of looking into it, sent Messengers to those of
Kiriath-jearim to fetch It unto them, with whom it remained twenty years; and
these years the Israelites counted long.

36. Saul was first by Samuel privately anointed, Chap. 10.
and afterward publicly declared King at Mizpah. Not long after (a month
it is thought) Jabesh-Gilead was besieged by Nahash, Chap. 11.
who refused to grant peace to the inhabitants upon any other terms than to put
out all their right eyes, and lay this for a reproach upon Israel. They desired
truce but for seven days; in which space, Raises the siege at Jabesh-Gilead.
if no relief came they promised to come out to him. But Saul, hearing of their
distress, got together an Army of 300000 of Israel, and 30000 of Judah, with
which he easily overthrew the Ammonites, and raised the siege. Hereupon, at the
procurement of Samuel, the people again met at Gilgall, where the Kingdom was
established, and confirmed unto Saul: at which time Samuel, upbraiding them
with their unthankfulness to God, and him, terrified them with Thunder and
rain in Wheat Harvest; and again comforted them in the mercy of God. Saul
having reigned two years, Chap. 13. etc.
the Philistines again afflicted the Land, with whom he had sore War all the
days of his life. He fought against his Enemies round about; against Moab, the
Children of Ammon, Edom, and the Kings of Zobah: he smote the Amalekites, and
delivered his people out of the hands of them that spoiled them. Yet, his heart
not being upright before the Lord, God chose him out a man after his own heart,
and rejected him and his family. This man was David, David anointed.
the youngest son of Jesse, of Bethlehem-Judah, whom Samuel was sent to anoint
some years before his own death, and more before that of Saul. In this space,
Saul persecuted him from place to place; yet such ardent affection was there
betwixt Jonathan his son and David, that the love of a Kingdom it self, joined
with the deep displeasure of a father, was nothing able to interrupt it.

37. The Apostle Paul declares; that, Acts 13.21.
after God had destroyed seven Nations in the Land of Canaan, and divided their
Land to them by Lot, he gave unto them Judges for the space of 150 years,
until Samuel the Prophet. And afterward, they desired a King, and God gave
them Saul, the son of Kis, a man of the Tribe of Benjamin, by the space of
forty years. Some take the words as giving so many years to his reign alone;
but by general consent the government of Samuel is to be included in them. 1 Samuel 25.
Samuel seems to have died not long before Saul (two years it is supposed), at
such time as David was provoked by the churlishness of Nabal; Verse. 55.
and is said to have judged Israel all the days of his life. Hence is it
certain that Saul reigned not alone all those forty years, and probable that
Samuel having governed alone for one half of them, had still an hand in the
public affairs of the Nation. At length Saul was overthrown in battle by the
Philistines, Chap. 31. and 1 Chronicles. 10.
and lost his three sons, Readiness three sons slain, and he kills himself.
Jonathan, Abinadab, and Melchisua. And he himself being sore wounded, after he
could not prevail with his Armor-bearer to kill him, fell upon his own sword
and died. His son Isbosheth, by the means of Abner Captain of his Host,
Ishbosheth succeeds him.
succeeded him at the Age of forty years; 2 Samuel 2.3. etc.
but the Tribe of Judah anointed David, King over them in Hebron, who had
formerly been consecrated to this Office by Samuel: and he reigned over that
Tribe alone, seven years and six months. A. M. 2944.
Isbosheth is said to have reigned over Israel two years; which is to be
interpreted, peaceably, and not disturbed by War; as his father is said to have
reigned one year, 1 Samuel 13.1.
viz. unmolested by the Philistines.

38. For, after these two years were expired, a long War insued betwixt David
and him; his side growing weaker and weaker, as David's grew stronger and
stronger: David to strengthen himself married Maacha, the daughter of Talma,
King of Geshur, on which he begat Absalom and Tamar. 2 Samuel 2.3. etc.
At length Abner conceiving a displeasure against Ishbosheth, because he had
reproved him for meddling with his father's Concubine, revolted to David, and
labored to transfer the Kingdom to him; but coming to visit himabout this
affair, he was treacherously slain by Joab, David's General, and Nephew by his
sister Zerviah. All being out of order now in Israel; Baanah and Recab two
Benjamites, the servants of Ishbosheth, slew their Lord as he slept in his
Chamber, and brought his head unto David. Ishbosheth slain after seven years.
He rewarded them with death, 1 Chronicles. 12.
and was by the Captains, and all the Elders of the Tribes, anointed the third
time King at Hebron, over all Israel; which government he held 33 years. 2 Samuel
5.6, 7. etc.
A little after this installment he took Jerusalem from the Jebusites, and made
it the seat of his Kingdom; himself building and fortifying the City of Sion,
and Joab repairing the rest. Then twice he overthrew the Philistines in
Rephidim, who came up against him after they heard he was made King. 1 Chronicles.
12. etc.
The Ark of God he removed from Kiriath-Jearim, to the house of Obed Edom the
Gittite, and thence after three months into Sion. He purposed to build God an
house, but was forbidden (because a man of blood) that work, which was to be
reserved for Solomon. For besides his Wars in his younger time; all the space,
betwixt this and the birth of Solomon, seems employed in Wars; wherein he
overcame the Philistines, Amalekites, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumaeans, and
Syrians. The Borders of his Empire he very much enlarged, not only from Shihor
of Egypt to the entering in of Hamath, but also as far as Euphrates, the utmost
limits promised by God unto Abraham; and only possessed by him, and his son
and Successor Solomon.

David's adultery and murder.
39. Solomon was the second son begotten on Bathsheba, 1 Samuel 11.12, 13.
the wife of Uriah the Hittite; with which woman David first committed
Adultery, and then for a cover added to it the Murder of her husband. After he
had been reproved by Nathan the Prophet he repented, and wrote the 51 Psalm
upon this occasion. Punished.
Yet the Infant conceived in Adultery, died as soon as it was born; and, though
Solomon was born the next year (at it is thought), A. M. 2957.
yet this sin escaped not without a further punishment. For, within awhile,
Davidis 14.
his eldest son Amnon ravished his half-sister Tamar, Amnon ravisheth Tamar.
and for that was killed by Absalom. Some years after, Chap. 15.16, 17, 18.
Absalom by the advice and policy of Achitophel seized upon the Kingdom.
Absalom rebelleth.
David hereupon fled to God as his Rock of refuge, and composed the 3d. and the
55th Psalms: then opposing force to force, overthrew Absalom in the Wood of
Ephraim by Joab his General, who thrust the young man through with a Dart as he
hung in an Oak, contrary to David's order, who had charged all the Captains to
deal gently with him for his sake. This Rebellion was followed by a new
sedition raised amongst the Israelites, by one Sheba upon this occasion; Chap.
19.20.
because they had not the chief hand above the Tribe of Judah, The conspiracy
of Sheba.
in bringing back the King to his house; but this was happily suppressed, after
Joab had procured the inhabitants of Abel to cut off Sheba's head.

40. After these things, several battles insued with the Philistines, 2 Samuel 21.
1 Chronicles. 20.
in one of which (the last wherein he was present) David hardly escaped the
hands of Ishbi-benob, one of the sons of the Giant; being rescued by Abishai
his Nephew, who slew the Philistin. Not 2 Samuel 24.
long after, tempted by Satan and his own ambition, he numbered the people: for
which God being angry proposed to him three sorts of punishments, David
numbreth the people.
viz. Famine, Sword, 1 Chronicles. 20.7.
or Pestilence; as to which, he chose rather to fall into the hands of God then
of man. Then God sent a Plague, whereby perished in one day 70000 men; but, as
the Angel was also about to destroy Jerusalem he was commanded to desist. David
at length having arrived at seventy years of Age, was so decayed and spent by
his many labors and troubles, 1 Kings 1.
that he could not receive any heat from Clothes, and therefore a young maid,
one Abisag, 1 Chronicles. 28.29.
a Shunamite was chosen out, to lie in his bosom. Adoniah his son taking
advantage at this infirmity, by the assistance of Joab the General, and
Abiathar the Priest, seized upon the Kingdom. Makes Solomon King.
When he had notice thereof, according to the prediction of God, and his
promise unto Bathsheba, he established Solomon in his Throne, and having given
him a charge, Dies.
died about six months after, when he had reigned over Judah alone in Hebron
seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem over all Israel and Judah 33
years; in the year of the World (according to the vulgar way of reckoning
without taking in the 100 years formerly mentioned in the History of the
Judges) 2985. A. M. 2985.


41. David being dead and Solomon established in the Kingdom, 1 Kings 2.
Adonijah asked Abisag the Shunamite to wife, and for that was put to death,
Solomon puts Adoniah and others to death.
as affecting the Sovereignty. Abiathar was removed from the Priesthood, and
Zadok, of the Posterity of Phinehaz, placed in his room, as had been foretold
by God, against the house of Eli, from which the Priesthood now returned; Joab
for fear fled to the horns of the Altar, and there was slain by Benaiah, who
was made General in his stead. Simei, who had cursed David when he fled from
Absalon, was commanded to build him an house in Jerusalem, and not to stir
thence beyond the Brook Kidron upon pain of death; which he after two years
suffered, having broken the order. Chap. 3.
Solomon within a year after his Father's death, married the Daughter of
Pharaoh; after which, offering 1000 burnt-offerings at Gibeon, where the
Tabernacle then rested, God appeared to him in a dream, and offered him
whatsoever he would ask. He asked only wisdom to govern his people, and
neither riches nor honor; with which God was so well pleased, that he made him
to excel therein all mere men, and accumulated also the other upon him^.

42. Having all things in a readiness for building an house to the Lord, Chap.
6. Clemens Stromat. lib. 4.
(for which David his Father had made large provisions) Vaphres King of Egypt
supplying him with 80000 Men, and Hiram King of Tire with as many, besides an
Architect named Hypero (whose Mother was an Israelitish Woman, of the Tribe of
Judah); he laid the foundation of the Temple in the 4th year of his reign, and
the second day of the second month Zif. The Structure being in building 7
years, The building of the Temple.
the work began (according to their computation, who by reckoning the years of
the Judges, and the oppressions severally, add 100 years to the Era of the
World) in the 3089th year from the Creation entering, was dedicated in the
3095th ending, and in the 587th year after the departure out of Egypt, also
ending; from which if we substract those 40 they lived in the Wilderness, then
547 years will be found to have passed from the Original of Jubilies to the
Dedication of the Temple, which make up eleven Jubilies, and eight years.
Ludov. Cappellus.
So the service therein began in the eighth year of the twelfth Jubilie, or in
the first year of the second week of the twelfth, which seems agreeable to
the Ceremonial Law, wherein most things consist in the number of 7, and are
reckoned by Sabbaticall years and Jubilies. And if we divide 3095 by 7, we
shall find the Temple dedicated in the first year of the 442d week from the
Creation, almost twelve entire Jubilies after the Service thereof had been
first appointed on Mount Sinai.

Solomon's Navy.
43. About the same time Solomon built a Navy at Esion-gaber, 1 Kings. 1.
on the shore of the Red Sea, in the Land of Edom. This furnishing with his own
Subjects and the Tyrians (then, by reason of the situation of their Country,
the best Sailors in the World) sent to him by Hiram, he dispatched to Ophir,
once in three years, for gold and other merchandise, whence they brought him
420 talents. The Country of Edom, David had formerly subdued, and thence
Solomon his Son had the privilege of building his Ships there. Aeleth or
Eloth, called by other Writers Aelana and Aelanum, was then a famous City,
seated upon the Arabian Gulf, to part whereof, lying about it, it gave
appellation. As Esion-gaber was the Arcenall for building the Navy; so this
City seems to have been the Emporium or Mart-town: and, as long as the
Edomites continued under the obedience of the Kingdom of Judah, it is probable,
that thence Merchandise was transported to Petra, the chief City of Arabia, and
so to Jerusalem. But when the Edomites revolted (which happened after the death
of Jehosaphat) the course was altered from Jerusalem to Rhino colura, a City in
Phoenicia upon Egypt; and there continued long, till such time as the
Ptolomie's with much ado, brought down the trade to Alexandria. To effect
this, they made two Ports upon the borders, whereof the one bare the name of
Berenice, and is mistaken by Josephus for Esion-gaber, that lying at a great
distance both from this and Elath, which seems to be the same place,
mentioned in Strabonem lege lib. 16. p. 780. D. and 781. A. B. etc. Vide
Fullerum in miscellaneis.
Strabo, by the name of (...).
Albus Pagus.

44. As this Navigation of the Tyrians gave a beginning to their Fame in that
Art; so from it (as is probably conceived) came the name of the Red Sea, or
that of Edom, first to be famous in other Countries. Their Traffic increasing,
they might well send out Colonies into other parts; and hence, as Herodotus
writes, the Seacoast of Arabia might be inhabited by them; but as for their
coming from these parts to inhabit Phoenicia (which opinion seems to have
taken it is original, SECT. 3.
from the journey of the Israelites out of these Coasts) it is a mere Fable.
Sailing out of the Arabian into the Persian Gulf, the name of Red Sea might
upon this occasion be given by them to both (which is usually to be expounded
of both in ancient Writers) the word Edom, being changed into others of the
same signification in several Languages. As for Ophir, if we think this
Country denominated from the Son of Sem, (or him from it) either immediately by
his habitation therein, or rather mediately by the Tyrians imposing that name
upon it, which properly belonged to a place in Arabia; then need we not seek
for it in America, and feign strange circuits to have been made, from the Red
Sea round about Africa to sail thither; as those, who place it in that part of
the World, are forced to do.

His buildings.
45. Solomon after the dedication of the Temple, fortified Jerusalem with a
treble wall, and repaired Hazron, the ancient Metropolis of the Canaanites; so
did he Gaza of the Philistines: he built Bethoron, Gerar, and the Millo, or
munition of Jerusalem. He also built Megiddo in Manasseh on this side Jordan,
Balah in Dan, and Thadmor; which may be either Thameron, in the Desert of
Judaea, mentioned by Ptolomy, or Palmyra, as Josephus thinks, situate in the
Desert of Syria, on the borders of his Dominions; which being many Ages after
rebuilt by Adrian the Emperor, was named after him Adrianopolis. He built for
himself in thirteen years time a Palace, and an house for his Wife the Daughter
of Pharaoh. After this, he offered twenty Towns, bordering upon the Tribe of
Asher, to Hiram King of Tire, as a reward for the assistance he afforded him in
his buildings; but he refusing them, he placed Colonies therein. And from his
refusal the Country came to be called Cabul.

His incontinency and idolatry.
46. In the later part of his reign, he fell into great incontinency, 1 Kings 11.
and thence became accessory to abominable Idolatry. He loved many strange
Women, as (together with the Daughter of Pharaoh) Women of the Moabites,
Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians, and Hittites: of the Nations, wherewith the
Children of Israel were forbidden to marry. He had 700 Wives, and 300
Concubines, which turned his heart after other gods, so that he went after
Ashtaroth the goddess of the Sidonians, and Milcom the abomination of the
Amorites: he built an high-place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, in the
hill before Jerusalem, for Molech the abomination of the Children of Ammon;
and so did he for all his strange Wives, which burnt incense, and sacrificed to
their gods. This provoked the God of Israel, who had twice appeared to him;
insomuch, that for his horrible ingratitude, he determined evil concerning his
Kingdom, to be fulfilled in his Son. Yet have we ground to judge well of his
eternal condition, seeing he made a recantation of his former errors, and was
used as a Penman of Scripture by the Holy Ghost. His death.
He dyed after he had reigned 40 years, A. M. 3025.
being without parallel for Wisdom, Magnificence, and Humane Frailty. A. M.
3025.

SECT. III. From the death of Solomon and the rent of the Kingdom, to the
destruction of the Kingdom of Judah.
1. SOLOMON being dead, Rehoboam his Son, 1 Kings 12.
by Naama an Ammonitish Woman, reigned in his stead. The Tribes, when they met
at Sichem to make him King, petitioned for a relaxation of their burdens
imposed by his Father; to which he answered so churlishly (despising the
counsel of the ancient and grave Men), that ten Tribes revolted from him, Ten
Tribes fall off from Rehoboam.
and made King over them Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, 2 Chronicles. 11. Ver. 13, 14.
who had fled into Egypt for fear of Solomon, after that God's intentions came
to be known of giving him part of the Kingdom. 2 Chronicles. 11. v. 13, 14.
With Rehoboam yet remained the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and the
greatest part of the Levites, who left their possessions and settled themselves
in Judah and Jerusalem, because Jeroboam and his Sons had cast them off from
executing the Priest's Office. With the Tribe of Judah is also to be reckoned
that of Simeon, whose possessions were within the Inheritance of Judah, Josh.
19.9.
for which that part of the division that fell to it was too much. Part also of
the Danites had it is seat within that of Judah; for it appears that they had
some Towns in the division of the Land, which formerly had been assigned to the
Children of Judah, who (as has been observed) had so large a Country at first
assigned to them, rather to protect and defend, than solely to possess it. All
these still remained the Subjects of Rehoboam, though ten Tribes are said to
have revolted, the Tribe of Dan being attributed to Jeroboam, for that Dan the
chief City, was within his dominions; and because the Tribe of Manasseh being
separated and divided into two parts, might be reckoned for two Tribes. The
Kingdom thus divided, the Northern parts fell off; but the Southern continued
in obedience to the Son of Solomon, whose successors henceforth are called
Kings of Judah, as those of Jeroboam, Kings of Israel; and yet this distinction
is not always observed, Jehosaphat being called King of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 31.2.
and 28.19.
and also Ahaz; though we know they were both Kings of Judah; of that division
only.

2. Rehoboam purposed to make War upon the Tribes, but, 1 King. 12.14.
admonished by God, gave over the enterprise of invading them with 180000 Men;
although there was continual War betwixt the two Kings all their days. The
Priests and Levites that were driven into Judah, retained it in the true
religion three years; but when Rehoboam had established himself, He and his
Subjects rebel against God.
he forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him, committing sins above
all that their Fathers had done. They built them high places, images, and
groves on every high hill, and under every green tree: there were Sodomites in
the Land, and they did according to the abomination of those Nations, which
the Lord cast out before the Children of Israel. Because of this, the fifth
year of his reign, Shishak King of Egypt (perhaps invited by Jeroboam, who had
lived with him in exile) came up against him with 1200 Chariots, 60000
Horsemen, and innumerous people, out of Egypt: the Lubims, Sukkiims and
Aethiopians, with which he took garrisons in Judah, and pierced as far as
Jerusalem. Afflicted, they humble themselves, and are delivered.
Rehoboam, and his Princes humbling themselves at the preaching of Shemaiah,
thereby obtained deliverance: which yet, was to be bought at an high rate. For
Shishak took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the Kings house,
with all the golden shields which Solomon had made, in the room of which
Rehoboam put others of brass. He died after he had reigned seventeen years.

Abiah.
3. Abiah his Son succeeded him, whose Mother is in one place 2 Chronicles. 11.20.
named Maachah the Daughter of Absalom, and in another Chap. 13.2.
Micajah Daughter to Uriel of Gibeah. A. M. 3043.
Some think she was the Daughter of Tamer, which might be married to this
Uriel, and adopted by Absalom, who seems to have left no issue. He imitated
the impiety of his Father; his heart not being perfect before the Lord his God,
and yet God remembering the Covenant made with David, brought him by a fatherly
correction into order, and acknowledgement of his Sovereignty. 1 Kings 15.
He also warred with Jeroboam all his days, who coming up against him with
800000 Men, he joined battle with him having but half so many, and yet
trusting in God, obtained Victory, and killed 500000 Israelites, the greatest
number we read to have fallen in one battle. He took from him Bethel, Jeskanah,
and Ephraim, with their Towns; neither did Jeroboam recover his strength in his
time. Abijah waxed mighty, married fourteen Wives, begat two and twenty Sons
and fifteen Daughters. Yet he reigned but three years.

Asa.

A. M. 3046.


4. Asa his Son succeeded him in the 20th year of Jeroboam ending, 1 Kings 15.
and 2 Chronicles. 14.15, 16. Chap.
and did that which was righteous in the sight of the Lord. He reformed what
was amiss, commanding his Subjects to seek the God of their Fathers: in his
time the Land had rest ten years. In his 11th year, according to Josephus, came
Zerach the Ethiopian against him, with 1000000 Men, of Cashaeans (inhabiting
Arabia, where also Zerach his Aethiopia is only to be found) and Labaeans,
besides 300 Chariots. To those he opposed himself with 300000 of Judah, and
280000 of Benjamin; and, calling upon his God, obtained the Victory, which he
prosecuted and got much booty. Returnnig to Jerusalem, he was so wrought upon
by the words of Azariah the Prophet, the Son of Oded, as together with his own
Subjects and others, (that fell to him in abundance out of Israel) he
sacrificed to, and made a Covenant with, God. Then proceeding in the
reformation of his Kingdom, he removed Maaca his Grandmother from her dignity,
because she was the patroness of Idolatry. Baasa now who reigned in Israel,
provoked with the revolt of his Subjects, and jealous of the growing power of
Asa, came up against him, and built Rama, in the 36th year from the division,
lest any should go in or out to him. Asa to divert him, hired Benhadad the King
of Syria to invade Israel. This Ben-hadad was the Son of Tabrimmon, and
Grandson to Hezrin, or Rezin, the first King of Damascus, and from him the
Surname of Hadad descended upon his Posterity. He smote Jion, Dan, Bethmaach,
all Civeroth, with the Land of Napthali, and constrained Baasa to leave off
building Ramah. Asa then destroyed Ramah, and with the stones thereof built
Seba and Mizpah; but was checked by God for not trusting in him, but putting
his confidence in the King of Syria; and War for this was denounced to be upon
him all his days. Hereat he grew angry with the Seer that brought the message;
and oppressed some of his people: and for this was punished with the Gout in
his later days, for a remedy to which, he had recourse to the Physicians, and
not to God. So he died, in the 41 year of his reign.

Jehosaphat.
5. Jehosaphat succeeded him, to a good Father a better Son. 1 Kings 22. A. M.
3087.
In his third year he sent the Levites throughout the Cities to teach the
people, having removed the Sodomites out of the Land. He married his Son
Jehoram to Athaliah the Daughter of Ahab King of Israel, and in his 18th year
made him Vice-King. This affinity drew him down with Ahab to fight against
Ramoth-Gilead, where Ahab received his death's wound, and he escaped narrowly
with his life. For joining himself with this wicked King, he was sorely chidden
by Jehu the Prophet, the Son of Hanani; which so affected him, as he reformed
his Subjects, 2 Chronicles. 19, 20, 21. chap.
traveling himself from Beersheba unto Mount Ephraim to accomplish it: he also
constituted Judges, to whom he gave a pious and strict charge. After this the
Moabites, Ammonites, and a great multitude of others invaded him; against which
he first strove by Prayer to God, and thereby obtained Victory, his Enemies
being so stricken with madness, that they fell upon, and slaughtered one
another. Afterward intending to send Ships for gold to Ophir; because he
joined with wicked Ahaziah King of Israel, the Lord spoiled the works, and the
Ships were broken at Esion-geber. Some think he made his Son Partner in the
Kingdom it self, having formerly been but his Vicegerent, a year or two before
he died. He reigned 25 years, or rather 24, with some odd months.

Joram.
6. To Jehosaphat succeeded Joram being 32 years old, 2 Chronicles. 21. A. M. 3109.
to the best Father the worst Son, who being established in his Seat, made away
all his Brethren, and some of the Princes. In his days the Edomites, or
Idumaeans, who hitherto, from the time of David, had been in subjection to the
Kings of Judah, revolted. They had heretofore been governed by a Viceroy,
chosen either out of themselves or the Jews; but now they made themselves a
King; the Prophecy of Isaac, the common Progenitor of both Nations, being now
fulfilled, that though Esau should serve his younger Brother Jacob, yet the
time should come, when he should break the yoke from off his neck. Genesis 27.40.
At the same time Libnah (a City of the Priest's in the Tribe of Judah)
revolted, because he had forsaken the God of his Fathers; for having married
Ahab's Daughter, he followed the example of his house, making high places in
the Mountains of Judah, and causing his Sujects to commit Idolatry therein.
Because of this, 2 Chronicles. 21. verse. 12.
there came a Writing to him from the Prophet Elijah, rebuking him for his sin,
and foretelling his punishment. Elijah being before this taken up to Heaven,
the Jews have believed that this Letter was sent down thence. Some think, there
was another Prophet of this name; but most are inclined to believe, that
foreseeing, before his assumption, the Idolatry of this man, he left this
Letter with his Scholars to be delivered to him in due time. According to the
threatenings therein contained, God first stirred up against him the Philistines
and Arabians, who making an invasion took away all his goods, his wives, and
sons, except Jehoahaz the youngest, otherwise called Ahaziah and Azariah.
Afterward God struck him with an incurable disease in his bowels, which after
two years came out of his body; so that he miserably died, having reigned eight
years; three whereof are to be reckoned in conjunction with his father. He was
buried without honor at Jerusalem, not in the Sepulcher of Kings; not desired,
missed, nor lamented.

Ahaziah. A. M. 3116.
7. 2 Kings 8. and 2 Chronicles. 22.
Ahaziah his son succeeded him who followed the steps of his Grandfather,
Ahab's wicked family, and became a Patron of Idolaters. But having scarce
reigned one year, he went down to Jezreel to visit his Uncle Joram, King of
Israel, where they were both killed by Jehu; 2 Kings 9.
Joram being slain outright, and Ahaziah dying shortly after of his wound, at
Megiddo. Athaliah his mother seized upon the Kingdom, Athaliah usurpeth.
Chap. 11. 2 Chronicles. 24.
wherein to establish her self, she destroyed all the Royal seed. Only
Jehosheba the daughter of Joram, and wife to Jehojada the High Priest, withdrew
Joash an infant, her brother's son, and hid him six years in the house of God.
At the end of these years, Jehojada brought him out to the people, then seven
years old, and anointing him King, slew Athaliah, restored the worship of God,
and destroyed the house of Baal, whose Priest Matthan he slew before the Altar.

Joas.
8. Joas then succeeded his father after six years, 2 Kings 12. A. M. 3122.
who did what was good and just as long as Jehojada the Priest lived, and
through his advice took care to repair the Temple, which now had stood 155
years. But Jehojada being dead (who lived 130 years; the Jews observing that
he, the repairer of the Temple, was born the same year, that the builder
thereof died) Idolatry brake out afresh through his connivance. The Prophets
exclaimed against it in vain, especially Zacharias, the son and successor of
Jehojada, against whom Joas was so far transported beyond the bound's of piety,
and gratitude to his father's memory, that he commanded him to be stoned, and
that in the Court of the house of the Lord. Whilst as he died, he said, The
Lord look upon it and requite it. So he did; for after a years time, the forces
of Hazael, King of Syria, though but small, invaded Judah, destroyed all the
Princes of the people, and sent the spoil to their King. Joas himself they left
very sick of great diseases, but when they were departed from him, his own
servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehojada the
Priest, and slew him on his bed, in the 40th year of his reign. A. M. 3160.

9. Amaziah his son succeeded him, Chap. 14.
who also seems to have reigned with him the three last years; seeing he is
said to have begun his reign in the second year of Joas, King of Israel. When
he was confirmed in his seat, 2 Chronicles. 25. A. M. 3160.
he put those to death that slew his father, sparing their Children according
to the Law of Moses. In his 12th year, he undertook an expedition against the
Edomites with 300000 of his own Subjects, and 100000 Israelites, which he hired
for 100 Talents of silver. But as he was about to begin his march a Prophet
dehorted him from joining to himself the Idolatrous Israelites, so that he
dismissed them, and they returned home in great discontent. He prospered
against the Idumaeans, but the Soldiers (dismissed) fell upon his Cities, and
smiting 300 of them, took much spoil. Yet he at his return, to amend the
matter, having brought home the gods of the Edomites, set them up to be his
gods, bowed down before them, and burnt incense to them. The Lord being sore
angry for this, sent first a Prophet to him whom he rejected. But burning with
a desire to be revenged upon the Israelites he sent and defied Joas their King,
who admonished him to be well advised, but this being in vain, they met, and
joined battle, wherein Amaziah was taken, and led back to Jerusalem; the Wall
of which City, Joas demolished 400 Cubits, and plundering the house of the
Lord with the Kings house then departed. Fifteen years after, Amaziah lived;
but then, having turned away from following the Lord, a conspiracy was made
against him in Jerusalem; whence he fled to Lachish, and there was slain by the
pursuers, after he had reigned 29 years.

Uzziah.
10. He left a son named Uzziah and Azariah, who succeeded him; 2 Kings 15.
but being said to have begun his reign in the 27th year of Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles.
26.
King of Israel, an Inter-regnum of twelve years must needs have passed betwixt
his father's death and his beginning; the Kingdom all this time having,
perhaps, A. M. 3201.
been governed by a Lieutenant, or the High Priest. When he came to the Age of
16. all the people of Judah took him, and made him King in the room of his
father, and under him the State of Judah much flourished. He fought
prosperously against the Philistines and Arabians that dwelt in Gur-Baal, and
Mehunims, or Minaeans, dwelling in Arabia the Happy upon the Red Sea: the
Ammonites sought to him with presents, and his name was great in those parts.
About his 35th year was celebrated in Greece the first Olympiad, that great
help to our understanding in the distinction of times. He invaded the Priests
Office in Offering Sacrifice, and for that was stricken with Leprosy, which
continued upon him till his death, living in an house by himself, and Iotham
his son ordering the affairs of the Kingdom. He reigned 52 years.

Jotham.
11. Iotham his son succeeded him, who prevailed against the Ammonites, 2 Chronicles.
27.
and forced them to pay Tribute two years. He became mighty, A. M. 3253.
because he prepared his ways before the Lord his God; he built the High-Gate
of the Temple much on the Wall of Ophal; Moreover, Olymp. 5. an. 4.
Cities in the Mountains of Judah, and in the Forests thereof Castles and
Towers. Under him, his Predecessor, and his two Successors, prophesied Isaiah
and Hosea: Micah began in his time; and Nahum also, according to Josephus,
prophesied the destruction of Niniveh, which was fulfilled 115 years after;
though others think the beginning of these years should rather be placed in the
time of his son. A. M. 3269. Olymp. 9. an. 2. 2 Kings 16. 2 Chronicles. 28.
He reigned sixteen years, and was succeeded by Ahaz his son, Ahaz.
whose reign if it be compared with that of Pechah and Hosea, Kings of Israel,
it will appear that he reigned seven, or eight years with his father. He did
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, walking in the ways of the Kings
of Israel: he made molten Images for Baalam, burnt Incense in the Valley of the
son of Hinnom, burnt his Children in the fire, Sacrificed and burnt Incense in
the high places, on the Hills, and under every green Tree. Because of this, God
stirred up Pekah, King of Israel, and Rezin the son of Remaliah, King of Syria
against him, who invaded his Kingdom, and did much hurt: Rezin got Elath, which
Uzzias had recovered and built; the King of Israel gave him a grievous
overthrow; the Edomites also afflicted him and the Philistines, whom Uzziah had
brought under, made inroads upon him. Suspecting his Estate because of these
things, he sent to Tiglath-Pileser, King of Assyria for help, presenting him
with the Silver and Gold, which was found in the Temple.

12. Tiglath-Pileser accordingly came up, and taking Damascus, Nicol.
Damascenus apud Iosephum Antiq. l. 7. c. 6.
killed Rezin, in whom fell this Kingdom: which having continued ten
Generations, and begun in a Rezin, ended in one of that name. Then turned he
his Forces upon Pekah, transporting into Assyria the Inhabitants of Gilead and
Naphthali, as formerly he had done those of Damascus. But Achaz, to procure
those things, having made himself his Vassal, was yet never the better,
remained in great fear of him, and still continued in his wickedness. He made
his son Hezekiah for his three last years partner with him in the Kingdom, and
at the end thereof died, having reigned together with his father, and by
himself, 16 years. Hezekiah.
Hezekiah succeeding, A. M. 3276. Olymp. 12. an. 3.
opened the Temple which his father had shut, and reformed the abuses in
Religion. He brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, 2 Kings 18. 2 Chronicles. 29. etc.
because the Superstitious multitude fancying some Divine virtue therein, gave
it suitable Worship. He shook off the yoke of the King of Assyria, refusing to
pay Tribute; for which cause in his fourteenth year, Senacherib, being to make
War upon Egypt, led part of his Forces into Judaea. Besieging Lachish, Hezekiah
bargained with him to depart; but he brake his promise, and sent Rabshakes with
others to Jerusalem, who blaspheming God, and reproaching the King, labored to
draw the people from their obedience, This being to no purpose, Rabshakes
returned to him, who had now departed from Lachish, and besieged Libnah, a
strong City of Judah; removing still nearer Jerusalem, that he might seem to
pursue what he had given in charge to Rabshakes to denounce against Hezekiah.

13. But lying before Libnah, news came that Tirhakah, King of Aethiopia (who,
as it seems, had entered into conspiracy with the Egyptian against him) was
moving toward him; at which he was so terrified, that he brake up his siege,
and departed homewards. Yet having a greedy mind toward Judaea, he sent a
blasphemous Letter full of threats to Hezekiah; but he lost in one night by the
stroke of an Angel 180000 men (as some think being on his way toward
Jerusalem) and confounded hereat, returned to Niniveh, where he was slain by
his two sons, Adramelech and Sharezer, as he was worshipping in the house of
Misroch his God. In the time of these dangers, Esaias 38.8.
Hezekiah fell sick unto death, the sentence of which he received from Isaiah
the Prophet. But by his prayers and tears he obtained a prolongation of life
for fifteen years, and, in confirmation of the promise, the shadow of the
degrees which was gone down in the Sun-dyal of Ahaz was brought ten degrees
backward; and it follows, The Sun returns ten degrees backward.
So the Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down. As for
this Sun-dyal it is thought that in those ancient times the knowledge of Dyals
was scarce amongst the Hebrews. Yet is it possible that Achaz might have
something of that nature, though imperfect, from the Babylonians, who were of
old much given to Astrology, he being otherwise too curious an admirer of
foreign things as appears, in that he must needs have such an Altar made, and
erected at Jerusalem as he had seen at Damascus. That the Sun went back, has
been generally believed: Gregory, of Oxford.
but one of late has gone about to prove that the shadow was liable to
reduction, without retrocession of the great Luminary.

14. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
The knowledge of this miracle coming to the Babylonians (who by reason of
their continual observation of the Heavenly bodies might have more occasion to
take notice of it) Merodach-Baladan their King sent to Hezekiah to congratulate
his recovery, desirous, it is likely, of his friendship whom he had understood
to be so much in the favor of God; especially bearing no goodwill to the
Assyrians. He in a vain ostentation of his Wealth showed the Ambassadors all
his Treasures, and whatsoever was in his house; for which, Isaiah the Prophet
denounced the carrying away of all these things to Babylon. For the pride of
his heart there was wrath upon him and Judah; yet he humbled himself, both he
and the inhabitants of Judah, so that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them
in his days. He flourished in abundance of riches and honor, stopped the
upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the West Side of
the City of David. He reigned 29 years (3 whereof were together with his
father:) being dead, they buried him in the chiefest Sepulchers of the sons of
David, and all Judah, with the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, did him honor at his
death.

Manasses.
15. Manasses his son succeeded him at the Age of twelve years, 2 Kings 21. 2 Chronicles. 33. A. M. 3304. Olymp. 19. an. 4.
and therefore was begotten by him after his recovery. He did evil in the sight
of the Lord above those Nations, which the Lord had cast out before Israel,
being more Idolatrous then any of his Predecessors; he was also given to
Witchcraft and Divinations, built Altars for all the Host of heaven, which he
served in the two Courts of the house of the Lord, wherein he also set up an
Image of the Grove which he had made. He filled Jerusalem with innocent blood;
amongst other Martyrs Isaiah the Prophet (as it is said) being sawn asunder with
a wooden saw, because he was free with him in reproving his ungodly life;
although he was of the blood royal as the son of Amos, the brother of King
Amaziah, according to the tradition of the Jews, who also have related him to
have been father-in-law, nay (as some) Grandfather by the Mothers side, to
Manasses himself. In such wickedness continued he for several years, till such
time as God sent upon him the Captains of the King of Assyria (Esarchaddon some
think) who took him lying hid amongst the thorns, and carried him bound with
fetters unto Babylon, which City (as it appears from this place) was now
again under the King of Assyria. Here having leisure and occasion to bethink
himself, in his affliction he repented* was humbled greatly, and besought the
Lord, who heard his Prayer, and restored him to his Kingdom. After this, he
knew that the Lord was God; and purged his Realm of Idolatry; which Reformation
the Jews make to have been in the 33th year before his death. He reigned 55
years.

Amon.
16. Amon his Son succeeded him in his Kingdom, and Idolatry, A. M. 3359. Olymp.
33. an. 4.
but not in his Repentance, worshipping and sacrificing to all the carved
Images which his Father had made, and going on to trespass more and more.
After two years, his servants conspired against him and slew him in his own
house, Chap. 34.
all whom the people of the Land put to death, and made Josiah his Son (a child
of eight years old) King in his stead. Josiah.
He in the eighth year of his reign began to seek after the God of his Fathers,
and in his twelfth to cleanse his Kingdom, and all the Land of Israel, from
Idolatry: although the greatest part of the later, was now subject to the King
of Assyria. 2 Kings 23. 2 Chronicles. 35. A. M. 3368. Olymp. 35. an. 4.
In the 18th year of his reign and of his age the 26th, he commanded the Temple
to be repaired, and the Worship of God therein restored: where also finding a
Book of the Law, he renewed the Covenant between God and the people, and
celebrated such a solemn Passover, as had not been kept in Israel since the
time of the Judges. Now if the time of the Judges, and the Oppressions, be not
confounded, but taken at their full length; then this year being the 9^0th
ending, or the 931th beginning, from the entering into Canaan, was the 7th of
the 133 week, or the last of the 19th Jubilie. Josiah in his 31th year ending,
disguised himself that he might fight with Necho King of Egypt (who was going
up against the Assyrian) and would not hearken to his words from the mouth of
God, laboring with him to refuse fighting against the Lord, who had sent him,
and commanded him to make haste. Therefore joining battle with him in the
Valley of Megiddo, he was sore wounded, and being carried to Jerusalem, died
there; all Judah and Jerusalem, mourning and making great lamentation for him.

Jehoahaz.
17. Whilst Pharaoh was busy in his affairs against the Assyrians, the people
made Jehoahaz the younger Son of Josias, King; 2 Chronicles. 36. A. M. 3392. Olymp.
41. an. 4.
who continued but three months in the dignity. For Pharaoh having finished
his work at Euphrates, and in Coelesyria, came to Jerusalem, whence he led away
into Egypt this young King, and left his elder Brother Eliakim in his place,
whose name he changed into Jehoiakim, Jehoiakim.
imposing a tax of a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold upon the
Land. Though Jeoahaz be said to have reigned three months, yet some will have
a year to have passed betwixt the 31 year of Josias, and the first of
Jehoiakim; partly for that Josias seems to have reigned something more than
31 years, and some space would be taken up in so solemn a mourning for him,
before the instalment of Jehoahaz; and also to consult about this thing, seeing
it was against right and custom to give this honor to the younger Brother:
lastly some time (perhaps some months) was requisite for settling the affairs
of Judaea, about the instalment of Jehoiakim, and the tribute. Ludovicus
Cappellus moreover, gives a whole year to Jehoahaz and Jehoiakim (though the
Scripture speaks but of three months a piece) that the last year of Zedekiah
might fall into the 390th year from the rent of the Kingdom; of which more,
when we arrive at that time.

18. Jehoiakim thus advanced by Pharaoh Necho, was 25 years old when he began
to reign; which if so, he was born in the fifteenth year of his Father's age;
as, if Jehoahaz was 23 when he began his reign, he must also have been born in
the sixteenth of Josiah. This makes Josiah to have applied himself to
procreation of children at least in the fourteenth year of his life; which
seeming too early, and not agreeable to the Piety of that Prince, there are
that suspect for 25, ought to be read 15, and 13 for 23; so that the one might
be born in the 24 and the other in the 25 year of his Father: But thereis no
necessity for such a reading of the Text. The fourth year of Jehoiakim fell in
with the first of Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, Ierem. 25 1* and 3.
and was the 23th from the 13th of the reign of Josias, wherein Jeremiah the
Prophet first began to prophesy; and hence it also appears, that Josias
reigned at least full 31 years, and that one passed between his death and the
beginning of Iehoiakim, else 23 only had passed betwixt the 13th of the one,
and the 4th of the other. In this year Pharaoh Necho fell upon the Babylonians
with War, Chap. 8.
because, as it seems, they had solicited Iehoiakim his Tributary to revolt,
and fought against Nebuchadnezar at Carchemish near Euphrates, Pharaoh Necho
slain.
A. M. 3396. Olymp. 42. an. 4.
(by the Greek and Latin Writers called Cercusium); in which battle he was
overthrown and slain.

19. After this Victory, came Nebuchadnezar to Jerusalem, where he either took
Iehoiakim captive to lead him to Babylon, or at least made him his tributary
Vassal. Some account this year, as the beginning of the reign of
Nebuchadnezar, so of the Captivity of Judah, and the desolation of that
Country, because that Jeremiah, having spoken first of the 13 years, in which
he and the other Prophets had warned the people to no purpose, afterward
adds, Chap. 25.9. and 11.
that God would send Nebuchadnezar his Servant against the Land, which should
be a desolation and an astonishment, and that these Nations should serve the
King of Babylon 70 years. But the Prophecy of Daniel begins thus: In the
third year of the reign of Jehoiakim King of Judah, came Nebuchadnezar King of
Babylon to Jerusalem, and besieged it: and the Lord gave Jehoiakim King of
Judah into his hand, with part of the Vessels of the House of God, which he
carried into the Land of Shinar, to the house of his God. This place seeming to
contradict the other; some have chosen to close with the literal sense of it,
and to hold, that in the third year of Iehoiakim, began the Captivity of the
Jews. Others see more reason to stick to the other place, and, to take away all
difference, interpret this third year of the third of the Sabbaticall year, or
the week of years, and thus would read it, In the third year, Jehoiakim the
King of Judah reigning, came Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon unto Jerusalem, etc.
But the Jews with some modern Writers understand by this third year, the third
of the rebellion of Jehoiakim, against whom Nebuchadnezar coming, about the end
of the fifth year of his reign, made him his Tributary, and so he continued
three years; The beginning of the Seventy years of Captivity, which is
variously assigned.
viz. the 6, 7, and 8th of his reign. Afterward, changing his mind, he
rebelled in the beginning of his 9th year, and so continued for three years in
rebellion, which being expired, in the end of his 11th, Nebuchadnezar took
Jerusalem, and carried him Captive to Babylon, with part of the holy Vessels,
and others of the Royal and Princely Race, amongst whom was Daniel; and so the
Captivity of Seventy years began not till this year.

20. That this third year cannot be understood of the third of Iehoiakim's
reign, is clear from Jeremiah, who joyneth his fourth with the first of
Nebuchadnezar; and because elsewhere is made mention of his fifth: whence is
aprarent, that he could not be led Captive in his third year. The second
opinion indeed is not amiss; for this was really the third year of the week or
the third from the Sabbaticall year. For, the 18th of Josiah, in which the
Passover was celebrated, being the last year of the 19th Jubilie, and so the
Sabbaticall year; from that to the 11th ending of Iehoiakim, or the 12th
beginning, are counted 31 years: viz. four weeks and three odd years; this
being usual with the Penmen of holy Story, to count their times by
Sabbaticall years or Jubilies. Iacobus Cappellus Ad. A. M. 3391 and 3392.
would have Nebuchadnezar, at the command of Nabopolasser his Father, to have
come into Iudaea in the second year of the reign of Iehoiakim, who then swear
fealty to him; but in the third year rebelled: whence Nebuchadnezar came down
again in his fifth year, and took him Captive. Then will he have him to have
set Shallum over the Kingdom, till Ieconias his Son, an Infant of a year old,
should come to age; but Iehoiakim himself there lived miserably in Captivity,
till the 11th year, reckoned from his first being made King by Necho. He being
then dead, and news of it brought to Jerusalem, they there made his Son
Iehoiakim King in his stead. And he begins the Seventy years of the
Captivity in his fifth year, when he will have him carried to Babylon.

21. But Ludovicus Cappellus his Brother replyeth, that in no place is there
any mention made of Nebuchadnezar's coming up against him in the second year of
his reign, the 2 Kings 24 1.
place thought to make for the purpose, having as much respect to the fifth as
the second year. And as little mention is there any where made of Iehoiakim's
six years of Captivity, who if he had died at Babylon, the Scripture would
never have attributed to him the reign of eleven years, but only so many as he
really reigned, viz. 5. The rest, it would either have given to Shallum the
pretended Viceroy, or to Iehoiakim his Son; it being a thing improbable, that
the name should be preserved for Iehoiakim, whilst Sallum indeed reigned:
Besides, the Babylonian King observed no such matter afterward in Iehoiakim,
whom taking away he really made King Zedekiah, without the title of Viceroy or
Lieutenant. Nay, though Jehoiakim lived long at Babylon, and, after the death
of Nebuchadnezar, being loosed out of bonds, was honored and esteemed by
Evilmerodach above any of his condition (and therein excelled Jehoiakim, if he
lived there so long); yet is there no more time given to his reign, than that
wherein he only continued in his principality. As for the Regencie of Shallum,
it is a mere invention, there being no other according to the Jews, then
Jehoahaz, who was also called by that name. For in the Ierem. 22.11. Consule
Ludov. Cappellum Chronol. Sacr. p. 202.
place thought to make this out, they are bidden not to weep for the dead (viz.
Josias) but for him that goes away ( Iehoahaz taken away by Necho) for he
should return no more into his Native Country.

22. Iehoiakim therefore being taken to be led away Captive, in the third year
of his rebellion and the 11th of his reign, died ere he went (as we may
suppose) and was cast out or buried, according to the Prophecy of Jeremiah,
Chap. 22.18, 19. and 36.30.
who had foretold he should be buried with the burial of an Ass; being cast
forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem, in the day to the heat, and in the night
to the frost, which could be done by none, except the barbarous Babylonians.
After his death, the Conqueror placed in his stead Jehoiakim his Son, called
also Conias and Jechonias, who did evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.
2 Kings 23. A. M. 3404. Olymp. 44. an. 4. Nebuchad. 8.
as his Father before him, Jehoiakim.
and Nebuchadnezar, it semeeth repenting of what he had done, lest he should be
drawn from his obedience, by the example of his Father, and the persuasions of
those about him, sent his Army before him, (about a year after his former
expedition) to besiege Jerusalem. When he himself came to the Siege, Jehoiachim
came out to him with his Mother and Servants, and yielded his person in the
eighth year of Nebuchadnezar ending. Then the Babylonian entering Jerusalem,
took away the Treasures found in the house of the Lord, and the Kings house,
brake all the golden instruments which Solomon had made for the Temple, and so
carried Iehoiakim with his Mother, Wives, and Servants unto Babylon. Besides
those, he transported all the best sort of the people from Jerusalem, with the
ablest and strongest for War from other places, in which number was Ezekiel. 1.2,
3.
Ezekiel the Priest, the Son of Ruzi* Iehoiakim in 2 Kings 24.8.
one place is said to have been eighteen years old, when he began to reign, but
in another 2 Chronicles. 36.9.
only eight. A fault must needs be in the reading of one place of the two,
which may best be laid upon the former. For if Iehoiakim his Father was 15
years old when he began to reign, (as some will have it) then was he born to
him in the 18th year of his age, being otherwise (according to this tenent)
absurdly made to have been begot in his 7 or 8th year.

23. Nebuchadnezar made King over the Jews that remained, Mattaniah the Son of
Josiah, from whom he received an oath of homage, and thereupon changed his name
into Zedekiah. Zedekiah.
He trod in the steps of his Brothers and Nephews, the people also being with
him incorrigible. He rebelled against Nebuchadnezar, taking part with the King
of Egypt, who maintained a quarrel with him, and therefore the Babylonian came
up in the 9th year after his establishment, took all the Cities of Iudaea,
except Jerusalem, Lachish, 2 Kings 25.
and Az^ka, which he also besieged. The year following Pharaoh came with an
Army to his assistance, which Nebuchadnezar understanding went to meet him, and
he thereupon afraid to engage, retreated into his own Land. Nebuchadnezar then
returning sat down again before Jerusalem, wherein famine at length
prevailing, and Zedekiah still refusing to yield, though Jeremiah constantly
advised him to do it, in the end of his 11th year, and the first day of the
month it was broken into, Zedekiah taken.
by the Caldaeans. Zedekiah flying, Jerem. 39.
was overtaken, and brought to Riblah: where he first saw his Children and
Friends slain; and then, having his eyes put out, was carried to Babylon, where
he miserably ended his days.

24. On the seventh day of the fifth month, in the 19th year of Nebuchadnezar
came Nebuzaradan, Captain of his Guard, and, having got all things ready in two
days, set the King's House, with the Temple, and the rest of the buildings in
the City on fire. Jerusalem and the Temple burnt.
The same month all the Walls were demolished; they that remained in the
City, A. M. 34^5. Olymp. 48. an. 4.

Nebuchad. 9.


with those which before had revolted, and the rest of the people, together
with the Treasures of the King and Princes, and the Utensils of the house of
the Lord, did Nabuzaradan carry to Babylon. So went Judah into Captivity in the
12th year after the death of Iehojakim, 390 after the death of Solomon and the
Rent of the Kingdom (which the Prophet Ezekiel. 4.5.
Ezekiel was commanded to represent by sleeping so many nights upon his left
side, the iniquity of the Children of Israel having from that time abounded) to
which the two years being added wherein the Captivity was completed at the
death of Gedaliah, and eight Jubilies are therein contained; 490 from the
beginning of Saul; so that the Kingdom of Judah continued 10 Jubilies, or 70
weeks of years, so many as are given by Daniel to the Commenwealth of the Jews,
from its restitution to the Messiah: From the building of the Temple 420. which
therefore stood eight Jubilies, with four weeks, or in all sixty weeks of
years; from the entrance into Canaan 967. as Ludovicus Cappellus reckons,
containing 138 weeks; from the departure out of Egypt 1007. during which time
Satan was as it were bound, and Gods people were free: Lastly, from the
beginning of the World 3515. which make 502 weeks, and 71 Jubilies with five
weeks of years. The concurrence of all these Accounts do mightily confirm the
Discoverer in his opinion of their realitie.

25. Chap. 40.
Jeremiah the Prophet had leave, either to go to Babylon, there to live
honorably, or to stay with the small remnant that were left in the Land. The
later of those he accepted, and went to Gedaliah, who being appointed Governor
kindly embraced him, and gave encouragement to all the Jews left under his
charge, promising them favor and liberty, so long as they remained obedient
Subjects to the King of Babylon: Chap. 41.
But ere the year went about, one Ismael, a Prince of the blood, who during the
War had kept himself out of the way with Baalis King of the Ammonites,
Godaliah, the Governor slain.
slew Godaliah whilst he lovingly feasted him at Maspha, with others, both
Jews and Caldaeans in his Company. The residue then of the Jews being without a
Governor, and fearing the revenge of their Lords and Masters, were minded to
fly into Egypt, and caused the Prophet to inquire of the Lord for them.
Jeremiah answered, that if they would remain in Judaea, God would mercifully
provide for them; but if they offered to save themselves in Egypt, Chap. 42.43.
etc.
they should undoubtedly perish. The Jews constrain Jeremiah to go down with
them into Egypt, where they stone him.
They, notwithstanding this warning, went down and constrained him, with
Barach, to accompany them, where, by the leave of Pharoh, they inhabited near
Tahpanes. Here the Prophet often reprehending them for their Idolatry, and
foretelling both their destruction, and the ruin of those that harbored them,
was by their wretched and ungrateful hands Xonaras Tomo 1. Tertullian in
Scorpiaco. cap. 10. Jerem.
stoned to death; but is said to have been exceedingly honored by the
Egyptians, so that Alexander the Great translated his bones into Alexandria. In
the 23th year of Nebuchadnesar (who then besieged Tire) Nebuzaradan, SECT. 4.
Captain of his Guard carried away the relics of the Jews and Israelites, to
the number of 745. which was the last deportation. Jerem. 52.
And the Prophecies both of Chap. 43.44, 46.
Jeremiah and Chap. 29.30, 31.
Ezekiel confirm us in this belief, The last deportation.
that the Jews in Egypt, after Nebuchadnesar had subdued that Country, were
partly slain, and partly carried away Captive to their own Countrymen with the
Natives, being nothing reformed by the forme^ punishments inflicted either upon
themselves, or their Nation.

SECT. IV. The Kingdom of Israel From the revolt of the Tribes, to their final
Captivity under Salmanasser.
Jeroboam.
1. THe ten Tribes, falling off from Rehoboam upon his Churlish answer, chose
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, of the Tribe of Ephraim to reign over them. He,
being industrious in the work of Fortifications, 1 Kings 11.12.13, 14. 2 Chronicles.
11.13.
had been made by Solomon Ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph; but
the Lord, after he was provoked by the Idolatry of Solomon, sent Ahijah the
Prophet to him to promise him ten Tribes; which coming to the ears of the King
he sought to slay him; whereupon Jeroboam fled for his life to Shishak, King of
Egypt, with whom he sojourned till Salomon's death. Then he was sent for out of
Egypt, and accompanied all Israel as their Speaker in their address made to
Rehoboam; whom after they had rejected, they made him King, A. M. 30^6.
that the Lord might perform what he had promised by the Prophet.

2. In the beginning of his reign he built up Shechem, which had lain waste
well nigh 260 years, from the time that Abimelech destroyed it. This place
being situated in Mount Ephraim he first made his habitation, till he went over
Jordan, and built Penuel, whence afterward he also removed his seat to Tirza.
He forsook the Lord, who promised him establishment, if he would keep his
Statutes and Commandments, going about by carnal and wicked policy to secure
his interest. For, lest his Subjects by going up to Jerusalem to Worship,
should be turned again from their obedience to him, he set up two Golden
Calves, Sets up to Golden Calves.
the one at Dan, and the other at Bethel, having learnt Idolatry toward this
sort of Cattle in Egypt. To that in Bethel he sacrificed, instituting a Feast
like to that of Tabernacles: and though, rebuked by a Prophet, he was stricken
with Leprosy, and might have been convinced by other Miracles; yet neither
these things nor the many judgments of God against him, and his Successors,
could reclaim either him, or them. Rejecting the Priests of the sons of Aaron,
and the Levites, he made of the lowest of the people Priests for the high
places: He had War with Rehoboam continually, and with Abiah his son, who
overthrew him in a great battle, and slew 500000 of his men, although he added
a stratagem to the force of his numbers (which doubled those of his Enemy)
compassing-in Abiah's Army whilst he was speaking to it. Some years after, he
died, having reigned 22. Nadab his son succeeding him, Nadab.
walked in the ways of his father, A. M. 3047. Asae 2.
and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin; but in his second year, he and
all Israel besieging Gibbethon of the Philistines, Baasa.
Baasa the son of Ahijah, 1 Kings 15.
of the house of Issachar conspired against him, and slew him there.

3. Nadab is said to have began his reign in the second year of Asa, and to
have reigned two years: yet Baasa to have began to reign in the third year of
Asa. To this, either must be said, that Jeroboam made his son King whilst he
himself yet lived, or else not reigning 22 years complete, but some part only
of the 22th year (so that the far greater part of the first year of Nadab must
fall in with the greater part of the second of Asa) neither did Nadab reign two
whole years, but one with a piece of another, and so the first year of Baasa
will fall in with the greater part of the third of Asa. For in this comparing
of the times of the Kings of Judah and Israel, is to be taken notice; That, 1.
A year only begun is taken for a complete one. 2. The fathers often yet living
communicated the royal dignity to their sons. 3. Some were twice inaugurated,
as Joram in the Tribe of Judah, and H^shea in that of Ephraim. 4. That there
were many vacancies, especially in the Kingdom of Israel. Baasa cut off all the
posterity of Jeroboam, Jeroboams posterity utterly destroyed.
not leaving one to piss against the Wall, according as Ahijah had foretold;
so that here Jeroboam's policy failed him, the Golden Calves having pushed down
his family. When Baasa saw that Asa had restored Religion, and for that cause
many of his subjects revolted to him, he had War with him all his days, and in
his fourteenth year built Ramah to restrain fugitives. 2 Chronicles. 16.
Asa to divert him hired Benhadad, King of Syria, who breaking the league
formerly made with Israel came up with his forces, and smote Jion (a City of
the Tribe of As^er) Dan of the Danites, Abel-hethmaach of the Manassites, and
all Cinneroth with the Land of Napthali; which forced Baasa to leave off
building Ramah, and return to Tirza. He reigned 24 years, 1 Kings 16.
viz. 23 with part of another.

Elah slain by Zimri.
4. Elah his son succeeded him in the 26th year of Asa, A. M. 3071.
and reigned two years; at the end whereof his servant Zimri, Asae 26.
Captain of one half of his Chariots, slew him at Tirzah as he was drinking in
the house of Arza his Steward, and the Prophecy of Jehu, the son of Haneni was
fulfilled against the house of Baasa, that it should be made like to that of
Jeroboam; all of it being destroyed in like manner by Zimri. Omri.
But Zimri himself reigned only seven days; for the people then besieging
Gibbethon, and understanding how things had passed at Tirzah, made Omri the
General of the Army, King. He presently led them against Tirzah, and took it;
Whereupon Zimri withdrew himself into the Palace, and setting it on fire
perished therein, because he also walked in the steps of Jeroboam. A Schism now
followed, for one half of the people chose Tibni, Tibni.
the son of Gineth, and four years (imperfect) as the Jews have it: this
division continued, till at length Tibni dying, A. M 3076.
Omri reigned alone. Asae 31.
He is also said to have began his reign in the 31th year of Asa, which must be
understood of his reigning alone, having slain Zimri in the 28th year
(beginning) of that King. After he had reigned six years at Tirzah, he
translated the seat of the Kingdom to Samaria, which City he had built on an
Hill, bought of one Shemer, from whom it took the name. Having done worse then
any that were before him, he died after he had reigned twelve years. Which if
they be accounted from the death of Zimri, and so contain his whole reign, then
reigned Ahab his son, Vide Lud. Cappellum Chron. Sacr. page 179.
and Successor but two years with him, his 11th year falling into the 38 of
Asa; but if they be reckoned from the death of Tibni, then must Ahab have
reigned about five years together with him.

Ahab marries Jezebel.
5. Ahab exceeded in wickedness all his predecessors, A. M. 3083. Asae 38.
not only living in the sins of Jeroboam, but marrying Jezebel the daughter of
Ethbaal, King of Sidon, whose God Baal he served and worshipped. For this, 1
Kings 18.
through the prayer of the Prophet Elijah, it rained not upon the Land for
three years; but at the end thereof he prayed again, and the Heavens gave rain.
He took occasion to show the vanity of the Idol Baal, and then slew his
Priests; for which being threatened by Jezebel, he fled into the desert to Mount
Horeb. Chap. 19.
Against Ahab came up twice Benhadad, King of Syria; once with 32 petty Kings,
and both times with great forces, but still was overthrown, Chap. 20.
and at the latter time yielded himself. Ahab honorably received him, and,
making a league with him, let him go in safety; for which he was sharply
rebuked by a Prophet, and told that his life should go for the life of
Benhadad, and his own people for his people; but there followed a peace betwixt
Israel and Syria for three years. In this space Ahab fell sick for Naboth's
Vineyard, who being by Jezebels procurement accused of blasphemy, was stoned to
death, and so Ahab enjoyed the Vineyard by way of confiscation. For this so
wicked a fact severe judgment was pronounced against him and Jezebel, by
Elijah; the execution whereof by a temporary repentance they caused to be be
prorogued. But the three years of the peace being expired, he renewed the War
with Syria; for that Benhadad having engaged to restore such Cities, as he had
taken, refused to surrender Ramoth-Gilead. Four hundred false Prophets
persuaded him to undertake the Expedition; only Micajah sent from God
dissuaded him from it. With him joined Iehosaphat King of Judah, whose Son
Iehoram had married Athaliah his daughter. But going down both together, Ahab
received a wound by an arrow, and thereof died, that day, in the 22th year of
his reign. A. M. 3103. Jehosaphati. 18.


Ahaziah.
6. Ahaziah his Son succeeded him, whom he had formerly made his Associate in
the Kingdom, and reigned 2 years in all; being said to have begun his reign in
the seventeenth year of Iehosaphat King of Judah, because his Father then dyed,
having reigned 21 years, and some part of another. After Ahab's death, Moab
fell off from Israel, 2 King. 1.
to which it had been subject ever since the days of David. Ahaziah falling
sick, of a fall which he had through a lattise in his upper Chamber, sent to
consult Baal-zebub the god of Ekron about his recovery; but the Lord commanded
Elisah to meet the Messengers, and denounce death to him for this his sin.
Hereat Ahaziah being angry, sent two Captains with their fifties, one after
another, to fetch him to him; but he called for fire down from Heaven, which
consumed them: then being entreated by the third, he went with him to the King,
where denouncing the same to his face, Joram.
Ahaziah accordingly died, not long after. Him his Brother Ioram followed in
the 18th year of Iehosaphat King of Judah ending, who wrought evil in the sight
of the Lord, Chap. 3.
but not like his Father and Brother; for he put away the Image of Baal,
erected by his Father, yet cleaved to the sin of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who
made Israel to sin, because of his carnal interest; all the Kings of Israel
accounting it an especial piece of policy, to busy the people in the worship
of the golden Calves.

7. Joram made War upon the Moabites which had revolted, in conjunction with
Jehosaphat King of Judah, and the King of Edom his Tributary, Elisha the
Prophet miraculoussy providing the Armies of water, and promising them Victory.
When the Sun arose and shone upon the Pits full of water, it appeared, to the
Moabites, blood; so that they concluding their Enemies to have fallen one upon
another, came out to take the plunder of the field; but finding other
entertainment, were repelled with great consternation and loss. The Israelites
then falling upon the Country, made havoc of all things, and besieged Mesha
King of the Moabites, in Kir-hazereth, who being streightened, attempted with
700 Men to break through to the King of Edom, but could not; whereupon taking
his Son, (his own some think, others the King of Edom's) which should have
reigned in his stead, he offered him for a burnt-offering upon the wall. This
spectacle seemed so horrible, as raised indignation against Israel, and such
pity toward the Man driven by extreme necessity, (as Josephus tells it),
that being mindful of the mutability of humane affairs, they raised the Siege
and departed.

8. Benhadad King of Syria made several attempts upon Israel, and besieging
Samaria, reduced it unto extreme necessity by Famine. Him Hazael his Servant
slew, and possessed himself of his Kingdom; but having received, together with
it, the succession of the War, Jehoram went up against him, Chap. 8.
and was accompanied by Ahaziah King of Judah to Ramoth-Gilead. Here receiving
a wound, he returned to Iezreel, to be cured; but the Army was left under
several Captains, amongst which was Jehu the Son of Jehosaphat; to whom Elisha
sent one of the Sons of the Prophets, Jehu anointed King.
to anoint him King. He was presently received as such by the Army, and
returning to Jezreel, Chap. 9.
slew Joram, A. M. 3117* Athaliae. 1. Chap. 10.
(and gave Ahaziah his death's wound) after he had reigned twelve years.
Destroys the family of Ahab.
He caused Iesabel to be thrown down out of a window, where her carkeise was
eaten by the Dogs; after which writing Letters to Samaria, he procured Seventy
Sons of Ahab to be slain, and their heads sent to him. Then going thither, he
slew 42 persons in his way, of the kindred of Ahaziah King of Judah, who were
going to visit Iehoram and Iesabel: at Samaria he put to death all the Priests
of Baal, and burnt the Temple with the Images. Yet took he no heed to walk in
the Law of the Lord God of Israel, with all his heart, departing not from the
sin of Jeroboam. For his executing of justice upon the house of Ahab, the Lord
promised that his seed of the fourth generation should sit upon his Throne; Yet
because of the rottenness of his heart, he began to cut Israel short in his
days, by the means of Hazael, who now subdued not only the Gileadites, but
also whatsoever the Israelites possessed beyond Jordan, raging with cruelty
againg Man, Woman, and Child, as Elisha had foretold him. Iehu coming to the
Kingdom at the same time as A^haliah began her usurpation in Iudab, reigned
full 28 years, and then died.

Jehoahaz.
9. Iehoahaz his Son succeeded him, in the 23th year of Ioash the Son of Ahaziah
King of Judah, who did evil in the sight of the Lord, Chap. 13.
in the sin of Jeroboam; a grove being also in Samaria. Hazael mightily
oppressed Israel also in his days, so that to him were left but 50 Horsemen,
A. M. 3145. Joasi. 23.
10 Chariots, and 10000 Footmen. Yet the Lord was entreated by him, and sent
Israel a Deliverer; notwithstanding which, yet Prince and People remained
incorrigible. After he had reigned seventeen years he died, and left his
Kingdom to his Son Ioash, Joash.
who also reigned with him about three years, for that he began his reign in
the 37th year of Ioash King of Judah, A. M. 3159. Joasi 37.
and is held by the Jews to be that Deliverer, mentioned to have been sent by
God. He overcame the Syrians thrice, as dying- Elisha foretold him (whom he
visited, and consulted about the affairs of his Kingdom); and thereby recovered
the Cities lost to Hazael by his Father. Upon the occasion formerly mentioned,
he took Jerusalem, with Ahaziah the King of Judah, and, breaking down the wall
of the City 400 cubits, plundered the House of the Lord and the Kings house. He
also was guilty of Ieroboam's sin, and died after he had reigned together with
his Father, and by himself sixteen years.

Jeroboam the Second.
10. His Son came after him, Jeroboam by name, Chap. 14.
whom God made instrumental to preserve Israel; nay to raise it to the highest
top of greatness it arrived at. For he recovered Damascus and Hamath, A. M.
3175. Amatziae. 16.
which had by right belonged to the Tribe of Judah, with whatsoever the Syrians
had taken from his Predecessors, from the ancient border of the entrance of
Hamath, to the Sea of the Plains, or the Lake Asphaltites, as Jonas the Prophet
the Son of Amitthai had foretold, the same with him that prophesied against
Ninive, being of Gath-Hepher, a Town of the Tribe of Josh. 19.13.
Zebulon, in Isa. 9.1.
Galile of the Gentiles; out of which therefore arose a Prophet, though the
learned Pharisees so earnestly urged the contrary to Nicodemus. In this King's
days also prophesied Hosea, and Amos, called from the Herd in Iudaea, to
prophecy to the people of Israel. Notwithstanding all that God did for
Jeroboam, he did evil also in his sight, accompanying his Ancestors in the sin
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. He reigned 41 years, 2 Kings 25.
and after his death the affairs of his Kingdom fell to decay; way being made
for the ruin of his house, and an Anarchie ensuing for 24 years. For so it
must be, if Zacharias his Son began not his reign till the 38th of Uzziah King
of Judah, Zachariah.
A. M. 3238. Hazariae. 38.
the last of Jeroboam falling in with the 14th of this King, seeing Uzziah is
said to have begun his reign in the 27th of his, and he reigned 41 years. This
may well seem strange in this Kingdom, where Princes were often made away by
Usurpers; but God had promised Iehu, that his Children should reign to the
fourth Generation; and this Zacharias might be a posthumus, or however very
young, and therefore not admitted by the Nobility to govern, till he had
attained to such ripeness, as was convenient for so great a charge.

11. Zachariah, doing evil in the sight of the Lord, as did his Ancestors,
reigned but six months, Shallum.
being then slain by Shallum the Son of Iabesh who reigned in his stead in the
39th year of Azariah King of Judah. He enjoyed his usurped royalty but a short
space, being after two months served so himself by Menahem the Son of Gadi,
Menahem.
who also reigned in his stead. Menahem smote Tiphsah and all that were
therein, with the Coasts thereof from Tirzah, because they opened not to him;
and ripped up the Women with child. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, not
departing from the sin of Jeroboam all his days; wherefore God stirred up the
Spirit of Pull King of Assyria, Pull King of Assyria invadeth Israel.
who invaded the Land; but he gave him 1000 talents of Silver, which he wrested
from the richest of his Subjects, to confirm the Kingdom in his hand. After he
had held it ten years he died, and his Son Pekahiah reigned in his stead, in
the 50th year of Azariah; so that Menahem having begun his reign in the 39th of
that King, and reigning but ten years, here seems an Inter-regnum of a year
or more to have happened after his death, except that be admitted, which some
think, viz. that Menahem did not peaceably enjoy the Kingdom till about a year
after Shallum's death, Pekahiah.
purchasing it then of Pull; so that beginning his reign in the 39th of Azariah,
or Uzziah, A. M. 3250. Haraziae 50.
must be understood peaceably, and in that year ending. Then must Pekahiah have
begun his reign in the very beginning of the 50th year, and so a few months
being added to the ten years of Menahem, at the furthest, there will be no need
of an Inter-regnum. Pekahiah treading in the wicked steps of his Praedecessors,
reigned two years and then was slain by Pekah the Son of Remaliah, one of his
Captains, who possessed himself of his Seat.

Pekah.
12. Pekah joined with the King of Syria against Ahaz King of Judah, slew in
Judah 120000 in one day, all valiant Men, because they had forsaken the Lord
God of their Fathers. Zichri a mighty Man of Ephraim, 2 Chronicles. ^8.
slew Maaseiah the King's Son, Azrikam the Governor of the house, and Elkanah
that was next the King. Two hundred thousand were also carried Captive, with
much spoil, all which Oded the Prophet, when they came to Samaria, procured to
be sent back. This made Ahab purchase the help of Tiglath-Pileser King of
Assyria, 1 Chronicles. ^.26.
who first destroying the King and Kingdom of Damascus, carried the inhabitants
thereof into Captivity; and then came against Pekah and transported the
Reubenites, The Reubenites, Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses, carried
Captives into Assyria.
Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses into Halah, Habor, Hara, and to the
River Gozan: then crossing Jordan, he set upon Galilee and carried away the
Inhabitants thereof with all the Napthalites (which remained of those that were
left by Benhadad) into Assyria. Pekah doing evil in the sight of the Lord,
after he had reigned twenty years, was slain by Hosea the Son of Elah who
usurped the Kingdom.

13. Hoshea the 19th King of Israel began his reign in the 12th year of Ahaz
King of Judah, who reigned seven or eight years with his Father Jotham, 2 Kings
17.18. A. M. 3272. Achazi 12.
and began to reign by himself in the 17th year of Pekah; Hoshea the nineteenth
and last King of Israel.
so that Hosea may truly be said to have began his reign in the 20th year from
the inauguration of Jotham; which we must say except we allow of a kind of
Inter-regnum for eight or nine years, during which time, Hoshea for the stirs
that happened could not peaceably enjoy the Kingdom; and then must we lenghthen
out the time of this Kingdom longer by so many years. Hoshea did evil in the
sight of the Lord, but not as the Kings of Israel which were before him.
Against him came up Salmanasser King of Assyria, and made him his tributary
Vassal, which he continued for some time, till weary of this bondage, he
conspired with So King of Egypt, and refused to pay his tribute: Hereupon,
Salmanasser subdued first the Moabites, lest he should have an Enemy at his
back, then invaded Israel and besieged Samaria, A. M. 3280. Ezechiae 6.
in the fourth year of Hezekiah King of Judah, The Israelites carried away
Captive.
and the seventh of Hoshea. At the end of three years (in the sixth of
Hezekiah, and the ninth of Hosea) he took the City, and carried the Israelites
Captive into Assyria, where he placed them in Chalach, Chabor, by the River of
Gosan, and in the Cities of Media, because they had not obeyed the voice of the
Lord, but transgressed the Covenant. In their Seat he placed certain Persians
that inhabited by the River Chuthus, and afterward, in distinction from the
Jews, were called Samaritans. The Samaritans placed in their room.
This happened to Israel, for their abominable Idolatry, 255 years after the
rent of the Kingdom; so that this Schism lasted five Jubilies and ten years; in
the 832 after the entrance into Canaan, according to Ludovicus Cappellus, and
therefore in the end of the seventeenth Jubilie from that; in the year of the
World 3380. or 3381. and so in the end of the 69 Jubily from the Creation;
SECT. 3.
134 before the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Captivity of Judah.

CHAP. IV. The most ancient Kingdom of Egypt, Contemporary with the Babylonian
Empire.
Cham the first inhabitant of Egypt after the Flood.
1. THis Country falling, at the Division of the Earth, to Cham and his
Posterity, seems also to have been inhabited by himself. For, thence Psalm.
105.23, 27.
David knew it by the name of the Land of Ham; In Iside.
Plutarch found it was called Chemia; Stephanus, Hermochymius; the Inhabitants
themselves calling it Isiodorus and Hieronymus in Genesim. vide cap. 1. Parag.
22.
Kam, who distinguished their Nomi, by this Allusion, into Chemmis, Psochemmis,
Psittachemmis; the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon in Africa, and the names of
Ammonis, and Ammonia, given to that Country, challenge no other Original. It
is not probable that these names should be only given to it upon this account,
that part of his Posterity here fixed themselves, for then the like might have
been expected concerning many other places. Misraim his son.
Misraim his second son succeeded him; or he, to whom Moses gives this name,
Lege Bocharti Phaleg. l. 4. c. 24.
as father of the Inhabitants of the Land of Misraiim; it scarce being the name
of a man, because not of the singular number. The Scripture calls Egypt 2
Kings 19.24. Esaias 19.6. Mich. 7.12.
often by the name of Masor, which seems the singular of Misraiim contracted
from Mesoraiim, and signifies a fortified place; no Country in the World
being more fenced by its natural situation. The Arabians at this day know the
Metropolis Alcairo by the name of Mesre, and the Egyptians anciently called
their first month Mesori. The dual word Misraiim seems to hint at the
distinction of Egypt into Orosius l. 1. c. 2.
Upper and Lower; whereof the former, watered by the River Nile, running in one
Channel, was divided into Thebais and Heptanomus. (Thebais being called the
Land of Pathros, and distinguished from Egypt by Isaiah and Jeremiah) and the
lower part was by the Greeks called Delta, from the Triangular Figure thereof;
the River being herein divided into many branches.

The same with Osiris.
2. This Misraim is thought to be the same with Osiris, so much spoken of by the
Egyptians, and accounted the son of Saturn, the eldest of the gods, and also
the son of Jupiter Hammon. For Osiris being by the Greeks named Dionysus,
Diodorus Siculus lib. 1. page 1.
one tells us that he had this appellation both from his Father and Country,
the former part of the word noting the one, and the later the other, viz. Nysa
a City of Arabia Foelix, built by Cham, in which he seems to have been born.
From the reign of Osiris, to the coming down of Alexander the Great into Egypt,
the Priests reckoned, some above 10000 years, others little less then 23000.
But several forms of years being used in several Nations we are to suppose
theirs to have been measured rather by the course of the Moon through the
Zodiac, than that of the Sun. Jacobus Cappellus therefore thinks 1889 years
to have passed from the reign of this Osiris to Alexander his going down into
Egypt, the beginning whereof he fixes at the 1778th year of the World; 100 and
odd years after the Flood, about the same time that Nimrod his Nephew began his
principality at Babylon. Osiris, and Isis their renowned acts.
This Osiris is feigned by the Egyptians to have married his sister Isis, and
they make them the true Bacchus and Ceres. Much they are both reported to have
done for the benefit of mankind, by bringing it to civility; to him they
ascribe the finding out of Agriculture, and to her the invention of Corn and
Laws. He built Thebes the ancient seat of the Kings, with 100 Gates; traveled
into the greatest part of the World to teach men civility with the use of Corn
and Wine, taking Pan along with him, who being had in great reverence amongst
the Egyptians, dedicated a City to him by the name of Chemmis. In his time
lived Hermes, or Mercurius; SECT. 4.
and Hercules, who being otherwise called Gyg^n, or Gygn^n, is said to have
helped the gods against the Giants. Osiris, when he returned was killed by his
wicked brother Typhon.

Osiris killed by Typhon.
3. Typhon, seizing upon the Kingdom, was by Isis, Diodorus.
through the help of her son Orus, dispossessed again of it, and his life;
after which gathering together the 26 parts of her husbands body (into which he
had m^ngled it) she instituted to him divine honors, Typhon punished by Isis,
and her son Orus.
ordering that the several Tribes of the Priests should dedicate some one of
their living Creatures to him, and for him worship it as long as it lived; then
at its death, seeking out another of the same kind, to do as much to it.
Several things were consecrated in several places, yet by a general consent the
Sacred Bull, called Apis, The Sacred Bull Apis.
or Mnevis, was most valued, and chiefly adored, because of the special help
that kind of Creature affords to Tillage. This Bull was black all over,
having only a square white spot in his forehead, says Herodotus* on his right
side says Pliny, like to a Crescent, being also sacred to the Moon, as
Marcell^nus will have it. On the back he had the image of an Eagle, a knot on
the tongue like to a Crab, and on his Tail double hairs. This kind of beast did
the Egyptians worship as the greatest God with astonishing veneration, as
Macrobius terms it, till it had lived several years; but not being suffered
to pass a certain term, it was then drowned by the Priests. Being dead, a
great and solemn mourning there was until another could be found with the same
marks. Now some make this beast to be worshipped in honor of Apis, King of the
Argives, August. de Civit. D^ l. 18. c. 5.
who going down into Egypt, was there Deified after his death, and called
Serapis. But there having been several Kings in diverse places of that name,
they are confounded one with another.

4. Nothing, indeed, but uncertainties attend the most ancient History of that
Nation; no two Authors agreeing betwixt themselves, concerning the succession
of the Egyptian Kings. This is not only to be attributed to the force of time,
but the unfaithfulness of their Priests, who having it committed to their
charge, to record the Memorables of their Country, foysted things of their own
heads into the story, concealed from the Natives whatsoever made against their
own profit, and from strangers all things that tended to the dishonor of their
Country. Out of such a kind of design they related not the same things to such
as traveled thither with a desire to be informed; so that from the corrupt
Fountains of their records have proceeded the Histories of several, who
pretending to have taken them out of the very Archives, are no less dissonant
amongst themselves then from the truth. The Catalogues of their Kings are full
of inextricable Labrynths; Manetho being of no credit, because of his notable
lying, and all those who profess to follow him, as Josephus, Africanus,
Eusebius, Syncellus, Scaliger, Usher, and others, not agreeing in their
ranking, and ordering of them.

The Dynasties of the Egyptian Kings.
5. Several Dynasties are made to have preceded the time of Abraham, Eusebius.
with whose birth (as it is placed in the 43th year of Ninus) the beginning of
the 16th is ^oyned. Much labor is spent by some, in an endeavor to clear the
order of these Dynasties, and to expound them. But, if they should be allowed
of; little more then 200 years are to be assigned to the continuance of all the
first 15. because the passage of Cham, and his posterity from the Mountains of
Ararat into Egypt, and the establishment of a formal Government there, could
scarce be performed within one Century after the Flood; time for the increase
of mankind, and the unpassablenesse of the earth duly considered; except we
cast the beginning of the first Dynastie back beyond the Flood. It has been
thought therefore that these were not several successions of Kings, which
continued for so small a time, but rather certain Ranks and Orders of
Governors under the Kings; who might be content to enjoy their ease and quiet
together with the Dignity (as the Kings did which Joseph served) whilst the
management of public affairs was wholly committed to these Regents, or
Lieutenants, of sundry linages or sorts of men, who by their actions might
leave greater impressions upon posterity than the Kings themselves, and so give
occasion to the Egyptians of vaunting them for so many Sovereign Princes
indeed: That Eusebius might accommodate the times and Orders of these Dynasties
to the Histories of other parts of the World, he is not afraid to transpose
them as he finds them in several Authors. Upon this account Jacobus Cappellus
thinks it a vain thing to recite in his Chronicle the series of the Kings,
seeing Manetho, by whom Scaliger would amend Eusebius, is most unworthy of
cre^it. But it being requisite to give beginners some insight into the story;
such things must be briefly related, as, out of such uncertainties carry the
greatest show of probability.

Orus the last of the Egyptian gods.
6. After Typhons death, Isis, as Diodorus writes, Lib. 1. p. 13. etc.
for some time governed the Kingdom; but so jointly with her son Orus, or
Horus, that he is also said to have succeeded after the death of his father,
and is moreover accounted the last of the gods. He instituted a year consisting
of three months, Censorious. etc.
and thence a year was called after him Horos. The Egyptian year, properly so
called, consisted of 365 days; but besides this, they had also monthly years
of thirty days, and others of four months apiece, or 120 days, that by this
various, and cunning account, as Cappellus thinks, they might delude the
Greeks. Of this later way few examples we meet with: but Diodorus makes
mention of it, assigning the cause to have been for that they divided their
Solar year, not into four, but only three parts; and Cappellus makes this
following account to consist of such kind of years. After the gods, came men to
the Government, and the Egyptians boasted that they had Kings of their own
Country and home-born, for the most part, during the term of 4700 years; after
Cambyses strangers: as Persians and Macedonians having governed them. Now these
4700 years he guesseth to consist of four months apiece, and to contain 1544
Julian years, Vide Cappellum ad A. M. 1931. and 1941.
which being deducted out of the years of the World, at the period whereof
Cambyses came down into Egypt, 1931 will remain; at what time Osiris, or Orus
his son might perhaps die, who being the last of the gods, Kings began where
they ended.

Menis the first King.
7. The first King that reigned after these gods was Menas, or Menis, Herodotus
and Diodorus.
which name by some is thought to have been only of Dignity, and that Osiris
was so called. Others think Mercurius Trismegistus meant thereby, for that the
Hebrew word Meni signifies an Arithmetician, and that Osiris might well be
termed Trismegistus, being a great Conqueror, Philosopher, and Benefactor to
mankind, in giving good Laws, and teaching profitable arts. Another would have
Sesostris, whom he supposes to have succeeded Osiris, to be meant by Menas, as
nothing inferior to Osiris in prowess and great undertakings. But Sesostris
the Great reigned not till many years after, and nothing hinders but Menas in
the Egyptian language (to say nothing of the Greek) might be a proper name as
well as a title of dignity. But, who succeeded him is not known; the Priests
feigning 52 Princes to have followed him in order for the space of 1400 years
unto Busiris, multiplying Kings, years, lies (or fallacies) to make their story
the more admirable. We must therefore in this unknown path, take the blind
conduct of the Dynasties again, of which omitting the first seventeen, to which
almost 4000 years are ascribed, the 18th is by Cappellus made to begin nine
years before the time whereunto Eusebius sets it, viz. in the 107th year of the
Patriarch Jacob, Amos, or Amosis.
the first in order of it being Amos, A.M. 2274.
or Amosis.

8. To his reign are given 25 years; so that, according to this account, he it
was who honored Joseph and set him over the Land. Eusebius.
He dying in the second year of the Famine, Chebros. Amenophis. Mephres, etc.
Chebros succeeded him, who reigned thirteen years, and him Amenophis who
reigned 21, under whom Jacob died. To him succeeded Mephres, according to
Eusebius, but Manethon after him places his Sister Amesses, or Amerses, to
which he gives 21 years and 9 months. After this reigned Mephres twelve
years, Mephramuthosis 26, and Thuthmosis (or Thmosis) 9. After him followed
Amenophis (otherwise called Palmanothis and Phamenophis) who reigned 31 years,
and by some is accounted that Memnon, whose image of stone, at Thebes in
Egypt, sounded like an Harp, when the Sunbeams, first in the morning, beat
upon it; which is witnessed by many Authors of good credit. To him succeeded
Orus, or Horus, who reigned 38 years, and to him Acenchres, who reigned 12.
Manetho makes Acenchres the Daughter of Orus, and gives to her 12 years and
one month; after her, he brings in Rath^tis her Brother, to whom he gives 9
yeas. But after Acencheres, Eusebius places Achoris, and gives to him but 7
years, to whom succeeded Cenchres the twelfth King: who, being more wicked than
his Praedecessors, oppressed the Israelites most grievously, and continued
eighteen years in his tyranny, A.M. 2508.
till an end was put to it in the Red Sea.

The Israelites afflicted in Egypt.
9. Above Eighty years had they vexed the Israelites with insupportable
burdens, notwithstanding which, they grew and increased exceedingly; nay
although order was given to drown all the Male Children, lest growing too
numerous, they might in time of War join with their enemies; else get them out
of the Land with an high hand; or because of a Praediction mentioned by
Josephus, that an Hebrew should be born, who was to afflict and overthrow the
Egyptians. That the Jews lived amongst them, is ever acknowledged by their
Historians, accounting it an honor, as all Nations do, to have sent forth
Colonies. But to take away disgrace, and to save the honor of their Country,
(which to the Priests was ever most solemn) abominable lies have been made,
and strange stories devised, concerning their first coming into Egypt, and
especially about their departure: which briefly to relate seems agreeable
enough to the nature of our design.

10. Manetho, an Egyptian Priest and Historian, pretending to describe the
Original of the Jews, relates that in the days of one of their Kings, In 2o
Aegyptiac. apud Josephum lib. 1. contr. Apionem.
Timaus by name, Manetho his Lies concerning the Original of the Jews.
a certain ignorant people called Hycsos, (which signifies Royal Shepherds,
or Captives as he himself interprets it) from the Eastern parts, with great
confidence invaded Egypt, which easily obtaining without any force of Arms,
they burnt the City and Temples, and raged against the Natives with Sword and
Servitude. At length they made them a King of their own stock, named Saltis,
who, coming down into the Country about Memphis, imposed a Tribute upon the
upper and nether Province, and put Garrisons in convenient places. Especially
he took care of the Eastern Coasts, being jealous of the Power of the
Assyrians; so that in the Principality of Sais, Eastward from the River
Bubastis, he built up a City called anciently Anaris, which fortifying with
most strong walls, he therein placed a Garrison of 240000 Men. When he had
reigned nineteen years, he gave place to Baeon, who governed 44, after him
Apachnas 36 with seven months, then Apochis 61, Janias 50 and one month, then
Assis 49. Under those six first Kings, they sore oppressed, and endeavored
utterly to destroy Egypt, and 511 years had they power over it. Afterward the
Kings of the Province of Thebes, and the remaining part of Egypt, fell on them
with a great and lasting War, and by a King named Alisfragmuthosis, were they
overcome, and driven up into a place containing the quantity of 10000 Akers of
ground, called Auaris. The Son of this King, Themosis by name, attempted the
taking of this place, besieging it with 480000 Men; but, dispairing of
success, agreed with them, that leaving Egypt, they should go whither else
they pleased; so that departing with all their goods, to the number of 240000
persons, they traveled through the Desert into Syria, (for that they feared
the Assyrians, who then obtained the Empire of Asia) and built them a City in
the Country, afterward called Judaea, which might suffice for so many
thousands, and named it Jerusalem.

11. To this history taken out of the ancient records, Manetho adds, as he
confesses, fabulous reports rife amongst the Vulgar, mixing with the
Israelites a multitude of Egyptians languishing with Leprosy and other
diseases; which he relates, as having forgotten, that the Shepherds left
Egypt 518 years before, as may be gathered from the series of the Kings, and
the distance of time betwixt Themusis, who reigned when the Shepherds departed,
and Amenophis, under whom the Lepers went out: the time of whose reign neither
dares he to define; though he be exact, in the years of other Princes, as
Josephus notes. Now this Amenophis, forsooth, was told by a Priest of the same
name, That he might see the gods, if he would cleanse his Kingdom from Lepers,
and other unclean persons. He, being a very religious Man, gathered all the
infirm out of the Land, to the number of 80000, whom he sent with others to cut
stones on the East of the River Nile; there being amongst them also some of the
learned Priests infected with Leprosy. Because favor was showed toward them,
the Priest who would have had them destroyed, feared much the displeasure of
the gods, as well against himself as the King, and foreseeing they should have
power over Egypt for thirteen years, he durst not tell the King so much, but
wrote a Book concerning the matter, and then killed himself; which cast the
King (you must know) into a great melancholy.

12. But being still desired to do something for the security of the diseased
people, he gave them Avaris, the City of the Shepherds, now not inhabited:
whither being entered, and perceiving the place to be very advantageous for
rebellion, they made choice of Osarsiphus, one of the Priests of Heliopolis,
for their Captain, swearing to obey him in all things. He presently established
for Law, that they should not worship the gods, nor abstain from such creatures
as were most sacred to the Egyptians; to marry with none but those that were
tied to them by the same league, and commanding many other things (especially
such as he knew contrary to Egyptian customs) he prepared for War. Then sent
he to the Shepherds at Jerusalem, formerly expelled by Themusis, to open their
condition to them, and to invite them to give their assistance against Egypt.
The Shepherds readily closed with the motion, and all, to the number of 200000,
marched down to Avaris. Amenophis much startled hereat, especially because of
the Praediction of the Priest, committed his Son, but five years old, to a
Friend; and, together with Apis and his other gods, went into Aethiopia, where
he was received with all his multitudes of Subjects, and was kindly entertained
by the King, who made provision for them for these thirteen years. The
Solymitans, or Shepherds, with the unclean multitude, made now great havoc of
all things in Egypt, burning Villages and Cities, and raging against the
sacred Animals with their Priests, whom they compelled to be their Butchers,
and drove away naked; the forementioned Priest still giving Laws, and framing
their Policy; who being from Osiris the Heliopolitan-god called Osarsiphus, now
changed his name into Moses. But at the end of the thirteen years, Amenophis
returned with great power out of Aethiopia, and with the assistance of his Son
Rampses, fell upon the Shepherds and unclean multitude, whereof killing many
they pursued the rest as far as the borders of Syria.

13. These ridiculous lies are much more augmented by others. Chaeremon,
Chaeremon his ridiculous Lies.
who professed to write the History of Egypt, gives the same name Amenophis
to the King, and of Rhamesses to his Son; but adds, that the Goddess Isis
appeared to the former, complaining that her Temple was destroyed by War. That
Phritiphantes a sacred Scribe, told the King, that if he would be freed from
terrors in the night, he must purge Egypt from polluted Men: he therefore
gathering out 250000 diseased persons, cast them out of his borders: That the
two Scribes Moses and Joseph (the Egyptian name of the former being Tisithes,
and of the later Petesephis) became their Leaders, and, coming to Pelusium,
found there 380000, which Amenophis having left behind would not convey into
Egypt: with those they struck up a league, and undertook an Expedition against
the Land. Amenophis not expecting the issue of their attempt, fled into
Aethiopia, leaving his wife big with child, which lying hid in a Cave, brought
forth a Son called Messenes. He, when he came to age expelled the Jews, to the
number of 200000 into Syria, and received back his Father Amenophis out of
Aethiopia.

Lisimachus his malicious forgeries.
14. Lysimachus an Historian, going beyond the other two in the maliciousness
of his lies, wrote, that when Bocchoris reigned in Egypt, the people of the
Jews, infected with Leprosy, Scab, and other diseases, resorted to the Temple
to beg for their living, and many being infected with this disease, barrenness
fell upon the Land. Bocchoris, sending to the Oracle of Ammon about it,
received this answer; that the Temples were to be cleansed from impure and
profane persons, who were to be cast out into the Desert; but the scabbie and
Leprous should be drowned, the Sun not enduring they should live; which being
done, and the Temples purified, fruitfulness would be restored to the Earth.
Bocchoris accordingly ordered the Priests to gather all the profane out of the
Temples, and give them up to Soldiers, who were to carry them into the
Wilderness; and the Leprous and Scabbie to be wrapped in Lead, and cast into
the Sea; which being drowned accordingly, the other were exposed to perish in
the Desert. But those, consulting for their own safety, kept fires that night,
and strict watch; then, the day following, a solemn Fast to God for their
preservation. On the next, counsel was given them by a certain Man named
Moses, that they should march on in one body, till they arrived at some good
Soil. Then commanded he them to be kind to no man, to give bad counsel rather
than good, and overthrow the Temples of the gods, as many as they should find;
which being approved of, they traveled through the Desert, and, after much
trouble, came to a fruitful Soil, where using the Inhabitants very
injuriously, and rifling and burning the Temples, they arrived at length in
that Country, since called Iudaea, and building a City seated themselves there.
This City was at first called Hierosyla, from the spoiling of the Temples; but
afterward, to shun the disgrace of the occasion, they changed it into
Hierosolyme, and took the name of Hierosolymitans.

Apion his Lies.
15. Further than this; Apion a Grammarian of Alexandria, Josephus Lib. 2.
contr. Apionem.
as he counterfeited himself, but born in Oasis, a Town of Egypt, amongst
several other lies against the Jews, wrote, that he had received from the
eldest of the Egyptians, how Moses was a Heliopolitan, and, being brought up
according to the customs of his Country, changed the rites thereof at his own
pleasure. That he led the Leprous, Blind, and Lame, out of Egypt; but fairly
says, it was in the first year of the seventh Olympiad, the same wherein
Carthage was built by the Tyrians, which happened about 150 years after Hiram
the King of Tire (as apppeareth out of the Phoenician Annals) with whom Solomon
was contemporary. He mentioned the same number of infirm persons as Lysimachus,
but adds a reason why the Sabbath was so called. Traveling six days
together, says he, on the seventh day they rested in Judaea, for that they
were sorely plagued with Ulcers in their privy parts, and named it Sabbath,
from the Egyptian word Sabbatosis, which signifies that disease.
Notwithstanding that he says they finished their journey in six days, yet he
further writes, that Moses hid himself for forty days upon the Mount Sinai
(which lies betwixt Egypt and Arabia) whence coming down, he gave Laws unto
the Jews. As for the Jewish Religion, he was not ashamed to write, that in
their Temple was set the head of an Ass made of gold, and of great value,
which being there worshipped, was taken thence when Antiochus Epiphanes spoiled
the place.

16. Such absurdities were delivered by the Egyptians, and those who out of
desire to gratify them, have, after their example, endeavored to conceal the
truth; to which Josephus in his two Books against Apion, has abundantly
answered. Several reasons have moved them to corrupt their Original Records.
Reason for these Lies raised by the Egyptians, and others against the Jews.
The Israelites growing great in that Country, out of it they returned to the
promised Land by the stretched out arm of God, to the great reproach of their
cruel and imperious Lords. The difference of religion raised also betwixt the
two Nations (as betwixt the Jews and the whole world) mortal enmity, whilst
the one worshipped the only true God, and the base and degenerate spirit of
the other fell down to things far inferior to themselves; which difference some
(though but few) persons discerning, were ambitious to become Proselytes to the
Jewish Doctrine: Hence again arose such Envy, that some descended to that
indiscretion and weakness, as to contradict their own most ancient and
authentic Writers. The inbred blindness of Men's minds, increased by
Paganish Education, has so far prevailed, that the As Diodorus Siculus in
Eclog. lib. 34. and 40.

Tacitus Hist. lib. 5. ad initium. Justin. lib. 36.


greatest part of Heathen Writers have in this contention sided with the
Egyptians, (otherwise contemptible enough in their eyes) and subscribed to what
they have said concerning the Original of the Jewish Nation; though some
Strabo lib. 16. p. 761. Dion. Cassius lib. 37.
have not given credit to such reports.

17. As Manetho erreth in the cause of the departure of the Jews out of Egypt,
Manetho his false Chronology.
so also in the time thereof, though not so grossly as his Friend Apion.
Manetho names the King Themusis, by whom they were expelled: Who, if the same
with Amosis, he lived 230 years before their true departure; and that he is the
same appears by Manetho's Catalogue, taken out of Josephus. But (to go on
with the Story of the Kings) Themusis reigned, according to Manetho, 25 years
and four months after their Expulsion. Chebron his Son succeeded him, and
reigned thirteen years; next him, Amenophis 20 with seven months; his Sister
Amesses 2 and 9 months. Mephres followed her, and continued twelve years and
nine months, him Mephramuthosis, who reigned 25 and ten months; then Thmosis
nine and eight months, Amenophis thirty and ten months, Orus 36 and five
months. His Daughter Acencheres reigned 12 years and one month, Rathotis her
Brother nine years, Acencheres twelve and five months, another of that name
twelve and three months, Armais four and one month, Armesis one and four
months, Armesses Miamun Sixty six and two months, and lastly Amenophis
ninteen and 6 months. In whose time one who, forsaking Eusebius, follows
Manetho, in ranking those Kings, holds the Israelites to have departed Egypt,
and consequently will have this King drowned in the Sea. That Ramesses Miamun
was he, who first began to afflict the Israelites, the length of his reign (as
Usserius Annal. Vet. Test. ad A. M. 2427. and 2494.
one supposes) makes probable; whose name also seems to him, to have given
appellation to one of the Cities, in building of which they were employed.

18. After Amenophis reigned Sethosis, who having great Forces both by Land and
Sea, left his Brother Armais deputy of Egypt, Manetho apud Josephum l. 1.
contr. Apionem.
and forbidding him the Diadem and meddling with his Wife or Concubines,
undertook an Expedition against Cyprus and Phoenicia, Sethosis or Aegyptus.
and then against the Assyrians and Medes, all which he brought under, A. M.
2522.
either by the sword or the terror of his name, whereby, elevated in his mind,
he confidently marched up and down the East-countries, overturning the Cities
and States thereof at his pleasure. Much time being herein spent, his Brother
in the mean while acted all things in Egypt contrary to his injunctions, by
the advice of his Friends, assuming the Diadem and rebelling. Of this the
Chief-Priest secretly gave him intelligence, so that hasting back to Pelusium,
he recovered his Kingdom. Manetho adds, that this Sethosis was also called
Aegyptus, (from whence the Country took the name of Egypt) and this his
Brother Armais had also the appellation of Danaus. If so; then Amenophis, who
was swallowed up of the Sea, His Brother Armais or Danaus.
must be taken for Belus, the Father of Aegyptus and Danaus according to the
Greeks, who not being confounded with the Father of Ninus (as by Mythologists
he is wont to be) is said to have lived 322 years before the destruction of
Troy, which account Learned Usher judges fitly to agree with the time of
Amenophis. He also thinks Ramesses Miamun to be Neptune, Mia coming near to,
and therefore seeming to be derived from, Moy; which in the ancient Egyptian
language, Ramesses Miamun the same with Neptune.
according to Josephus, signifies water. Neptune is said also to be Father of
Busiris, who at this time tyrannizing about the River Nile, cruelly slew such
Strangers as came near him. Such a Son indeed was worthy of so cruel a Father
as Ramesses Miamun; and it seems likely enough, that the Story of Busiris
might be taken from his and his Son's cruelty to the Israelites, and so the
thing may well enough be applied to Amenophis. Amenophis his Son with Busiris.
Further, if we observe what A. Gellius Noct. Attic. lib. 15. c. 21.
another tells us, that the Poets are wont to call cruel and bloody men by
the name of Neptune, as born of the raging and troublesome Sea; then may we
find more reason for Ramesses Miamun his being so called, because of his
inhumanity toward the Israelites and their innocent Children.

19. Now, to join this Story of the Egyptians with that of the Greeks, (whom
yet the other complain of, as corrupting their Antiquities) Lib. 2.
Apollodorus writes, how Neptune, on Lybia the Daughter of Epaphas (who being
the Son of Telegonus, What the Greeks write concerning Sethosis.
and Io the second daughter to Jasus King of Argos, built Memphis, as some say,
and reigned in the lower part Egypt) begat two Sons Belus and Agenor, whereof
the later went into Phoenicia, and there reigned. Belus obtained Egypt, and of
Anchinoe the Daughter of Nilus begot Aegyptus and Danaus. He sent Danaus to
inhabit Africa or Lybia (so called from his Mother); and after Aegyptus had
subdued the Country of the Melampodi, or Black-feet, named it Egypt after
himself, which, according to Eusebius, was formerly called Aeri^, and,
according to others, Potamitis. But he whom Maneth^, in Josephus, calls
Sesothis, seems to be the same with Diodorus his Sesoosis, and Sesostris of
Herodotus, concerning whom both of them record (as Manetho has done) very
admirable things. Agreeable to what Manetho delivers of Sesothis, Herodotus
Lib. 2. c. 102, etc.
writes, that Sesostris subdued many Nations. Lib. 1. p. 34, etc.
Diodorus says, His Conquests.
that Sesoosis conquered Arabia and Lybia before his Father's death, and
afterward having a great ambition to do as much by all the World, first
secured the affections of his Subjects at home (to keep them in obedience) by
his clemency and bounty. Then with an Army of 600000 Foot, 24000 Horse, and
27000 Chariots, he set upon the Ethiopians, toward the South, whom having
conquered, he compelled to pay a Tribute of Ebonie, Ivory, and Gold. With a
Navy of 400 Ships sent into the Red Sea, he subdued all the maritime Coasts, as
far as India; he himself with a Land-Army overrunning not only those parts of
Asia which afterward Alexander subdued, but beyond Ganges all as far as the
Ocean it self.

20. After this, he conquered the Nations of Scythia as far as the River Tanais
(which severeth Asia from Europe) and left some of his Egyptians to make a
Plantation by the Lake Maeotis, that gave original to the Nation of the
Colchi, which the Egyptians supposed they sufficiently proved to be their
Colonie from the use of Circumcision, imagining that the Jews had also this
rite from them. Finally all Asia he subdued, with most of the Islands Cyclades;
but then passing over into Europe, was in danger of losing his Army for want of
Provisions, and by the difficulty of places: therefore in Thrace he put bounds
to his Expedition, having in all places erected Pillars, wherein was written
his success; and where he found courage, he caused a member of a Man to be
engraven, but where he met with cowardice that of a Woman. At length, after
nine years, he returned home with much spoil, where he refreshed, and rewarded
his victorious Army. Here he was not idle, but set himself to such works as he
thought might eternize his name, wherein he employed none of his natural
Subjects, but the Captives he had brought with him. This the Babylonians not
enduring, brake out into rebellion, and fortifying a place near the River, held
it out in despite of him, till at last by composition they enjoyed a Seat,
which they called Babylon, in remembrance of their own Country. He raised up
great heaps of stones and earth, and to them removed such Cities, as by reason
of the lowness of their situation, were obnoxious to inundations from the
River: yet, lest there should be want of water, and for convenience of trade,
he caused Rivolets to be dug throughout the Land; he also fortified the
Country by a wall on the East, and otherwise povided against invasions.

21. For an ostentation of his greatness, he caused such, as being subdued
held their Kingdoms of him, or had received new Principalities at his hand, at
certain times to come down with their Presents, His pride.
whom he otherwise used with much respect: but being to go to the Temple, or
enter the City, he would loose his Horses out of his Chariot, and be drawn by
four of these Princes. At length, having excelled all Men in Conquests, and
other Royal achievements, he fell blind, and killed himself when he had
reigned 33 years; for which act he was the more admired by the Egyptians. These
amongst other things are reported of Sesostris, before whose Statue many years
after Darius, the son of Hystaspes causing his own to be erected, the chief
Priest contradicted it, alleging that Darius had not yet excelled Sesostris
in honorable actions; with which freedom the King was well pleased, and said,
Sethosis, or Sesostris, the second, son to the other.
if he lived, he would labor to come no whit short of him. His son succeeded
him of the same name and misfortune in the loss of his sight, which to recover
he was bid by an Oracle to wash his eyes in the Urine of some woman which never
knew any other man then her own husband. Beginning with that of his own wife,
he proceeded to make trial of the honesty of many others, but found none
effectual to the cure, but the wife of a certain Gardener, which woman he then
married, and burnt all the rest. Many after him followed in order till one
Arnosis came to the Government, who by his Tyranny made way for Actisanes,
Actisanes King of Aethiopia.
the King of Aethiopia. He, using his power with moderation, put no Malefactor
to death, but, cutting off their Noses, sent them away into the Confines of
Egypt and Syria, where he built them a City, called from the maimednesse of
the inhabitants Rhinocolura, which was destitute of all sorts of provisions
through the barrenness, and unhealthfulnesse of the place. The soil he chose
on purpose, that they might be diverted from idle, and vicious courses, by
anxious and effectual care for a livelihood, which they got by a trade of
fishing in the adjoining Sea.

22. After his death the Egyptians recovered the Sovereignty, and created a
King of their own Nation, Mendes.
called Mendes. He spent his life in making provision for death by a Sepulcher
inimitable for Art, which he made under the notion of a Labrynth; according to
which pattern they believed Daedalus to have framed that he made for Minos,
King of Crete, wherein to keep the Minotaure. After Mendes an Anarchy followed
for a long time, till one of ignoble extraction was made King; After an Anarchy.
by the Egyptians, named Cetes, but by the Greeks Proteus, who living in the
time of the Trojan War, had great skill in Astrology, and the knowledge of
winds; whence, and because the Kings of Egypt were wont to have several kinds
of living Creatures, Trees, Fire, and other things painted, and worn about
their heads, the Greeks took occasion to invent that fable of his turning
himself into all manner of shapes. Remphis.
Remphis his Son, and Successor spent his time in the improvement of his
revenue and customs, insomuch that he died far richer then any of his
Predecessors, having got together 400000 Talents of Gold and Silver. Nileus,
from whom the Nileaas named.
The next, who was any thing considerable was Nileus, who because he took great
care about bringing water from the River to furnish the Country, changed the
name of it from Egypt into Nile.

Chemmis first builds a Pyramid.
23. The 8th. from Nileus was Chemmis, Diodorus.
who being born at Memphis reigned fifty years, and built the greatest of the
three Pyramids, counted amongst the seven wonders of the World. Herodotus
writes that the first King who gave his mind to this work was Cheops, and that
he prostituted his daughter to raise money for this purpose: That the biggest
was twenty years in building by no fewer then 100000 workmen, toward the diet
of whom the price of Onions and Garlic only, amounted to 1600 Talents of
silver: That his daughter, of every one who had to do with her, begged a stone,
and therewith built a little Pyramid near adjoining. Diodorus writes that the
basis of the greatest was on each side 700 foot broad, Vide Phicium lib. 36. c.
22.
the height above 600 foot, and at the top it was six Cubits broad, all of
solid stone very hard, and of an everlasting substance, which he proves for
that the whole structure in his time remained unchanged and uncorrupted, though
raised 1000 years before. But others which within this hundred years have
traveled into Egypt relate how those monstrous buildings which stand 13 miles
off from Memphis, and look like Mountains at a distance, are on the North-side
much eaten, and consumed with that wind; the Etesian winds being there as much
putrefying as the Southern in other parts. These Piles of stone stand in a
sandy place which affords not any quarries of stone, some five miles distant
from the Nile, so that the work may well seem right miraculous, though the
Egyptians raised many fables thereupon. But so many thousands of men were to be
killed with this toil that one might be stately buried; which yet they say
happened not to him: For the people were so enraged hereat, that his son durst
not there bury him, but laid him in another obscure and ignoble place. And yet
he could not contain himself, but to his power must also imitate his father's
madness.

Cephren.
24. Cephren the brother of Chemmis succeeded him, and reigned 56 years,
Herodotus.
though some would have his son Chabry's immediately to have followed him.
Diodorus.
He spent his time the same way, building another Pyramid in workmanship like
to the former, but much inferior to it in compass and largeness; being also
buried in an obscure place for fear of the rage of the multitude. After Cephren
followed Mycerinus (or Mycherinus) the son of Chemmis, Mycherinus.
or Cheops, of whom the Egyptians made great account, because he reformed much
amiss in his Father's and Uncle's days. He also built a Pyramid less than
the other, but in excellency of workmanship far excelling them. One Bocchoris
succeeded next, Bocchoris.
according to Diodorus; in body contemptible, but for endowments of mind going
beyond all his Predecessors. Then, after a long time came in Sabacon the
Ethiopian, and reigned in Egypt. But Herodotus writes that Asychis succeeded
Mycerinus, and built a Pyramid of Brick; then followed Anysis, who being blind,
in his time Sabacus, or Sabacon, invaded Egypt, and drove him into the Fens,
where he hid himself: but Africanus relates that Sabacon took Bocchoris alive,
and burning him quick, reigned in his stead eight years, This cruelty is little
agreeable to that humanity which Herodotus ascribes to him, viz. that he put
no malefactor to death; but, according to the degree of guilt, imposed upon
every one the carriage of so much earth to the place where he dwelt; and hereby
the Towns were made much higher, and less subject to inundations, at the time
of the overflowing of the River. His piety is much commended; for being told by
one of the gods, that if he would reign quietly in Egypt, he must cut off all
the Priests by the middle, he made choice rather to quit his interest in the
Kingdom, and the possession thereof, than to hazard the quiet of it, or commit
such an act of cruelty He is thought by some to be the same with So, King of
Egypt, who combined with Hoshea of Israel against Salmanasar.

25. After his departure Herodotus brings the blind man out of his lurking
hole, where he had now lien fifty years, and makes him to have recovered the
Kingdom. Sathon.
More likely it is that Sathon the Priest of Vulcan succeeded him, thought to
be Senechus his son whom Africanus places after him, and it may seem probable
enough that if he forsook the Kingdom himself, yet he might leave his son in
the Government. This Sathon (or Sethon) wholely devoted to his Superstition
neglected Military men, and therefore, when Senacherib King of Assyria invaded
Egypt, was quite forsaken by them; yet he is said by his importunity so far to
have prevailed with his god, that pitching his Tents at Pelusium, the Mice did
eat the Thongs of the Assyrian Targets, and the Horse-Bridles, so that his
Enemies were rendered incapable of fighting; and, confounded with fear at so
strange an accident, retreated. But whatsoever was done at Pelusium, the Nahum
3. Esaias 20.30.31. 2 Kings 18.
Prophecies against Egypt clearly show that the Assyrians pierced further into
the Country, and led away a multitude in Captivity. After Senechus, Africanus
places Tiracus the Ethiopian, the same with Tirhaka, Tirhaka.
who affrighted Senacherib back into his Country, A.M. 3288.
and is said to have made an expedition into Europe, Strabo.
and pierced as far as the Pillars of Hercules. Him followed an Anarchy of two
years, Diodorus.
and then happened the Government of twelve men together, which having
continued fifteen years, Psammeticus.
Psammeticus one of the twelve, assisted by the Ionians and Carians, Herodotus.
got the power wholely to himself. He reigned 54 years, 29 whereof he spent in
the siege of Azotus, or Ashdod in Syria. By placing his Egyptian Soldiers in
the left Wing of his Army, he gave them such distaste, that, disdaining
strangers should have the chief place, 200000 forsook him, and, do what he
could, departing into Aethiopia, there seated themselves. He, first of all
Egyptian Princes, invited the Greeks, and others to Trade in his Dominions,
from which they had been formerly discouraged, either by the severity of his
Predecessors, or by giving credit to the fable of Busiris.

26. He left the Kingdom to his son Necos, A.M 3390. V.C. 139. Josiae 30.
called in Scripture Pharoh Neco, Pharoh-Neco.
who first undertook that fruitless task of cutting a passage from the River
Nile into the Red Sea, and in that work spent the lives of 120000 men.
Undertaking a War at Gods command against the Assyrian, Josias King of Judah
opposed him in the Valley of Megiddo, where he was worsted, and so mortally
wounded that he died within a short space. After his return he disposed of the
Kingdom of Judah to Eliakim, to whom he gave the name of Jehojakim, and made
him his Tributary: Him Nebuchadnezar King of Assyria withdrawing from his
obedience to his own service, Neco went up against the Assyrian to Carchemish,
and there was slain as is before Chap. 3. sect. 3. Paragr. 18.
shown from Scripture. Herodotus L. 2. c. 159.
writes that he got a victory over the Syrians in Magdalum, and took Cadytis
in Syria, which may well be that Kadesh mentioned by Number. 20.16. A.M. 3396.
V.C. 145. Joakimi 4.
Moses. He reigned sixteen years, says Herodotus, Psammis.
six says Eusebius, and was succeeded by his son Psammis or Psammitichus, who
after he had reigned six years made an expedition into Aethiopia and died.
Pharoh-Hophra, or Apries.
Him folllowed Apries, his son, called in Scripture Pharoh Hophra and Vaphres,
who invading Phoenicia, made War by Land upon Sidon. He fought a battle at Sea
with the Tyrians, whom overthrowing, and returning home with great spoil, he
was so far puffed up, as to persuade himself that no god could deprive him of
his Kingdom; so strongly did he think he had established it. But making War
upon the Cyrenaeans, he received from them a great overthrow, and the Soldiers
thereupon mutined against him as having wilfully exposed them unto danger. To
appease them, A.M. 3426. Nebuchad. 30. Astyagis 15.
he sent one Amasis whom they presently chose for their King, Amasis.
and he after some pause acccepted their offer. Apries fled, but after some
time was taken, and by Amasis delivered up to his Subjects, who strangled him,
having reigned six years.

27. With this report of Herodotus agrees Diodorus Siculus his story,
relating how Apries vanquished the Cyprians and Phoenicians in a Sea Fight,
took by force and demolished Sidon, wan the other Towns of Phoenicia with the
Isle of Cyprus, and finally perished, as is before rehearsed, when he had
reigned 22 years. But others of late considering the more sure Testimony of
Scripture, and how Egypt was promised to Nebuchadnezar Ezekiel. 29.18, 19. Jerem.
43. and 44.
as wages for the service he had done against Tire; how Pharoh and his Army
should be slain by the sword, and the Jews in Egypt, and Pharoh Hophra
delivered into the hands of his Enemies as Zedekiah had been; resolve that the
Egyptian Priests notably deluded those Historians, hiding the disgrace and
bondage of their Nation. Therefore it is thought fit rather to believe the
report of Josephus, that Nebuchadnezar in the 23th year of his reign, and the
5th after the destruction of Jerusalem Conquered Egypt; killed the King
thereof, and appointed another in his stead. Some think Amasis might be used as
an instrument by Nebuchadnezar, and for that was made Governor by him; others
that the Deputy, or Viceroy, which he had set over the Land was slain by
Amasis. Agreeable to this later opinion, the Army of Ionians and Carians are
held to have been none other than the Garrisons of Mercenaries left by the
Assyrian, for the Guard of his Viceroy, and custody of this his new subdued
Province: as likewise the Company returning from Cyrene and Barce, who,
together with the friends of such as were slain in that expedition, deposed,
and slew Apries, are conceived to have been the Egyptian Fugitives, which then
recovered their own Country, seeing that of the Prophet was verified: At the
end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the people where they were
scattered, and I will bring again the Captivity of Egypt, and will cause them
to return into the Land of Pathros, into the Land of their habitation, and they
shall be there a small Kingdom.

28. Amasis being a man of mean extraction, Herodotus.
and perceiving himself upon that account, despised of his people, took a
Golden Vessel wherein he and his Guests had used to wash their feet, and
thereof made an image of a god, which when the Egyptians worshipped with great
reverence, he called them together, and comparing his Original with the former
use of the Gold, convinced them of that equal reverence which the change of
both ought to beget in them. Under him the Egyptians boasted that their
Country was most happy, no fewer then 1020 Towns of good note flourishing
therein, in his days. Amasis his Law.
He made a Law that all men should yearly give account how they lived, which if
they could not prove to be by some honest calling, they were to be punished
with death; and this, Solon is said to have translated to Athens. He being the
first of all others that took Cyprus, reigned 54. or 55 years. It seems
probable enough that he revolted from Cyrus, being before tributary to the
Babylonian Empire (though the Priests hid this amongst other things from
Herodotus and others); and that this was the chief cause, whatever is
pretended, why Cambyses came down and conquered his Kingdom. This was not
accomplished in his time, he dying in preparation for the War. A. M. 3480. V.C.
229. Cambysis 5.
But his Son Psammenitus succeeding him lost all, and so Egypt became a
Province of the Persian Empire; Psammenitus.
which things involving much of the affairs of Persia, and nearly relating to
the tragedy of Cambyses, are to be referred to a more proper place.

The Kingdom of Egypt very ancient.
29. The Egyptians, accounting themselves the most ancient of all Nations, were
not wanting indeed of many reasons to witness their antiquity, although their
pride transported them beyond the true Epoche of their Original. The Scripture
it self witnesses Egypt to have been a mighty Kingdom, every way better
replenished then any other Country that we can read of, in so ancient times: in
the days of Abraham it was a flourishing Kingdom, and the Israelites were not
a People till such time as the Egyptians were one of the most flourishing
Nations upon Earth. The Ethiopians concluded themselves more ancient, because
Egypt, as they thought; was of old a Sea or Lake, Ephorus apud Diodorum. l. 1.
p. 25. Herod. lib. 2. c. 5.

Arist. Meteor. l. 1. c. 14. Strabo. l. 12. p. 536. D. Plut. in Iside. Plin. l.
2. c. 85. Ammian. l. 22.


ancient Writers being of opinion, that it was the gift of the River Nile,
which having once contained within it self all the compass of the Land, at
length warped it up out of it is bowels; so that from it is mud, or dirt, the
firm ground proceeded, and became a Continent. They urge, that in the yearly
inundations of the Nile much mud is left and sticks immovable; that in the
moutains of Egypt the shells of Fishes are found; that the Springs and Wells
there dug, affoard water of a brackish taste, as if the relics of
Seawater yet remained in the Earth: Lastly, they say, that the Island Pharus
at this day, Egypt not the gift of the Nyle, as was generally imagined.
is scarce a mile distant from Alexandria; whereas in the time of Odyss. l. 4.
ver. 356.
Homer it was a day and a nights sail off from Egypt. But experience shows,
that for some thousands of years there has been no accession by any such mud,
but that those Towns which anciently stood upon the Shore of the Sea, and
River, still continue there. The shells might come from the general Deluge,
being found also in other places as well as Egypt. Many describe the Fountain
of the Sun at Heliopolis, Vide Brodaei Miscell. l. 3. c. 5. and Bocharri
Phaleg. l. 4. c. 24.
and yet none observe any brackish taste in the water. And as for Pharus in the
Trojan times it was distant from Canobus, where Menelaus is thought to have
arrived, but 120 furlongs; and therefore could not be a day and nights sail
from Egypt, as Homer wrote by virtue of his Poetic liberty, or rather his
ignorance in Geographie.

The antiquity of the Greeks, novelty in comparison of that of the Egyptians.
30. Certainly they had cause enough to charge the Greeks with novelty, and to
jeer (as they did) at their pedantick pretense to Antiquity; the luster of any
one of their Commonwealths being to that of theirs but as yesterday; their
Laws and Policy, their Religion and Rites but new upstarts, and (as the
Egyptians would go about to demonstrate) but copies of their Original. There
was ripeness of literature, civil discipline, and inventions of several sorts
amongst them, before the like did as much as bud forth in Greece, Italy, Herod.
l. 2. c. 49.
or other Western Countries. They stick not to instance wherein the Greeks have
borrowed of them. All, or most of the names of their gods, with the
superstition belonging to them, were, they say, stolen out of their Country,
the Rites being something altered and new stories invented, to blind the World,
as to their Original. Diodorus l. 1. p. 14. etc.
Osiris they avow to have been the true Bacchus or Dionysus, in whose Mysteries
Orpheus the Poet being initiated whilst he sojourned in Egypt, when he was
afterward kindly entertained at Thebes in Boeotia, to gratify them of that
place, raised a Fable of his being born there, and begotten by Jupiter on
Semele the Daughter of Cadmus, a certain Bastard having at that time been born
of her, and fathered upon Jupiter. Isis the Sister and Wife of Osiris, they
affirm to be the true Ceres. Hercules was an Egyptian, not born immediately
before the Trojan War, but in the most ancient time, even at the beginning of
Mankind, to which season the wearing of a Club and Lyons-skin was most
congruous, when clothes were not as yet found out, as also his cleansing the
Country of Monsters and wild Beasts, at that time; the Earth being but
inhabited in a scattered manner. Apollo in like sort was no other than Orus,
who was taught the Arts of Prophesying and Healing, by his Mother Isis. As to
this controversy, is observable the incertainty of the names of those
Heathenish vanities, the same being to some Isis, The incertainty of the
Heathenish Deities.
to others Ceres, and to others Themophoris (or, the Inventor of Laws) to
others Juno, to others the Moon; and to some all those names are one. Osiris in
like manner, is now taken for Serapis, then for Dionysus, otherwhiles for
Pluto, sometimes for Ammon and Jupiter; and not seldom thought to be Pan, as
Diodorus has observed.

31. Several Colonies they glory to have sent forth. The first by Belus the
Son Libya, Colonies pretended to, by the Egyptians.
and Neptune, into Babylon; where, upon Euphrates, he constituted Flamins after
the custom of Egypt, free from all taxes and impositions. These by the
Babylonians were called Chaldaeans, who in imitation of the Egyptian Priests,
and Philosophers, observed the Stars. Danaus out of Egypt peopled Argos the
(almost) ancientest City of Greece. The Nation of the Colchi and the Jews they
prove theirs by Original, from the rite of Circumcision. Cadmus and Phoenix his
Brother they report to have been Natives of their Egyptian Thebes, whence the
former translated the name of that City into Greece: but Agenor his Father, as
is believed, (being the Brother of Belus and Uncle to Aegyptus and Danaus) came
thence into Phoenicia, then have they further occasion to boast of a Colonie
led by him into that maritime tract. The Athenians they prove to have been a
Colonie, led by Cecrops from Sais in Egypt, for that they alone called their
City Astu, from a place so named in their Country, and because the members of
their Commonwealth were distinguished into three ranks; of Noblemen, who only
were capable of honors as the Egyptian Priests; Countrymen who bare Arms
agreeable to that sort of people in Egypt, who being called Husbandmen,
afforded Soldiers for the Wars; lastly, Artificers, exercising manual and
common Arts, which fitly answers to the custom of that place. Besides
Cecrops, Petes the Father of Mnestheus and Erictheus were of the Egyptian
extraction; of whom the later carrying great store of Corn out of Egypt to
Athens, thereby obtained the Kingdom, and gave occasion to the Story that Ceres
at that time came into Greece.

32. Although it may not pass for current, that the whole World is beholding
to them for the use of Letters, the knowledge of the Stars, Geometrical
Speculations, the best Laws, and most of the liberal Arts, as they have
bragged; Ammianus Marcell. l. 17. De Hieroglyph. vide Ioh. Pierium Valerianum
Bellunensem.
yet most ancient have several of these things been amongst them. Besides the
common and usual way of writing, they had certain Notes, The Egyptian
Hyeroglyphicks.
called * Hieroglyphics, wherein each letter served for a word, and single
words expressed whole sentences. As by the image of a Vulture they expressed
the word Nature, because in that kind of Bird no Male can be found. By the
picture of a Be making Honey they undestood a King; hinting, that in a
Governor, a sting or sharpness ought to be mixed with sweetness. They also
used aenigmaticall compositions or mixtures of images; as, by a Scepter with an
Eye, and an Ear on the top thereof, they signified the Sovereign and
all-knowing Majesty of God. As for Astronomy, though the Babylonians, for the
antiquity of their knowledge herein, had no need to give them place, yet were
the Egyptians furthered in the due observation of the Stars, by the plainness
and evennesse of their ground, and the severity of the air; it never raining in
Egypt in ordinary course of Nature, which defect is supplied by the yearly
overflowing of the River. If the World be bounden to them for Geometry, it is to
be ascribed also to their River, as another fruit of it is inundation, whereby
washing away the marks and removing the fences of their particular Lands, they
were forced every year to measure them over again, and thence, through
necessity, driven to Mathematical speculations. Now that the best Laws, and
most ingenuous Arts were from them conveyed into Greece, they evidence by a
particular of the bearers.

33. The Priests, pretending in their Sacred Records to find the Register of
their names, and to demo^strate the truth thereof by other tokens, Diodorus l.
1. p. 60, 61, 62.
have made mention of Orpheus, who out of Egypt fetched the Mysteries of Ceres,
with the Fable of the Inferi, Greek Poets and Philosophers that borrowed their
knowledge of the Egyptians.
or those in Hell; the several places whereof, with the Ferrie-man Charon, are
taken out of the Fens of Acherusia, and the passing over this Lake by boat to
bury their dead there. Besides him, they make mention of Musaeus, Melampus,
Daedalus, and Homer, who traveled into Egypt to get knowledge. To these they
add, of Lawgivers, Lycurgus the Spartan, and Solon the Athenian, who borrowed
many of their Laws, and Plato the choicest of his notions. Pythagoras of Samus
from them received his Sacred Speech, as it is called; his Principles of
Geometry, Arithmetic, and The doctrine of the transmigration of Souls.
Democritus of Abdera they take for granted, to have lived amongst them five
years, in which time he proved an excellent Astrologer. Oenopis of Chius, by
his conversation with their Priests and Astrologers, amongst other things,
learnt the particular oblique course of the Sun. And, to add no more; Eudoxus
the Mathematician is beholding to Egypt (where he studied) for those
instructions which much profited Greece, and thereby procured him no small
honor.

34. The invention of Philosophy and Laws, with all the rest of the Egyptian
wisdom, wherein Moses was learned, is ascribed by diverse unto Hermes, Laertius
Jamblicus.
or Mercurius Trismegistus; of whom yet either as to his person or time,
nothing certainly can be affirmed. Hermes or Mercurius Trismegistus.
Cotta in Cicero, reckons up five, who have born the name of Mercury. The
first, begotten by the Heaven, or the Day; the second, Son to Valens and
Pheron, who lives under the Earth, called also Triphonius; the third, begotten
by Jupiter the third on Maia; the fourth, Son to the Nile, whom the Egyptians
feared to name for reverence sake; the fifth and last, whom the Phaeneatans
worship, who slew Argus, and flying thereupon, was set over Egypt; to the
Inhabitants whereof he gave Laws and Literature, and was by them named Theul.
But others attribute the finding out of Letters, not to the last, but the first
Mercury truly called Theut, Thoyoth, Thot, and Tautus; it being utterly against
all Antiquity, that any should out of Greece transport Learning into Egypt.
Others account two of this name natural Egyptians, of whom the later was
Nephew or Grandson, to the former. Some think Joseph, some Moses the true
Mercury. What ever he was, his Works lost and Translated by Facinus and
Apulc^us.
those yet extant, show him to have been a Man very well skilled in true
Divinity, and have gained him the credit to be numbered amongst the Prophets,
and Sibylls, for that he wrote many things of God, worthy of admiration; nay
also, it is believed, of the coming of Christ, of the Trinity, and the last
Judgment. Of the Learning of the Egyptians he is Jamblichus.
said to have written 36525 Books, if Pages be not rather meant hereby: And
Clemens Stromat. l. 6.
tells us, that in his time were extant 36 of his Books, viz. of the wisdom
of the Egyptians sixteen, of Physic six, of the Orders of Priests ten, and
four of Astrology.

The ancient Government of Egypt.
35. The most ancient Government of Egypt, though Monarchical, yet left not
Princes to the liberty of their own wills, which were restrained by the Laws
and Customs, that had such authority over their private and domestic actions,
as they could not exceed the bounds of Temperance and Moderation prescribed to
them thereby. For no slaves were they suffered to entertain, which might prove
instruments for debaucherie, but were attended by the Sons of the most noble
Priests, excellently educated. Their hours, both night and day, were destined
and set over to particular businesses. In the morning when first awake, Letters
were brought in to them; that, having perfect intelligence, they might be
better able to provide for the public safety. When washed and royally
apparelled they sacrificed; during which devotion the chief Priests prayed for
them, and their subjects extolled their virtues, cursing at last their sins of
ignorance, committed without their faults, and reflecting upon their Advisors
and Counselors. Then did the Priests read out of the Records, famous
Presidents of Council, or Action performed by their most Illustrious
Predecessors, which were to them proposed as Copies to take out. Their time was
prescribed, not only of speaking to the people, and distributing Justice, but
also of walking, washing, and other more secret employments. Their diet was
very moderate: usually Veal and Goose, with a moderate quantity of Wine, as if
ordered by an exact Physician. No liberty was there of punishing any man in
passion, or choler, either of acting any otherwise unjustly; every case being
determined by the Laws. Yet neither did they hereby account themselves
straightened of true liberty, but rather happy in that they indulged not their
appetites like other men. Hereby obtained they the love of their subjects who
held them more dear, alive, or dead, than their own relations, and the
Government continued for many Generations, as long as they submitted to those
Rules and Orders.

The divisions of the Land, and its Inhabitants.
36. Sesocsis, or Sesostris, divided Egypt into 36 Nomi; which word, Diodorus
lib. 1. p. 35. etc. Strabo l. 17.
whether Greek, or Egyptian, signified several Cities with certain Villages and
Grounds thereto belonging. Of these, 10 belonged to the Province of Thebes, or
to Thebais, other 10 to Delta, Aristot. Oeconom. lib. 2.
and the rest to the Midland Countries lying betwixt them; all which had their
several Nomarchae, or Governors, who ruled them, and took care of the King's
Tributes. The Lands were divided into three portions, whereof the first
belonged to the Priests, who were in great Authority, Diodorus.
and high esteem with the people. Of their Revenues they maintained Sacrifices
throughout the Land, and their own families; being exempted from all burthen^
and impositions. They were chief Counselors to the Kings, always assisting
with their advice, judging of things out of their deep skill in Astrology, and
suggesting useful matter out of the Records; their function hereditarily
descending upon their Children. The second portion of Land belonged to the
Kings, by which they maintained their State, waged War; rewarded deserving
persons, and which affording them sufficient Treasure, they burdened not their
Subjects by any Taxes. The third portion belonged to the Soldiers, who were at
all occasions ready for the War; it seeming reasonable that such as ventured
their lives for the safety of their Country should be well rewarded; and good
policy not to commit the safeguard thereof to any that had nothing dear, or
precious in it: and hereby they were encouraged to be careful in behoof of
their posterity which succeeded them in their possessions. As for the rest of
the people, they were divided into three Ranks, or Orders, viz. Shepherds,
Husbandmen (that farmed the grounds), and Artificers; who all attending their
business, and not meddling with State-affaires, neither having any right to
Offices, thereby the more improved their Arts, and saved the Commonwealth
harmless from such distempers, as are bred by the violence of an heady, and
ignorant multitude.

The Courts of Justice.
37. Their Courts of Justice were furnished with the most upright, and able men
that could be procured. Thirty Judges were chosen from Heliopalis (or On),
Thebes, and Memphis, each of them 10. Which Assembly would not give place,
either to that of the Areopagites at Athens, or the Senate at Lacedaemon. One
of these thirty being chosen President, the City for which he served made
choice of another to sit in his place. All had maintenance from the King; but
the President in larger proportion: who also wore about his neck, in a Chain of
Gold, an image of Truth made of precious stones, as a badge of his Office. When
they were sat and the Codes, wherein the Laws were contained, laid before
them; then the Plaintiff exhibited his Bill of the Crime, the manner of it, and
the estimate of the damage. The Defendant having a Copy of the Bill answered
particularly to it, either that he did not the thing, committed no Crime in
doing it, or else had not deserved so great a punishment. The Plaintiff had
liberty to reply, and the other to rejoyn his answer; but after this, the 30
proceeded to judgment, and the President set the image of Truth toward one of
the parties. No Lawyers were suffered to plead, as being thought rather to cast
a mist upon the Cause, and darken the Evidence.

Particular Laws.
38. As for particular Laws; Perjury was punished with death as a great offense,
both against God and man. If one man suffered another to be murdered in the
highway, or undergo any other violence, without giving his assistance, he was
to die for it; and if he could give him no help, he was bound to discover the
Robber, and follow the Law against him, under pain of enduring a certain number
of strokes, and being deprived of all sustenance for three days. False
accusers underwent the punishment due to that fault they accused of. Every one
was bound to give in an account to the Magistrate how he lived under pain of
death; which Law was made by Amasis. Wilful murder, either of Bond, or Free,
was death; only this Law took no hold on Parents; but such were constrained to
continue three days embracing the Carkeises. Against Children who killed their
Parents most exquisite punishment was devised: for, having first their flesh
all cut and slashed, and then being laid upon Thorns, they were burnt quick.
Women condemned were not executed before their delivery. For other Laws
not-Capital, it was enacted that Soldiers running from their Colors, or
disobeying their Officers should not dye; but be branded with infamy, as a
means to excite them to regain their former credit. If any held intelligence
with the Enemy, his Tongue was to be cut of his head. They that imbased the
Coin, used new weights, counterfeited Seals; Clarks that falsified and forged
Records, were to loose their hands. Ravishment of a free woman was punished
with the loss of the Members. Adultery of the man, with 1000 strokes with a
Rod; of the woman, with the loss of her Nose.

39. Bocchoris enacted, that he who denied the borrowing of any money should be
absolved upon his Oath; which was accounted as a sufficient purgation; a man's
credit being so much therein concerned. Usury upon Bond was not to exceed the
double of the principal; for which it was lawful to distrain the goods, but in
no wise to meddle with the person of the debtor that was owing to his Country,
and not due to his Creditor; especially if a Soldier, the common safety
suffering in him. Upon this account, they were wont to scoff as the Lawgivers
of Greece, who forbade seizing upon Plows, Weapons, and other things, but
suffered those that should use them to be carried away, and imprisoned. For
stealing, they had a peculiar Law: Every Thief entered his name with the Chief
of that mystery; and when he had stolen any thing carried it straight to him,
where, if any one could tell the time, and place, and prove it by certain
tokens to be his, he was to pay the fourth part of the value, and receive it
again; the Lawgiver thinking this the best remedy against what otherwise could
not be prevented.

The Lawgivers of Egypt.
40. The first man that gave Laws to the Egyptians was Mnevis, persuading the
people to receive them, because they were communicated to him by Mercury. The
second was Sasyches, who amongst other Laws instituted those concerning
religion; and, being a man of great learning, taught Geometry and Astronomy. 3.
Sesostris, who as he excelled all others in military glory, so he made Laws for
the Discipline of War. 4. Bocchoris, a wise and prudent man, several of whose
Apothegms were a long time preserved in the memories of men. 5. Amasis, who
much amended the whole policy of Egypt, his rare wisdom having preferred him to
that high Dignity, for which also being admired abroad as well as at home, he
was resorted to by some out of Greece as an Oracle. Lastly, Darius, the son of
Hystaspes, King of Persia.

Particular customs of the Egyptians.
41. As for particular Customs. The Egyptians married as many wives as they
pleased (posterity being with them a thing of greatest consequence) except the
Priests, who were allowed but one apiece. Children born of bond-vvomen, and
free, were alike respected, and equally legitimate, the father by them being
only accounted the author of Generation, the mother affoarding but place and
nourishment to the Child; in which respect also, contrary to the custom of
other Nations, those Trees that bare fruit they accounted Males, and the barren
ones Females. Their Children they educated exceeding hardly, the expense of
bringing one up not exceeding twenty drachms. Each Child succeeded his Father
in his Trade, or course of life. All sorts had some kind of learning,
especially such as conduced to their callings. Music was neglected by them as
rendering men effeminate. Once a month they used to purge, or use some
Medicinal course for their health. With them no Physician was found (as
Herodotus writes) who professed the Art of curing the whole body; but one was
for the head alone, another for the eyes, and so for the other parts: all which
yet, as Diodorus has it, were nourished of the public, and bound to observe
Methods, and Medecines prescribed them in books; which if they altered or
changed, upon the miscarriage of the Patient they forfeited their lives
together with their credit.

42. Such was the constitution of the Egyptian Commonwealth as they themselves
related, which from some gains little credit, this constitution of policy
hardly agreeing with the manners of those Kings that built the Pyramids; so
that to them this excellent model of Government seems to be of the same
nature, and credit with the Vide Judicium Jacob. Cappelli in Hist. saern and
Exotica ad A. M. 1931.
Cyropaedia of Xenophon. This is observable, that according to this
constitution the propriety in the Land was carried from that form wherein it
was left by Joseph, who purchased all the Land (except that of the Priests) for
Pharoh, and made the King absolute Lord thereof. Their ridiculous superstition.
The fond and ridiculous superstition, which possessed this people above others
takes off much from its reputation. That sordid, and degenerate humor of
consecrating, with such blind earnestness, Bulls, Sheep, Dogs, Cats,
Ichneumons, Ibis., Gossehawks, Eagles, Goats, Wolves, Crocodiles, Porrum aut
caepe nefas violare aut frangere morsu. O Sanctas gentes quibus haec nascuntur
in hortis Numina! Juvenal. Satyr. 15.2.9.
plants that grew in their Gardens, and other things, is so abominable at the
first sight, as none of their pretenses can give thereto the least show of
reason, in the opinion of a man but ordinarily qualified with the light of
Nature.

Ah! what a thing is man devoid of Grace,
Adoring Garlic with an humble face:
Begging his food of that which he may eat.
Starving the while he worshippeth his meat.
Who makes a Root his God. How low is he,
If God and man be severed infinitely?
What wretchedness can give him any room,
Whose house is foul while he adores his Broom.
None will believe this now, though money be
In us the same transplanted foolety. Mr. Herbert in his Church Militant.
CHAP. V. The most Ancient state, and condition of Greece, during the
Babylonian Empire, with a Description of its Kingdoms and Commonwealth.
SECT. I. The State of Greece in General.
1. THe most Ancient common name of the inhabitants of this Country is more
agreeable to the Roman Appellations of Graii, Graeci, and Grajugenae, than that
whereby they have rather chosen to call themselves, viz. Hellenes. For, till
Vide Apolled. lib. 1. c. 21. Thucyd. l. 1. in praefat. Aristot. de Meteoris l.
1.
such time as Hellen, the son of Deucalion reigned in Thessaly, which happened
some years after the Deucalionean Deluge, no such name as the later was known.
From him his Subjects, who inhabited that part of Thessaly, Whence the Greeks
were called Hellenes.
being betwixt the two Rivers Strabo l. 8. p. 383. A. (...).
Peneus and Asopus, were first called Hellenes, being formerly known by the
name of Graeci; and the Country it self Hellas, afterward named Ptbiotis.
Homer owneth none by the name of Hellenes, but those, who with the Myrmidonae,
amongst others, followed Achilles to the Siege of Troy, neither any place
calls he Hellas, SECT. 1.
but only one in Thessalie, mentioned by Strabo, who knows not whether it be
a Town or Country, though he would gladly prove, that, by Hellas, Homer
understood the whole Nation. Strabo is in no wise to be heard against
Thucydides, and Apollodorus, whereof the former witnesses, Vide Strab. lib. 8.
p. 370. A.
that the Poet no where mentions the Barbarians, because all the Hellenes
were not yet known by one common name, whom he might oppose against them; and
the later expressly says, that he only called those in Thessalie by the name
of Hellenes. But though in Homer's time the whole Nation might begin to be
called Hellenes, and the Country Hellas; yet clear it is from many witnesses,
that these names came out of Thessalie, and were thence transferred to signify
the whole Nation, and their Colonies placed elsewhere; insomuch, that prideing
themselves, as it were, in it, they wholly rejected the other of Graeci (which
signifying ancient, as it seems, they had also out of Thessalie from the same
people) who were afterward called Hellenes; though the Poets despise it not,
as Callimachus, Sophocles, and others; and the Latins still retain it, taking
no notice of the other in their Language, whence these words Greece and
Graecians are derived.

2. Greece was not anciently inhabited in any settled or established way, Thucyd.
though in after ages it became so famous in it is flourishing Commonwealths.
Seats and habitations were often changed, The most ancient Greeks lived in an
unsettled condition, preying one upon another.
according to the power and strength of such as were not satisfied with their
own fortune. No commerce was there amongst them, being in continual fear one
of another: they lived only from hand to mouth, not regarding money, or the
improvement of their grounds, knowing not how long they should enjoy any thing
in present possessions; so that no considerable City was there, or any
Fortifications of value. Attica indeed was something privileged by it is
barrenness, and secured from such violent attempts as other parts were
obnoxious to; whence such, as were disturbed elsewhere, flocked thither, and it
grew so populous, that not able to maintain the great numbers, under which it
groaned, it poured out Colonies into Asia the less, which made up the body of
the Ionians. Before the Trojan War, nothing considerable was done abroad by the
Graecians; but at that time having got some power at Sea, they were rendered
capable of that expedition. Nothing considerable done by them abroad till the
Trojan War.
For Minos King of Crete, A. M. 2773.
(whom Thucydides would make to have had the first and most ancient Fleet of
all others) had not long before obtained the dominion of the greatest part of
the Greek Sea, and making himself Master of the Islands Cyclades, cast thence
the Carians, and placed Colonies of his own therein, over which he made his
Sons Princes. And, to increase his Customs, he scoured the Seas of Pirates; it
being then the trade of those that lived upon the Coasts, to pass over and
make prey one of another; which to the last could not be left by some, as the
Aetolians and Acarnanians amongst others.

3. The Sea being cleared, Cities began to be built upon the Coast both for
trade and security, whereas the more ancient Towns stood at a good distance
from the Sea, Cities begin to be built upon the Seacoasts.
both in the Continent and Islands. Then came it to pass, that the weaker
submitting themselves to the more powerful for matter of profit, or the other
by strong hand procuring it from them, some new and considerable Principalities
were erected, which rendered them fit for the Expedition against Troy; wherein
Agamemnon praesided, as the most powerful Prince then reigning, especially at
Sea. Yet was there still such scarcity of money and of provisions, that only
so many Forces did they carry over, as they hoped the War might maintain, and
used those not all together, and at the same time, The Graecians maintained
themselves by tillage and plunder at the Wars of Troy.
but employed them in tilling the Cherronesus, and in depraedations; whereby
being thus dispersed, the Trojans were the longer able to resist them; which
they could not have done, had they been sufficiently furnished with
necessaries, and incontinently with all their strength, A. M. 2821.
fallen upon the City. Ten years being consumed in this War, great alterations
were thereby produced in Greece. For through their absence so long abroad,
seditions and tumults arose at home; whence many at their return, or
afterward, were forced to seek out new habitations. A long time it was, ere
the Country returned to quietness and settlement; but at length, it was
enabled to send out Colonies as the Athenians into Ionia and the Islands of the
Greek Sea, Great changes caused at home by their so long absence.
the Peloponnesians, and some other Cities, into Italy and Sicily. The Nation
growing now stronger and wealthier daily, Tyrannies or petty Kingdoms were
erected in every place, there being now a possibility of raising revenues; and
as any exceeded others in power or cunning, they invaded the Governments of
others, which they made arbitrary; whereas before Kingdoms were haereditary
with a constant limited power, that they seldom exceeded.

The Corinthians first eminent at Sea.
4. The Corinthians first began to be famous at Sea, being the first that used
that sort of Galleys camed Triremes, and fought a battle with the Corcyreans,
A. M. 3353. D. C, 102. Manassis. 50.
220 years before the beginning of the Peloponnesian War. For being seated in
the Isthmus, they enjoyed thereby a constant Mart, which filled them with
wealth, especially after the Sea was cleared of Pirates, and Traffic increased.
Long after, The Ionians.
the Ionians got the start of the rest in navall glory, making good progress
therein, and had gone still further, A. M 3462.
but that Cyrus having broken in pieces the power of Croesus, and subdued all
as far as the River Halys, forced them also, after some struggling, to submit
themselves unto the yoke: A. 3473.
After them, Polycrates and others.
Polycrates the Tyrant of Samus, the Massilians and Corcyraeans obtained the
greatest power at Sea; the Egyptians and Athenians, with the rest, being
inconsiderable therein, till these two States falling out, Themistocles
procured the Athenians to apply themselves more to Sea matters, when they now
also expected the coming of the Persian King. Great commodity all these
obtained by the power of their Navies, either in getting money, or new
possessions; for they subdued the Islands, such especially laboring herein, No
War by Land.
whose native Soils afforded least advantage. By Land no War arose that gave
any sufficient advantage of enlarging their dominions further, than to the
disturbance of their next Neighbors; they stirred not abroad nor gave their
minds to any new Conquests. Those that were Subjects, were patient under the
yoke, and Equals in power made no considerable quarrels, till all Greece came
to be divided in the old War, betwixt the Inhabitants of Chalcis and Eretria.
Then to hinder them from growing great, the affairs of the Persians were
advanced; till having cast out their Tyrants, (who all this while contenting
themselves with the private power they had over particular places, stirred not)
they got ground by little and little of the Eastern Empire. Almost during this
whole Period had they No written Laws.
no written Laws, Homer being witness, who never uses the word No written
Laws.
Law throughout his writings. Joseph. centra Apion. l. 2.
They were not generally governed but by indefinite Sentences and Praecepts of
their Kings, remaining a long time without any written Praecepts, and referring
all to the event, according to which Judgment insued. Such was the most ancient
condition of Greece in general. Now a particular account is to be given of the
several Kingdoms and States, that were most considerable and contemporary with
the Babylonian Empire.

SECT. II. The Sicyonian Kingdom.
The Sicyonian Kingdom most ancient.
1. THe affairs of the Sicyonian have the Eusebius. in Chronic. August. de Civit.
Dei. l. 18. Pausan. in Corinthiacis. p. 49. Edit. Graec. Francfurti. 1583.
first place allotted to them in Antiquity, who inhabited a City situated upon
the Bay of Corinth, and the confines of Achaia. Here Aegialeus began a Kingdom
about 270 years after the universal Deluge, 232 before the beginning of
Inachus, 1313 before the first Olympiad, Aegialeus the first King.
the year of the World 1915, according to the Vulgar way of computation,
without taking in the 100 years formerly mentioned in the History of the
Judges, and the 859th year of Noah) whilst Ninus reigned in Assyria. A. M. 1915.
From him the City was first called Aegialia, and part of the Peninsula it self
according to some; SECT. 2.
which afterward was from Pelops named Peloponnesus. Europs. Telchines Apis.
He left his Kingdom to Europs his Son, after he had reigned 52 years, and
Europs having reigned 45, was succeeded by Telchines. He governed 20, and was
followed by Apis, who was so great, that all within the Isthmus was from him
called Apios. When he had continued 25 years, Thelxion.
his Son Thelxion succeeded him, during whose reign, all things were so
prosperous and happy, that being dead, they worshipped him for a god by
sacrifices, Aegyrus.
and solemnizing games, which (as they say) were first invented for his sake.
Him followed Aegyrus, after he had reigned 52 years. Aegyrus or Aegydrus,
Thurimachus. Leucippus. Peratus.
reigned 33, Thurimachus 45, Leucippus 53, who had only a Daughter named
Calchinia, on which Neptune (or rather Mesapus) begat Peratus, who was Heir to
his Grandfather, and governed 47 years. Plemnaeus. Orthopolis.
After Peratus followed Plemnaeus, whose children all died as soon as they were
born, till Ceres came in the likeness of a Woman, and brought up Orthopolis,
who succeeded his Father, having reigned 48 years.

2. Orthopolis the twelfth King of Aegialea, had a Daughter named Chrysorthe,
Coronus. Corax. Epopeus.
on which Apollo is supposed to have begot Corenus his successor. Coronus left
two Sons Corax and Lamedon. Corax after he had reigned 30 years, died without
issue, and Epopeus a Thessalian seized on his Kingdom. Epopeus stole Antiopes
the Daughter of Nycteus King of Thebes, for which injury he was prosecuted with
War by the Thebans. A battle being fought, he had the better, but both the
Kings were mortally wounded. Nycteus presently died after he was carried home,
but left the tuition of Labdacus the Son of Polydorus and Nephew to Cadmus,
(whose Guardian he had been) to his Brother Lycus, requesting of him to lead
down another Army into Aegialea, to revenge him upon Epopeus, and to punish
Antiope, if he could take her; Lamedon.
but in the mean time Epopeus died also of his wounds, being neglected, and
Lamedon the Son of Coronus obtained his Fathers Kingdom, gave up Antiope to
Lycus, as Pausanias writes, though Apollodorus says, A. M. 2616.
that Lycus took Aegialea and slew Epopeus. Antiope in the way to Thebes fell
in travel, and brought forth Amphion and Zethus, who being found and nourished
by an Herdsman, the former gave himself to Music, and the later to nourishing
of Cattle; and both afterward revenged their Mother upon Lycus and his Wife
Dirce, from whose hard usage she had escaped and came to them.

3. Lamedon married Pheno the Daughter of Clytius an Athenian, and undertaking
War against Archander and Architeles the Achaeans, sent for Sicyon the Son of
Metion and Nephew of Erechtheus, out of Attica to assist him, Sicyon, from whom
the City was named.
to whom giving his Daughter Zeuxippe in marriage, A. M. 2656.
he left him also his Successor. From Sicyon the City was named Sicyon, and the
Country Sicyonia. He had a Daughter named Chthonophyle, on which Mercury begat
Polybus; after whose birth she was married to Phlias the Son of Dionysus,
Polybus. Adrastus.
and to him bore Androdamas. Polybus succeeding his Grandfather, left also his
Grandson Adrastus (by his Daughter, married to Talaus King of Argos) his Heyr,
who being expelled his own City, had fled to him. But he making his peace at
home returned, Janiscus.
and after his departure Janiscus or Inachus the Nephew of that Clytis whose
Daughter married with Lamedon, came out of Attica and obtained the Kingdom.
Phaestus.
After Janiscus had reigned 42 years, he gave way by death to Phaestus, one
vulgarly accounted the Son of Hercules, who after eight years, at the direction
of an Oracle, went over into Crete, where he built a City of his own name.

Zeuxippus.
4. After his departure Zeuxippus the Son of Apollo by the Nymph Syllis, A. M.
2846.
was King of Sicyon; but reigned not long, Hippolytus Nephew to Phaestus by his
Son Rhopalus, Hippolytus.
obtained his Grandfathers seat. Against him Agamemnon King of Mycenae made
War, till he forced him to submit. After four years succeeded Polyphides,
Polyphides. Pelasgus.
and continued 31, then Pelasgus 20, and after this Ex Castore Rhodio
Chronographo.
Eusebius would have Zeuxippus to have begun his reign, which after 32 years
ended with the Kingdom. The Priests of Apollo Carinus.
It having now continued the space of 962 years, the Priests of Apollo Carnius
obtained the Sovereignty, and held it 33. SECT. 3. Lacestades. Phalces seizes
upon Sicyon.
But Pausanias writes, that when Lacestades, the son of Hippolytus reigned at
Sicyon, Phalces the son of Temenus (who had been King of Argos) seized upon it
with the Doors in the night time; but, A.M. 2908.
for that both of them were descended of Hercules, dealt not roughly with him,
but admitted him to partnership in the Kingdom. So, from thenceforth the
Sicronians became Doors, and were reckoned amongst the Argives. This fell out
87 years after the destruction of Troy, 120 before the first Olympiad, A. M.
2908.

SECT. III. The Kingdom of Argos.
The Kingdom of Argos has the second place, if not the ^rst.
1. THe Eusebius. in Chronico.
second place in Antiquity belongs to this Kingdom, for which Vide Ludov.
Vivem in Augustine. de Civitat. Dei lib. 18. cap. 3. A.M. 2149.
some have not been wanting to challenge the first, affirming that many years
after the establishment of this, Aegialeus began that of the S^cyonians; and
certainly though Argos missed something of Sicyon in years; yet in fame,
dignity, power, and riches it exceeded it. Inachus first here began a Kingdom,
about 244 years after the beginning of the Sicyonian, the 142 of the life of
Abraham, 676 before the destruction of Troy, and 1082 before the beginning of
the Olympiads. From the Antiquity of Inachus came that proverb Inacho
antiquior, Inachus.
concerning which Erasmus is to be consulted in his Adages. Phoroneus.
On his sister Melissa he begat Phoroneus and a daughter named Io, which must
not be confounded with the daughter of Jasus of a later date, as she is wont to
be by Mythologists. After fifty years reign, he left his Kingdom to his son
Phoroneus, who by Pausan. in Argolicis p. 58.
some was thought the first man, as the son of a River in that place, called
Inachus, and consequently the father Clemens Stromat. l. 1.
of Mortals, and Author of Mankind. He is said to have Nonius.
built the first Altar unto Juno. Against him and the Parrhasians, the
Telchines, and Caryatae made War, but being overcome betook themselves to the
mercy of Wind and Sea, and at length arrived in Crete, as some, or Rhodes, as
others say. He obtained the Dominion of the whole Peninsula and of the Nymph
Laodice Orosius l. 1. cap. 7. Apollodorus lib. 2.
begot a son called Apis, and a daughter named Niobe, which Jupiter loved the
first of all women, and on her begat Argus. Phoroneus, after he had reigned
sixty years, died, and left his Kingdom to his son Apis.

Apis.
2. Apis turning Tyrant, commanded the Peninsula to be called after himself,
Apios, and being circumvented by the wiles of Thelxion, and Telchin, A.M. 2260.
died without issue after he had reigned 34 years. Apollodorus says, he was
killed for his Tyranny in Greece, though some make him to have gone into Egypt,
and there dying to have been taken for a God, and called Serapis; but there
being two Kings of this name besides him, viz. one of Sicyon, and another of
Egypt, most Mythologists confound them, and attribute what was done by all unto
one; which thing is usual with the Greeks. Apis dying after he had reigned 34
years, Argus.
left for his Successor Argus his sisters son by Jupiter, the King of Crete,
who lived about this time. In that Island first reigned Cres, who gave name to
it, and was one of those Curetes that were said to have hid Jupiter from his
father Saturn, who would have devoured his youngest son after the other, and
nourished him; as also to have built the City Cnossos, and the Temple of
Cybele. With this man, many others are confounded, according to the custom of
Poets, who have observed no distinction in ascribing to one what many did, and
fathering things of their own invention upon the common name of Jupiter.
Several particular men known to have had the name Jupiter.


3. The first man known to have had this name was Ham, the youngest son of
Noah, who was worshipped for a God under the title of Jupiter Hammon. His
Nephew Nimrod, the first King of Babylon, and Assyria, was surnamed Belus, and
often called Jupiter Belus. In Crete lived Eusebius.
one very ancient that has gone under this name; although as many places have
challenged him for their Native, as Vide Pausan in Messemus p. 143. 7.
contended for the birth of Homer. Some think that he who is reported to have
been preserved, and nourished by the Curetes, or the Idaei Dactyli, was more
ancient than Niobe, and therefore make a second Jupiter to have lived in Crete
about 150 years after; who because he was the first of this name known to have
been extravagant toward women, thence arose that saying that Niobe was the
first woman beloved by Jupiter. Aeolus the son of Hellen, and Nephew of
Deucalion; who lived about Thessaly, and gave name to the Aeoles, became so
famous with Posterity, that they gave him the name of Idem ibid. p. 154. 31.
Jupiter and Neptune. Picus, King of the Aborigines in Italy, father to Faunus,
and supposed to be begotten by Saturn, after he had fled into Latium from his
son Jupiter, is also called Jupiter by Apud Suidam.
one, and Aeneas Jupiter Indiges by the Romans. These are such particular men
as are known to have had this name, which has been so far advanced as to
signify the best, and chiefest Being, whilst such as at first were reverenced
for their virtue or power, at length were forgotten to have been mortals.

4. Each Nation of old had its Native Jupiter, who was either the Founder
thereof, or, living in remote times, was by that Generation, which attributes
immoderate things to Antiquity, elevated into a Deity. Here is to be considered
what Annius his Xenophon wrote in his Treatise of Aequivocals, Whence so many.
as he calls them. The most ancient King of any great, and Illustrious family
was wont to be called Saturn, the eldest son Jupiter, and the most valiant
amongst the Nephews, or Grand-sons, Hercules. Jupiter the ancient King of
Crete, or some other, by his great exploits, and well-deserving of that Age,
might gain this credit to his name; or the word Zeus, in the Greek tongue
signifying what Ham does import in the other language, the Original of this
name may better agree with the name, place, and condition of the son of Noah.
As for Jupiter the younger, who is supposed to have begotten Hercules on
Alcmena, the wife of Amphytrio, appears a mere fiction; so valiant a person
as that Child proved, inhancing the repute of his generation: or if this
Hercules was not the son of Amphytrion, but begotten by some other man, then
was the name of Jupiter given to his father to take away the Odium of
Bastardie; it being an ordinary thing for such as were base-begotten to be
fathered upon Jupiter, Mars, or Apollo.

From Argus the City took its name.
5. From Argus the City was named Hesychius.
Argos, before called Phoronicum from Phoroneus, who first gathered the people
into it, being before that dispersed; and made them Laws for Government. From
him also his Subjects took the name of Argi and Argivi, and the whole Lege
Strabon. lib. 3. p. 365.
Peninsula; named Apia before; he would have called after himself Argos. In
August. de Civit. Dei l. 18. c. 6.
his time Greece began to be full of Corn, which being ascribed to his care and
industry, he was honored after his death with a Temple and Sacrifice, which
worship was before given to one Homogyrus, killed by a Thunderbolt, for that
he had first yoaked Oxen in the Plow. His brother Apollodorus lib. 2. initio.
was Pelasgus, (said also to have been begotten by Jupiter on Niobe) the father
of Lycaon, and who gave name to the Pelasgi, a people that first inhabited
Arcadia, (hence called Pelasgis and Pelasgia) afterward spread Dionys.
Halicarnass. l^b. 1.
themselves throughout Greece, and sent Colonies into Latium. Argus, on his
wife Euadne, the daughter of Strymon begat Jasus, Peiranthus, Epidaurus, and
Criasus, Jasus begat Agenor, Criasus.
the father of that Argus whom the Poets make all eyes, though some report him
the son of Arestor. Criasus succeeded his father after he had reigned seventy
years, and Governed the Argives 54. Two of his brothers are added by Pausanias,
viz. Pirasus the same with Peiranthus and Phorbas. Peiranthus first built a
Temple to Juno at Argos, wherein he placed her image made of a wild Pear Tree,
and made his daughter Argol. p. 58. 17. Eusebius. praep. l. 3. Evangel. lib. 3.
Callithya called also Callithoe, and Io) Priest thereof; which Superstition
being continued for many Ages, all instruments public and private were dated
from such or such a year of her Successors, as the custom has been from those
of the Kings, or Magistrates in other places.

6. That this Peiranthus reigned, appears no where but in Pausanias, who
seems to make him the immediate Successor of Argus, by the name of Pirasus.
Pirasus. Phorbas. Triopas.
But Phorbas succeeded Criasus, and reigned 35 years; after him Triopas 46.
whose son Xanthus being Prince of some of the Pelasgi, who went out from Argos,
seized first upon part of Lycia, and there seated himself: afterward he passed
over into the Island Isa, then void of Inhabitants, Diodorus Siculus lib. 5.
page 239. in margin notata. A.
which dividing amongst his followers he named Pelasgia, in process of time
called Lesbos. Pausanias makes Jasus and Agenor the sons of Triopas, Jasus.
and Jasus to have reigned at Argos, though by Eusebius he be not reckoned
amongst the Kings. His daughter was the famous Io, which being got with Child
by Jupiter, and thereupon, through the displeasure of Juno turned out of her
wits, or into a Cow, as the Poets sing, passed over the straits of Thrace, to
which, upon this occasion of her Metamorphosis, was given the name of
Bosphorus. Then went she down into Egypt, where, restored to humane shape, she
brought forth her son Epaphus, the builder of Memphis, and was afterward taken
for a goddess, and called Isis. Herodotus leading us out of the Labrynth of
fables, Lib. 1. ad initium.
relates that the Phoenicians after their removal from the Red Sea (where he
thinks them once to have inhabited) to the Mediterranean, applied themselves
unto sailing, and Traffic from Assyria and Egypt unto other places. On a time
coming to Argos (which then excelled all Greek Cities); on the fifth or sixth
day after they had exposed their merchandise to sale, many women came to their
ships to buy what liked them, and amongst the rest this Io, the Kings daughter.
The Phoenicians encouraging one another laid hands on those they could catch,
and taking her with some others, carried them into Egypt. This by Herodotus is
made one of the first grounds of envy, betwixt the Asiaticks and Greeks; though
he confounds her with the daughter of Inachus, (which is usual) and the
Greeks, as Pausanias hinteth, gave another account of her deportation.

7. As Pausanias reckons Jasus amongst the Kings of Argos (which after him
was, without doubt, called Jasos Stephanus.
and the Citizens Jasii); so he names Crotopus, Crotopus.
his brother Agenor's son, for his Successor, whom Eusebius will have to have
succeeded his Grandfather Triopas. His daughter Psamathe being with Child by
Apollo, after her delivery exposed the Infant, which she named Linus. It
chanced to be devoured by wild beasts; whereat she was so troubled, that her
father perceiving it, got out the matter, and put her to death, for which
Apollo brought a plague upon the Argives, who, to pacify him, made great and
solemn lamentation for the Child, which is not to be confounded with the Poet
Linus, as some so order the matter. Crotopus having reigned 21 years was
followed by Sthenelas his son, Sthenelas.
who held the Kingdom for 11. Galenor.
and then left it to his son Galenor. In his time, Danaus, the brother of
Egyptus, King of that Country, having 50 daughters, refused to marry them to
his brother's 50 sons, because he was bidden by an Oracle to beware of a son in
Law, and therefore taking them away with him, Apollodorus lib. 2.
sailed to Rhodes, wherein he built a Temple to Minerva Lindia; and thence to
Argos, where he moved a contest with Galenor for the Kingdom, Diodorus l. 5. p.
227. D. A.M. 2531.
as descended of Epaphus, the son of Io. Both pleading hard before the people,
the cause, as doubtful, was put off till the day following; at what time there
came a Wolf and killed an Ox, which was feeding by the Walls. Apollod. ibid.
and Pausan. in Argolicis page 61.
The people took the Wolf to signify Danaus, because a stranger; and, making
this contest of the beasts a leading case, decreed the Kingdom to the Egyptian.

Danaus.
8. Danaus having obtained the Kingdom, his brother Egyptus feared lest by the
marriage of his daughters he might get too great alliance and strength, and
therefore sent down his 50 sons to Argos with an Army, and command, either to
marry them, or destroy him. They persuaded their Uncle by fair means to receive
them as sons in Law; but he commanded his daughters that each of them should
the first night kill her Bridegroom, and gave them Poniards for that purpose.
They all obeyed him, except Hypemnestra, (and some add Bebrice); which,
dismissing Lynceus, with advice to shift for himself, was by her Father
accused, and brought to Judgment; but acquitted by the Argives, and afterward
had leave from him, to receive again Lynceus, now reconciled to him. As for the
rest of the Sisters, they were bestowed upon such, as in trial of Masteries
got the better; and became so infamous, that it was believed they were
condemned in Hell, to fill with water a Barrel, which having an hole in it,
let out as much as it received in.

9. From Danaus those who formerly had the name of Pelasgiotae were called
Danai. He built the Castle, and his Daughters are said to have supplied the
City with water, by digging of Wells; although Vide lib. 8. p. 376, 371.
Strabo proves, that by reason of it is situation it could never want the
commodity of that Element. Having reigned Eusebius. Apollod.
50 years, he died, and was succeeded by Lynceus, who governed 41, and on
Hypermnestra begat Abas his Successor. Abas ruled 23 years, and begat on his
wife Ocalea, the Daughter of Mantineus, Acrisius and Praetus.
Acrisius and Praetus Twins. They are said to have strugled in the womb, and
did it to purpose afterward for the Kingdom. Pausan. in Argolicis.
Praetus first obtained and held it seventeen years, but then was driven from
Argos by Acrisius, and forced to fly into Lycia, to Iobas his Father-in-Law,
King of that Country. From him he returned with armed hand, seized upon
Tyr^nthe, and afterward joined battle with his Brother, wherein they two are
reported first of all others, to have used Targets, The battle ending with
aequall success, they came to an accommodation, and divided the Kingdom.
Acrisius was to stay at Argos, and Praetus to enjoy Heraeus, Midaea, Tirynthe,
and the maritime parts. Praetus had by his wife Sthenobaea, a Son named
Megapenthes, and three Daughters, which being taken with the fury of Bacchus,
Melampus the Poet is said to have cured. Acrisius on Eurydice begat a Daughter
named Danae, Danae.
and consulting the Oracle about issue-Male was answered that he should have no
Son, but a Nephew by his Daughter, that should procure his death. Hereupon, he
shut up Danae with her Nurse in the ground; but Jupiter turning himself into a
golden shower, thereby got to her, Mother to Perseus.
and begat Perseus. Both Mother and Son were put into an Ark, and cast into the
Sea, which drove them ashore on the Island Seriphus, where Dictys Brother to
Polydectes the King, educated the Boy. Being grown up, he made an Expedition
into Africa, where he slew the Gorgon Medusa, being sent, as the Fable goes,
by Polydectes, who sought to be revenged on him, for hindering him from the
Marriage of his Mother; but Pansanias not at all regarding the Fable, writes,
that this Medusa was the Daughter of Phorchus, and succeeded him in his Kingdom
which lay upon the Lake Tritonis; that she was wont to go out to hunt and fight
with the Africans, over which she reigned; but Perseus coming against her with
choice Forces out of Peloponnesus (so that this Voyage must have been after his
return thither, and his Grand-Father's death) she was entrapped by him and
slain in the night. He admiring her beauty, cut off her head, and carried it
into Greece for a spectacle.

10. Perseus, after this, married Andromeda, (Daughter to Cepheus, by
Cassiopeia, who reigned at Joppe a maritime Town of Phoenicia) having first
saved her from being devoured by a Whale. This by one is thus interpreted;
Conon. apud Photium in Bibliotheca.
That Phoenix by her Father's consent, took her away by force, and carrying her
in a Ship called the Whale, Perseus sailing that way, and hearing her
lamentations, boarded the Ship, and delivering her out of his hands, married
her. After this, he returned to Sisyphus, where he revenged upon Polydectes,
the violence offered to his Mother; and then, with her and his wife, went to
Argos to see his Grandfather, who being afraid because of the Oracle, Apollod.
lib. 2.
departed into Pelasgia (or Thessalie, so called, from the Pelasgi, who were
now removed thither out of Peloponnesus, being a vagabond people, and staying
in no place): where when Teutamias, King of the Larissaeans, made Games in
honor of his deceased Father; thither also came Perseus, amongst other lusty
and active young Men, and slew his Grandfather at unawares in the Game,
Perseus kills Acrisius. The General Council of the Amphyctiones.
by a stroke of a quoit upon his foot, after he had reigned thirty years.

11. Some Lege Strabon. lib. 9. p. 419, 420.
think that rather to Acrisius then to Amphyction the Son of Deucalion (who 182
years before began his reign at Athens) the founding of the famous Concill of
the Amphyctiones is to be ascribed. It seems probable, that Amphyction first
of all assembled it in Thessalie, near the Streights of Thermopylae, (Pausanias
writes to have been the common opinion) and that Acrisius thence transferred
it to Delphos in Phocis, where it for the most part assembled; this place being
the middle of Greece, and, Lege Pausan. in Phocicis.
as the Greeks thought, of the World it self, where was also the famed Oracle
of Apollo Pythius. For, These Cities which at first had only right to send
their Deputies to the Coucill, were such as either were seated in Thessalie, or
near unto it. This was the chief Tribunal of all Greece, for deciding of
public and most weighty causes, betwixt the several Cities, and
Commonwealths. The authority thereof was very great; insomuch as it is Decrees
have sometimes been executed by the Sword, with the great motions of several
States, some or other scarce ever being wanting to undertake the work. It used
to meet twice a year, (and oftener if necessity required) in the beginning of
Spring, and Autumn; the Cities sending their Deputies, three, two, or one,
according to their bigness. These were called Pylagorae, because they met at
Pylae, a place near to the Temple, of which they also had the oversight, and
praesided over the Games made in honor of Apollo Pythius every other year.
This Court continued for many Ages without change, until the time of Philip
King of Macedon, and Father of Alexander the Great, who overthrowing the
Phocians, in the Sacred War; for their Sacrilege outed them and the
Lacedaemonians their assistants, of their Privileges of voting therein, and
transferred the right to his own Kingdom. Long after, Augustus Caesar innovated
again, by removing the Magnesians, Maleans, and others, from their interest
herein, and making Nicopolis (a City built by him in memory of his Victory at
Actium) free of that Society, as Pausanias tells us, who has also recorded,
that in his time, (which fell in with the reign of Antoninus Pius the Roman
Emperor) this Council was still maintained and kept up, consisting of thirty
persons.

12. Perseus, after that dysaster, which happened to his Grandfather, A.M. 2693.
was ashamed to return to Argos, his Inheritance, and therefore went to
Tirynthe, and changed Kingdoms with his Cousin Megapenthes. He built Mycenae
(so called from his Sword's (...).
Scabberd, that fell from him in this place, which thing he took as a sign,
that here he should build a City) and making it his seat, The Kingdom of Argos
divided.
therein reigned 58 years. About this time this Kingdom of Argos, that had now
continued about 544 years, came to be divided into three parts. For Anaxagoras
the Son of Megapenthes contenting himself with a third of his half, gave the
other two to Melampus the Son of Amythaon, and his Brother Bias; Apollod. lib.
2.
either for that he (who is said to have found out the way of purging) had
cured the Daughters of Praetus (Aunts to Anaxagoras) of their madness, as was
told before, or Pausan. ut supra. Diodor. l. 4. p. 188.
invented a Remedy for that distemper, which had seized epidemically upon the
women of those parts. But Perseus begat of Andromeda five Sons: Perses,
Alcaeus, Sthenelus, Electryon, and Mestor. Hereof Perses the first, as the
Greeks believed, gave Original to the Persians, Alcaus was Father to
Amphytrion, Stheneles succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Mycenae, and
Electryon begat Alcmena, wife to Amphytrion. Sthenelus on a Daughter of Pelops
begat Eurystheus his Successor, seven months after whose birth Hercules the
Son Amphytrion and Alcmena was born. Hercules.
Aphules their other Son coming into the World after Hercules (for they were
Twins) Amphytrion was accounted the Father of him, and Jupiter of Hercules,
whereupon, A. M. 2724
Juno is said to have ever hated him, and by the help of Ilythia, (Lucina or
the Moon) to have hindered his birth, and kept his Mother in travel for seven
days. The Boy was first named Alcaeus after his Grandfather; but afterward,
for his great achievements called Hercules, and ascribed to no less a Father
than Jupiter, who made the night wherein he begat him, as long as three, that
his strength might be the greater. That this person was eminent in his time, is
easy to be granted; but incredible things contained in twelve labors, being
reported to be done by him, are either meant of the passing of the Sun through
the twelve Signs of the Zodiac; or what things were performed by several
others that lived elsewhere, have been by his Countrymen attributed to him,
whose Epithete of Hercules (signifying fame and glory spread abroad in the air)
came also to be given to them, if the word be of no other than Greekish
Original.

How many of that name.
13. Cicero reckons up six who had the name of Hercules. The first and most
ancient, he makes begotten by the antientest Jupiter on Lipitus, and to have
striven with Apollo about the Tripos. The second was an Egyptian, Son to Nile,
who despised the Phrygian Letters. The third a Native of Crete, and one of the
Idaei Dactyli, who first found out the making of Iron, by taking notice of the
melting of that Metal in the Hill Ida when it burned, and being five in
number, had the name of Dactyli from the fingers, in number so many on each
hand. The fourth was son to Asteria the Sister of Latona, and Father to
Carthage, being worshipped by the Tyrians. Belus in India is reckoned for the
fifth, and then in the sixth place comes this Son of Alcmena. The Egyptian
Hercules is said to have aided the gods in their War against the Giants, which
being the offspring of the Earth, Diodorus acknowlegeth that this cannot agree
with the time of the Grecian Hercules, who lived but one Age before the Trojan
War; but rather happened at the original of Mankind.

14. Hercules the Tyrian is believed to have been the Captain of that
Expedition which the Phoenicians made into Spain and Gades, which though the
Graecians attribute to theirs, yet this convinces their assertion of falsehood,
that in the Island Gades, was a most ancient Temple, wherein Hercules was
worshipped, not after the Grecian manner, but according to the Rites of
Phoenicia. This was he, who erected his pillars at the bound or unmost limit of
the World, and that overran Spain, Italy, and Gaul. Ganchoniathon a Phoenician
Author of great antiquity, wrote, that he was the Son of Demacuns, and that his
proper name was Melcharthus (which signified the King of the City) by the
Greeks called Melicertes and Palaemon. He was also called Diodas Consule
Bocharti Canaan lib. 1. cap. 24.
by Eusebius (for which Desanaus is thought to be corruptly written in Hierom's
translation) which Phoenic^ ^ame he seems to have had, because he was
invocated by lovers; their happy success being supposed to depend on him. Some
think this Tyrian Hercules was the same with the Egyptian or Libyan, by
Pausanias named Maceris, who undertook a journey to Delphos, and whose Son
Sardus leading a Colonie into the Island Ichnusa, changed it is name into
Sardinia. Tacitus Annual. lib. 2.
writes, that the Libyans would have the most ancient Hercules a native of
their Country, and that such as came near him in valor and renown, were named
after him. Diodorus Siculus, and Eusebius mention three of this name, (though
the former attributes all their actions to the youngest, or the Son of
Alcmena) Servius four, and Varro 44. And here must be remembered what was before
noted; that it was the custom of old, to call the most ancient Kings by the
name of Saturn, their Sons by that of Jupiter, and their most valiant and
active Nephews by this of Hercules.

15. This Hero being so much written and talked of, it concerns beginners to
have some account of his actions, and the rather, because they include the
labors of many. Amphytrion his Father, as it seems, Apollodorus and Diodor.
was Prince of Tirynthos, The story of Hercules the son of Alcmena.
but thence was forced to fly to Thebes, having at unawars killed Electryon
his Uncle and Father-in-Law, where Hercules being educated, slew Linus his
Musick-Master with an Harp as he taught him. His Father seeing his
disposition, and fearing some such like accident might fall out again, sent him
amongst the Herdsmen, where not yet eighteen years old, he slew a Lion. For his
extraordinary strength and courage, he was taken notice of by Thespis (or
Thespius) Prince of the Thespienses, who made him lie with his fifty daughters,
of which begetting so many sons, these afterward passed over into the Island
Sardinia with the name of Thespiades. A little after this he delivered Thebes
from the Tyranny of Erginus, King of the Minyans, who exacted an annual Tribute
of 100 Oxen. He destroyed Orchomenus with his Palace therein, and for this was
rewarded with Megara, daughter to Creon, Prince of Thebes. When he was about 20
years old, he sailed with Jason amongst others to Colchos, to fetch thence the
Golden Fleece so much celebrated by Poets, and variously interpreted by
Expositors of Mythology.

16. This Jason was the son of Aeson, and the fourth in descent from Aeolus,
being born at Ioleus, which place Pelias, King thereof, unjustly detained from
his father. The Argonautae.
He considering with himself what glory Perseus, and others of late had gotten,
sought how he might accomplish some notable Enterprise for the eternizing of
his name, and having at length resolved on this design, published his
intentions throughout Greece, by a Crier. The young and active spirits of that
time were much taken therewith, and 53 of the flowr of Greece gave their names
to the expedition, of whom the most eminent, besides Hercules, were Orpheus,
(Scholar to Linus) Oi^eus, Telamon, and Peleus, the sons of Aeacus, Pollux, and
Castor, sons to Tyndareus, King or Sparta, Meleager, and Argus, who built the
ship, named after him Argo, wherein they sailed, and thence were afterward
called Argonautae. Having all things in readiness ( Pelias supplying Jason
with all necessaries, to be rid of him, fearing he should call him to account
for the Kingdom) they set sail from Ioleus, and came to Lemnus, an Island in
the Aegaean Sea, whence they sailed to the Country of the Doliones, Apollonius
Rhodius l. 1.
by whose King Cyzicus they were honorably received; but thence lanching out
by night, were driven back by Tempest, and being taken by him for the Pelasgi,
Lege Simsonium in Chronico ad A.M. 2743.
with whom he was at feud, he fell upon them, and lost his life in the fight,
with many of his followers; but, his error once understood, was magnificently
buried by them. From Cyzicus they came into Mysia, where Hercules for want of
skill in rowing brake his Oar, and going into the Woods to provide another,
whilst his companions rested themselves on the shore, it happened that Hylas
his Boy drinking at a Fountain, was intercepted by the Nymphs, as the story
goes. Crying out, Polyphemus, the son of Elatus, who had married Laonome, the
sister of Hercules, ran out to rescue him, and meeting with Hercules, went up
and down seeking ^im in great perplexity; so that they were left behind by
their companions, Theocritus in Hyla.
whom Hercules followed on foot to Colchos.

17. Jason with the rest sailed to Colchos, and by the treachery of Medea,
daughter to Aetes the King, that fell in love with him, became master of the
Golden Fleece, and returned home with her, having finished his journey in four
months. They lived hapily at Corinth for ten years, till Creon, King of that
City, betrothing his daughter Glauce to him, Medea was commanded to quit the
place; whereupon mad with anger, she set the Palace on fire, and slew her own
three sons, which she had by Jason; as Euripides relates the story. Who, as
it is probable, too much indulgeth his poetic liberty, the Corinthians having
corrupted him with five Talents, as an ancient Vide Parmeniscum, scholiis ad
Euripidem.
Historian has discovered. Lib. 1. c. 2.
Herodotus writes in that a Messenger was sent from Colchos to demand Medea,
but he was put off with this answer, that they of Asia had formerly stolen away
Io from Argos. As the Argonautae sailed by Athos and Samothracia, they were
driven by Tempest upon Sigaeum, a Promontory of Troas, Diodorus l. 1. p. 171.
where they found Hesione, daughter to Laomedon, King of Troy, bound upon the
shore, that she might become a prey to a Whale. This Whale had been sent by
Neptune to devour Passengers upon the Coast, because Vide Pindari interpret. ad
Nem. 3.
Laomedon with money taken out of the Temples of Neptune, and Apollo, had built
the Walls of the City, and made no restitution. Apollo, had answered that no
way could they be quit of the Whale, but by the devouring of some one chosen
out by lot, which fell upon the Kings own daughter. But Hercules moved with
pity, upon promise to have the maid, and certain horses that never were
handled, undertook to kill the Whale, which readily performing, he trusted
Laomedon with his wages, till his return from Colchos. Then he demanded them
Diodorus ibid. p. 175.
by Iphicles his brother and Telamon, whom he sent into the City, but the King
instead of restoring what he formerly detained, imprisoned the Messengers, and
plotted the destruction of the whole company. Priamus of all his sons was only
against this treachery, and when he could not otherwise prevail, sent in two
swords to the prisoners, wherewith they dispatching their keepers, got out to
their companions. In revenge for this afterward Hercules took the City, slew
Laomedon, and preferred Priamus for his integrity to the Kingdom.

18. The Argonautae being returned into Greece, Hercules Idem page 178.
took an Oath of them mutually to aid one another, as also to choose out some
certain place, wherein to meet and celebrate Games in honor of Jupiter
Olympius. This matter being left to his care and management, Olympic Games
instituted by Hercules.
he pitched on the plains of the Eleans, lying upon the River Alpheus, where he
ordained exercises, both to be performed on foot and hors-back, appointed
rewards to the Victors, and sent abroad to give notice thereof to the several
Cities, which were all hereby wonderfully affectionated toward him. But after
Eurystheus had succeeded Sthenelus his father in the Kingdom of Mycenae, he
began to grow jealous of the strength and prosperity of Hercules, and ceased
not to press him forwards into dangerous, though glorious attempts. He at
first refusing went and consulted the Oracle at Delphos, which is said to have
acquainted him with the pleasure of the gods, that at the appointment of
Eurystheus he should finish twelve labors, and so attain to immortality.
Hereat he grew exceeding melancholy, taking it in great disdain to be commanded
by him, which discontent arose to a Frenzy, and in this distemper he killed
the Children that he had by Megara, and put her away; but afterward coming to
his right mind, resolved to venture himself, and returned to Eurystheus for his
orders.

His twelve labors.
19. The Diodorus l. 4. p. 219. B.
first task imposed on him was to kill a Lion in Nemea, a Wood of Achaia, whom
no sword nor any other vveapon could pierce. Being only to be mastered by the
hand he caught and strangled him, then taking off his skin, thenceforth wore it
as a Garment. The second thing enjoined him was to kill an Hydra with 100
heads, like Snakes, whereof when one was cut off, two others sprung up in its
room. The third was to bring home alive the Erymanthian Boar, at the sight of
which beast upon his shoulders, Eurystheus was so frighted that he ran for fear
into a brazen Hogshead; and in this expedition he also overcame the Centaures.
The next thing commanded him was to catch an Heart of marvelous swiftness with
Golden horns, which he effected, but in what manner is not agreed on. After
this he drove away innumerable companies of Birds from the Stymphalian Fens,
which there, and in other places devoured the Corn. Then cleansed he Augeas his
stable; not by carrying the Dung out upon his shoulders, (which indignity was
intended him by Eurystheus) but by the current of the River Peneus, which he
brought down thither for that purpose. The seventh thing commanded him was to
fetch a wild Bull out of the Island Crete, with which Pasiphaes is said to
have fallen in love: and betwixt this and the next labor he helped the gods
against the Giants, and pacifying Jupiter toward Prometheus, loosed this man
from the place where an Eagle continually fed upon his Liver for his
communicating to men the knowledge of fire. The eighth task was to fetch the
Mares of Diomedes out of Thrace, which had brazen mangers, were tied with Iron
chains, and fed not on any other fodder than the flesh of strangers coming that
way: But Hercules first gave them their masters flesh, and then brought them to
Eurystheus, who dedicated them to Juno, and their breed is said to have
continued to the time of Alexander the Great.

20. After this it is that Diodorus makes him to have sailed amongst the
Argonautae to Colchos. Then at the command of Eurystheus he warred against the
Amazons in Africa, and brought to him the Girdle of Hippolyta their Queen. The
tenth labor was to fetch the Oxen of Geryon out of Iberia, or Spain, as the
fable goes; whereas Geryon reigned not there, but in that part of Epirus which
lies about Ambracia and Amphilochus, as L. 2. Anab.
Arrianus witnesses from the Pen of Hecataeus a most ancient Historian,
Eustathius in Dionysium Periegetem. Athenaeus lib. 9. Scholiastes in Aristoph.
Aves. Suidas.
and others do testify. There were afterward in Epirus a very large sort of
Oxen, called Larini, thought to be of that kind which Hercules drove away, and
to have had this name from Larinus his herdsman. Seeing then that this occasion
of invading Spain, Italy, and Gaul is taken away from this Hercules, that
expedition is to be left to the Phoenician, to whom formerly we ascribed it.
But Hercules is farther said in this journey to have slain Antaeus, to have
gone down into Egypt, and made an end there of Busiris that cruel Tyrant, and
erected his Pillars in the utmost bounds of the World. Within eight years and
one month he finished these his ten labors. After his return he was enjoined
to fetch Cerberus out of Hell, which having accomplished, the 12th was the
setching of the Golden Hesperian Aples; which, whether they were such, and were
kept by a terrible Dragon, or by them is to be understood Herds of Cattle
defended by some strong and valiant man, he also brought out of Africa to
Eurystheus. Those are his 12 labors, as Diodorus describes, and ranketh them.

His other acts.
21. Having served Eurystheus twelve years, he returned to Thebes, and there
gave Megara, whom he had put away, to Iolaus, the son of his brother Iphicles.
He had now no legitimate issue, and therefore married Deianeira, Diodorus and
Appollodorus.
daughter to Oeneus, King of the Calydonians, to pleasure whom he derived the
River Achelous into another Chanel, and thereby rendered the Country more
fertile; whence the fable arose that he fought with Achelous, turned into a
Bull, and cutting off one of his Horns, gave it to the Aetolians (part of whom
the Calydonians were) called the Horn of Amalthea, wherein was plenty of all
fruits. Before this he had won Iole, the daughter of Eurytus Prince of
Oechalia, by shooting, which exercise her father had proposed to all comers
against himself and his son. Yet was he denied her, whereupon to be revenged on
Eurytus, he drove away his Horses, and carrying his son Iphitus, who was sent
to seek them, up into a Tower to see if he could make any discovery of them,
when he could not espy them, as if he had wrongfully accused him of theft, he
threw him down headlong. For this he was struck with a disease, and had answer
from the Oracle at Delphos, that if he would be freed from it he must be sold,
and the price given to the Children of Iphitus. He then passing over into Asia,
willingly permitted one of his friends to sell him, and was bought by Omphale,
Queen of the Maeonians, to whom her husband Tmolus had left the Kingdom. Being
freed from his disease, he did his Mistress great service, killing many of the
famous Robbers, called Cercopes, and bringing some of them alive unto her.
Omphale admiring his acts, after she knew who he was, gave him his liberty, and
took him to her bed. Of her he begat Lamus, having already a son by his fellow
slave, named Cleolaus: he served her three years, and then returning into
Peloponnesus, went against Laomedon King of Ilium, as some rank the series of
his actions.

22. Some years after, having subdued several persons, and Cities in Greece, he
joined the Arcadians and others to him, and went with an Army against Eurytus,
whom he slew with his three sons, and taking away Iole, came to Cenaeum, a
Promontory of Euboea. Here being about to sacrifize, he sent Lichas his servant
to Trachine for his Shirt and Coat, Diodorus ut prius p. 169. etc. Apollodorus.
wherein he was wont to perform that religious work. From Lichas, Deianeira
learning how Iole was taken, and fearing to be robbed by her of her husbands
affections, anointed his Shirt with a poison given her by Nessus, the
Centaure, as he was dying (who would have ravished her, and for that was killed
by Hercules) persuading her that it was an ointment Efficacious to procure
love. As soon as the Shirt touched his body the venom also seized on it, His
end.
wherewith being grievously tormented he dismissed his Army, and returned to
Trachines, where the disease increasing, he sent to enquire of Apollo about a
remedy. It was answered, he should be carried up to the Mountain Oeta, where a
great pile of wood being reared, Jupiter would take care for the rest. This
done, and all hope of recovery past, Hercules in his warlike habit cast himself
upon the pile, and desired the standers by to put fire to it, which when all
his own relations refused to do, Paeas, who seeking his Cattle, came that way,
as Apolodorus writes, or his son Philoctetos, as most deliver, (to whom
Hercules gave for a reward his Bow and Arrows) set fire to it, which also being
kindled with lightning, was presently reduced together with the body into
ashes. Iolaus finding one of his bones, a persuasion arose, A. M. 2776.
that he pass^d from amongst mortals to the Gods, as the Oracle had formerly
showed. He commanded that Hyllus his son, when he came at age, should marry
Iole. As for Deianeira, she seeing what she had brought upon her husband, out
of vexation hanged her self. Thus perished Alcaeus, Surnamed Hercules, the Son
of Amphytrion and Alcmena, at the age of 52 years, having in a fit of Frenzy,
as it is thought, burnt himself. And these are the most remarkable things that
are written of him, who lived (according to that Chronology which takes not in
the hundred years formerly mentioned) in the days of Tholah the Judge of Isral.

23. Hercules being dead, his children for some time stayed at Trachine with
Ceyces, the King, till Hyllus and others of them were grown up. Then Eurystheus
began to fear them, and therefore resolving to banish them all out of Diodor.
l. 4. p. 181.
Greece (or rather Peloponnesus) sent to Ceyces, commanding him upon pain of
his displeasure, to remove them together with Iolaus and the rest of their
Friends. They being unable to make resistance, voluntarily quitted the place,
What happened to his children.
and sent about to the principal Cities to beg harbor, which none would afford
them except the Athenians, who placed them in Tricorinth, one of the four parts
of their City. After some time, when they were come to ripeness of age, and
now bare themselves high upon the glory of their Father, Eurystheus much more
suspecting their growth, lead down a great Army against them; but assisted by
the Athenians under conduct of their Cousin Iolaus and Theseus, they overthrew
and slew Strabo l. 8. p. 377.
him with all his Sons, and then invaded Peloponnesus. Now a Plague seized on
the Country, and the Oracle answered, that it was, because they returned
thither before their time; whereupon Hyllus returned, as some say, and went to
Aepalius King of the Dorienses about Oeta, by whom he was Idem lib. 9. p. 427.
c.
adopted, because, by Hercules his means, Aegymius had formerly recovered his
Kingdom; and thenceforth the Heraclidae became imbodied with the Dorienses.
Diodorus writes, that Hyllus provoking some one of his Enemies to a single
Combat, upon this condition, that if he overcame, then were the Heraclidae to
be Masters of Mycenae, if not, they should depart for fifty years, was slain,
and so they accordingly returned, and kept themselves quiet for that time.

24. Euristheus being slain after he had reigned at Mycenae 43 years, Eusebius.
Atreus the son of Pelops succeeded him, Atreus the son of Pelops.
who also at this time had the sovereignty of Argos. This Pelops above an
hundred years before (for so famous a Man must not be omitted) being the son of
Tantalus Prince of Phrygia, had made War upon Ilium, where after he was put to
the worst by Ilus the King, he was forced to fly into Greece, and coming to
Pisa, fell in love with Diodorus. lib. 4. p. 191.
Hippodamia Daughter of Oenomaus Prince of that City, who being warned by the
Oracle to take heed to himself, when she should take an husband, had condemned
her in his resolutions, to perpetual virginity. Therefore he admitted no
Suter, but on this condition, to run a race with him in the Chariot, and if he
won her not, then to suffer death, to which he brought many, through the
swiftness of his Horses, till Pelops (or Hippodamia for him) corrupting the
Chariot-driver, obtained the Prize, for grief of which, the old man thinking
now the Oracle to be fulfilled, hanged himself. Pelops Obtained Pisa with most
of the Peninsula.
Pelops then obtained Hippodamia and Pisa with her, after which, by little and
little, he got most of the Peninsula into his possession, called after him
Peloponnesus, wherein he reigned 58 years. Of Hippodamia he begot many
children, by which he promoted his affairs more than power; for by the marriage
of them, he insinuated into the Principalities of most of the Cities. Amongst
his Sons the most eminent were Atreus, Thyestes, and Plisthenes. The two former
he left his Successors, and Plisthenes dying young, left two Boys to Atreus,
to be brought up, called Agamemnon and Menelaus. Atreus married their Mother,
by name Aerope; the Daughter of Minos King of Crete, with whom his Brother
Thyestes committing Adultery, he first banished, and after recalling him,
feasted him with the flesh of his own sons.

25. Some will have Atreus to have outlived Thyestes; others say, he died
before him, and, being reconciled, left him the Kingdom at his death, on this
condition, to restore it to Agamemnon when he should come to age. After
Eurystheus his death, it seems, that he became Master of all Peloponnesus,
and opposed Hyllus, who challenging any in his Army, as was said, to a single
Combat, Echemus King of the Tegoatae in Arcadia accepted the challenge, and
slew him. He was very skilful in Astrology, being by some reputed the first
that discovered the motion of the Sun to be contrary to that of the Starry
Heaven, Agamemnon and Menelaus.
Servius.
and that observed the Eclypse of that luminary. He adopted his two Nephews
Agamemnon and Menelaus, who succeeded him Clemens in Stromat.
seventeen years before the beginning of the Trojan War. Agamemnon a Man of
prudence and courage, obtained not only Mycenae, but Argos also, with all as
far as Strabo ex Homero. lib. 8. p. 377.
Sicyon and Corinth, and that Country then called Ionia and Aeglalea,
afterward Achaia. Menelaus got Laconia, and their reigned at Lacedaemon. For
Castor and Pollux the sons of Tyndareus the King, Apollod.
dying before their Father, he sent for him to Sparta, and delivered up his
Kingdom to him, having first given him his Daughter Helena, whom Paris the
second Son of Priamus King of Troy (by his wife Hecuba) stealing away, The
Trojan War.
gave occasion to the famous ten years War, and the ruin of that City;
concerning which something is to be spoken.

The Original of the Trojans.
26. The first Dionysius Halicarnasseus. lib. 1. Diodorus lib. 4. p. 192. and
lib. 5.
Man reported to have reigned in Arcadia, was Atlas, who inhabited about the
Mountain of Caucasus, and had seven Daughters, which made up the Pleiades,
whereof on Electra, Jupiter her husband begat Jasus and Dardanus. Jasus lived
unmaried, but Dardanus had by his wife Chryse, the Daughter of Palaus, two
sons, Idaeus and Dimas, who succeeded Atlas in his Kingdom. Afterward great
inundations happening in this Country, they were forced to divide the people
into two parts, whereof leaving one with Dimas in Arcadia, with the other
Jasus, Dardanus and Idaeus left Peloponnesus, and coasting by Eupope, at length
came into the Bay of Melane, and arrived at a certain Island of Thrace, called
Samo-thracia, from the Country, and a Man's name who inhabited it; one Samon
the son of Mercury, by the Nymphe Rhene. Here finding no convenient habitation,
the greater part under the conduct of Dardanus (for Jasus died in the Island,
being struck with a Thunderbolt, because he attempted the chastity of Ceres)
passed into Asia, and landing in the Hellespont, seated themselves in Phrygia.
Idaeus with part of the Army, settled upon the Mountains, which bore his name,
and Dardanus in that part of the Country, since named Troas, built a City of
his own name, having some grounds given him by Teucer the King of the place,
the Son of Scamander, from whom the Country was called Teucris, Dardanus.
and whose daughter Batea he married. He succeeded him in his Kingdom, and
changed the name of his Subjects from Teucri to Dardani, and built the City
upon the Seaside, about the 2530th year of the World, in the days of
Sthenelaus King of Argos. On Batea he begat his Son and successor, Erichthonius.
called Erichthonius, reported by Iliad. l. 20.
Homer and others, to have been exceeding rich and fortunate, who on Callirhoe
the Daughter of Scamander begat Tros, Tros.
from whom the Country was named. Tros succeeding him begat Ilus, Ilus.
Assaracus and Ganymedes. Ilus succeeded him. From Assa^acus descended Aeneas.
Ganymedes for his beauty was stolen by Tantalus King of Phrygia, and Father to
Pelops, whence arose a War, in which many lost their lives, and Tantalus
(though the son of Jupiter by the Nymph Plota) was beaten out of Paphlagonia.
Ilus built the chief City in the Plain, which though the Latins called it
Troja, and we Troy (which names most properly belong to the Country) yet the
Greeks constantly Ilium from him. Against him and it Pelops made an Expedition,
Diod. ut suspra. Vide Strabon. l. 13. p. 587. C.
and miscarried in the success, Laomedon.
as was said before. Laomedon his Son succeeded him, who seeking to defraud
Hercules of his wages, for killing the Whale which should have devoured his
Daughter Hesione, was outed of his Kingdom and life; and Priamus his Son for
his love to Justice was placed in his Throne.

Priamus.
27. Podarces (Surnamed Priamus, as Apollodorus writes) was exceeding rich, and
had a large dominion, extending from Lesbus and Tenedos, to the upper Phrygia,
containing Consulas oma^^o Strabon. l. 13. p. 184.
nine divisions, and many Towns besides. He had Fifty Sons, Cicero Tuscul.
quaest. l. 1.
whereof seventeen were lawfully begotten. His first wife was Arisba the
Daughter of Merops, on which he begat Aesachus. Dismissing her, he married
Hecuba, the Daughter of Dymas, Cisseus, or Sangarius (all which are mentioned)
and by her he had Hector, Paris, Helenus, Deiphobus, and others. Before she was
brought to bed of Paris, she dreamed that she was delivered of a firebrand,
which should consume to ashes the whole City. Apollod.
Priamus hereupon caused the child to be exposed on the Mountain Ida, but by
the procurement of his Mother, he was educated amongst the Shepherds, whom
because he assissted against robbers, and showed himself very courageous, The
rape of Helena.
he obtained the name of Alexander. He (whether out of design or no, is
uncertain) came to Sparta to the house of Menelaus the King, and thence stole
his wife Helena, which some Herod. l. 1. c. 3.
report he took away by force, and that after the taking of the City; but
Servius in Virgil. l. 10.
others affirm of her, as of all others thus taken away, that it was not
without her own liking. Fearing he might be persued, he carried her first to
Sidon in Phoenicia, where he married her, and thence to Troy, at which City
they were scarce arrived, before all Greece was in an uproare, as if the whole
Country had been overrun. Agamemnon, who was much concerned for his Brother,
possessing almost all Peloponnesus, by his authority easily persuaded other
Princes to engage in the quarrel. He first assembled them at Pausan. in
Achaicis. A. M. 2812.
Aegium, a City of Achaia, to consult about the management of the War, where
being chosen General, they afterward met at Aulis, a Sea-town of Boeotia with
their Ships, and there swear, never to return home, till Troy should be taken.

The names of the chief amongst the Greek Wariours.
28. The chiefest of these renowned Warriors were Vide Simsonium in Chron.
Cathol. ad A.M. 2812. etc.
Nestor, who reigned in Messenia, Ajax the Son of Telamon Prince of the Island
Salamine, Ajax the younger, or the son of Oileus King of Locri, over against
Euboea, Achilles the Son of Peleus by the goddess Thetis, whose principality
was Pthiotis, part of that Country afterward called Thessalie, Ulysses the son
of Laertes King of Cephalenia, Thoas the Aetolian, Podalirius and Machaon, Sons
of the third Aesculapius, and Nepolemus the Son of Hercules, who now inhabited
the Island Rhodes. They made up amongst them a Navy of about 1000 ships, and
therein transported an Army of 120000 men. From Aulis they failed to Lemnos,
and thence, missing of Troy, into Mysia, which mistaking for their Enemies
Country, they began to make encursions into it, and were beaten back by
Telephes Prince thereof; all but Achilles and Patroclus, the former whereof
sore wounded him: and Thersander Pausanias in Boeoticis.
General of the Boeotians here lost his life, into whose room, because his Son
Tisamenus was but young, they elected Peneleus. A conflict presently ensued
their arrival at Troy, wherein Protesilaus was slain by a Dardanian, as Homer
calls him, (either Hector or Aeneas) and then the Greeks sent Menelaus and
Ulysses Ambassadors, to demand Helena. Priamus calling a Council to deliberate
about the matter, Antenor was for delivering her up, and so were the rest of
the grave and ancient Men, though they attributed much to the beauty of the
Woman; but Antimachus being corrupted by the gold of Paris, urged the contrary,
and not only moved to have the message rejected, but the messengers killed.

29. Priamus, though otherwise prudent enough, rejected the counsel of the old
men, and out of indulgence to his son, sent away the Ambassadors without any
satisfaction. Then both parties prepared for the War, and another engagement
followed, wherein the Greeks had the better, who then dividing their forces,
left part to continue the siege, and with the other, Achilles (who took with
him Palamedes) was sent to harraze the Country, and cut off provisions from
the City. This he so well performed, as he took 23 Towns, vius.
and therein got much booty, which was divided. Whilst Palamedes was with him
carrying on the War in the Island Lesbos, Ulysses envying him for his great
wisdom, wherein he seemed to overtop him, circumvented him by treachery, and by
false suggestions procured him to be sent for to the Camp, and stoned as a
Traitor, though he had exceedingly well deserved of the Army, being a person of
great courage (which he also expressed at his death) and yet so moderate and
wise, that he thereby allayed the too much heat of Achilles. To him Tacitus
lib. 11.
some attribute the invention of 16 Letters in the Greek Alphabet, Plin. l. 7.
c. 56.
others only 4. but withal the ordering and ranking of an Army, the watch
word, Guards, and Dice to divert the Soldiers. His death was grievously taken
by Ajax the son of Telamon, who for some time absented himself, but especially
by Achilles, who took it so heinously, that for a great while he would not be
reconciled, nor brought to fight, having much more cause to be offended for
this thing, than the detaining of a woman from him by Agamemnon, as the Poet
sings, who industriously omitteth whatsoever reflecteth upon Ulysses.

30. Achilles determined not to fight till the Trojans should pierce as far as
his own ships, which at length happening, Lege Simsonium in Chronico Cathol. ad
A.M. 2820. etc.
he first sent out Patroclus in his Armor, who had desired it. Patroclus with
the Myrmidones (Achilles his subjects) put the Trojans to flight, who now had
begun to cast fire into the ships, slew Pyraechmes with his own hand, pursued
Hector, and smote Sarpedon King of Lycia about the heart so that he died; but
being wounded by Euphorbus, Patroclus slain.
who came behind him, he was slain by Hector. Euphorbus endeavored to get his
body, but was killed by Menelaus; and the Soul of this Euphorbus Pythagoras
affirmed (according to his principle of commigration) to have passed into his
own body. After this, Achilles (whose presence formerly had kept the Trojans
within their Walls) went out to fight, and taking twelve young men alive slew
them at the funeral of Patroclus. By the River Scamander (or Xanthus) he killed
Asteropaeus, Captain of the Paeones, from whom, though he received a wound in
the Arm, yet went he to fight with Hector, Hector slain.
who expected him without the Walls, and would not be persuaded to decline his
fury, though it proved his ruin, being slain in this single Combat about the
30th year of his age. His body tied to a Chariot, the Conqueror drew in
Triumph about the Walls, Diodorus l. 2. p. 91.
but afterward it was ransomed by Priamus. After this he slew Memnon the
Nephew of Priamus by his brother Tithonus, who was sent out of Persia by the
Assyrian King Teutamus to his aid; then Troilus his son by Hecuba, and lastly
Penthesilea one of the Amazons, who for murder had fled her Country, and
coming to Troas Servius.
after Hector's death, did good service against the Greeks. When dead, Achilles
is said to have been enamoured of her body, and with her also the valor of
this sort of women is believed to have been extinct.

31. Achilles, whom no art nor violence of the Trojans could overcome, was
taken by the love of a Woman, and slain by treachery. For having a view of Idem
ad Virgil. Aeneiad. l. 3.
Polyxena, the daughter of Priamus, from the Wall, he became so inslaved to her
in his affections, that he proceeded to a Treaty of marriage, wherein he was
shot with a Dart by Paris, Achilles treacherously killed by Paris.
who hid himself behind the image of Apollo, which idol is therefore feigned an
assistant in the work. Afterward the Greeks had it revealed to them, that
except they could take the Palladium, or Image of Pallas out of the City, till
they should get Hercules his Arrows, and provide a wooden Horse, Troy could
never be taken. Ulysses therefore, and Diomedes, as Aeneiad. 21.
Virgil sings, stole away the Image; Philoctetes, who had the Arrows was sent
for from the Island Lemnos, and with them slew Paris the incendiary, after
whose death Deiphobus the son of Priamus obtained Helena, as being of best
account for valor next to his brother Hector. Then was a wooden Horse prepared
by the hands of Epeus, which pretending to dedicate to Minerva they left before
the City, having industriously made it higher than the Gates, hoping the
Trojans would pull down part of the Wall to take it in. They left also some of
their choicest men in the Horses belly, and Sinon with his hands bound behind
him, who under notion of a fugitive that had been ill used, should persuade
them to receive it into the City; and then giving out that they would raise
the siege for some time, they withdrew into the Island Tenedos. The Trojans
with great resolution break down the Wall, and taking in the Horse placed him
in the Castle; but in the night Sinon giving warning by fire, the Greeks came
from Tenedos, and being easily let in by their companions, by reason of the
Trojans had drunk themselves fast asleep, Troy taken.
the City was taken, sacked and burnt. A.M. 2821
Menelaus killing Deiphobus in his bed, took away Helena, and Priamus was slain
in his own house by Pyrrhus (or Neoptolemus) the son of Achilles. Of the
Trojans which escaped, Antenor being spared by the Greeks came with the Heneti
into the Adriatic Sea, where he built Padua, and Aeneas the son of Anchises at
length reached Italy. This destruction of Troy happened in the 10th year of the
siege, 408 before the first Olympiad, 1182 before the Era of Christ, of the
World 2821. in the days of Jepthah, who judged Israel.

32. Of the Greek Captains which escaped, Ajax the son of Telamon striving with
Ulysses for the Armor of Achilles, and overcome by the judgment of the Army,
killed himself, or else was circumvented by his adversary. Ajax the younger,
the son of Oileus, having taken prisoner Cassandra, the daughter of Priamus,
unwilling to part with her, was driven by the plots of Agamemnon to shift for
himself, and putting out to Sea in an unseasonable time miscarried by
shipwreck. Of those that returned home, most encountered with many difficulties;
Ulysses especially, who for many years wandered about, The Greeks return home.
as it is poetically described by In Odyss. ^
Homer. Menelaus after the work was done, presently commanded the Greeks to
prepare for their return; but Agamemnon being unwilling to depart before he had
sacrifized to Minerva, the Fleet was divided, and a contention arose betwixt
the followers of Menelaus when they came to Tenedos, because some would have
stayed for Agamemnon there; insomuch as Ulysses then returned back to him.
Nestor set sail thence before Menelaus, but was overtaken by him about the
Island Lesbos, whence they sailed together as far as Attica, where Menelaus
staying to bury Phrontes, the other left him and came safe home to Pylus.
Menelaus his ships were most of them overwhelmed in a Tempest about the
Promontory of Malea, and the rest with him and Helena driven into Egypt, where,
and in other places he continued till Consule Strab. l. 1. p. 37. etc.
the 8th year. Agamemnon, after he had sacrifized, and erected an Altar to the
twelve gods in the Promontory of Troas, came home, and was presently Homer
Odyss. 4.
murdered by Aegisthus, the son of his Uncle Thyestes, with whom Clytemnestra
his wife (the daughter also of Tyndareus) had lived in Adultery, and now
conspired to make him away.

Orestes.
33. He left a son named Orestes, and three daughters begotten on this woman.
The Boy (for he was but young) was by his sister Electra, and his Nurse, when
they perceived his life was laid at by Aegisthus before his fathers return,
conveyed into Phocis, unto Strophius, Lege Simsonium in Chronico. A. M. 2829.
who had married his father's sister, whence returning the 8th year after his
death he killed Aegisthus together with his mother, and recovered the Kingdom.
Because of his mothers death he was vexed by the furies, and found some
difficulty in mastering the Argives, who now opposed him; but by the help of
the Phocians he recovered his father's Dominions, though Menelaus his Uncle,
either for that he disapproved the death of his mother, or for private
respects, bare him no good will, and neglected him, which he showed further
in taking from him his daughter Hermione (who had brought him a son) and
giving her to Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles. Tormented with the furies he went
into Arcadia, and thence to Athens, where he was acquitted in the Court of
Areopagus about his mother, the suffrages, for, and against him being equal, in
which case judgment always passed on the Defendants side. Paterculus l. 1.
A little after this he is thought to have killed Pyrrhus as he was sacrifizing
to his father at the Temple of Delphos, and then resumed his wife. Pausan. in
Corinthiacis.
When Menelaus was dead he obtained the Kingdom of Sparta, the Lacedaemonians
being more willing to receive him as the Grandson of Tyndareus by
Clytemnestra, than the base sons of Menelaus, Nicostratus and Megapenthos,
begotten on a slave. It is probable that he, as his father before him, was
supreme Lord of Argos, and that the Successors of Melampus and Bias, ever since
the division of the Kingdom, or for a good space, held their principalities of
his Predecessors and himself. But now being King of Lacedaemon, and the
greatest part of Arcadia, lying near to Argos, after the death of Cylababos,
the son of Sihenelus (who left no Children) and that Amphilochus was departed
thence to the Amphilochians (to whom he gave name) having the Phocians constant
friends to him, he easily made himself sole master of Argos, and so this
Kingdom was reunited about 140 years after the threefold division of it.
Diverse years after, he placed a Colony of the Aeolians in Asia Strabo l. 13.
page 582.
(four ages before that of the Ionians) and shortly after died in Arcadia, when
he had reigned 70 years.

34. He left Vide Pausan. ut prius p. 60. Apollodorum l. 2. page 123.
two sons: One legitimate, and named Tisamenus (from his revenging his fathers
death) begotten on Hermione; and another born of Erigone, the daughter of
Aegisthus. Tisamenus succeeded him according to Pausanias, though Paterculus
writes that both of them reigned after their] fathers death. Tisamenus.
Scarce was Tisamenus warm in his seat when he was displaced by the Heraclidae,
or posterity of Hercules. They had several times attempted their return into
Peloponnesus, but were ever frustrated till now; Hyllus the son of Hercules
once or twice, Cleodaeus his son after him, and Aristomachus his son also with
the same success. Aristomachus left three sons, Temenus, Cresphontes, and
Aristodemus, which being grown up consulted the Oracle of Apollo concerning
their return, and had the same answer their father formerly had, that they
should attain their desire, if they went by the way Stenygrus, which word in
the Greek being of an ambiguous signification, Aristomachus thinking by it to
be meant the Isthmus, as a narrow way, led down his forces through it, and
miscarried. Temenus objecting this, the Pythia, or woman that delivered the
Oracles, answered, that their Ancestors by their misunderstanding had been
Authors of their own infelicity; for whereas Hyllus was told that the third
fruit was to be expected, the third Generation was meant, and not the third
crop, or summer, as he expounded it, and accordingly perished: And as for
Stenygrus, by it they were to understand the deep Sea on the right hand as one
enters Peloponnesus, and not the narrow Isthmus. Having received this answer,
and conceiving all things now to be fulfilled and ripe for their effectual
return, they built ships in Aetolia upon that Sea, the place wherein they were
made thenceforth keeping the name of Naupactus from that occasion. Whilst they
were about this work, a certain Prophet appeared to them, and foretold them
several things; but Hippotes taking him for a Magician sent on purpose to
delude the Army, killed him. For this a Pestilence was sent amongst them, about
which consulting the Oracle they were bidden to banish Hippotes for 10 years,
and use the conduct of a Captain with three eyes, for two years space.

The return of the Heraclidae.
35. Seeking out such a man, they met one Apollodorus.
Oxylus, an Aetolian, son to Thoas that went to the siege of Troy; who being on
hors-back had but one eye, now returning into his own Country from Elea in
Peloponnesus, whither he had been banished for killing a man. Him they made
Captain of the expedition, bargaining to procure him the possession of Elis as
Eliac. 1. p. 150.
Pausanias witnesses, who reports him to have ridden on a Mule that had but
one eye, and therefore to have been taken for the man meant by the Oracle,
through the persuasion of Cresphontes. Being ready, they Polyaenus Stratag. l.
21. A.M. 2901.
gave out they would march again through the Isthmus, and by that means the
Peloponnesians attending their motions there, easily passed over the Sea, and
landed at Molycrjum. Three parts of Peloponnesus especially they challenged as
their due: Argos, because descended of Perseus, whereas Tisamenus the present
King was of the posterity of Pelops, Lege Pausan. in Argolicis and Strabon. l.
18. p. 352, etc.
who had no right to that Kingdom. Lacedaemon, for that Hercules killed
Hypocoon, who had expelled Tyndareus thence, and restored the later to the
Kingdom, on this condition, to keep it for his children. Messenia, because
having also conquered it, when he destroyed the City Pilus, and slew all the
brothers of Nestor, he gave it to him of mere goodness and compassion, but on
the same condition as Lacedaemon to Tyndareus. The dominion of Argos without
much ado they got into their hands; after that, taking a certain Village in
the confines thereof, Temenus fortified it, and used it for a place of retreat
for carrying on the War. One Philonomus betrayed Sparta into their hands,
Strabo. lib. 18. p. 365.
which they entered with sound of Pipes instead of Trumpets, as most effectual
by the tune, to make the Soldier attentive, and keep his ranks, which use was
constantly observed by the Lacedaemonians, Polyaenus.
together with that of the Harp.

36. Tisamenus and the Achaeans thus expelled these parts, Phusan. in Achaicis,
Messenicis and Laeinicis.
and out of Messenia by the Heraclidae and Dorienses their associates, sent to
the Ionians then inhabiting Peloponnesus, their Neighbors, desiring leave to
live amongst them. But they being jealous of him, lest for his high birth and
valor, he should be chosen King of the Country, denied their request. The
Achaeans then, driven by necessity and desperation, attempted to get by force,
what they could not by entreaty, and though they lost Tisamenus in the fight,
drove the Jones out of their Seats, and constrained them to pass into Attica,
where they were received by the Athenians, through the persuasion of Melanthus
the King. As for the Heraclidae, when they came to divide what they had won,
Argos fell to Temenus, Cresphontes, by fraud used in the Lot, obtained Messene,
and Lacedaemon became the portion of Procles and Eurystheus, the sons of
Aristodemus, who was slain by the sons of Pylas kinsmen to Tisamenus, before
they entered Peloponnesus: They also according to their engagement possessed
Oxylus of Elis.

Temenus obtained Argos.
37. Temenus being settled in Argos, Idem in Argolicis.
after some years incurred the displeasure of his Sons, for marrying his
Daughter Hyrnetho to Deiphontes his kinsman, he so affected them two above his
other children, that he made him his only Counselor in all affairs; insomuch
that his sons fearing he would transfer the Kingdom from themselves to him,
made their father away, by one means or other. And Cresphontes his Brother, who
had used too much cunning in getting Messene, not long after, seeming to be too
gracious with the people, incurred the displeasure of the Nobility, In
Messenicis.
and was murdered together with two of his Sons; only Aepitus then but young
escaped, and killing Polyphontes the usurper, revenged his Father's death.
Recovering thus the Kingdom, he had Successors, Glaueus, Isthmias, Dotadas,
Sybotas, Ph^ntas, Antiochus, and Euphaes, who dying of a wound, received in a
battle fought with the Lacedaemonians, without issue, Aristodemus was elected
in his room, Cisus.
and continued as long as the Kingdom it self lasted, being overturned by means
of the Spartans, as will be seen in their story. Cisus the eldest son of
Temenus succeeded him, though the people generally inclined to Deiphontes, by
whose party they were so stirred up and animated, that Cisus being dead, they
took away from his Successors all regal power and authority, All regal power
taken from his Successos.
left them nothing but a mere empty title, and so in reality, this Kingdom
fell, being in effect turned into a Free State. Which change happened about
forty years after the return of the Heraclidae, A. M. 2940.
690 after the beginning of Inachus. A. M. 2940.

38. One Grotius ex Aeschylo in supplicibus, de jure belli and pacis. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
(and he a great one) there is, who would gather out of an old Tragoedian, that
the ancient government of this Kingdom of the Inachidae was merely absolute,
the King being by the Poet called both People and City, not subject to any
Laws, but sustained by the power of his Throne, and acting all things according
to his mere will and pleasure. But if credit may be given to the express words
of In Corinthiacis. page 61.
Pausanias, SECT. 4.
rather than the liberty of a Poet, The Kingdom of the Inachidae moderate.
Emmius thence concludes, their power was but moderate; for the Argives says
Pausanias, from the most ancient times were exceeding studious of liberty. Out
of this principle (being stirred up as it seems by the party of Deiphontes)
they abated the power of Cisus his Successors, leaving them nothing but an
empty name. And this they further showed, when Meltas the Son of Lacidaus, one
of these Kings, not enduring this abatement, grew as they thought dissolute and
imperious in the Government. For impatient hereof, they deprived him of all
power, took upon them to condemn him to death, The Government made Democratical.
and plucked up all Supremacy by the roots, not suffering any afterward to
reign amongst them. For though we meet with one afterward, called King of
Argos in Herodotus; yet that name signified no more than it did in the
Commonwealths of Athens, Carthage, and Rome, where this title was wont to be
given to some sorts of Officers, as this work will show. The Government was now
Democratical, the chief power lying in the people, divided into three tribes,
to which the Senate was subordinate, chosen every year for the preparing of
matters for the whole body, and the management of the executive power, with
authority to enact things of lesser consequence. There was also a Council of
State, consisting of 80 persons, besides inferior Magistrates of the City, and
Judges for determining of causes, all which are mentioned in the league, made
betwixt the Argives, Athenians, and others, described by Thucydides in his
fifth Book of the Peloponnesian War. No fuller intelligence have we concerning
the constitution of this Commonwealth, which yet flourished downwards for many
Ages, and had great contests with the Lacedaemonians, especially about the
territories of Thyrea, to which both laid claim. Sometimes they fell out about
their confaederates, being moved with much emulation and distaste at each
others Government (the one being a Democracie, and the other an Oligarchie)
which once especially brought the State of Argos into great danger. But these
things belong to another place.

SECT. IV. The most ancient Kingdom and Commonwealth of Athens.
Cecrops.
1. THe founding of the Athenian Kingdom is ascribed to Eusebius in Chron. ex
Castore. A. M. 2449.
Cecrops, who first reigned in Attica (then Act) in the days of Triopas King
of Argos, 373 years before the destruction of Troy, 780 before the first
Olympiad, A. M. 2449. The Diodorus. l. 1. p. 17.
Egyptians said he was their Countryman, and brought hither a Colonie of the
Saitae, who inhabited upon one of mouths of Nile. He was feigned to be
double-natured, consisting both of a Serpentine and Humane shape, because
coming into Greece, he shook off barbarism and turned civil. Besides this
Colonie, he gathered the people of these parts into twelve Towns, whereas
before that they lived dispersedly according to the most ancient custom of
Greece, and called them Athenae, after the name of Minerva in the Greek
Language. The story is Augustine ex Varrone, de Civitat. Dei l. 18. c. 9.
told, that when the name came to be given, on a sudden an Olive Tree, and a
Fountain of water appeared, whereat Cecrops moved with wonder, sent to enquire
of the Oracle what they should mean. It was answered, that the Olive signified
Minerva, the water Neptune, and that they might name that City from which of
these two they pleased. Hereupon, all the men and women were gathered together
to make the choice: the men were for Neptune, but the women being the greater
number, carried the name for Minerva, Neptune angry hereat, drowned their
territories, whom to pacify, they punished the women several ways. They
decreed, that thenceforth they should not have a voice in any public matter;
that no child should bear the mother's name, and that they should not be called
Athenaeae, but Atticae, Some women known by the name of Minerva there have
been, though impure spirits, ambitious to blind men with superstition and
idolatry, might well act in this matter, as Augustine tells us, under the
name of Neptune.

Several Minerva's,
2. Cicero 3o De natura Deorum.
mentions five several women that have had the name of Minerva. The first was
the mother of Apollo by Vulcan. The second born of the River Nile, and
worshipped by the Saitae. The third daughter to Jupiter Coelius. The fourth
begotten by Jupiter on Ce^iphe, daughter to the Ocean, called Coria by the
Arcadians; which invented the Chariot drawn by four horses. The fifth was the
daughter of Pallas, said to have killed her Father, because he attempted to
violate her virginity Of these the second must be she that was thus honored by
Cecrops, having founded the City Sais, near to Delta, being by the Egyptians
called N^uth. To her he had formerly erected a Statue in Egypt, and he, as
they say, first gave the name of Zeus to him whom the Latins called Jupiter. As
there were several Minervaes, so also more Varro de Analogia. Vide Ludovic.
Vi^em in Augustine d^ Civitat. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 9.
than one City known by the name of Athenae. From this in Attica, And Athenae.
the Citizens were by the Romans called Athenienses; but another there was in
Euboea, built by Cecrops the Son of Erechtheus, the Inhabitants of which went
by the name of Athenae^: and a City in Na^bone, a Province of Gaul, near to
Marseils, called Atheneopolis, and the Citizens Atheneopolitae. There was also
in Laconia a Town called by the name of Athenae.

Deucalion his story.
3. In the days of Eusebius.
Cecrops, Deucalion the Son of Prometheus reigned in Thessalie, whose history
being remarkable, must be briefly touched. Lapetus had three Sons, Atlas,
Prometheus, and Epimetheus. For Servius ad 8. Aeneiad.
the first, One tells us there were three that bore the name of Atlas. One a
Moor, and the greatest of all; another an Italian, Father to Electra; the
third, an Arcadian, Father of Maia, the Mother of Mercury; all which the
ancients confound according to their custom. The first Diodorus l. 5.
lived near to Mount Atlas; to which for his great skill in Astrology, is
attributed the bearing up of the Heavens; and he is also counted the Father of
Electra. Prometheus found out the instrument to strike fire, and thereupon is
said to have stolen fire from the Gods. Deucalion his Son married Pyrrha the
daughter of his Uncle Epimetheus, and in his time August. de Civit. Dei, l. 18.
c. 8. Orosius. l. 1.
happened that great deluge in part of Greece, which is known by the addition
of his name; that Country called most anciently and truly Hellas, his seat near
to the Mountain Parnassus being chiefly afflicted with it, on which Hill he is
thought to have saved many men by boats, and thence the Fable to have risen of
his repeopling the Earth. But (that we may note it altogether) there are three
particular Floods which we read to have happened to this Country of Geece. The
first, under Ogyges (called the Ogygean deluge) concerning whom, we shall speak
in the History of Thebes. This fell 248 years before either of the other, and
overwhelmed Attica especially so, that as Pererius will have it, it remained
waste 200 years after. The next was this of Deucalion, which happened 737 years
before the first Olympiad: and the Diod. l. 5. p. 223.
third fell 86 after it, in the days of Dardanus and Cadmus.

His issue, which is especially to be noted, for a distinct knowledge of the
several sorts of Greeks.
4. Deucalion of Pyrrha his wife begat Hellen and Amphyction. Hellen gave the
name of Hellenes to his Subjects before called Graeci, and of Hellas to the
Country formerly named Pelasgia, from the Pelasgi (who there inhabited) as
Haemonia from Haemon, the son of Pelasgus, and Pyrrhaea from Pyrhar. Strabo. l.
8.
He had three sons, Xuthus, Aeolus, and Dorus. To Aeolus he left his Kingdom,
and sent the other two abroad to seek out seats elsewhere. Aeolus grew so
famous, that the name of Jupiter and Neptune came to be given him. Dorus
inhabited the Country Histiaeotis, Herod. l. 1. Pausan. in Achaicis.
about the Mountains Ossa and Olympus. Xuthus after his Father's death was
banished Thessalie by his other Brothers, for stealing away a great part of his
Fathers treasure, and came to Athens, where he married the daughter of
Erechtheus, on which he begat Achaeus and Ion. Achaeus getting aid from Athens
and Aegialus, went into Thessalie, and recovered his Grand-Father's Kingdom;
but afterward killing a man by chance, he fled into Laconia, Strabo ut supra.
where his posterity continued till expelled by the Heraclidae and Dorienses,
as we showed in the History of Tisamenus. Ion being exceeding famous at Athens
had a numerous progeny, which, for that Attica was now grown too full, was sent
out as a Colony into Peloponnesus, whence they were thrust out by their
brethren the Achaeans, after they had denied them harbor (as is formerly said)
and returned to Athens, from which City they were afterward led out into
Asia, by the sons of Codrus. But these things happened in after times.

The Council of Areopagus.
5. In Cecrops his time Eusebius.
one makes the Council, or Senate of Areopagus to have had its Original,
though no clear light can we discover concerning the true beginning of it.
Cicero offic. l. 1. and Plutarch.
Some write that it began under Solon, but Aristot.
another of a more ancient date signifies that it was a Court of Judicature
before. Pausan in Atticis.
One deriveth the word from Mars (in Greek Ares) making him to have been first
tried there for killing Halirrhodius, the son of Neptune, who offered violence
to his daughter Alcippe. Others would fetch a reason from the erecting of his
Spear there, or from this, Suidas.
that the Court of Areopagus took Cognizance of slaughters, which are usually
committed with Swords, or other Weapons of Mars. Lastly, some think it thence
to have been named, for that the Amazons, when they fought against Theseus,
made Mars his Hill their Fortress, and there offered sacrifice to him. Eusebius.
Cecrops died after he had reigned 50 years, and because Erysicthon his son
died before him, Cranaus.
Cranaus the most powerful man then at Athens succeeded him in the Kingdom.
He, after he had reigned some seven years, Pausan. ut supra. A. M. 3507.
was thrust out by Amphyction, Amphyction.
the son of Deucalion, and his son-in-law, the founder as some have thought of
the National Council of the Amphyctiones, of which we have already spoken. He
is reported to have given entertainment to Dionysus, or Bacchus, who at this
time, as they say, came into Attica, and when he had reigned ten years, was
also expelled by Erichthonius.

Erichthonius.
6. The father of Erichthonius was said to be Vulcan, and his mother the earth,
because he was found in Vulcan's Temple upon the earth, Apollodorus. l. 3.
with a Snake wound about his feet, whence also they feigned that he had feet
like Snakes, and invented a Chariot wherein he might ride and hide them. He
instituted Games to Apollo and Minerva, and having reigned 50 years, left his
Kingdom to his son Pandion, Pandion.
who also, after 40. gave way to his son Erechtheus. Erechtheus.
He became a man of great account, and whereas the subjects of Athens were
before his time called Cecropidae, thenceforth they were named after the place
it self. He made War upon the inhabitants of Eleasine, Ion the son of Xuthus,
and his own Grandson by his daughter being his chief Commander, wherein after
he had slain Immaradus, Pausan. in Atticis.
the son of Eumolpus their General, he also lost his life, when he had reigned
50 years. He left three sons, Cecrops, Metion, and Pandorus, who falling into
contention about the succession, put it to the arbitration of Xuthus. He
adjudged it to the eldest, but yet would they not rest satisfied, which made
him leave Athens, Cecrops 2d.
and go into Aegialea where he died. This Cecrops the second, some think to
have gathered the people into twelve Towns, for that living dispersedly abroad,
the Carians by Sea, and the Boeotians (called Aeonae) by Land harrased the
Country, as L. 9. p. 397. C.
Strabo writes. At the end of 40 years his son named Pandion succeeded him,
Pandion.
who was expelled the Kingdom by the sons of Metion his Uncle, and fled to
Pyla, the King of Megara his father-in-law, who left him his Successor. Whilst
he here reigned he begat four sons, Aegens, Lycus, Pallas, and Nisus, Pausan.
ut prius.
who after his death went against the Metiontidae, and expelled them Athens,
the Dominions whereof they divided into four parts, according to their father's
injunctions, Megara falling to Nisus, who reigned there a long time.

Aegeus.
7. Though this division was made, yet was Aegeus Sovereign in effect, for fear
of whom Lycus fled to Athens. Pallas the other brother had 50 sons, A. M. 2723.
which growing up gave cause enough to Aegeus to be jealous of them, having him
in contempt because he was childlesse. For though he married two wives,
Plutarch in Theseo.
yet had he issue by neither of them, which made him go to Delphos to enquire
of the Oracle about posterity. The answer being obscure, in his return he was
entertained by Pittheus, the son of Pelops, a man famous for learning at
Traezene, Begets Theseus.
who either understanding the Oracle, or otherwise induced, Apollod. A.M. 2725.
made his daughter Aethra to lie with him, after he had caused him to drink
good store of Wine. At his departure he put a sword, and a knife under a great
stone, bidding her, if she brought forth a Boy, as soon as he could remove the
stone, and take those things from under it, to send him with them as tokens
unto Athens, and he would own him for his son. She accordingly brought forth a
son (called Theseus, from putting the marks under the stone) whom Pittheus
brought up, and for that he proved exceeding prudent and courageous, his mother
at sixteen years of age brought him to the stone, acquainting him with his
Original, and his fathers injunctions. He easily removing it, and taking away
the tokens, prepared for his journey; but they were unwilling to let him go by
Land, because all the ways were full of Robbers, since Hercules (who went up
and down destroying them) after his killing of Iphitus had quitted these parts,
and was gone into Lycia, where for some years he served Omphale the Queen. But
Theseus burning with emulation upon hearing continually the praise of Hercules
his Kins-man (for their mothers were next Cousins) resolved to take that way
to obtain some renown in killing those Robbers, and effected his design upon
several of them.

8. Being arrived at Athens, he was in danger to be poisoned by his father,
through the persuasion of Medea (who now was fled to him from Corinth,
Plutarch.
and filled his jealous head with suspicions of this stranger) till thinking
it wisdom to make himself known, rather than let another do it, he showed him
the tokens, which he presently acknowledged, and owning him for his son, made
his subjects as such to take notice of him. But the sons of Pallas, who before
had been seditious, now seeing all hopes of the Kingdom taken from them by him,
and disdaining that Aegeus should first reign himself, being not of the blood
Royal, but adopted only by Pandion (as Plutarch vvriteth) and then leave for
his Successor a stranger, and a Bastard, they took Arms, and the better to
accomplish their design, divided themselves into two parties, whereof the one
came openly with their father against Athens, and the other lay in ambush. The
acts of Theseus.
Theseus having notice of the later sort, surprised, and cut them all off,
which so discouraged the other as they separated themselves and fled. Theseus
after this, to employ himself, and gain the favor of the people, went, and
took the Marathonian Bull, fetched out of Crete by Hercules, and brought him
quick into the City, after he had infested the Country very much. Then sailed
he to Crete, where, as the fable goes, he slew the Minotaure, a Monster kept
by Minos, King of that Island.

Minos.
9. Minos, Diodorus l. 4. p. 183.
Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon were the Children of Jupiter by Europa, and all
adopted by Asterius (the Grandson of Hellen, by his son Teutamus) King of that
Island, who married their mother, and was childlesse. Minos was the Lawgiver
of the Cretians; this honor being ascribed to him by the most Authentic of
ancient Plato in legibus. Aristot. Politic. l. 2. cap. 8.
Authors. Yet Apud Strabon. lib. 10. p. 476.
Epherus in his book of Europaean Commonwealths, vvrote that he was but an
imitator of one Rhadamanthus (of the same name with his brother, who by others
is also said to have been employed by Minos in this work, but more ancient) who
first cultivated the Island by Laws, Cities, and Commonwealths, feigning that
he had from Jupiter all the Ordinances which he published. In (...).
imitation of him, Minos having continued in the Law of Jupiter nine years,
produced Laws in writing, and ascribed them to the same Author as Homer also
hinteth; which Odyss.
word of Homer, though Strabo takes to signify a continuance for ten years,
yet Plato, and from him Lib. 1. c. 2. Exter. Exemp. 1.
Valerius Maximus interpret it not of nine years continuance, but every ninth
year wherein as it seems he amended his Laws. Although Minos was a King,
yet he directed (according to Apud Strab. ut prius. page 480. B.
Ephorus) the whole model of his Laws to the freedom of his subjects. This
liberty he thought to be preserved best by Concord, which would be most
established by the prevention of avarice and luxury, the great causes of
disagreement. He would therefore have them all live soberly and frugally, to
which purpose he ordained that Boys should live together in companies, called
Ageloe, when they were grown up, and men, in others, called Syssitia, from
eating together, (which they also named Andr^a from their m^nhood) that taking
their meat all in public, the poor might live in equal condition with the
rich.

The form of the Cretian Commonwealth.
10. After the abdication of regal power, the chief Magistracy was exercised by
ten Cosmi, in power, though not in number, like to (...) Spartan Ephori, being
chosen out of the lowest sort of people as those; Vide Aristot. quo prius and
Strabon.
ye^ not out of the whole body but particular families, which custom Aristotle
accounts worse than the other of Lacedaemon. Those Cosmi at home Governed the
Commonwealth; in War commanded the Army with absolute Authority. There was also
a Senate, chosen out of those who in this Office had well demeaned themselves,
being for life, and not liable to be called to account. There was an Order of
Hors-men, who were bound to keep Horses for the service of the State, whereas
they at Lacedaemon had no such tie upon them. In the Concio, or great Assembly,
all Members of the Commonwealth had equal Votes, but its power was not great,
confirming only what was propounded by the Senate and Cosmi. They had public
slaves, called Periaeci, from their inhabiting up and down the Country, who
tilled the grounds, and paid in a constant Revenue. All, when ripe of age, were
commanded to marry for the propagation of legitimate issue: Yet they did not
lead their wives to their houses when newly married, but let them stay till
they were fit to govern a family. The Boys took their meat altogether on the
ground, serving themselves, and the elder sort. They were clothed meanly, and
alike, both Winter and Summer; they used bickerings with one another, both with
single hand and Weapon on certain days, and had those who exercised them also
in shooting, and a warlike kind of leaping invented by Cures; moreover in
certain Rithms, called properly (...).
Rythmi Cretici. The Cretians had several commendable Laws as that which
severely restrained drunkenness, another commended by Plato, that required an
account how public Corn was distributed and spent. The younger sort were
utterly forbidden to make any inquiry into the equiry of the Laws, and if the
elder were unsatisfied, without their knowledge, they were to have recourse to
the Magistrates, and their own equals. But that the Laws might be engraven in
their memories, the boys were wont when they were taught to read, to get
some of them by heart, being put into Verse, together with some Musical Notes.

11. Lycurgus the Spartan Lawgiver made this model the pattern of his new
Commonwealth, having traveled into the Island, where he had converse with
Thales, a man ennobled for his Laws, and Lyrick Poems; Strabo. lib. 10. page
482.
for we must not suppose Minos the sole Author of the Cretiam customs. As the
Cretians had their Cosmi, so the Spartans their Ephori, though most probable it
is that these were brought in after the death of Lycurgus. As they a Senate,
so these also endovved with the like immunities. The Concio, or Assembly of
the people in Crete, resolved nothing but what was propounded by the Cosmi
and Senate, which was follovved by the first constitution of Lycurgus the
Senate propounding at Sparta. The Periaeci, Aristot. Politic. lib. 2. cap. 8.
and Heloti fitly agreed, though the Cretians received less damage from the
former, because being in an Island there were no Neighbors to hold
correspondence with the slaves. The Syssitia of the Lacedaemonians were
fetched, as Aristotle proves, from Crete; and their Phiditia taken from the
Andria of that place, as also their education of Children was agreeable to the
Cretian. Plato commends much the Commonwealth of Crete, De Legibus lib. 8.
and the Legislator for his wisdom and prudence, though he abominateth the
immodest love of boys, and rejects his reason for it, which yet Lycurgus so
approved, as to put it in his model. Aristotle condemns it, as also amongst
some other things, the Election of the Cosmi, and their too great advantage
they had of raising seditions in the State, when they came to be punished. But
Polybius affirms the two Commonwealths of Crete and Sparta to have vastly
differed, not fearing to blame Ephorus, Xenophon, Calisthenes, and Plato, for
saying they were very like; because with the Cretians it was usual to ingrosse
Land and Money, whence they were avaricious, contentious, sedition, and what
not? moreover they had annual Magistrates, Lib. 4. and 6.
whereas the other had two Kings for life. They were, he says, fraudulent and
crafty in their private demeanor, and most unjust in their public Councils.
Proverb. cum Cretense Cretissare, lib. 8.
Though some public abuses taxed by Polyb^us, might have crept in in ancient
times; yet it appears from the testimony of that Verse of Epimenides a
Cretian, which St. Paul cites and confirms, (...), that the disposition even
of the old Cretians (for Epimenides is found contemporary with Solon) was very
naught.

12. Minos succeeding his Step-father, begat Lycastes, and left him his
Successor, who on Ida the daughter of Corybas begat Minos the secohd, fathered
also on Jupiter. He had issue by P^pphae (daughter to Sol and Crete) Deucalion,
Astrea, Androgeos, Ariadne, and other children. Androgeos going to the solemn
Feast of the Panathenaea, instituted by Theseus at Athens, excelled all men in
the exercises then performed, whereby he became farmiliarly acquainted with the
Sons of Pallas. This when Aegeus perceived, fearing they might by his means
receive some aid and assistance, he procured him to be made away, at which
Minos sore aggrieved, came to Athens to demand satisfaction, but obtaining
none, is said to have procured from Jupiter a Famine to fall upon all Greece,
and especially Attica, which could not be abated, till he received
satisfaction. A Plutarch. ut supra.
yearly Tribute then be imposed on the Athenians, of seven Boys and as many
Girls, which being unwillingly willing to submit to, they were sore displeased
when they came to part with their children, and repining at Aegeus as the
author of their calamity, at the third time of sending, Theseus offered himself
to go amongst the rest. The Fable is, that they were to be devoured of the
Minotaure, a Monster, whose upper parts were like to those of a Man, but
resembled a Bull in the other. Some thought there might be such a Monster
indeed, but most account it fabulous, and it is interpreted to be meant of one
Taurus, the Captain of Minos, who might have custody of these children, whom
Aristotle will not have killed, but made slaves, till their death. Theseus
promising to kill this Minotaure, Aegeus with much ado yielded he should go,
and commanded the Master of the ship, that, whereas for the sadness of the
occasion they used black sails, if his Son came back alive, he should change
them for white ones, as soon as they came within kenning of Attica.

He kills the Minotaure.
13. Theseus coming into Crete by the help of Ariadne the daughter of Minos,
(which fell in love with him) got into the labyrinth where the Minotaure was
kept (and which was made by Daedalus, who having killed his Sisters son at
A^hens, fled into this Island) and slew him. It is thought, Philocharus apud
Plutarchum ut supra.
that when he landed, he offered the Combat to whomsoever would accept of it,
and that this Taurus, who bore himself high upon his valor, and was hated by
all for his ill manners, was forced by Minos to accept of it. Theseus having
killed him, was so admired by the King, that he gave him back the children and
remitted the Tribute. Ariadne fell in love with him, whom some say, he carried
away with him, but others, that he left her behind, and she hanged her self;
several things, one contrary to another being reported of her. Peace now being
made, and Theseus returning homewards, they were so transported with joy, that
they forgot to set up the white sails; whereupon Aegeus dispairing of his sons
safety, threw himself headlong from a Rock and perished. The death of Aegeus.
From this Aegeus some would fetch the name of the Aegean Sea. But others,
think it was so called from Aegae, the Island near Euboea; others from Aegae a
town of Euboea; some from Aega a promontory of Aeolis, and others from the Rock
Aege, lying betwixt Tenedus and Chius; Again some from Aegeus, the name of
Neptune in Pherecydes; and others from Aegeon, the same with Briareus, and
others from a Goat, because by it is turbulency it leapeth like that creature.
Festus who deriveth the name also from Aegeus, mentions other two Originals
as probable, viz. the many Islands, which to one looking at them a far off,
appear as Goats, in the Greek language called Aegae; and the perishing of Aege
the Queen of the Amazons in it. Concerning Aegeus, Suidas tells a long story
out of Nicocrates, which is refuted by the Scholiast of Apollonius, who
concerning this, is to be consulted, together with Strabo and Pliny.

Theseus gathers the Athenians into one City.
14. Theseus succeeding his Father, A. M. 2775.
set himself all manner of ways to deserve well of his Subjects; Whereas
before they were dispersed in twelve Towns or more, he gathered them into one
City, as being more convenient for strength, concord, and dispatch of public
business. This being hard to effect, by reason that the people were unwilling
to quit their present possessions for new hopes, he went from place to place,
showing them the convenience of the thing, and that he might effectually
persuade, he promised them liberty, offering to lay down all power except that
of the Generalship, and of keeping the Laws; in all other things to be like
them, and the power to rest in the people. The multitude being allured by this
promise, he made the chief City, called Cecropia, his regal seat, and built
another about it for the people, which he divided into three ranks, of
Nobility, Husbandmen, and Artificers, all under the same aequality of liberty
and Law. But the former sort he appointed to be the fountain of Magistracy; yet
so, as elective by the suffrages of the other two. He abolished the several
Courts of Judicature belonging to the twelve Towns, and constituted one general
Prytaneum in the City. Thus did he divest himself of all royalty in a manner,
and brought popular-government into the State.

His exploits.
15. As Hercules had instituted the Olympic Games in honor of Jupiter,
Plutarch.
so he ordained the Isthmian, and dedicated them to Neptune. He sailed with
Hercules into the Euxine Sea (some say, by himself) against the Amazons, from
amongst whom he got Antiope his wife, which gave occasion to that sort of women
to come against Athens. They sore distressed it by a Seige, till peace was made
by Antiope or Hippolyta, as others called her. Some have affirmed, that he was
not partaker in any Exploit with any of the Heroes of his time, except in that
he helped the Lapithae against the Centaurs. Others again contend, that he
sailed to Colchos with Jason, and assisted Meleager in killing the Boar; whence
came the Proverb, Non sine Theseo: he also performed many brave things by
himself, without the assistance of any, hence he came to be counted Alter
Hercules. Having contracted near friendship and alliance with Perithous the Son
of Ixion, being now 50 years old, he joined with him in stealing away Helena
the daughter of Tyndareus from Sparta, and when they cast lots who should have
her, she fell to him. He carried her to his Mother living at Aphidna, there to
be kept till she were ripe for marriage: But having agreed that he who obtained
her, should help the other to procure him a wife elsewhere, they both traveled
into Epirus, to steal thence the daughter of Aidoneus King of the Molossians,
whose wife was called Proserpina, and his Dog Cerberus, he himself by the Fable
being named Pluto. When he understood their errand, that they came not to woo
but to steal, be laid hands on them both, and caused his Dog to devour
Perithous, kept Theseus in prison, till Hercules desired he should be set at
liberty.

16. Whilst Theseus was absent, one Menestheus the son of Peleus (who was
Grandson to Erechtheus by his Son O^neus) incensed the people against him, and
that upon the account of that change he had made in the State, which he would
have them believe was intended to inslave them under pretense of liberty: and
at this time came down the Tyndaridae, Idem.
Castor and Pollux (some think by his procurement) against Athens in behalf of
their Sister. Finding that she was not there, and discovering the place of her
restraint, they went to Aphidna, and taking it by force recovered her, and took
Aethra the Mother of Theseus, which afterward accompanied her as her servant
to Troy, and at the taking of that Town was set at liberty by her Grandson
Demophon. By means of Menestheus, the Tyndaridae were received into Athens, and
great honor was done unto them, which thing contributed to his design. For
when Theseus returned, the Citizens were so wrought upon, His exile
that in no wise would they be reconciled, and so was he forced to banish
himself into the Island Scyrus, having sent away his children privately to
Elpenor the son of Chalcedon into Euboea. One writes, Diod. l. 4. p. 184.
Pausanians in Atticis. A. M. 2802.
that sailing toward Crete to Deucalion the son of Minos (whose Sister Phaedra
he had married after the death of Antiope) he was driven by tempest upon
Scyrus, the Inhabitants whereof receiving him with great honor for reverence
of his name, Lycomedes their King, out of jealousy, made him away, having led
him up to a Rock, And death.
as though to show him the Country, and thence tumbled him down headlong.

Menestheus.
17. Menestheus then began his reign at Athens, in the days of Atreus King of
Argos and Mycenae, and some years after accompanied Agamemnon and Menelaus to
the siege of Troy, with 50 ships. During the War, we hear little or nothing of
him, but after the City was taken, he honored the Funerals of Ajax the son of
Telamon with a Funeral Oration, Philostratus in Heroicis.
which work belonged to the Athenians to perform for those that died in the
Wars; but within a while he himself afforded matter for that office, dying in
the Isle Melos at his return homewards. Demophon.
After his death Demophon the son of Theseus, (who together with his brother
Achames, (both begotten on Phaedra) followed Elphenor to Troy) went to Athens
and obtained the Kingdom. As he returned, Phyllis daughter to Sithon and Queen
of Thrace, fell in love with him, Servius in Eclog. 5. Virgil.
and wood him for marriage. He told her he would first go to settle his affairs
at Athens, and then come and marry her; but staying somewhat long, she had no
patience to wait, and thinking she was slighted, hanged herself. He stole the
Palladium or image of Pallas, from the Argives, who brought it from Troy, and
in their return with Diomedes made encursions unwittingly into Attica, being
driven by night upon Phalerus, and not knowing where they were. He reigned
about 34 years, and then left his Kingdom to his son Oxyntes, Oxyntes. Aphidas.
Thymoetes.
who after twelve was succeeded by Aphidas his son, who reigned but one year.
Then followed Thymoetes the fifteenth King, Atheneus.
who being a Bastard, is reported to have murdered Aphidas his brother, and
after eight years lost the Kingdom, He was the last of the Erechthidae that
reigned at Athens.

18. It happened that the State of Athens had War with the Boeotians about
Celoenae, a place seated in the confines of both Countries, and it pleased the
parties that their Kings should decide the quarrel in their own persons.
Thymoetes declined the combat, and for that was deposed. Melanthius a
Messenian, who was then driven from home by the Heraclidae accepted it, Pausan.
in Atticis.
and overcame Xanthus the Boeotian King by a stratageme; for when they came to
fight he cried out: Thou do not justly Xanthus, Frontinus Stratagem. l. 2. c.
5. Exemp. 41.
but contrary to our agreement, who accompanied with another person, come to
fight against me a single man, at which he wondering, and looking back to see
who should follow him, Melanthius.
Melanthius ran him through with his Lance. He then reigned in the room of
Thymoetes, and at his death left Codrus his son his Successor; who willingly
offered himself to death for the safety of his Athenians. Codrus the last King.
There were now distasts arisen betwixt the Heraclidae, who held Peloponnesus,
Justin lib. 2.
and them, for that they harbored the Jones, Strabo lib. 9.
and other fugitives out of that Country; and at length the Heraclidae
intending to make War upon them, consulted the Oracle beforehand concerning
their success, which answered, that they should have the better, if they kept
off their hands from the Athenian King, and not otherwise. They gave order to
their men to beware of hurting him; but he getting knowledge of the matter,
disguised himself, and going into their Army, by blows provoked them to kill
him. This being known, they raised their Siege, though some of them had already
got into the City, on whom then the Athenians had mercy, and dismissed them
without any harm. This happened 486 years after Cecrops, A. M. 2935.
114 after the destruction of Troy, 35 after the return of the Heraclidae, 293
before the first Olympiad, A. M. 2935. The Archons for life.
Pausan. in Messeniciis.


19. After Codrus his death, the people took away the title of King and gave
the name of Archon with a diminished power to his Successor, who might be
called to an account for what he did, though he kept the principality during
life. This was Medon the son of Codrus, whom the rest of his brothers
despising, as weak, and lame, led out Colonies of the Ionians, Idem in Achaicis
and Strabo l. 14.
and some others ( Attica being now full) into Asia, The twelve Cities of Ionia.
and there founded the 12 famous Cities of the Ionians, viz. Ephesus, Miletus,
Priene, Colophon, Myus, Teos, Lebedus, Claromenae, Erythrae, Phocaea, Chius in
the Island Chios, and Samus in an Isle of the same name over against Ephesus,
which at first being subjected to several petty Princes, at length joined in
one body politic, and became very famous in after-ages. Twelve other Archons
succeeded Medon, named from him Medontidae, and in this condition the state
remained unaltered for 315 years, during which time there is little remarkable,
Eusebius.
either concerning Princes, or Commonwealth; only the time of Ariphron the
19th. Archon fell in with that of Sardanapalus, and Alcmaeon the son of
Aeschylus was the last, who dying when he had scarce reigned two years, the
people took another occasion to alter the Government; for being weary of this
perpetual power of their Princes, they confined it to the space of 10 years.
This change being made about the beginning of the first Olympiad, Archons for
ten years.
A. M. 3248.
Charops was the first that underwent it, in whose time Dionysius of
Halycarnassus will have Rome built. Six others succeeded him in the power thus
qualified, whereof Hippomenes the fourth in order was the last of the posterity
of Codrus, being deposed for his cruelty to his daughter, Suidas.
whom being defloured, he shut up with an Horse that had no meat given him, and
so caused to be devoured quick. The last of all the six was Eryxias, Eusebius.
who after he had Governed six years, either died, or being deposed for some
Crime, opened the Door to a new and greater innovation, after 70 years
continuance of the Decennal Government.

Annual Archons, nine in number.
20. The people still burning with a desire of greater liberty, A.M. 3318.
abolished quite the power of a single person, and instead of him made nine
Archons, Lege Sigonium de Repub. Athen. and Uttonem Emmium.
to be but annual, a new Election being to be made every year out of those who
for birth, wealth, or favor were most considerable in the City. The first in
order was properly called Archon, as principal of the College, and Eponymus,
because he signed the Calendar, and all things that fell out in that year were
said to be done, he being Archon. He had the care of their superstition, to him
it belonged to take Cognizance of differences arising about inheritances, as
also betwixt Husband and Wife, Parents and their Children, and Kinsfolks one
amongst another: Moreover, he took care of Orphans, and assigned them
Guardians. The second in order had the name of King, who taking care also of
another part of their superstition, determined causes, both Civil and Criminal,
or referred them to the greater Courts of Judicature. The third was called
Polemarchus, who besides the charge of some religious customs, had that of War
committed to him (whence he had his name); was General of the Armies abroad,
and at home the Judge of strangers. The other six were termed Thesmothetae,
being keepers of the Laws, or Customs, Judges in several Cases, and had power
to commit to prison all suspicious persons. These were their distinct Offices.
Altogether they had Authority to assemble the people, as the Kings, and other
Archons in former times, and to resolve with them about public business.

21. Such were the improvements of that liberty, which Theseus bestowed on the
people: But though they seemed great, yet were they not arrived at that height
as to satisfy the heady multitude offended with the too great power of the
Nobler and Richer sort; and which finding it self aggrieved with the many
inconveniences that arose for want of Laws (the sentence of the Magistrate, or
Judge being the only Law) many grudges and discords thence arose, which so far
prevailed, as that after 50 years, power was given to one Draco, Draco.
a man honest and wise, but of austere severity, to make Laws. Many he framed,
reformed the Court of the Ephetae, A.M. 3381.
which he made to consist of 51 persons, not under 50 years of age, who were to
judge of murders, and such like Crimes. But so severe were his constitutions
concerning manners (judging no less than death to the least offense) that as
they were by Demas said to be written in blood, so in process of ti^e they
grew intolerable, Plutarch. in Solone.
and little, or no relief had the poorer sort against the power of the great
ones, with the usury of whom they were even exhausted: Hence grew great
disturbances in the Commonwealth, the Commons hated the Nobility, and the
Nobility feared the Commons; nothing but desolation seemed to attend the State,
some being earnest for a Popular Government, others for an O^igarchie, and
others for a middle way. These tempered, and poised the other two parties; but
nothing at length seemed to avail, except all the whole power should be put
into the hands of one, and a plain Tyranny erected as the only sufficient
remedy for these desperate distempars. The common sort were hot for an equal
division of the public grounds now in the hands of the rich, and fit to make
themselves an head, and do it by force; but the most prudent sort taking notice
of Solon, Solon.
now very eminent, a man of unblameable life, and unbyassed by the interest of
either party; him they besought, having sufficient wisdom, to compose these
differences of the distracted Commonwealth; offering him the power and command
of all.

How he became eminent.
22. A year or two before those great disturbances, happened that which give a
rise to the eminency of Solon, and as well out of respect to the Commonwealth,
as in relation to him, must be recited briefly. Plutarch. and Diogenes Laertius
in vita Solo it is, Polyaenus Stratagem. l. 1.
The Island Salamine lying not far from Athens, had of late time revolted to
the Inhabitants of Megara, and for the recovery of it several attempts had been
made with such bad success, that a Law was preferred whereby it was ordained
Capital for any man thenceforth to move about it. Solon considering the
consequence hereof, counterfeited himself mad, and going into the place of
public meeting, began, as the people came about him, to say a company of odd
conceited Verses, whereby he so moved them, that they repealed the Law, and
decreed another expedition against the Megarians, ordaining him their Captain
therein. Solon sailing toward Colias, where the Athenian women were keeping
the Feast of Ceres, sent one to the Megarians, who counterfeiting himself a
fugitive should tell them, that now at this place they might easily surprise
the women. This being done, he sends them away, and in their rooms and clothes,
left there a company of beardlesse young men, who being provided of Daggers,
stabbed the Megarians when they came to seize on their prey, and so by this
plot (which several Authors say was executed by Pisistratus though devised by
Solon) the Athenians again recovered the Island. Solon proved it to belong to
Athens, Frontinus Strat. l. 4. c. 7. Justin. 212. Aeneas Poliorcet. l. 4.
for that Philaeus the son of Eurysaces, and Grandson to Ajax Telamonius,
being made free of the City, gave it unto the Athenians; and because that such
as were buried there, lay with their faces to the West, according to the
Athenian custom, whereas the Megarians buried their dead in a careless manner,
not regarding any such position.

23. Solon having got much credit by the success of this enterprise, procured
such to be called to an account, as had been guilty of the death of Cylon.
Herod. l. 5.
This man being famous for his victory at the Olympic Games affected the
Tyranny of Athens, and endeavoring to seize on the Castle, failed therein, and
fled for refuge to the image of Minerva, whence the Magistrates giving him
hopes of life, took him and his companions, and notwithstanding put them to
death. This now was accounted a great injury offered to the goddess, and such,
as both the actors thereof, their posterity and Country were esteemed as
contaminate, and liable to heavy punishment. Solon persuaded them to submit to
trial, and 300 Judges were appointed out of the chiefest persons, who condemned
them to banishment. Whilst this was adoing the Megarians fell upon the
Athenians, took Nisaea, and recovered Salamis: strange sights also appeared,
whereat the City was afrighted, and their Prophets told them that certain
Crimes were committed, which must be expiated. For this cause Epimenides a
famous Philosopher (whom some reckon amongst the number of the seven wisemen
in the room of Periander) was sent for out of Greece to cleanse the City; a
plague having also fallen upon it at this time, as Diogenes Laertius writes in
his life. Several Altars upon this occasion he caused to be made, as amongst
the rest one Cicero de Legibus lib. 2.
to Contumely (or Reproach) and another to Impudence. At Isiodorus lib. 4.
Epist. 69.
this time also it is thought that the Altar was erected to the unknown God,
they having received no benefit by making addresses to their known ones, but
present ease as soon as this Altar and a Temple of the same dedication were
made and used. One Hieron. in Comment. ad Titum.
says this was the Inscription: To the gods of Asia, Europe, and Africa, to
gods unknown and strange; Beza.
another that it ran after this manner: To the gods of Asia, Europe, and
Africa, to the unknown and strange god, in the singular number. But these
calamities increasing public discontents, made the assistance of Solon the
more desirable.

24. He feared much to undertake so difficult a task as a setlement; and as for
the Tyranny (so then it was termed) he refused it absolutely; Lege Plutarch in
Solone. Aristot. lib. 2. Politic. Julius Pollux lib. 8. A.M. 3411.
though his friends persuaded him that by his moderation and good demeanor he
might easily change this odious name into that of a Kingdom. But being elected
Archon after Philombrotus, in the third year of the 46 Olympiad, some 93 years
after the last change of Government, and in the days of Nebuchadnezar, He
reformeth the Commonwealth.
King of Babylon, he set himself about the work of reformation, and first of
all eased the people of the great burden of their debts, whereby they redeemed
their bodies and estates; which act was in Greek called Sisachthea. Some have
thought that it was only of the interest, but others of the principal too,
alleging him to have forgiven 5 (some have said 15) talents that were owing to
himself. However, he made them more able to satisfy their Creditors by raising
the value of money, as of the Attick Mina from 75 drachms to 100. Then for the
settling of the Commonwealth; in way thereto, and in the first place he
abrogated all Draco's Laws, except that against murder, as too severe. The
four Tribes of the people he left as they were ordered by Erechtheus,
distinguished into Soldiers, Crafts-men, Husbandmen, and keepers of Goats;
but for that here was no distinction made according to estates, and it
concerned those that had most therein to take care of the Commonwealth, he also
divided the people into four Ranks, or Classes, according to their substance,
and out of the three first ordered all Magistrates to be chosen, the fourth and
last having equal Votes in the great Council, or Assembly of the whole body of
the State, in which lay the supreme power. The first was called Pentacosio
Medimni, the second was the Ordo Equestris, the third called Zeugitae, and the
fourth Thetae, Hereby he gave a right to the common sort to elect, and call to
account the Magistrates, to have an hand in making, and repealing Laws, and in
the highest Court of Judicature, by which equal temper he suppressed all these
factions that had lately risen. And yet, lest the multitude should be too much
elevated, A Senate of 400.
besides the Court of Areopagus he instituted a Senate of 400. (100 to be
chosen out of each Tribe) through which all things should pass into the great
Assembly, wherein nothing was to be debated, but what was offered from this
Council, elected a new every year.

25. The College of the nine Archons he left Elective as he found it; but
ordained that they should not be admitted to take their Oath, till they had
first in the Senate made proof of their descent, and the unblameablenesse of
their life (especially of their duty to their Parents) and then been approved
in the great Assembly, after which they were to take their Oath in the Kings
Gate, to keep the Laws, and accept of no bribes; Vide Ubbonem Emmium in
descript. Reip. Athen.
or if they should be thereof detected, then to erect at Delphos a Statue of
Gold of their own bigness: and the same Oath they were again to take as they
went up to the Castle, Crowned with Myrtle. Unto them severally he assigned
their Offices; for the most part as they were before, only more certain; and
for a reward of their good service, if after much, and through examination they
were found upright and faithful, they were to be chosen unto the Senate of
Areopagus, the College of the Archous being hereby constituted the seminary of
it. To this Council, Of Areopagus.
consisting of most grave, experienced, and upright men, an inspection was
given into all concernments of State, a power of preserving the Laws and
Customs, and also of reforming manners, in which particular they were so
severe, that once they condemned a boy, for a custom of pulling out the eyes of
Quails, as hereby betraying a bad disposition. They met ordinarily thrice a
month on Mars his hill (whence the Council had it is name) but extraordinarily
as occasion required, and then in the place called the King's Gallery. As for
the Council of State consisting of 400, it had power also to determine great
matters and controversies of it self, and if it saw it convenient, to report
them to the people. If the assent of the people was had, then passed it is acts
and constitutions into firm Laws; if not, they continued in force one year, and
no longer. To this Council moreover it belonged, to provide for such as were
grown poor, and were to be maintained by the public; to call all indebted to
the State to an account, and provide for the making of Galleys.

The Assembly of the People.
26. To the great Assembly of the people alone belonged the power of making and
nulling Laws, of Peace and War, sending Ambassadors, and giving the freedom of
the City. When they were met together they took an Oath, with a bitter
execration, to consult the best they could for the good of the Commonwealth.
Those that were above fifty years of age spoke first, and, after the business
was thoroughly debated, they signified their pleasure by holding up their hands.
Solon ordained that all the Laws should be reviewed once a year, being recited
by the Thesmothetae. But when any were to be abrogated, or new ones made, the
whole Assembly took not that matter of debate upon it self; but committed it to
the care of the most grave and prudent amongst them, chosen for that purpose,
and called Nomothetae, amongst which none were admitted, but such as had dealt
in the most important affairs. Before them five Orators (called Syndici)
pleaded concerning any Law that was to be abolished, which should not be done
without mature advice, lest thereby an occasion might be given to sedition and
innovation; and what was concluded by these Nomothetae, the body of the people
always approved. The Assembly was had ordinarily thrice in 35 days, at the
pleasure of the Council of State or 400; but extraordinarily upon occasion
called together, either by the same authority, of the Strategi or Generals for
War, and sometimes of the nine Archons.

Courts of Judicature.
27. For Courts of Judicature, besides the Areopagites formerly mentioned, there
was that of the Ephetae, founded, as its thought, by Demophon the Son of
Theseus, consisting at first of 50 Judges chosen out of Attica, and as many
from Argos; but Draco excluding the Strangers, made the number only 51
Citizens, and after him Solon tempering the rigor thereof, transferred thence
the more weighty matters to Areopagus, leaving the Judgment of casual homicide,
and lying in weight for life, in some cases to it. The causes brought in
thither were reported by the King or second Archon. There was another Court
most large and common, consisting of 500, 1000, or sometimes 1500 persons,
according to the occasion, chosen by lot out of all the Citizens of 30 years
old, and upwards. They judged of many, and often, of the greatest causes; and
this was called the Heliastick Council, becuase they sat in an open place
where the Sun shone. A fourth Court there was of Arbitrators, consisting of 220
chosen out of the Tribes, and being aequilly divided according to the number of
them, heard and determined their Causes. A fifth and least considerable there
was yet, made up of thirty persons at the first, afterward increased to forty,
going in circuit to the several sorts of people gathered by Theseus into one
City, heard and judged lesser matters. As for the Officers belonging to the
several Courts, the twelve men for imprisonment, and execution, with the
Officers of the several tribes, they are scarce to be mentioned by this Work.

Particular Laws.
28. For particular Laws. Solon knowing what a multitude of people inhabited
Athens, took such care for prevention of idleness, that he absolved any son
from the duty of maintaining his Father, fallen into povery, Plutarch in Solon.
that had not procured him to be instructed in some Trade: and the same liberty
he gave unto such as were born of Strumpets. He made a Law whereby he gave
leave to the people to make Testaments, which they never could do before; all
the estates of deceased persons going to the next Heir. He forbad women to have
any portions, lest marriages should be made for gain; yet succeeded they in the
inheritances of their Fathers, in default of issue Male. Some things about
Marriages and Adultery he decreed, which have been noted, and not unworthily,
as absurd. He commanded the Court of Areopagus, to take an account of all
persons how they lived, and punish those that could render none. He forbad all
native fruits, except that of the Olive, to be transported out of Attica. And
nothing is more memorable than this, that he deprived of all honor, and
rendered infamous those, that, in a time of faction and sedition in the City,
joined themseves to neither party, concluding, that such as were concerned for
the good of the Commonwealth, would according to their best apprehensions, side
with such as contended for it. His Laws he exposed to public view, that none
should pretend ignorance in them. He swear the People, Magistrates, and Senate,
to observe them for an hundred years, and the Archons, if they brake them, to
set up a Statue at Dephos, of their own bigness. Then to conclude his Work, he
reformed the Calender, much amiss at that time, and reduced the year into such
a form as was agreeable to the motion of the Sun.

Solon travelleth.
29. The work being over, there wanted not those who would both praise and
discommend it. Some would be amending it by addition, Idem ibid, and Herodotus
l. 1.
others by Substraction or change, so that plainly seeing what stir would be
about it, he got leave to travel for ten years; in which time he went into
Egypt, where he conversed with Amesis, and into Lydia, where he had that
notable conference with Croesus, before mentioned. But while he was abroad, the
City anew brake into factions. There were the Pediaeans headed by Lycurgus, the
Paralians by Megacles, and the Diacrians by Pisistratus, one who was descended
from Codrus the last King. To the later, a company of the poorer sort joined
themselves, such as were most inveterate against the rich, and although they
had not much to say against Solon's Laws, yet were they desirous of innovation,
hoping to be gainers therein. Things were in this posture when Solon returned
home, who being received with much honor, labored by his authority to take
off the ringleaders of the several factions, and reconcile them. Pisistratus
seemed to give ear to him, being a man of deep dissimulation, and so much apter
to deceive, in that no man appeared so great a friend to equality as he, and
therefore a greater Enemy to the change of the present Government. But Solon
quickly found him out; yet prosecuted him not with any open malice, but sought
to draw him from his designs by fair means, often professing, that no man was
more inclined to Virtue, or to make a good Common-wealth's-man, if the desire
of rule and sovereignty were but taken from him.

30. For all this, Pisistratus proceeded, and by his seeming readiness to
patronize the poorer sort against the rich, invaded the Tyranny. He wounded
himself and his Chariot-horses, and drove into the Forum, Plutarch ut supra.
making show of an escape from great danger, and desired of the people that he
mignt have a guard assigned him to defend his person. He so far prevailed, as
to have fifty persons allowed him, though Solon stepping to him, told him he
did not well to act Ulysses in Homer, A. M. 3425.
(who, as he counterfeited himself wounded to circumvent his Enemies, so did he
the same, that he might cheat his fellow Citizens) and opposed the thing as
much as possible. Having obtained the liberty of so many followers, he then
took leave to increase their number, and thereby got the Castle into his hands,
at which the City was much startled. Solon went into the Assembly of the
people, Pistratus invadeth the tyranny.
where upbraiding them with their former stupidity, he earnestly exhorted them
yet now to pluck up that tyranny by the roots, which before they might have so
easily prevented, but not at all prevailing, such consternation had seized upon
men's spirits, he got him to his house, and laying his weapons before his
Court-gate, said, he had discharged his duty toward his Country, and
thenceforth kept himself quiet, continuing in the City, though his friends
moved him to fly for his life. But such a reverence bore Pisistratus not only
to his person, but also to his Laws, that he retained still the most of them in
their former vigor. A few he made himself, as one for maintenance of maimed
Soldiers (though some attribute this also to Solon, and say, the occasion was
given by one Thesippus) and another against idleness, whereby he caused the
ground to be more diligently tilled, and the City more quiet than usual. By
these two he effectually provided for his own interest, obliging the Soldiers
by the one, and by dispersing the people into the Country through the other
(under praetence of preventing idleness, and keeping up tillage) cutting off
from them all occasion of plotting any thing prejudicial to him. For he knew
well, that as Theseus his gathering them all up into one Town, conduced to the
preservation of that liberty he meant to bestow on them, so this contrary way
tended as much to the keeping up of his arbitrary power.

31. Being seized of the Sovereignty, he carried it exceeding well to People,
Magistrates, and Laws, and much adorned the City, of which he held possession
about three years. Then Megacles and Lycurgus, with their parties, Expelled.
so prevailed, as they banished both him and his tyranny, Herodot. l. 1. cap.
59.
and being condemned, his goods were set to sale, of which none but Callias the
Son of Phoenippus would adventure to buy any. But not long it was, before those
that cast him out, became the means of his restitution; for falling out amongst
themselves, Megacles, upon promise that he would marry his daughter, covenanted
to bring it about, and effected it by a strange and ridiculous wile. There was
a woman in the City named Phya, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 2. Ext. exemp. 2.
almost four cubits tall, but otherwise of tolerable beauty: her being armed,
curiously dressed and seated in a Chariot, they drove into the City, sending
some before to proclaim, that the Athenians were to receive Pisistratus, whom
their goddess Minerva esteeming above all mortals, now in her own person
reduced into her Castle. This being acted with wonderful confidence, the
Citizens were so far besotted, as to adore this woman for Minerva, and received
Pisistratus as brought by her; whereby he recovered the tyranny about five
years after his expulsion. Restored.


32. He married the daughter of Megacles, according to agreement; but having
several sons already in the flower of their age; and Megacles being supposed
guilty of that heinous crime about the death of Cylon, Herodot. l. 1.
not yet expiated, lest he should put them beside their just expectations, and
his family be attainted, he neglected to use her as his wife. She concealing
this for some time, at length revealed it to her mother, who told it to
Megacles. He took it in great disdain, and reconciled himself to his Enemies,
consulting again how he might out him, Forced out again,
which Pisistratus understanding, departed of his own accord out of Attica, and
went to Eretria a City of Euboea in the third year of the 54th Olympiad, about
ten years after his restitution. Ten other years he continued in exile, at the
end whereof, by the advice of his eldest Son Hippias, he labored again for a
recovery of his principality. Scraping together all the money he could make,
he drew the Thebans and Argives into confaederacy with him, and got Marathon a
Town of Attica into his hands, whither flocked to him from Athens and the
Country round about those of his Faction. He marched then against the City, and
put such to flight as came out against him, And again recovereth the tyranny.
but fearing they might rally again, he gave order to his Sons to ride after
and bid them fear nothing, so they would but get them to their own homes, and
be quiet. Thus recovered he the tyranny once more, which then he labored to
establish, not by the shedding of blood (from which he wholly abstained, and
therefore has the best report of any of his condition) but by seeking
confaederates, making himself a considerable revenew, and taking the Sons of
those his Enemies, that remained in the City, for Hostages, sending them into
the Isle Naxus to be bept. Not long after his restitution he died (for his
whole reign including the exile amounted but to 33 years) about the time that
Croesus King of Lydia was overthrown by Cyrus, in the second year of the 57th
Olympiad, A. M. 3460.
and the 3460th year of the World.

SECT. 5.
33. This only could be reprehended in Pisistratus, that he had cast the yoke
upon his Country. For such an one it was as had no great weight in it, more
than what lay in the minds of the Athenians, not accustomed since the days of
Theseus to stoop to Sovereignty. Plutarch and Diogenes Laertius.
Though he commanded them to apply themselves to husbandry (contrary to what
Theseus had done, who gathered them out of the Country into the City) that he
might take them of from plotting against him, yet required he no other Tribute
than the Tenths of their profit, which had wont to be paid to the former
Kings. He killed no man, neither banished any; he made spoil of no man's
fortune, or estate, injured none by any contumelious demeanor, abused neither
the one Sex nor the other through any libidinous carriage. The Laws of Solon
with the order of Magistrates he left as he found; and though he had most cause
to be averse to him, yet detained he him in Town when he would have been gone,
desiring his counsel and advice for the better Government of the Commonwealth,
contenting himself only in having a power greater than the Laws, in which
respect Cicero was wont to call Julius Caesar, who trod in his steps, by the
name of Pisistratus. Gellius l. 6. c. ult. Cicero 3. de Oratore. Aelian lib.
13. c. 14.
He was as learned as any in his time, and deserved very well of learning,
being the first that erected a public Library. Whereas Homer's Verses before
this were scattered abroad and confused, he purchased with Gold whatsoever of
his works he could come by, and setting on work the ablest Grammarians, put
them into that order of Iliads and Odysses, in which they are now found; to
which work Solon is said to have contributed his diligence. He had two sons,
Hippias and Hipparchus, to whom he left the principality of Athens. They for
many years reigned, as lovingly betwixt themselves, so with moderation toward
their subjects, till the younger being slain by Harmodius and Aristogiton, upon
occasion of some injury supposed to be offered by him to the sister of
Harmodius, the other exasperated hereat grew severe toward the Athenians, and
for that was expelled by them four years after his brothers death, and his
Tyranny was utterly subverted. But these things falling in with the reign of
Darius, the son of Hystaspes, belong properly to another place.

SECT. V. The most ancient Kingdom and Commonwealth of Lacedaemon.
The first inbitants of Lacedaemon.
1. THis Country was most antienly inhabited by a people called Pausanias in
initio Laconicorum and Messenicorum.
Leleges, so named from Lelex their King, said to be an indigena, or a natural
of the place, because it was obscure from what Country he, and his people
came. From him this Region was called Lelegia, and Lelegis. He left two sons,
Miles and Polycaon, whereof the former succeeded him in his Kingdom, and the
later marrying Messene, the daughter of Tryopas King of Argos, went, and
subdued that Country, which from her he named Messenia. Miles was succeeded by
his son Eurotas, who perceiving the water to stand in the grounds, drew a Ditch
from it to the Sea, which draining the earth, continued to be a River, bearing
his name. He, A.M. 2598.
dying without issue-Male, left his Kingdom to Lacedaemon, the son of Jupiter,
and Taygeta, from which woman the Mount Taygetus took its name. For Lacedaemon
married Sparte, Sparta, whence so called.
the daughter of Eurotas, and when he came first to the Kingdom named the
Country from himself, and to the City which he built gave his wives name; it
being ever after most properly called Sparta, when any distinction was made
betwixt Country and City; although it be also sometimes read Lacedaemon, as
in L. 1. (...)
Thucydides, and Latin Livius l. 38.
Authors. As for the Inhabitants of both places, those of the City are by
Herodotus, Xenophon, and Diodorus called Spartiati, in opposition to those that
lived up and down in the Country, comprehended under the name of
Lacedaemonians. The City was built in the days of Crotopus, King of Argos,
and Amphytrion of Athens, 303 years before the destruction of Troy, 711 before
the first Olympiad. A.M. 2518.

2. Amyclas the son, and Successor of Lacedaemon Pausan. ut supra.
begat three sons, which are recorded; Argalus, Cynortas, and Hyacinthus, of
which the later, as Apollodorus writes, being for his beauty the delight of
Apollo, was killed by him at unawares, when they were at play. Argalus
succeeded his father, and left his Kingdom to his brother Cynortas, whose son
and Successor was Oebalus, from whence the Country was also called Servius ad
Georg. 4. Apollod. l. 3. Pausan. A. M. 2646. Diodorus Siculus.
Oebalia, and Castor and Pollux, by Statius, Oebalidae fratres. On his first
wife he begat Hypocoon, and Icarion, and on his second Gorgophone (the daughter
of Perseus by Andromeda, Tyndareus.
and widow of Perieres) his son Tyndareus. The former and later after his
death, contended about the succession, and Tyndareus having the worst of it,
was constrained to banish himself for many years, till at length he was
restored by Hercules (who slew Hippocoon and his ten sons, with a great number
of the Spartans) but on this condition delivered was the Kingdom to him, to
keep it for Hercules his own Children, and restore it when it should be
demanded. Tyndareus of Leda, the daughter of Thestius an Aetolian, Castor and
Pollux. Helena.
begat Castor and Pollux (called Dioscuri, as the supposed offspring of
Jupiter) and on her, or some other, a daughter named Helena. The two sons being
famous in their lives, grew more renowned after their death, having the esteem
of gods, and from them was named the constellation of Gemini. Helena was she
that made such a broil in the World, being first stolen by Theseus, afterward
married to Menelaus, and from him stolen again by Paris, who kept her till the
destruction of Troy, as has been showed. Her two brothers dying before their
father, Menelaus.
Menelaus with her obtained the Kingdom of Lacedaemon, through the special
favor of Tyndareus, A. M. 2809.
who from amongst 29 suitors, (all Princes of Greece) made choice of him. Lest
those great ones should fall out amongst themselves, he bound them all with an
Oath to be Defendants to whomsoever he would give her; which he did by the
advice of Ulysses, upon promise to assist him in his suit being one of the
number. This we do not find that he did; but in way of requital procured for
him Penelope, the daughter of Icarius.

3. Menelaus on a slave begot two base sons; but by Helena had only a daughter
named Hermione, which he married first to Orestes, the son of his brother
Agamemnon, and again taking her from him, gave her to Pyrrhus the son of
Achilles. It Is thought that Orestes killed Pyrrhus; for after his death he
presently resumed his wife, and Menelaus once dead, he added the Kingdom of
Lacedaemon to his other two of Mycenae and Argos; for the Lacedaemonians were
more willing to receive him as their Prince, than Nicostratus and Megapenthes
the bastard sons of Menelaus. Tisamenus his son succeeded him in his Kingdoms,
out of all which he was outed by the Heraclidae, or posterity of Hercules, as
before was showed, by the help of the Doors; with him the Achaeans being also
banished, who were Originally of Pthiotis in Thessaly; for Achaeus their
Progenitor was the son of Xuthus, Grandson to Deucalion by his son Hellen. The
descent of the Heraclidae. Procles and Eurysthenes obtain in Sparta.
Argos fell to Temenus by lot; A. M. 2901.
Crespontes got Messene; and Lacedaemon became the portion of Procles and
Eurysthenes the sons of Aristodemus, who was slain at Delphos (for Pausanias
judges this the most probable opinion) by the fraud of Pylas, when they were
preparing for the expedition. Thenceforth the Lacedaemonians were accounted
Doors; who, if formerly they were part of the Achaeans, and going to Troy, at
their return were expelled by those that remained at home, and so forced to
seek out new seats, and received the name of Doors from their Captain, as Plato
writes; then had they full as much right to the Country as the Heraclidae
themselves, the title of whom we have formerly shown. this change happened 80
years after the destruction of Troy, as Thucydides gathers; 327 before the
first Olympiad, in the days of Melanthus, father to Codrus the last King of
Athens, the year of the World 2901.

4. The two brothers Eurysthenes and Procles were Twins, and that so like, as
their mother not knowing them asunder, was ignorant which was the eldest, Lege
Herodot. l. 6. c. 52.
and therefore the Lacedaemonians made them both Kings with equal power: Both
Kings with equal power.
only because Eurysthenes was first washed and fed, he was vulgarly accounted
the elder; and though their families were of the same dignity, yet was his
accounted something the more honorable. In their minority Theras their Uncle
by the Mother's side managed the Kingdom for them, in obeying whom they ever
agreed; but in nothing else, though Twins, and so like one another. This
difference was in a manner propagated to their posterity, which continued on
both sides for many Generations downwards by the names of Eurysthenidae and
Proclidae, and being partakers in what is commonly accounted to bear no
corrivals, no wonder it is that emulation should be continued, but much that
for so long it kept within the bounds of civil concord. After these two
followed their two sons: Helotae made slaves.
Agis for Eurysthenes (from whom the Kings of this family were also called
Agidae) and Sous for Procles. Plutarch. in Lycurgo.
In their time it happened that the Inhabitants of Helos (a Town built by Helius
the youngest son of Perseus) were made slaves (both they and their posterity)
to the Lacedaemonian State; Strabo l. 8. page 363. and 365.
for whereas they as well as others had formerly the freedom of the City, and
were Members of the Commonwealth, Agis took away that privilege, and ordered
them to pay Tribute to Sparta, which refusing to do, and standing out, they
were thus punished; all other slaves to that State, though of what Original
soever, being called after them Helotae. Agis dying, was succeeded by
Echestratus his son; and Sous some years after, Eusebius.
left for his Successor his son Eurytion (called otherwise Eurypon, and
Euryphon) from whom the Kings of that family were also named Eurytionidae.
Echestratus was followed by Labotas his son, and Eurytion by Prytanis, in whose
reign the first quarrel arose betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Argives: Labotas
being dead, Doryssus his son succeeded him the Kingdom, and in like manner
after the death of Prytanis, Eunomus his son continued the succession of that
family.

5. After Doryssus followed Agesilaus, A.M. 3019. Eusebius. in Chronico.
Eunomus of the family of Procles still continuing, who of a former wife begat
Polydectes, and of a later Lycurgus born 150 years before the first Olympiad.
Archelaus, the son of Agesilaus succeeded his father, Plutarch. ut supra.
and was accompanied in the Government by Polydectos, who dying without issue
left his inheritance to Lycurgus his brother. Lycurgus then governed as King,
Lycurgus.
but not long after his brothers wife proved to be with Child. She sent to
acquaint him therewith, and to tell him, that if he would marry her she would
make away the infant. He detesting from his heart such Villainy, yet returned
her no denial, but desired her not to practice any thing upon her self whereby
she might come in danger, for when the Child was once born he would take care
for the destruction of it: and by this deceit he drew her on till the time of
her Travel. When that came he sent some to observe her, with command, if it
were a Girl to deliver it to the women, but if a Boy, to bring it strait unto
him. As he was supping with the Magistrates, a Boy was born and brought to him,
who taking him in his arms, told the Spartans that there was their King, and
presently put him in the Royal seat. And, A.M. 3107.
because all men wonderfully rejoiced at so strange a thing, admiring his
Magnanimity and Justice, he gave to the Child the name of Charilaus.

Tutor to Charilaus.
6. Then as Tutor to this his young Nephew, he managed public affairs for some
eight months; but there wanted not those of the Queens kindred (especially her
brother) who reproached him to his face, as intending no good to the Child,
which she also now stuck not to say, incensed by his repulse in the matter of
marriage. He took this in very ill part, Lege Plutarchum and Strab. lib. 10.
page 482.
and fearing that some inconvenience might follow these suspicions that were
begotten by his adversaries in the breasts of several persons, resolved to cut
them off by Travel, wherein he purposed to continue so long, till his brothers
son should come to maturity, and had begotten an Heir for his Kingdom. He went
first unto Crete, Travelleth.
where he made observations of the Laws and Customs of that Commonwealth
instituted by Minos (which afterward he made his pattern) and whence he sent
Thaletas an Eminent Lyrick Poet of those times, by his charming Verses to stir
up the Lacedaemonians to Love and Unity. From Crete he passed over into Asia
(that he might compare the luxury thereof with the Cretian severity, and as
good Physic make up a temper out of both) where he found Homer's Verses, kept
as it seems by the Sons of Creophylus (the Poet being dead not above thirty
years before) which he then copied out, and bringing them home, first made them
public in Greece, though in great disorder; in which they continued till the
days of Pisistratus. The Egyptians reported that he came down into their
Country, and there learnt the distinction of Military men from Artificers, and
those of other callings. But whilst he thus improved himself abroad; he was
much wanted at home, and often earnestly solicited to return, by all parties.

7. For great need there was of his pretense to heal the distempers into which
the State was now fallen, the heady multitude having by its desire of loose
liberty brought all things into confusion. The first Government till the coming
in of the Heraclidae, for any thing that can be found, was merely absolute, and
afterward we do not find that the Regal power was diminished, till Eurypon, or
Eurytion most imprudently let loose the reigns of Government. This gave
occasion to the Rabble to fly high in disobedience, and contest with his
Successors when they endeavored the recovery of their old Authority. Many
great tumults and seditions were hence raised, insomuch that Eunomus the
Grandson of Eurypon, father of Lycurgus, and fifth from Procles, was murdered
in one of them with a butchers knife. These distempers increasing, Plutarch.
and the Kings not being strong enough to rule the dissolute Rabble, nothing
but absolute ruin and destruction was expected, when Lycurgus returning home
(of whose prudence and integrity they had had formerly large demonstrations)
alone seemed able to give any hope of better things.

8. He thought this opportunity, was not be neglected, now that all were in so
good a mind, and resolved to use his utmost endeavor for an alteration. At his
return he anew modelleth the State.
Herein this was the scope he aimed at, to make Provision for equality, which
he thought to be the best Nurse of Concord, and the Bulwark of all societies.
To accustom the People from their tender years to obey the Laws and
Magistrates, and hereby to render them more inclinable to live justly and
frugally, to bridle all corrupt affections, endure labor and hardship, refuse
no danger for the public good, nor death it self if the case required. Having
therefore a design to make a full evacuation of all bad humors, as he
accounted them, and knowing how full of difficulty and danger this might prove
to the body politic, men's minds much loathing so violent a Purgation, he
considered that they were apt to be led by a show of Religion, and having
learnt how Minos pretended to have received his Laws from Jupiter, with whom he
conversed in a Cave, he resolved to go to Delphos, and make use of that Oracle
to the same advantage. There was he received with encouraging words, saluted,
Beloved of the gods a god, rather than a man, and received in an Oracle the
frame of a Commonwealth, which bringing home, he called Rhetra to gain the more
Authority to it. At his return he first consulted with his intimate friends,
and drew others on by degrees, till having made a party he ordered thirty
principal persons to go Armed into the Marketplace betimes in the morning,
that they might thereby strike a terror into their Adversaries. A.M. 3122.
Charilaus at this much affrighted, as thinking it some plot against himself,
fled to Chalciaecum (the Temple of Minerva much spoken of) where he took
Sanctuary; but understanding how things were, came forth and joined himself to
his Uncle, being of a most sweet and mild disposition.

9. The Rhetra according to which he framed his Model was of this tenor. Let
him build a Temple of Jupiter Syllanius and Minerva Syllania: Let him divide
the People into Phylae and Obae, ordain thirty Senators, with the Archagetae:
then let him call together the People betwixt Babyces and Cnacion, so let him
propose concerning matters, or null them. Gamodan, Gorian, etc. In these words
of the Oracle, says Plutarch, Obae, and Phylae (that is Tribes) signify
certain parts, into which the People was to be divided: the Kings are called
Archagetae, as Captains: and to assemble the People, is in Greek expressed by
apollazein, for that he attributed the beginning and cause of the Commonwealth
to Apollo Pythius. Babycas and Cnacion is at this day called Oenuns. Aristotle
writes, that Cnacion is the name of the River, and Babycas of the Bridge. In
the middle betwixt these the Concio was assembled, though there was neither
Gallery nor any other accommodation, because he thought, that those things
conduced nothing to Council, but rather hindered, for that Statues, Pictures,
the attiring Rooms of Theaters, and withdrawing-rooms of the Court, being too
curiously adorned, made those that met light and vain, diverting them with toys
and idle thoughts. The multitude being assembled into one place, power was not
granted no any of the People to propose: they could only enact what the
Senators and Kings had propounded. But in after times the common People
perverting and wresting, their suffrages, Polydorus and Theopompus then Kings,
added this to the Rhetra: But if the people resolve upon any bad thing, let it
be lawful for the Senators and Kings to dissent; that is, says Plutarch, let
them not ratify it, but forthwith dismiss the Assembly; seeing the People
depraveth the Decree, and alters what is best. As for Gamodan and Gorian,
Plutarch does not interpret them, and it cannot be understood what they mean.
Another Rhetra was this; that they should use no written Laws: another
concerning expenses, commanded, that the roof of every house should be made
with Axe only, and the doors with a Saw: and a third ordained, that War should
not be often made upon the same Enemies: lest learning to defend themselves,
they should thereby be made warlike: which afterward was laid to the charge of
Agesilaus in behalf of the Thebans.

The Kings.
10. Having prepared all things for his purpose, he dissolved the Government of
his forefathers. For though he left two Kings as he found, with the same right
of succession, yet took he away almost their whole power, instituting a Senate
to restrain them, and be an equal poise betwixt them and the People, to reduce
both parties into order. Without the Authority of this Senate the Kings could
not decree nor undertake any thing of consequence. Lege Plutarchum in Lycurgo.

Nic. Cragium Ubbonem Emmium and Doctiss. Dr. Heylin lib. cui titulus, The
Stumbling Block of Disobedience discovered, etc.


He ordered they should fit in the chiefest places as Members of the Senate,
first speak their minds, and give their suffrages; but conclude nothing without
consent of the Major part. All Magistrates, till the impudent Ephori took so
much upon themselves rose up to, and did them reverence. Their employment was
to take care of Sacrifices, to command the Pythii, whereof two constantly
attended them, to be sent to consult the Oracle of Apollo Pythius at Delphos;
they took care of Ambassadors and other Strangers, of the causes of women that
were Heirs; adoptious also they had charge of, so as none could be made without
them. They gave answer to Ambassadors, and looked to the repairing of
highways. This was their condition at home, which amounting to no more than
titulary Royalty, after that the present Kings had either given away their just
right (as Plutarch tells us, that Charilaus joined with his Uncle) or were
deprived of it by the treason and violence of Lycurgus and his party; the
attempt of some men is as ridiculous as seditious, who taking it for granted
that the Popular Villains, the Ephori, were 130 years after this set up by the
People to restrain the Kings (which yet cannot be granted, though most have so
thought) thence would draw a precedent to the disadvantage of true Royal
Majesty. For these Kings were not real Kings as to Prerogatives of Majesty,
being scarcely so much as a Duke of Venice.

11. Abroad they were the Generals of Armies, which were left to their
ordering, or disposal; so as no Council of War, or any in Commission could
thwart their Commands; they only receiving orders from the State, for their
expeditions and returns. They had Judges to accompany them, a General of the
Horse, four Polemarchi, besides Colonels, and other inferior Officers, whose
advice, as well as help, in the War they might use, but were at their own
disposal, and obnoxious to none of them. And what is here spoken of a King, is
to be extended to his Protector, Guardian, or Tutor in his minority, by the
Lacedaemonians called Prodicus. Such were chosen to this trust and charge, as
were nearest of kin by the father's side, to the Orphans, and consequently the
next Heirs, that whose was the hope, his also might be the burden. This
appears by several examples of Lycurgus himself, Aristodemus, and Pausanias,
to be related in their due places; which though it be not admitted in other
Commonwealths, and perhaps with good reason, yet these Prodici having all in
their power, scarcely ever any of them was found to have played false, or, by
treachery toward their Pupills, gone about to make way for their own
preferment.

The Senate.
12. The Senate consisted of 28 persons, besides the Kings, not under 60 years
of age. The first were such as had assisted Lycurgus, Lege Plutarch. in
Lycurgo. Platon. de legib. l. 3:

Xenoph. ut supra.

Aristot. Polit. lib.

Demosth. adversus Leptinem.


and been helpful to him in the setlement, whom he ordered to continue for
life, except they committed any offense worthy of seclusion, conceiving it not
safe for this his Commonwealth, to have a frequent change of Senators, which
the Kings might improve to their own interest. Into this second rank of
dignity, were none to be admitted, but such as had well deserved of the State
by good Service or eminent virtue; that so it might be a reward to old men, and
an encouragement to the younger sort, to be conformable to the Laws. They had
in effect the whole executive power in their hands. They had the Supreme power
of Judicature, wherein they proceeded not rashly, but with great advice and
delay, deferring judgment most commonly for some days, till they had heard
both parties, and received the testimonies of witnesses: yet it was lawful
afterward to appeal from them to the people. They were not liable to be called
to an account for whatsoever they did; which immunity, as exceeding the
moderation of a Commonwealth, Politic. l. 2. c. 8.
(together with their suing to the people for their places, whereas able and
honest men should be sought for) amongst other things is taxed by Aristotle.

13. A Reverend and most Learned man observes, Dr. Heylin.
that whatever the Kings lost, the People got little by the alteration, being
left out of all employment in affairs of State, and forced to yield obedience
unto thirty Masters, whereas before they had but two. For the Kings and Senate
assembled, and dismissed them when they pleased, and propounded to them what
they thought convenient. For the People so assembled it was not lawful to
propound any thing to be debated or determined, nor to deliver their opinion in
the point propounded: there being nothing left to them but to testify their
assent to the Propositions made, either by the Kings or Senate. But the cunning
flattery of the Ephori in after times much enlarged the power of the People. By
the appointment of Lycurgus it met at the River Cnacion (afterward called
Oenuns) by the Bridge Babycas. Sometimes only the Spartans, Plutarch. in
Lycurgo.

Xenoph. Hellenic. lib. 3. and 6.


or Inhabitants of the City met together, and then it was called the Lesser
Assembly; but otherwhiles the whole body of the Lacedaemonians gathered
together out of all Laconia, that was free of the Commonwealth, which went by
the name of Greater Meeting or Assembly, called then simply (...).
Ecclesia.

14. Having reduced the Government to this Antimonarchical pass, Plutarch. in
vita Lycurgi. Et in Compar. Lycurgi and Numae. Et in Agide and alibi.
he rightly judged it could not subsist without levelling. He therefore
attempted a thing most difficult, An equality of possessions.
and even beyond all hope of attaining. Many that had got much wealth in the
late turbulent times, he persuaded to part with most of it, and to an equal
division of the grounds, urging, that no inequality was to be amongst them, but
what vice and virtue made; and what by arguments drawn from convenience, as
others from necessity that lay upon them from the indigent and displeased
multitude, he brought his design to perfection. Then divided he the grounds
into 30000 lots, or equal portions, whereof 9000 he laid to the City of Sparta
it self, (the number of Citizens amounting to so many) and distributed the rest
to the other Lacedaemonians inhabiting the Country. Each portion contained so
much as to maintain a family in a frugal way, and no more. To the Kings a
larger quantity was assigned for the maintenance of their degree, so much as
might serve with moderation, and not make them abound in riches.

Iron money.
15. That he might take away covetousness, and the desire of hoarding up
wealth, he forbade the use of Silver and Gold Coin, putting in the room thereof
Iron money, of which a great quantity amounting but to little value, no
considerable payment could be made, without the help of an Horse or Wagon.
Hereby it came to pass, that they were unfit to Traffic with other people, no
Merchandise being imported, which he herein aimed at, as well as by another Law
made expressly against the continuance of strangers in the City; fearing more
the contagion of the mind in his people than that of the body. And eitherwayes
to prevent Luxury, Plutarch.
he forbade that any man should eat at home by himself, or with his family, or
to make any private feasts, without some special occasion; but ordered them to
sup together in common, without any distinction of Dignity or Fortune, by
fifteen together. Each one sent in his Provision monthly; as Meal, Wine,
Cheese, and Figs, with a little money to buy other victuals. If any had killed
Venison, or offered Sacrifice, whereby any flesh was gotten, the ancient men
left that to the younger sort, and contented themselves with Broaths, of which
a black sort was most used, of no pleasant taste to such as were not accustomed
to eat it. As for fish, and all kinds of delicate acates, they were utterly
forbidden. None were to eat or drink beyond such a proportion as sufficed
nature: the Kings indeed were allowed a double Mess, but this was, that they
might have opportunity to pleasure and countenance others with part of it. The
Phyditia, or Syssitia.
All came to these public meetings (which first were called Andria after the
name of those of the Cretians, from whom Lycurgus borrowed this constitution,
afterward Phyditia and Syssitia) with their Arms, and after Supper were to go
home without Torch or Candle, though never so dark, that they might learn, if
need should be, to make the same shift when they lay abroad in the field. All
stately buildings he forbade, and all Trades that tended any way to the
maintenance of Luxury or Excess.

16. But to have these customs durable, it being highly necessary to breed up
the youth in suitable Discipline, he also provided for that in ample manner.
The education of boys.
The first thing previous to education was very unnatural and cruel; for the
Infant as soon as born, was carried to the most ancient of that Tribe to be
viewed; and if it was found any way deformed, weak, or sickly, whereby might be
judged that it would rather prove burthensom than beneficial to the
Commonwealth, then was it to be exposed upon the craggy places of the Hill
Taygetus, there to take such quarter as wild beasts, fowls, hunger, and cold
would affoard it. But if it seemed strong, lusty, and worthy to live, Plutarch.
in Lycurgo.
then was it restored to its Parents to be nursed. And nursed it was very
harshly, not used to any delicate, or costly feeding, and so used to darkness
and solitariness as not to be afrighted at them. When the Children were seven
years old they were not committed to any mercenary Schoolmasters, after the
custom of other people, but to the care of the public, being distributed into
several Companies, over which some that were most fierce, hardy, and prudent
amongst them were set as Captains, who governed them in their sports and
exercises, and to whose correction they submitted. There were also most
commonly some men present at their exercises, who would rebuke and chastise
them, observing which had the most notable spirits; Lycurgus leaving it in
charge to the Lacedaemonians to take care of other men's Children as of their
own. All manner of ways were they inured to labor and pains. Their hair was
cut close to their heads, they went barefooted from their Infancy, fought with
one another naked, with as much earnestness as might be, and after a certain
barbarous and cruel manner, were once a year whipped at the Altar of D^ana
^aurica, (to which goddess sacrifice could not be offered without man's blood)
till the blood ran down in great abundance, their Parents beholding the sight.
They would bear it with admirable patience and emulation, cheerfully, (nay,
many times with great delight which they took in excelling one another in
patience) enduring the strokes unto death it self.

17. When they were past their Childhood, at twelve years of age, their labors
and exercises were but increased, lest vice together with years should grow
upon them. They were to be content with one Coat, both Winter and Summer, and
slept by Companies together upon coarse, and uneasy beds. The ancient men also
oversaw them upon occasion, but the charge was committed to one of the
principal, Paedonemus.
called thence Paedonomus, who had power to gather them together and correct
them. Over several companies certain young men of twenty years of age, Iren.
called Irens, were set, who, if no men were present, had command over them,
exercised them in watches, lying in ambush, and other crafts of War, wherein if
any were caught they were severely punished to make them the more wary for the
future; as also if they were taken in theft, stealing with them being lawful,
and encouraged as an exercise for War, but to be surprised therein was
punishable. The same Irens supping with them would make some sing, and others
propose questions, in answering which they exercised their wits, accustoming
them to make a short, clear, and witty answer, in the dexterity whereof the
Lacedaemonians excelled all others; Plutarch. in Apothegmat. Laconicis.
Orators with their long-winded speeches being utterly forbidden. When the Iren
corrected them, there were men standing by to take notice of it, and if it was
not rightly done, nor upon good grounds, he had the same punishment inflicted
on him. Those boys performed several sorts of exercises; but amongst the rest
those called Platanista (from the place thick set with plain Trees) were most
eminent, in which with hands and feet, teeth, and nails, they fought in good
earnest, to the putting out of eyes, and sometimes to the danger of life it
self, none giving over, or shrinking one jot, than which no disgrace was
esteemed more heinous. Such strict, and constant discipline under-vvent they
all their minority, till they arrived at 30 years of age (before which time
they married not, went not out to war, neither exercised any Office) so that
the greatest trouble in the field afterward seemed much more easy to be
undergone.

The education of Virgins.
18. The education also of young women was agreeable to this of the other Sex,
that by vigilance, industry, and enduring labor, they might be furnished with
courage and resolution against all evils, being married with more ease undergo
the pains of Travel, and bring forth Children of the same constitution.
According to their age they had exercises of sundry sorts; most of which they
performed in public, naked, and that not only in the sight of Kings and
Senate, but the young men also; which yet because of the Laconick modesty and
temperance, with the custom of it, was not judged at all to contribute to vice,
but rather to an innocent, and harmless emulation, and honest love. Their diet
was such as might nourish them, and not any ill disposition in them. Such were
their Clothes, and all things else about them, as long as Lycurgus his
constitutions were in force; and therefore the too great power of the women,
their Luxury, and the many great inconveniences that thence arose to the State,
objected so much by Aristotle, is to be ascribed to the married sort; and
probable it is that this corruption crept in, in aftertimes, it being well
nigh as easy for him to reform the women as to make this great alteration in
the Commonwealth, Politic. lib. 2. cap. 7.
though the contrary be asserted by the Philosopher, who as it seems was much
satisfied in the wilfulness of that Sex. The set time for marriage of men was
at 30. for women at 20 years, before which it was unlawful; but if a man
within some reasonable time after, betook him not to that estate, he was
publicly disgraced by command of the Lawgiver. Women had no portions; yet the
Heirs carried with them their father's inheritance. No plurality of wives did
he allow; and yet as for adultery it was not heard of in that City, against
which neither did he make any Law, having already provided sufficiently against
it by such strict constitutions.

19. As he provided against the flocking of strangers to Sparta, so forbad he
any Citizen, Travel forbidden.
or Member of the Commonwealth to Travel, (except in any expedition of War)
lest he should bring home with him the dissolute and effeminate customs of
other places. Merchandising was esteemed a base employment, as merely practiced
for getting of wealth. Drunkenness they rendered more abominable to Children by
making their slaves drunk, that then they might behold them in that beastly
condition. He that had been so unthrifty as not to be able to bear the charge
of the Phiditia was excluded from all trust in the Commonwealth. Sparta
unwalled.
To keep them vigilant, he commanded that the City should not be walled, they
having sufficient leisure to look carefully to it; this being even their whole
calling, with their heads and hands to attend public affairs; the drudgery of
Tilling their grounds, and gathering their fruits, being imposed upon the
Hilotae, or public slaves, with other servile and Mechanic affairs. Those
slaves it was not lawful for any one privately to manumit, or sell out of
Laconia, whereby increasing to so great a number, that they equalized, or
exceeded that of their masters, they sometimes affoarded occasion of great
danger; upon which account this constitution is taxed by the Philosopher. For
the lessening of their numbers a course was taken not altogether clear from a
note of cruelty: The Cryptia.
Certain young men being sent about into the Country, who lying hid in the day
time (whence this practice was called Cryptia) by night killed as many of them
as they could light on.

20. Such was the form of the Commonwealth instituted by Lycurgus, which saved
him the labor of erecting any other Courts of Justice than what have been
already mentioned. For Gold and Silver being taken away, and the use thereof
forbidden upon pain of death, controversies and suits most commonly thence
arising naturally fell of themselves. Plutarch. ut supra.
He forbad his Laws to be written in Tables, because he would have them rooted
in the minds of the people, to which he thought the strict Discipline he
erected might sufficiently conduce. After the thing was done, as it has happened
usually in this kind, he was but ill rewarded; for such as had parted with
their Silver, Gold, or Luxury, were so enraged as to throw stones at him, which
to shun he was glad to betake himself to his heels, and looking back had an eye
struck out by one Arcander, who yet afterward repented him of the deed, and
was very observant of him. Valerius Max. l. 5. c. 3. Ext. Exemp. 2.
One tells us he was cast out by public rage; but he who has handled the
subject of his life with greatest industry, has recorded, that when things
began to be settled, and he saw the Commonwealth thus constituted able to
support it self, he calling the people together, told them, that indeed all
things were so already settled as to provide for virtue and happiness, but one
thing, and that of greatest consequence was yet behind, which was not to be
enacted before first he had consulted the Oracle at Delphos. Kings, Senate, and
people sworn to observe the Laws, and constitutions of Lycurgus.
Wherefore he desired them to keep the Laws already made, and change nothing in
them till his return with such answer as the Oracle would give him. All
consenting, he took an Oath of the King's, Senate, and people, and began his
journey. At Delphos he enquired whether the Laws already made, and established,
were not sufficient for the virtue and safety of the State. It was answered
they were, and that it should continue most glorious so long as it would stand
to them. This answer then he sent to Sparta, but, His death.
resolving never to loose them from their Oath, he there made an end of himself
by abstaining from all sustenance. Some have said that he died in Crete, and
that he ordered his body to be burnt, and the ashes thrown into the Sea, lest
his Relics being brought back to Sparta, they should account themselves freed
from the Oath. But In Apologet.
Tertullian writes, that he famished himself, because the Lacedaemonians went
about to alter his Laws.

The War with the Argives.
21. Lycurgus being dead, and the State settled after this great change, it
renewed the War formerly begun with the Argives, and afterward deluded with
the ambignity of the Oracle, commenced another against the Tegeata, Pausan in
Arcadicis. Herod. lib. 1.
a people of Arcadia, by whom they were worsted, and Charilaus the King was
taken prisoner, through the especial valor of the women: yet was he presently
set at liberty, upon his oath never to fight more against them, which he but
ill performed. After this they overthrew diverse Cities, on which the Achaeans
had seized, some whereof made their peace, as Pausanias tells us, and
departed out of Peloponnesus. Pausan. in Messenicis.
The Colleague of Charilaus (or Charillus) for some time was Teleclus, whose
death gave one occasion to the famous Messenian War. Charilaus was succeeded by
Nicander his Son, and Teleclus by Alcamenes. In Clemens Strom. lib. 1.
the 34th year of Nicander, was celebrated the first Olympiad, The first
Olympiad.
after the restitution of those Games by Iphitus, in which Coraebus a Cook of
Elis got the Prize in the Course. These solemnities being of so great
consequence in the knowledge of times, must not be passed over without some
observation.

The renewing of the Olympic Games.
22. These exercises had in former times been held by diverse others, as Hercules
(both the Idaean and the son of Amphytrion, as some think) Pelops, Endymion,
Neleus, Pelias, Lycurgus, and others. After the descent of the Heraclidae into
Peloponnesus, Oxylus the Aetolian also (who as we said, was chosen their guide,
and according to agreement, Pausan. in Eliacis.
had the Country of Elis given to him) renewed the Games; but they were
interrupted as formerly, or seldom observed, for about 300 years, till Iphitus
the son of Praxonidas, and Nephew of Haemon, descended from him, and one of his
Successors, again restored them; after which they never intermitted, but were
kept up for many generations. But the occasion of the last restitution was
this. Greece being almost ruined by seditions and pestilence, Iphitus inquired
of the Oracle at Delphos, how those evils might be redressed: A. M. 3229. Osiae
34.
and it was answered, that it was expedient for him and the Eleans to restore
the Olympic Games, whereupon he proclaimed them, and for the better
celebration of them, procured a Truce to be made. The place whence they had
their name was Olympia, a City situated in the territories of the Pisaeans,
upon the River Alpheus, upon which account the Pisaeans contended a long time
with the Eleans about their interest in them. There was a Temple dedicated to
Jupiter Olympius, and a place for races and all sorts of exercises, filled with
many goodly buildings which resembled another City. Near to the Town was also a
place where the Eleans sat and judged of the controversies arising about
Victories, to which Crowns were given. As long as the Eleans continued under a
Monarchical Government, their Prince, of the posterity of Oxylus, was sole
Judge; but afterward there were two, chosen by the votes of the people, which
were after increased to the number nine, then to ten, and last of all to
twelve. This Solemnity was held once every fifth year beginning, so that from
the commencing of one to the beginning of another, passed four entire years, by
some mistaken for five, because of the commencement of the Games. The time was
at the full of the Moon, the change whereof immediately preceded the Summer
solstice, in the month by them called Hecatombaeon.

23. Upon this occasion meetings and consultations were had, concerning the
affairs of all Greece, besides the Inhabitants of which, many flocked from
other Countries. Care was here taken concerning the form of the year, for the
intercalation of a day at the end of every fourth. Charge was given to the
Priests of the Temple, to take notice of every new Moon, especially of that
wherewith the month Hecatombaeon began, and to proclaim it: they were also not
only to register the names of the Victors in the several sorts of Games, with
other things that concerned them, but also whatsoever memorable thing occurred
in the intervals. The account of time henceforth never failed, and the affairs
of Greece, and other Countries, were known in a most certain order. And here
the second interval of time amongst three reckoned by Vide Censorinum de Die
Natali. cap. 21.
Varro, received it is period. The first began with the beginning of things, and
ended at the Deluge, called by him unknown; the second began where the first
ended, and concluded with this restitution of the Olympiads, which he termed
Fabulous, because the Story thereof is mixed with Fables; and the third
commencing with the first Olympiad, reached to his own time, which he name
Historical, for that things done therein, were truly and clearly related. This
happened 408 years after the destruction of Troy, 774 before the Era of
Christ. A. M. 3229.

24. Toward the later end of the seventh Olympiad, A. M. 3256. V. C. 5.
Jothami 10.
a great change was made in the Government of Lacedaemon, The bringing in of
the Ephori into Sparta.
by the bringing in of the Ephori, who, according to Plutarch, had their
beginning 130 years after Lycurgus. It seems that for all the means used by
him to gain an equality, and clip the power of the great ones, yet it again
grew extravagant within this time, Arist. Polit. l. 5. c. 11.
so that the people to provide against that of the Kings and Senate for the
future, got these Officers created. Five they were in number (whereof one
Elatus was the first) chosen every year by and out of the people, Val. Maxim.
lib. 4.
without any distinction of birth or wealth; insomuch, that sometimes the
meanest sort of men were elected, which custom is noted as bad by Aristotle.
Plutarch. in vita Licurgi.
But their use and end being only to protect the liberty of the people, such,
what ever they were, must be preferred, as made the greatest show of love to
freedom, of a sharp and bold wit and averseness toward the power of the great
ones. Plato de Legibus lib. 3.
Theopompus the Son of Nicander, and Grandson to Charilaus was King at this
time, who bringing in, or giving way to this Office, his wife rebuked him for
so doing, saying, that he would leave the Kingdom to his Son of less value
than he had it of his Father; to which he answered, Cicero de Legibus lib. 3.
that on the contrary, he should leave it so much the greater, by how much more
durable. Indeed hereby it came to pass, as Plutarch observes, that the Kingly
power being less, was not subject to that envy which ruined the affairs of the
Kings of Messene and Argos, who would not moderate their power, nor at all
stoop to any popularity; and the government here being poised, continued
longer, as freed from the intestine distempers of the neighbor Commonwealth.
Yet it is also observed by Machiavelli sopra la prima Decad. di Tito Livio.
one, that the reason of the prosperity and long duration of the Spartan State,
above that of the Athenian and others, is to be fetched from it is so much
partaking of Aristocracy, and the want of that influence which the heady
multitude had into the greatest affairs elsewhere.

25. The general and most probable opinion is, that the Ephori were brought in
in the time of Theopompus. So writes Aristotle, Plutarch, and Valerius
Maximus; yet (...). lib. 1. cap. 65.
Herodotus having reckoned up several things performed by Lycurgus in the
framing of his Commonwealth, at length adds, Further, Lycurgus ordained the
Ephori and Elders: of which opinion Xenophon seems also to have been in his
Treatise of the Lacedaemonian Commonwealth. But though they were brought in
during the reign of Theopompus, yet it is not agreed of who was the principal
cause of their creation, because the end or design thereof is uncertaian,
though that ere now spoken of be generally received. (...). De Legibus l. 3.
Plato, and Plutarch (as he confesses) from him, will have them created to be
as a bridle to the power of the Kings, for theirs it must needs be, which he
calls hereditary. Cicero also in his third Book of Laws testifies, that the
Ephori at Sparta were opposed against the Kings, as the Roman Tribunes against
the Consuls, who as well as the Senate were, even at the first institution,
feared by the Commons, for that they were the chief Patritian Magistrate at
that time, and the animosities in that State were caused by the distinction of
the two orders. Valerius Maximus makes the same comparison betwixt Ephori and
Tribunes, and makes them instituted by Theopompus for this very end, whom
Plato also seems upon the same account to call the third Savior of the
Lacedaemonians; so that he must have been at the least instrumental in their
institution. Aristotle (...). Politic. lib. 2.
accounts this Magistracy as the nerves of the Commonwealth joining the parts
thereof together; because the people by virtue of it being partaker of Empire,
was quiet; so that the people seems especially considered in this Office, by
which in another place the Philosopher expressly says Theopompus moderated the
power of the Kings. But Cleomenes King of Sparta, as In Cleomene.
Plutarch himself relates the Story, affirmed in a speech to the people, that
Lycurgus having added the Senate to the Kings, the Commonwealth was for a long
time governed without any other Magistracy. Afterward, when the Messenian War
was drawn out in length, the Kings because they were employed abroad, chose
some of their friends to administer Justice, whom they left as their Deputies
over the people: and those were called Ephori from their inspection. Being at
first no other than Assistants to the Kings, by little and little they assumed
power to themselves, and, no body aware of it, constituted a peculiar Office.
Hereof, he said, a sign remained at that day, for that the King being called by
the Ephori, refused to come once, and again; but at the third call came to
them: besides, Asteropus, who first enlarged the bounds of this Office, was
Ephorus many ages after.

Their power.
26. The power of those Magistrates, for what end soever constituted (as of
others in other places) was moderate at the first, but in process of time, as
the ambition of them, and the confidence of the people thereupon increased, it
exceeded the due and just bounds, and made the Government almost degenerate
into a Democracy. They not only consulted with the Kings and Senate, resolved
about the affairs of State, and judged of controversies amongst the people;
but afterward grapled even the whole power into their hands, doing all things
themselves that were of moment. They governed the Assemblies of the people,
proposing and gathering suffrages, they made and disanulled leagues, ordered
what forces were to be sent out, for which they also made provision, they
rewarded or punished, according to their pleasure, other Magistrates, calling
the very Agis.
Kings to account for their lives; insomuch that, as the Philosopher observes,
they obtained a kind of tyranny: the only remedy was, that their Office was
but annual, Pausanias.
and being five in number, the designs and endeavors of one or two, were
crossed and overthrown by the contrary party, nothing being done without the
consent of the whole College. They rose not up, as other Magistrates, Vide
Plutarch. and Corn. Nepotem.
in presence of the Kings, with whom they mutually swear every month; the
Kings that they would rule according to the Laws, and they in the name of the
people to preserve their rule thus ordered, safe and entire to them. With their
entering into their Office, the year began (constantly in Winter, as we learn
from Thucydides) and from one of them as principal, Lib. 5.
the year was named (who thence was called Eponymus,) as from the Archon at
Athens. At their first entrance they were wont to publish an Edict, that the
men should take off all the hayr from their upper lips, Plutarch. in Cleomene
ex Aristotele.
and observe strictly all the Laws, lest they should be constrained to punish
them, requiring obedience in a little, thereby to inure the people to it. In
the Wars two of them used to go out with the Kings, to assist them in their
Councils. They were wont to proclaim open war against the public slaves or
Helots, giving liberty to kill them, and thence is to be derived that cruel
custom of the Cryptia, rather than from any constitution of Lycurgus, as
Aristotle thinks. The cause thereof, as Plutarch judges, was the conspiring
of these slaves against their Masters, during the Messenian War.

The Messenian War.
27. In the second year of the ninth Olympiad this War began, Pausanius in
Messenicis.
though the ground of the quarrel had been partly laid several years before the
bringing in of the Ephori. In the days of Teleclus Father to Alcamenes now
King, there being a Temple of Diana in the borders, Strabo l. 6, and 8.
to which both the Lacedaemonians and Messenians constantly resorted; it happened
that some Spartan Virgins, going thither, according to the custom, were abused
by the Messenians, Just. in lib. 3.
and Teleclus endeavoring to prevent the injury, was there slain: moreover,
the Virgins for very shame and grief destroyed themselves, as the
Lacedaemonians told the story. On the contrary, the Messenians pleaded, that at
this Temple Teleclus lay in wait for the principal of their City, by sending
thither young men, disguised in the habit of Virgins, with Poniards under their
clothes; that hereupon the Messenians coming in to help their friends, slew
Teleclus, and the counterfeits, for which at that time, the Lacedaemonians
found not themselves so much concernd as to stir. However it was, grudges hence
arose, or were rather heightened betwixt them; for the Lacedaemonians often
complained, that in the division of the Territories obtained by the Heraclidae,
Eurysthenes, and Procles, their Kings, were cheated by their Uncle Cresphontes,
of the far better grounds, for which now they envied the Messenians, thinking
themselves far worthier of them, as being the much more considerable people.

28. Animosities being raised upon these accounts, another thing happened which
increased them to that height as they brake out into open War. There was one
Polychares a Messenian, who had got the victory in the course at the
celebration of the fourth Olympiad. He let out some Cows to one Evaephnus a
Lacedaemonian, on this condition, to have part of the profit. Pausan. ut supra.
Evaephnus sold the Cows, and then coming to Polychares, told him that they,
and their keepers were stolen from him; but while he was laboring to gain
credit to his tale, some of the Herds-men (who, as it seems, with the consent
of Evaephnus, were taken away by force) escaped from the Merchants, and
acquainted Polychares with the fraud, which now the other not able to deny,
asked him pardon, told him for how much the Cattle were sold, and promised to
send the money, if he would let his son accompany him to Sparta. He sent his
son accordingly, but when they were come together into Laconia, Evaephnus most
perfidiously murdered the young man, with the horridness of which fact
Polychares grievously moved, came several times to Sparta, complaining
bitterly, and with many tears to the Kings and Ephori, but found no Justice;
insomuch that growing into a great rage against all Lacedaemonians in common,
he killed them as enemies wheresoever he could meet them.

29. The Lacedaemonians, finding themselves concerned herein, sent to the
Messenians, demanding Polychares. At that time Androcles and Antiochus, the
sons of Phintas reigning at Messene, promised they would report the matter to
the people, and know their minds therein. The multitude being called together,
Androcles was much for the giving up of Polychares, but on the contrary
Antiochus urged how unjust, and lamentable a thing it would be for him to be
tormented before Evaephnus, and the contention grew so hot betwixt the
brothers, that it came to blows. Antiochus his faction prevailing, Androcles
with the chief of his party lost their lives. Antiochus then reigning alone
wrote to the Spartans, offering to refer the business to the Argives, who were
of the same stock with them both, or to the public Council of the
Amphyctiones; or else, if neither of these liked them, to the Senate of
Areopagus. They returned no answer by the Messenger, and within a few months
Antiochus died, and his son Euphaes succeeded him. Paus. Polybius l. 6.
Neither then did they send any message, nor yet renounced amity with the
Messenians, but entering into secret consultations provided for the War, and
bound themselves with an Oath never to return home till they had subdued
Messenia.

30. Being bound with this Oath, and having all things in a readiness, under
the conduct of Alcamenes, the son of Teleclus, they went out by night and fell
upon Aruph^a, a Town upon the Borders, which by the suddenness of the onset,
no Watch being kept, but the Gates standing open, Idem ibid. A.M. 3262. Olymp.
9. an. 2. V.C. 11. Iothaim.
they easily took, and finding it a place for situation, and convenience of
water fit for their purpose, put all to the sword, intending to use it as a
Receptacle, and chief Fortress in the War. After this they made excursions,
and rather practiced robberies than carried on a War, the Messenians declining
the fight through the persuasion of Euphaes. But after four years, when they
were now well exercised, and exceedingly incensed against the Lacedaemonians,
he gave them leave to make inroads into Laconia, where they wasted all about
Faygetus, He then lead down his Army into the Borders to fight, which
opportunity the Lacedaemonians embraced, and engaged with the horse, and those
foot that bare the light Armor. But Euphaes having provided matter for making
a Trench, caused the place where his other Soldiers lay to be fortified (in
them consisting his chief strength) so that, seeing they could not fight with
them, and being unprovided to besiege the Camp, they returned home, where they
had but cold welcome, because of this retreat made contrary to their solemn Oath.

31. The year after, for that the elder sort exceedingly upbraided them, they
returned into Messenia under conduct of both the Kings: Theopompus, the son of
Nicander, and Polydorus of Alcamenes, now dead. There they were received by the
enemy, and entertained in a great and bloody battle, wherein both parties with
much earnestness and contention demeaned themselves. The Spartans as they
surpassed the other in skill, being trained up in exercises from their
Childhood, so exceeded them also in numbers; but desperation and necessity made
the Messenians valiant, as they abundantly showed it, many breaking their Ranks
on purpose to come to hand-stroaks with the enemy. In the main battle the
victory continued doubtful a long time; in the right wing Euphaes put
Theopompus to flight, and in the left Polydorus did as much by the Messenians,
and neither party would give the chase; Euphaes for that he thought he had
already done enough, and Polydorus because the Lacedaemonians were deterred
from it through their ignorance of the place, being in an enemies Country: so
that fighting on even terms they were parted by the night. The day following
neither side would fight, nor had the confidence to erect a Trophy; but made
truce so long as to bury their dead.

32. After this battle none other succeeded for several years. The Messenians,
for that their Country was the seat of War, were pressed with many
difficulties. Their Garrisons had cost them so much money, as now they were
rendered unable to pay their Army: their slaves fled daily to the
Lacedaemonians, and a certain disease not much better than the plague, seized
upon them, which though not exceeding deadly, yet jointly with the other
difficulties, caused great trouble and perturbation. After a serious debate
concerning the main of their affairs, it was resolved, that most of the Towns
lying upon the Sea should be dismantled as far remote, and Ithome, a Mountain
as large as any within the Istmus (whereupon stood a Town more ancient than
great) was to be fortified because of the natural strength thereof. When they
had here settled themselves, they sent to Delphos to enquire concerning the
event of the War. The Oracle (agreeable to the disposition of the enemy of
mankind) required a Virgin of the stock of Aegyptus to be sacrifized; whereupon
all that belonged to that family were subjected to the lot, and the daughter of
one Lyciscus was taken. She being to be offered, the sooth-sayer forbad it,
alleging that she was not the daughter of Lyciscus, but brought in underhand
by his wife that was barren, and whilst he was thus pe^swading the people,
Lyciscus fled away with her to Sparta. All hereat exceedingly startled,
Aristodemus, another of that family, voluntarily offered his own daughter; but
a young man there present that was in love with her, and shortly intended
marriage, stiffly impugned it, and contended she was not in her fathers power,
because betrothed to himself. Not herevvith prevailing he affirmed he had lien
with her, and that she was with Child, vvhereat Aristodemus was so enraged,
Aristodemus kills his daughter.
that he killed her with his own hand, A.M. 3269. Olymp. 11. an. 1. V. C. 18.
Achazi 8.
and ripping up her belly, shevved plainly to all that there was no such
matter. Yet the sooth-sayer avouched her death could not at all profit the
State, and commanded some other to be offered; but Euphaes persuaded the
people that the Oracle was already satisfied, and required not the life of any
other.

The Lacedaemonians make War upon the Argives.
33. That rest which the Lacedaemonians had in this interval was presently
turned into action with the Argives about Thyrea, a Town situate in the Borders
of both Commonwealths. This fell out in the reign of Theopompus, Pausan. in
Laconicis and Argolicis. Plutar. in Parallelis. and Herod. lib. 1. Suidas in
voc^ Othryades.
whereat yet he was not present, partly by reason of his old age, and also for
grief taken at the death of his son Archidamus. The controversy was brought
before the Amphyctiones, who ordered that 300 on each side should decide it. Of
the Argives two persons survived the Combat; but on the Spartan party only
one, by name Othryades, as good as many, who lived no longer than to make use
of broken Spears instead of Crutches to sustain his body, then to gather
together the Targets of the slain, and to erect a Trophy therewith, whereon he
made an inscription with his own blood. Because of this Trophy the Amphyctiones
decreed the Town to the Lacedaemonians; but the Argives, for that two of their
party survived, afterward renewed the War to their own damage.

That with the Messenians renewed.
34. The offering up of Aristodemus his daughter seemed to the Messenians to
have done some good, Pausanias in Messenicis.
the affairs of Lacedaemon appearing to be in a declining posture, and that
State slower in its Enterprises than formerly. But in the sixth year after the
departure of Lyciscus, and the eighth from their removal to Ithome, the War was
again renewed against them. Another battle was fought, but with the same
success as formerly. In the midst of the fight was the hottest contest, the
most valiant on both sides betaking themselves thither, where Euphaes also
venturing further, than either stood with his dignity or safety, against
Theopompus, received many, and deadly wounds. Herewith being so weakened as he
fell, the Lacedaemonians strove to take him, and a great conflict ensued; but
one Antander so far resisting as to lose his own life in the quarrel, Euphaes
was brought off, and died a few days after, having reigned 13 years, all which
time he spent in the War against the Lacedaemonians. He dying Childlesse, A.M.
3274. Olymp. 12. an. 2. V. C. 23. Achazi 13.
a great controversy arose about the succession, for that several of the
family of Aegyptus stood for the Kingdom, amongst whom was Aristodemus, who,
though it was objected that having polluted his hands in the blood of his
daughter, he was not capable, was preferred before all others through the
favor of the people. After his Election he sent Presents to the chief of the
Arcadians, Argives, and Sicyonians, whom he engaged to his party. Assisted by
some Arcadians he made encursions, and the Lacedaemonians did the same,
proceeding to no greater extremity; but at length, in his fifth year, another
battle was fought near to Ithome, wherein the Messenians were assisted by the
three States ere now mentioned, and the Spartans by no other Peloponnesians
than those of Corinth. The dispute was very sharp, and the event doubtful,
till the Messenians, having the upper ground, at last put their enemies to
flight, of whom it is credible, as Pausanias only writes, that many
miscarried.

35. The Lacedaemonians, after this, almost despairing of success, both
parties sent to enquire at Delphos, concerning the issue of the War. The
Messenians received an answer so ambiguous as could not be interpreted: that to
the Spartans plainly signified, that as Cresphontes had obtained Messene by a
wile in ordering the lots, so by wiles it was to be recovered. Several then
they invented, but all were discovered, by the vigilance, and cunning of
Aristodemus. But the 20th year of the War approaching, the affairs of the
Messenians began exceedingly to relapse, and the Oracle again consulted,
answered, that whosoever could first dedicate a hundred Trestles (or
three-footed stools) to Jupiter of Ithome should obtain Messene. The Messinians
having the Temple within themselves, doubted not but to be able to do this
first; yet the answer being brought to Lacedaemon, one Oebalus a crafty man
there made 100 of Clay, and while the Messenians were busy about others of
Wood (for their purses were not able to reach to brass) disguised himself in
the habit of a fowler, and carried them into the Temple. This struck the
Messenians with great consternation, who were straightly besieged by this time,
and hindered from getting in any provisions. Aristodemus was also tormented with
sad dreams about his daughter, whereat sorely moved, and exceedingly afflicted
with consideration that he should kill his Child for his Countrey's good, which
notwithstanding was desperate, he slew himself at her Monument.

36. With this sad accident the Messenians were more grievously struck, and so
despaired as to have thoughts of making their applications to the
Lacedaemonians; but as yet not able to stoop, they made no overtures, though
almost oppressed with famine: they chose them Captains in the room of
Aristodemus, preparing to sallie out, and fight it out to the last man for
their lives and fortunes. Yet at length distrusting their ability to do any
thing that way, and considering themselves urged hard with the want of all
necessaries, they left Ithome, and yielded in the fifth month after the death
of Aristodemus, the 28th year of the War being almost finished, in the first of
the fourteenth Olympiad, the Medontidae at Athens yet enjoying the power for
ten years, in the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, and the time of the
deportation of the ten Tribes. The Conquerours utterly demolished Ithome, and,
having gotten easily the other Towns of Messenia into their power, imposed what
Laws they pleased upon the Inhabitants, who were commanded to till their
grounds, and send one half of the profits unto Sparta; to bind themselves by
oath, to remain in perpetual fealty to the Lacedaemonians, and both men and
women, when the Kings and Nobles of Sparta died, to attend upon their Funerals
in mourning weeds; which things were enjoined them upon pain of death. The end
of the first Messenian War.
As many as would not endure those hard conditions, A. M. 3282. Olymp. 14. an.
2. V. C. 31. Ezech. 8.
and had hope of entertainment with the Arcadians, Argives, and Sicyonians,
went thither, and such as were Priests to Eleusine: all the rest of the
multitude departed every one to his own seat, and so the first Messenian War
ended.

37. Whilst the Lacedaemonians were abroad, and lay under the obligation of
their oath, never to return till the War should be finished, fearing, Justin.
ex Trogo l. 3.
either through the suggestion of their wives, or their own recollection, that
their posterity might fail, they chose out of their lustiest young men fifty in
number, The Partheniae.
who coming out under age, were not liable to the oath, Lege Strabon. l. 6. p.
278, 279, 280, 281.
and sent them to Sparta to lie with their Wives and Virgins (or the Virgins
only) in a promiscuous manner, whence arose a generation called Partheniae, as
the Sons of Virgins. But after that the war was finished, and the Spartans
returned home, they looked upon them as a spurious brood, and as such contemned
them; which these youths apprehending, and how they could not inherit any thing
in the Commonwealth, entered into conspiracy with the Hilots, and made one
Philanthus their Captain, whose Father Aracus had given the advice, to send the
young Men to the Virgins. This plot being revealed by some of the slaves, they
were expelled, and forced to seek out new seats; so that departing into Italy,
they drove out the Barbarians and Cretians, who inhabited about Tarentum, and
seizing upon that place, therein planted themselves.

The second Messenian War.
38. The Messenians thus brought under the yoke, endured it, though with much
repining, for 39 years; but then, besides their most hard and servile
condition, wearied with the insolency of the Spartans, Pausan. in Messenicis.
A. M. 3320. V. C. 69. Manassis 17.
in the fourth year of the 23 Olympiad, a little after the nine Annual Archons
were constituted at Athens, in the 40th after the taking of Ithome, they
revolted, at the instigation of Aristomenes especially, a young man of a most
active and courageous spirit, who had before hand solicited for assistance the
Arcadians and Argives now being jealous of the power of the Lacedaemonians, and
at open enmity with them. At this time Anaxander the Nephew of Polydorus, by
his Son Eurycrates, and Anaxidamus the Son of Zeuxidamus, and Grandson to
Theopompus, by his Son Archidamus, who died ere he came to reign, were Kings at
Sparta.

39. Aristomenes managed the whole business for the Messenians, being of
extraordinary abilities both of body and mind. He first engaged with the
Spartans at Derae, a Village of Messenia, where he is said to have behaved
himself above the capacity of a man, and seeing he was of the Family of
Aegyptus, was chosen King by the people. Refusing this title, he was created
General, with absolute authority, and afterward, at the Monument of the Boar,
(a place in Messenia, where Hercules made a league with the Sons of Nileus) by
the assistance of the Arcadians, Argives, Sicyonians, and Eleans, overthrew the
Lacedaemonians, terrifying all where ever he came. In the pursuit he lost his
Target, which whilst he was seeking, they had opportunity to escape. After
this, he took and plundered a Town of Laconia, named Pharae, whence retreating
with much booty, he also overthrew Anaxander the King, who pursued him, and
having in his intentions to march against Sparta it self, is said to have been
deterred from it, by the apparitions of Helena, and her two brothers Castor and
Pollux.

40. The Lacedaemonians much startled at this loss, thought to have put a
period to the War, but were again encouraged by the Verses of Tyrtaeus, who
persuaded them to fill up their army with the Helots. Pausanias in Messenicis.
A year or two before this, sending to consult the Oracle about the War; they
had answer, that they must send to Athens for a Counselor. The Athenians were
unwilling in the least to promote their affairs, being jealous of their growing
power, yet fearing also to do any thing cross to the Oracle, they sent to them
this Tyrtaeus a Schoolmaster, lame on his feet, and not very sound in his
brain. In the third year of the War, another battle was fought, at a place
called the great Ditch, wherein the Messenians having no other associates than
their friends of Arcadia, these also failed them at this time, through the
treachery of their Captain; so that, left to themselves, and compassed in by
their Enemies, most of them were slain, though Aristomenes omitted nothing
worthy of a General, or common Soldier. Having gathered up the relics of his
Army, he persuaded the people to quit all inland Towns, and fortifying only
Pylus and Methone upon the Sea, to secure themselves in the hill Ira. Here they
were presently besieged, and issuing out for booty, made depredations, both in
Laconia and their own Country, which drew out an Edict from the Lacedaemonian
State, that the borders of both Countries should, during the War, be left
desolate; whereupon a dearth ensued at Sparta, and thence a Sedition, which
Tyrteus with his Poetry had work enough to suppress.

41. Aristomenes in the mean time, like some fierce and greedy Lion, with 300
choice men at his heels, to the great fear of all men, ranged up and down the
Country, and made continual excursions into the Enemies Country. At length he
was taken and carried to Sparta, where condemned to death, he was thrown into a
deep dungeon; the ordinary way of punishing capital offenders. Coming safe to
the bottom, though others were killed by the fall, he perceived a Fox feeding
upon some dead carkeises, whereat considering that this creature must have some
hole to creep in at, he caught it by the tail, and defending himself from it is
teeth by the other hand, it led him to the hole, which being but little, he so
enlarged with his hands, as contrary to the belief and expectation of all men,
he returned safe to his Companions. Presently after his return, he fell upon
the Camp of the Corinthians, who assisted the Spartans in the Siege, and lay
carelessly, without any watch, and killing the Captains, plundered their Tents.
Not long after a Truce was made for forty days, during which, he wandering
abroad too carelessly, was entrapped by some Cretians, who assisted also in the
Siege, and being bound with the thongs of their quivers, was carried into a
Village, to the house of a certain widow. This woman, understanding who he
was, cast in her head how to deliver him, which she effected, by giving his
Keepers so much drink, that they falling asleep, with one of their daggers he
cut the thongs. Being loosed, he stabbed the Cretians and escaped; and
afterward, to requite the woman's kindness, married her to his Son Gorgus.

42. Ten years the Siege of Ira continued, the Messenians enjoying the grounds
at the foot of the Mountain, as far as the River Neda, thereby being better
provided for to hold out. But in the eleventh, when Aristomenes was renderd by
a wound incapable of taking such care about the watch as he had been wont, in a
rainy and dark night the sentinels, secure of him, betook themselves to their
own homes. Amongst those there was one, whose wife in his absence entertained a
certain Herds-man as a Lover, who belonged to Emperamus a Lacedaemonian now at
the Siege. He being hid by his Paramour upon her husband's coming, heard the
man tell the Story, how he and his fellows had forsaken their charge, and
slipping away, therewith acquainted his Master. Both the Spartan Kings were
absent at this time, but Emperamus, unwilling to let slip so fair an
opportunity, led the Army thither, and got into the Fortress before he was
discovered. A.M. 3337. Ol. 28. an 1. V. C. 86. Manassis 34.
When the matter was perceived, The end of the second War.
a great contest there was betwixt the parties; but Aristomenes seeing there
was no hope of doing any good, and willing to save what was left of the
afflicted Messenians, obtained liberty to depart; and so Ira being taken the
War ended, after it had lasted sixteen years; in the first of the 28th
Olympiad, when Au^osthenes was Archon at Athens, A. M. 3337.

43. When the Arcadians understood of the taking of Ira, they desired of
Aristocrates their King to be led out, either to restore their friends, or die
with them; but he having formerly betrayed them at the great Ditch, was now
also corrupted with money, and refused to do it, alleging there was none left
to whom they could give assistance. Yet when it was clearly known that they
were alive, they sent some before to comfort them, then met them with clothes,
and meat, as far as the Hill Lycaeus, and kindly invited them to live amongst
them. Aristomenes boiling with hatred and revenge against the Lacedaemonians,
chose out of the Company 500 men, whom he knew to be no whit desirous to
outlive the fortune of their Country, and asked them in the hearing of
Aristocrates (not knowing any thing of his treachery) and the Arcadians,
whether they would venture their lives with him. Upon their answer that they
would, he acquainted them with his design, to march straight for Sparta, which
if he could surprise, now that all it is strength was employed in the plunder of
Messenia, then should he make an even exchange with the Lacedaemonians; but, if
not, death would be the worst that could happen. Besides the Messenians, 300
Arcadians gave their names to this Expedition; but being stayed by reason that
the entrails of the beast were not propitious, Aristocrates punished for his
treachery.
Aristocrates had time to give notice of the design to Anaxander King of
Sparta. The treachery was discovered after the return of the Messenger, by some
that suspected it, and the letter sent back from Anaxander, was red in the
Assembly of the Arcadians, wherein thanks was given to Aristocrates, as well
for the help he afforded the Lacedaemonians at the great Ditch, as for this
timely notice. Hereat the multitude was so enraged, as they stoned him out of
hand, cast him out unburied, and erected a monument to his infamy, with this
note, that Perjury cannot escape God. They exhorted also the Messenians to
throw stones at him, who looked upon Aristomenes, as expecting directions from
him; but he only fixed his eyes on the ground and wept.

44. The Messenians desired of Aristomenes to lead them out, to seek some new
place to inhabit; but he denied it, resolving to spend his days in doing as
much mischief as he could to the Lacedaemonians: only his son Gorgus and
Manticlus he offered to them. Those that had kept Pylus and Methone, with
others which lived on the Seacoasts, went by ship to Cyllene, the haven of the
Eleans, to seek out the rest. The following Spring several places being
proposed to go to, Anaxilas who then reigned at Rhegium, and was descended of
one Alcidamidas a Messenian (that after the taking of Ithome in the former War,
betook himself thither) sent some to convey them into Italy, After their
arrival, he told them he had continual War with the Zauclaeans, a people of
Sicilie, that inhabited a fruitful and pleasant Soil, which if they would help
him to conquer, he would put it into their hands. A. M. 3339. Ol. 28. an. 3.
V.C. 88. Manassis 36.
He then besieged them by Sea, The Messenians pass into Sicily.
and the Messenians by Land, whereby being distressed, and the greater part of
the wall now cast down, they fled to the altars of their gods. Anaxilus would
have had them slain, and their wives and children sold; but the other unwilling
to commit such cruelty against any Greeks, (for such they were, the Town being
first inhabited by R^vers, and afterward by others from several parts of
Greece) gave them liberty to continue, and incorporating themselves into their
body, changed the name of the place from Zancle into Messene. Aristomenes for
some time continuing in Greece, married his daughters very honorably, whereof
Demagetus, Prince of Rhodes at that time, took the youngest to wife, having
been advised by the Oracle, to make choice of that man's daughter who was the
best in all Greece. He carried his daughter to Rhodes, whence he intended to go
to Ardys the son of Gyges, then reigning in Lydia, and thence to Ecbatane, to
Phraortes King of the Medes; but death prevented him, and he finished his days
in that Island, being found in the number of those few, that lived and dyed in
great glory.

SECT. 6. Such as continued in Messenia made slaves.
45. Messenia thus subdued by the Lacedaemonians was tilled by the common
slaves, amongst whom such of the inhabitants as there still remained were
enrolled, and became a proverb for their hard bondage; being worse used than
any, because, as some think, the War was carried on with them, not for glory
and Empire, but for life and safety, not with a contention which people should
rule, but whether should be preserved. The accession of this Country to their
demesnes very much increased the power of Lacedaemon, and so they held it for
two hundred years, till an opportunity was offered for the old inhabitants, in
despite of them, to return. This thing being brought to pass long after, must
be referred to another place: as also (because what further happened betwixt the
Arcadians, Argives, and this Commonwealth, is not very material) whatsoever we
have further to observe concerning the Lacedaemonians.

SECT. VI. The most ancient Kingdom of Corinth.
Corinth first called Ephyra, and built by Sisyphus.
1. THis City, seated in the Isthmus of Peloponnesus, Pausan. in Corinthiacis.
had first the name of Ephyra, and was built by Sisyphus (whose posterity
reigned here some 428 years) in the days of Cecrops, the first King of Athens,
and a little before Deucalions Flood, about the 2486 year of the World. He
married Merope, the daughter of Atlas, by which he had four sons, Glaucus,
Ornytion, Thersander, and Almas; was accounted a very wise, Eusebius. in Chron. A.
M. 2486.
and prudent man, feigned also to have returned to life again, that he might
chastize his wife for not having performed what was due to his memory. After he
was once got up he would not return of a long time to Hell, where he is also
said by the Poets to roll a great stone up an Hill, which continually tumbling
down again keeps him in constant toil, having this punishment inflicted on
him for discovering to Asopus his daughter stolen away by Jupiter. Glaucus his
eldest son was the father of Bellerophon, and first celebrated Games in the
Isthmus. Ornytion begat Phocus, who led a Colony into, and gave name to the
Country called Phocis after him, and Thoas a younger son that continued at
Corinth. Thersander had two sons, Coronus and Haliartus, who being adopted by
Athamas their Uncle on the father's side, then reigning in Boeotia, (after he
had lost his own two sons Phryxus and Helles, and his daughter Ino with her two
sons) gave name to two places in that Country. Almus (called otherwise Halmus
and Olmus) the youngest son of Sisyphus had part of the Country of the
Orchomenians bestowed on him by Eteocles the King, and from him Almon, or
Olmon, a place of Boeotia, was so named.

Bellerophontes.
2. Bellerophontes, having committed manslaughter at Corinth, was forced to fly
thence, and went to Praetus King of the Argives, whose wife Sthenobaea
enamoured of his beauty tempted him to lie with her; Apoliodorus. A M. 2660.
but he had the modesty to deny her, wherewith she was so incensed as to accuse
him to her husband of an intended rape. Praetus taking it in great disdain to
be so used by his Guest, yet would not kill him, but sent him to Iolas, King of
Lycia his wives father with Letters, wherein he desired him to make the bearer
away. To fulfill his request, Iolas first caused him to fight with the
Chimaera, a Monster that vomited fire, not doubting of his destruction thereby;
but he mounting the horse Pegasus, slew the Monster. Then he sent him against
the Solymi and Amazons, whom he Conquered; then caused some of the strongest
young men he could procure to ly in ambush, and fall on him, which also he
having slain, Iolas admiring his valor gave him his daughter Philonoe to wife,
and when he died, left him his Successor in the Kingdom of Lycia. Concerning
this Chimaera, what should be meant thereby is scarce discernable. The Chimaera.
Servius in Virgil Aeneiad. l. 6.
Some have understood by it a Mountain in Lycia, the top whereof vomited forth
fire, the middle part had Pastures full of Goats, and the foot, or bottom,
abounded with Serpents. It Is conceived he might make this Mountain habitable,
and thence be said to have slain the Chimaera, which had a mouth like a Lion,
middle parts as a Goat, and the hinder parts like a Dragon. Plutarch de
virtutibus mulierum.
Others again say that Bellerophontes gave occasion to this fable by killing
one Chimaerus a Sea Captain, who infested the Lycians with piracy, the story
being thence raised, for that Chimaerus his ship had a Lion painted on the
prow, and a Dragon on the deck, and Bellerophon's Vessel called Pegasus, might
have a winged horse for its sign. A third Homer Iliad. 3. Eust. and Isac. in
Lycoph. p. 6.
sort think three kinds of enemies to be signified by this Monster: the Solymi,
Amazons, and Lycians; the former being for their valor compared to a Lion, the
next for their nimblenesse in climbing of Rocks to a Goat, and the last to a
Dragon, for their craftiness in ambushes. Lastly, a Lege Bocharti Canaan. lib.
1. c. 6.
modern, and most learned Writer judges the three gods of the Solymi, whom
Bellerophon overthrew, to have been painted in their Ensigns; resembling a
Lion, Goat, and Dragon, like the three heads of the Monster, as it is described
by Hesiod.

3. Bellerophontes being driven from Corinth, Thoas the son of Ornytion
obtained the Kingdom, whom succeeded Demophon his son, Pausan. ut prius.
then followed Propodas, whose two sons Doridas and Hyanthidas reigning both
together, Aletes the son of Hippotes (son to Antiochus, and Nephew to Hercules)
came down and subdued the Kingdom. The Heraclidae having, before this, Vide
Simsonium ad A.M. 2914.
obtained Peloponnesus, Aletes.
reserved this part for him, who consulting the Oracle of Jupiter at Dodona,
was answered, that he should then obtain it, when a clod of Earth should be
given him. At his return this was fulfilled; for begging some meat of an
Herds-man, he, having nothing to give him, offered him a clod, which he gladly
accepted, saying, Aletes aceepteth of a clod, which became a proverb. Who gave
the name of Corinth to the City is uncertain; but however, Aletes out of
gratitude to the Oracle, (...).
named it Corinth of Jupiter, which gave occasion to the multitude to believe
that Corinth the King that built it, was the son of Jupiter, wherein they so
gloried, and so often vaunted of it, that nothing became more ridiculous, and
they were laughed at for it throughout Greece. After Aletes the eldest of the
family succeeded for several Generations. The first was Ixion, Eusebius. in
Chronico and Excepta Diodori per Georgium Monact. inter. lib. 5. and 10.
who reigned 37 years, the next Agilaus, who ruled as many, Prumnis 35. and A.
M. 3048.
Bacchis full so many, who was so famous, that where as he, and all his
Ancestors were called Heraclidae, The Bacchiadae.
his Successors from him had the name of Bacchiadae. The first after him was
Agelas, who governed thirty years, the next Eudemus, who reigned 25. then came
Aristomedes, who having ruled 35. left a Child behind him, which his brother
Algemon, whom he had appointed Guardian, deposed, and held the Kingdom himself
sixteen years. After him followed Alexander for 25. whom Telestes the son of
Aristomedes slew, and obtained his fathers Kingdom, which he held twelve years.
He was also slain by Arieus and Perantas his Kins-men, and then Automenes
reigned one year, which being expired, the Bachidae, more than 200 in number,
seized on the Kingdom, and Governed in common; only every year they created a
Prytanis out of their own body to be in the room of the King, and so they
continued 90 years in the way of an Aristocracy.

Colonies of the Corinthians.
4. During this term, in the fourth year of the eleventh Olympiad, A.M. 3272.
the Corinthians being powerful at Sea, sent out a Colony into the Island of
Sicily under conduct of Archias, one of the Heraclidae, which, Olymp. 11. an.
4. V.C. 21. Achan 11.
expelling the Siculi out of that quarter, founded the City Syracusae. More
people flocking thither out of Peloponnesus, this City grew, and increased
exceedingly; so that it became not only the principal of all in Sicily, but
the greatest, and most beautiful of all Greece, as Cicero witnesses, and in
its due place will be further discovered. Much about the same time was there
another Colony sent into the Island Phaeacus, lying nigh to Epirus, at a little
distance from the Continent, conducted thither by Chersierates another of the
posterity of Hercules. Homer in his Odyss. Makes this Island inhabited in the
Trojan times, by the Phaeacians a most noble people, over whom reigned
Alcinous, the son of Nausithous, who received Ulysses after his long wanderings,
and helped him in his journey home to Ithaca. He mentions his Royal seat,
called Scheria, (which Pliny from him affirms also to have been the name of
the Island, as well as Phaeacia) and says, the inhabitants were much given to
Navigation, and most skillful therein. In the soil of this Scheria, the old
inhabitants being expelled, this new Colony planted it self, which taking the
name of Corcyra, the whole Island came thence to be so called. The City, much
befriended by the Commodiousnesse of the Haven, and the convenience of the
place for Sea matters, grew in a short time to be very considerable; so as it
founded of it self two Cities, viz. that of Epidamnus, as we have it from
Thucydides, (by the Romans called Dyrrachium) and Apollonia, as Strabo writes;
both of them seated in that part of Illyricum, inhabited by the Taulautians.
The form of this Commonwealth was (agreeable to the constitution of all
Colonies) like to that of Corinth the Metropolis, which then was Governed by
the Bacchiadae in an Oligarchical way. When Corinth was afflicted by Tyrants,
Corcyra felt also their influence upon its infancy; but at length it grew to
that height, as to renounce such obedience as the other challenged, whence
great and tedious Commotions were produced in Greece.

5. The Bacchiadae neither communicated the Government nor marriage to any
other person than of their own family, Herod. lib. 5. cap. 90. etc
till one of their women being lame, and upon that account despised by them all
of her own stock, had thereby an occasion given to break the custom. She (named
Labda) married Eetion (the son of Echecrates, and Nephew to Antassus of the
Petrean Tribe) who, having no Children by her, or any other, went to Delphos,
and inquired of the Oracle concerning issue. He received an answer to this
effect; that he should have a son, who like a stone would fall upon the
Oligarchy, and breaking it in pieces, amend the State of Corinth. This coming
to the ears of the Bacchiadae, who had an Oracle before much to the same
purpose, though under general terms, they resolved to hold their peace, and
kill Eetions Child as soon as it should be born. And as soon as his wife was
delivered, they sent ten of their Company to destroy it, whom the mother
presented with a sight of the Babe, thinking they had come to Congratulate her
husband about its birth. They had agreed amongst themselves, that whosoever
first came at the Infant should knock out his brains, but the Child smiling in
his face, who first took it in his Arms, he was so moved with compassion, as he
would not kill it, but delivered it to one of his fellows, who touched with the
same compassion gave it to another, till it passed through all their hands
unhurt. Being gone out, and standing at the door, they blamed one another
exceedingly, especially the first, whose part it was to kill it, and in they
returned now to do the deed; but the mother, hearing their discourse, hid the
Infant under a Bushel, or such alike instrument of measuring Corn, so that
finding it they returned, giving out they had done their errand, and so the
Child thus preserved was named Cypselus, Cypselus.
from the measure under which he was hid, (...).
in the Greek tongue called Cypsele.

6. When he was come to man's estate, relying upon another Oracle (whereby he
was plainly bidden to be King of Corinth, and his Children after him, but not
his Nephews) he invaded the Tyranny, which to establish many he deprived of
their estates, but many more of their lives. A. M 3350.
He first lulled the people asleep with good language, and thereby getting all
into his hands, made himself Lord of the City; his power he preserved by
removing those out of the way whom it most concerned; Consule Arist. Polit. l.
2. c. 12.
but once established he grew exceeding mild and fair, with good words, and no
ill deeds, drawing the people into such a respect of him, that all his time he
stood not in need of any Guard; a rare thing in men of his condition, which
Gelo at Syracuse only imitated. This change happened at Corinth in the 2 year of
the 31 Olympiad, in the days of Phraortes, King of the Medes, and Ardys
Grandfather to Craesus, King of Lydia, 20 years after the second Messenian
War, and 30 after the nine Annual Archons were established at Athens, A. M.
3350. Upon his seizing the power, Demaratus, a man eminent amongst the
Bacchidae, and very rich, fled into Italy, and seated himself in Hetruria, A.M.
3350. Dionys. Halycarn and Livius. l. 1.
where, of a woman of that Country he begat two sons, Aruns and Lucumon, the
later whereof became King of Rome, by the name of Tarquinius.

7. Cypselus having enjoyed the principality of Corinth and Corcyra the space
of thirty years, Periander.
then died, and left it to his son Periander. Herodotus and Aristot.
He was much unlike his father, of a cruel disposition (if we believe Aristotle
rather than Sosicles in Herodotus) insomuch as not trusting the good will of
his people, he got a guard of 300 men about him, and would rather be feared
than loved of his Subjects; yet being hardy and warlike, he held the power
longer than he. Herodotus, out of Sosicles relates, that at first he was very
mild and courteous, till by acquaintance with Thrasybylus the Tyrant of Miletus,
he altered his humor; for sending to him for his advice, how he migh best
order his affairs in Government, he returned no answer to the Messenger, but
carrying him out into a plot of Corn, fell a plucking off the tallest and most
eminent ears, till he had well nigh marred the whole plot. The Messenger
returning told Periander what he had seen, who easily guessed, that the most
eminent and powerful Citizens were to be removed out of the way; but Polit. l.
3. c. 9. and l. 5. c. 10.
Aristotle makes him the author of this counsel to Thrasybylus. Laertius
says, he grew more cruel after it was known that he lay with his Mother Cratea.

8. He married Melissa the daughter of Procles (or Patrocles) tyrant of
Epidaurus, on whom he begat Cypselus and Lycophron, Laertius in vita Periandri,
and Herod. ut supra.
whereof the elder was very blockish and stupid. At the instigation of his
whores, he afterward killed his wife, kicking her when she was great with
child, then lay with her when she was dead, and calling together the
Corinthian women, as well adorned as possible, to celebrate the feast of Juno,
caused his guard to strip them all naked, and made a parentation to Melissa of
all their clothes and ornaments. Lycophron his youngest son, who only was
capable of Government, moved by Procles his Grandfather, grew exceeding
froward and refractory because of his Mother's death; insomuch as, differences
and distasts increasing, Periander banished him, first his house, then forbad
all his Subjects to speak to, or comfort him, and at length forced him into
Corcyra. But after some years growing old, infirm, and unfit for business, he
sent for him home, offering to pass over all to him; but by no arguments or
entreaties could he move him to return, till he offered to change places, and
divest himself of all power. Now, when this was agreed on, the Corcyraeans
fearing above all things to have Periander come amongst them, to prevent it,
killed the young man, Periander to be revenged, took away from them 300 of
their choicest Boys, which he sent to Haliattes King of Lydia his friend and
allie to be gelded; but they being driven upon the Island Samus, the
Inhabitants took such pity both on them and their relations, as to send them
home safe, and disappointed the Tyrant. This so vexed him, now almost eighty
years old, that he dyed of grief, though by some he be reckoned amongst the
seven Wise Men of Greece. Suidas out of most ancient Authors delivers this
character of him; That he was an harsh and cruel Tyrant, very martial, scarce
being ever out of War, very powerful at Sea, having so convenient Havens both
upon the Ionian and Aegean Gulfs. He reigned nigh forty years, and dyed in the
fourth of the 48th Olympiad, A. M. 3420. Olymp. 48. an. 4. V.C. 169. Nabuch. 24.
seven after the establishment of Solon's Laws, A. M. 3420.

Psammetichus.
9. Periander being dead, his Tyranny as it were tottered for three years and
some six months, during which time Psammetichus the son of Gordias, brother to
Periander, or rather something akin to him, held it; as appears by Politic.
l. 5. c. 12.
Aristotle, who only has preserved his name to us from utter oblivion. After
his removal the power of one man was laid aside, and the people put themselves
into a Free State, which continued as long as the liberty of Greece it self.
The form thereof is not described to us by any ancient Author; only this we
know from In Timoleonte and Dione.
Plutarch, that it was inclining more to Oligarchy than that of ^yracuse; SECT.
7.
the power of the multitude being more bounded. Yet, for certain, the
Government was popular, things of greatest consequence never being resolved on,
without the consent and decree of the people, (which kept those of highest
concernment in its own power) and, if any other in the World, was a friend to
Antimonarchical liberty, and an utter enemy to Monarchy, where ever it was
found in Greece. For this City undertook many times great Wars for this very
cause, and not out of any ambitious design, as is clear in the case of the
Syracusians, and others; so that a Captain out of it was most desirable upon
such an occasion; as may hereafter be discovered.

SECT. VII. The ancient Kingdom of Thebes.
1. Boeotia had on the West Phocis, on the East the Euboean Sea, on the North
the Eastern Locri, and on the South Attica and Megaris. The chief seat and
Metropolis of this Country was Thebes, the builder of which is not certainly
known. Calydnus.
Calydnus is reported first to have reigned here; whence by a Poet of Chalcis,
it is called the Tower of Calydnus, and in Hesychius, Calydnaean is the same
with Ancient. After him was Ogyges, A. M. 2244.
or Ogygus, Ogyges.
from whom Thebes by the Poets is called Ogygian, and that great Ogygian Deluge
is named, which is said to have happened in his time, 1020 years before the
first Olympiad, in the days of Phoroneus King of Argos, (as Africanus
gathers) and so overwhelmed all the region of Attica, that it made it
inhabitable for 200 years, as Pererius notes. Pausanias writes, In Boeoticis
and Atticis.
that he was King of the Ectenae, the first Inhabitants of Thebais, and that
from his son Eleusine a famous Town in Attica took both Original and name, as
some were of opinion. These Ectenae are reported to have been comsumed by
Pestilence, whom succeeded the Hyantes and Aonae, that continued in those
parts, together with the Temmices (who came from Sanium) and the Leleges, till
Cadmus coming to Greece, made himself Master of this place, in the days of
Corax King of Sicyon, and Danaus of Argos, 347 years after the beginning of
Ogyges.

Cadmus.
2. This Cadmus, acccording to the tradition of the Greeks, Apollod. lib. 2.
was son to Agenor the brother of Belus, Uncle to Danaus and Aegyptus, who
coming out of Egypt into Phoenice some 36 years before, on his wife Telphassa
begat three sons; Cadmus, Phoenix, Cilix, and a daughter named Europa. This
Europa, Jupiter stole, and carried over Sea into Crete, in the likeness of a
Bull, where he begat on her Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon. Diod. l. 4. p.
183.
Asterius King of the Island afterward married her, and having no children of
his own, adopted her sons. Herodotus tells us that some Greeks (Asterius
perhaps, Lib. 1. cap. 2.
or some for him) in revenge for what the Nation had formerly suffered from the
Asiaticks in stealing away Ino, went to Tire, and thence stole Europa the Kings
daughter, bringing her away in a ship, whose ensign was a Bull, whence occasion
was given to feign, that she was carried over upon a Bull's back.

3. Agenor sent out his three sons to seek their Sister, Diod. lib. 4. p. 147.
charging them never to return without her into Phoenicia. Cadmus sailed first
into the Island Call^sthe, (lying betwixt Crete and Callisthe) where he left a
Colony, and thence into Thasus (so named from Thasus one of his Companions,
Pausan. l. 5. A. M. 2555.
and head of another Colony left here) and at length into Greece, where, in
Boeotia, being past all hope of finding his sister, and consequently of
returning into Phoenicia, by the command of an Oracle he founded Thebes; or
re-edifying what was formerly built by Ogyges, anew laid the foundation of the
Castle, which, ever after, from him retained the name of Cadmea. The Hyantae
beaten by his Forces, fled the night following into Phocis; Strabo l. 9. p. 401.
but the Aeonae, upon their submission, were suffered to continue and imbodie
themselves amongst the Phoenicians. Here he married Harmonia the daughter of
Mars and Venus, agreeable to which alliance, the gods are said to have come
down unto Cadmea to the wedding. Out of Phoenicia he first brought letters into
Greece, giving them their peculiar names and characters, Diod. l. 3. p. 140.
Lib. 5. p. 227, 228. Multi alii.
fitted for the language of the place, and thence they were called Phoenician,
though afterward Pelasgian, because the use of them was, after they were
brought over, first made known to the Pelasgi.

4. Of Harmonia, Cadmus begot Polydorus his son, and four daughters, Semele,
Ino, Antonoe, and Agave. Idem l. 3. p. 147.
On Semele Jupiter enamoured begot Dionysus, or Bacchus, who found out Wine and
Ale, and traveled throughout the then known World, to reduce men to civility.
This he did with an Army both of men and women, and after an Expedition of
three years returned out of India, first triumphing upon an Elephant. Ino was
married to Arhamas the son of Aeolus and grandson of Hellen, Apollod.
to whom she bore Actaeon that was devoured by his own Dogs. Agave became the
wife of Eetion, to whom she bore Pentheus. After Cadmus had reigned some time
at Thebes, he was called by the Encheleae, who had Wars at that time with the
Illyrians, Polydorus.
and were bidden by the Oracle to send for him and Harmonia to be their
Captains. He left then the Kingdom of Thebes to his son Polydorus, and having
subdued the Illyrians, reigned over them, and begot another son called
Illyrius, who either gave or took name from that people. The Poets feigned
Cadmus and his wife, to have been turned here into Snakes, because they seem to
have forgot their former civility, and learnt barbarism.

5. This is the sum of what the Greeks have delivered concerning Cadmus. But,
What the Sidonians said of Cadmus.
though they, for their own credit, made him the son of a King, yet the
Sidonians, whose Countryman he was, deny this, alleging that being their
King's Cook, he fled away with Harmonia, a certain minstrel. His time, as it is
computed, falls in with that of Joshua, so that he seems to have led into
Greece a Colony of those Canaanites, or Phoenicians, who were outed of their
habitations by the Israelites. His family may be gathered to have been that of
the Kadmonites, mentioned by Moses, who were the same with the Hivites, and
called Cadmonim, or Orientals, because they possessed Mount Hermon, the most
Eastern part of Canaan, taken for the East, as Thabor for the West. Hence came
it to pass, that Cadmus his wife was called Harmonia, or Hermione, and
apparent why they were feigned to be turned into Snakes, because an Hivite in
the Syrian language signifies a Serpent. That he first brought letters into
Greece is most probable, 1. Because the antientest Greek letters, in most
things, are like to the old Phoenician, which the Samaritans at this day use.
2. Their names are plainly Phoenician, or Hebrew, as may be instanced in Alpha,
Beta, etc. of which the Greeks were not ignorant, as appears out of Varro.
For Crates the Philosopher, disputing in Greece about some points of Grammar,
demanded why they said not Alpha Alphatos as well as Gramma Grammatos, to which
the Grecians answered, that the names were not theirs, but barbarous; and
Plutarch rendered this reason, why Alpha is set before the rest by the
Phoenicians, because they called an Ox by that name. 3. The Greeks kept the
same order of letters as the Phoenicians did, being most ancient, as appears
by some acrostick Verses of David and Jeremiah. Cadmus brought over the Rites
of Bacchus into Greece, and thereupon is feigned to be Grandfather to him, who
lived many Ages before, and indeed was Nimrod. To this City built or re-edified
by him, he gave the name of Thebes, of which name there was a place in Canaan
mentioned by the Book of Cap. 9. 50.
Judges, and by Antiq. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Josephus also written Thebae, in the plural number; so that an end may be put
to that controversy about the original of the word, which betokens mud or
dirt. But concerning all this, Bochartus is to be consulted, in the first Book
of that admirable Work entitled Canaan.

Labdacus.
6. Polydorus, succeeding his Father, married Nycteis the daughter of Nycteus,
by which he had a son named Labdacus, whom, dying before he came at age, he
A.M. 2601.
left to the tuition of his father-in-law. Nycteus had another daughter,
Antiope by name, which Epopeus King of Sicyonia stole away, whence a War
insued, wherein both of them received mortal wounds, Pausan. in Boeoticis and
Corinth.
and Nycteus dying, left the tuition of the young King to his brother Lycus.
After Labdacus came at age, Lycus restored faithfully the Kingdom to him,
wherefore the King dying also not long after, Laius.
and leaving his son Laius a Child but of one year old, having experience of
his faithfulness, he committed him to his protection. Afterward Amphion and
Zethus, the sons of Antiope, Diodor. l. 4. p. 191.
invaded Thebais in revenge for their mother's hard usage and Captivity, she
having been taken by Lycus in Sicyon, or delivered up to him by Lamedon King of
that City, when he led down thither an Army, at the desire of his dying
brother, to revenge him upon her and Epopeus, as we before showed. Lycus
meeting them in the field was slain in battle, Thebes lost, and the Child Laius
had miscarried, but that some well-wishers to his stock withdrew him out of the
danger, lest the posterity of Cadmus should be utterly extinct. Amphion then
and Zethus obtained the Kingdom; said by Homer to have built Thebes, which must
be meant of the lower City distinct from Cadmea. Amphion was so excellent a
Musician, that he is said to have made stones to follow him, wherewith he built
Towers about the City. He married Niobe, the daughter of Tantalus, and sister
to Pelops, which brought him many Children, but boasting her self mote
fruitful than Latona her self, procured the destruction of them all. For
Apollo was commanded to kill the Boys, and Diana the Girls, whereat she was
struck with such stupidity, as she is feigned to be turned into a stone; and
Amphion with all his family at length died of the pestilence. Zethus having his
young son killed at unawares by the mother, pined away for grief; so that both
brothers being dead, and their families ruined, the Thebans restored the
Kingdom to Laius the son of Labdacus.

7. Laius married Jocaste, the daughter of Menaeceus, but was admonished by the
Oracle to beget no Children, because else he should be killed by his son; which
punishment Pelops had prayed might fall on him for stealing his son Chrysippus,
begotten on a Concubine. Apollod.
Notwithstanding this he had a son, but as soon as he was born he thrust his
feet in Iron fetters, and exposed him as a prey to wild beasts. Yet, either by
those that had this charge, Diodorus l. 4. p. 185. A.M. 2695.
or others that found him, he was carried to Polybus, King of Corinth, who
caused his feet to be healed (from the swelling of which he had the name of
Oedipus) and brought him up. Many years after when he was grown, Laius, either
hearing some rumor concerning him, or carried by natural affection, went to
enquire of the Oracle what had happened to his son, and at the same time it
chanced that Oedipus, having heard of some design against himself, went thither
also to enquire who were his true Parents. They met in Phocis, A.M. 2722.
where Laius bidding the other somewhat imperiously to give way, Oedipus moved
with choler killed him, being utterly ignorant who he was.

Creon.
8. Laius being dead, Creon the brother of Jocaste (called also Epicaste) seized
upon his Kingdom, Oedipus.
and kept it for some time, till Oedipus explained the ridle of Sphinx. It Is
Munster, which the Boeotians also called Phix, Apollodorus.
is feigned to have had an head and face like a woman, the hinder parts like a
Lion, and wings as a Bird, and keeping upon the Hill Phicion, Plutarch. in lib.
quod bruta ratione utuntur.
or Phiceon (so named from her) she proposed ridles, which whosoever could
unridle should have Jocaste in marriage with the Kingdom; but if not, she
presently devoured them. Unridleth the ridle of Sphinx.
Her ridle to Oedipus was this: what is it that which goes both on two Legs,
three, and four? A.M. 2758.
Many having lost their lives for a misinterpretation, he expounded it to be
meant of a man, who when an Infant creeps on hands and feet, when arrived at
ripeness of age goes upright on legs, and when he comes to be old uses a
staff. Some think her a deformed, and savage kind of woman, that living on prey
used to lie in wait for passengers. But Pausanias writing that she was the
Bastard daughter of Laius, others judge her to have been for her wisdom
preferred to determine the pretenses of such as claimed the Kingdom, and that
those who were cast in the trial she punished with death; which cruelty the
Poets detesting raised the fable. Because of her abilities, this kind of
Monster was made by Clemens Strom. l. 5.
the Egyptians an Hieroglyphick of wisdom and strength, in both which Plutarch
makes her to have excelled.

9. Oedipus then married Jocasta his own mother, not knowing what she was to
him, and obtained the Kingdom of Thebes. Diodorus tells us that he had two
sons by her, Eteocles and Polynices, with as many daughters, but others say he
had them by Euryganea, the daughter of Hyperphas. At length all came to light;
both that he had killed his father, and married his own mother, whereupon she
presently hanged her self, and his sons kept him up close for the filthiness
of the thing, as some say, though others will have him driven from Thebes, and
that going to Theseus King of Athens, he there died a little after. Polynices,
while his father was yet living, went to Argos, Pausan. Diodorus. Apollod.
where he married Argia, the daughter of Adrastus; but after his death returned
to Thebes to succeed him in the Kingdom. The two brothers then agreed to reign
by turns; Eteocles and Polynices.
but Eteocles, having the first course refused to yield up his power at the
time prefixed; so that Polynices was glad to return to Argos. At the same time
there h^pned to be with Adrastus one Tydeus, the son of Oeneus, who having
killed a man in Aetolia, fled also to him: both these he kindly received, and
by direction of the Oracle making them his sons-in-law, promised to restore
them to their Countries and Estates. Beginning first with Polynices, he sent
Tydeus in Embassage to Eteocles, who caused fifty men to lie in wait for him by
the way, but he killed them all, and returned safe to Argos. Adrastus, to
revenge the injury, made all possible preparation for a War, and invited all
the best Soldiers from all quarters to the expedition. Seven Eminent Captains
gave their names, whereof Amphiaraus, who had married Eriphile, the sister of
Adrastus, was Chief, though of so ancient a thing as this Theban-war, there can
be little certainty.

The Theban War.
10. A.M. 2785.
Having each of them his several Army (or Company rather) they marched to
Thebes, which they besieged, and divided themselves according to the Gates of
the City. Eteocles made all preparations for defense, assigning to every Gate
its Officer, and consulted Tiresias a Prophet, then blind, concerning the event
of the War. He answered, that the Thebans should overcome, if Menaeceus, the
son of Creon, would devote himself as a sacrifice to Mars, which he presently
did, killing himself before the Gates. Diod. l. 4. p. 177.
The Thebans then made a sally, but were beaten back to the Walls, which, when
the Argives approached, Capaneus, one of the seven Captains, first of all others
set to Ladders, and mounted; but he being killed, the other retreated, and many
of them were slain in the pursuit. After this it was agreed that the two
brothers, in a single Combat, should decide the quarrel, and so doing they
mutually fell by the hands of each other: then followed a very sharp fight
wherein all the Captains that followed Adrastus were slain, and he only
escaped by the swiftness of his Horse Arion. Yet this victory cost the Thebans
so dear, that being themselves almost ruined, hence Cadmea victoria became a
proverb. This War fell out 28 years before that of Troy.

Laodamus.
11. Eteocles leaving behind him a young son, named Laodamus, Creon, the brother
of Jocasta, assumed the Guardianship of him, and would not suffer the Argives
to be buried, till Theseus, and the Athenians procured it. Ten years after the
War, when Laodamus was now grown up, the sons of those Captains that had been
slain, called Epigoni, made an expedition against Thebes to revenge the death
of their fathers. The expedition of the Epigoni.
A.M. 2795.
Consulting beforehand the Oracle of Delphos about the success, they were
bidden to choose Alcmaeon, the son of Amphiaraus, for their General, which
having done, and marching into Thebais, they wasted all the Country round
about the City. Hereupon the Thebans made a sally, and a sharp conflict
insued, wherein Laodamus slew Aegialeus, the son of Adrastus, and was himself
killed by Alcmaeon, though Pausanias says he escaped out of the fight, and
fled to the Illyrians. After this the City was taken, and with other plunder,
Pausan.
Tiresias the Prophet was sent as a present toward Delphos; but drinking by
the way presently died. This is he, SECT. 1. Thersander.
who is said to have experienced both Sexes, and lived seven Generations; even
from the days of Cadmus to this time. The Epigoni having taken the City, and
either slain, or driven away Laodamus, placed Thersander, the son of Polynices
in the Kingdom, who sailed with Agamemnon toward Troy as General of the
Boeotians, and was killed in Mysia by Telephus, as was before showed. Peneleus.
The Boeotians chose Peneleus for their Captain, because his son Tisamenus was
then but young, and he was also slain in the War by Euryphylus, the son of
Telephus, who after the death of Achilles, brought Auxiliary forces out of
Mysia unto Priamus.

Tisamenus.
12. Peneleus being dead, Tisamenus, the son of Thersander, Pausanias ut supra.
reigned at Thebes. Auresion.
His son Autesion left this place, and went to the Dorienses; wherefore
Damasichthon, Damasichthon.
the Nephew of Peneleus, and son of Opheltas, was chosen in his room.
Ptolomaeus.
After him followed Ptolomaeus, and then Xanthus the last King of all, Xanthus.
who was slain by Melanthus the Messenian in a single Combat, in behalf of the
Athenians, about Celaenae, a place situate upon the Borders, as we have Chap.
5. Sect. 4. Parag. 15. A. M. 2877.
already showed. This happened 56 years after the destruction of Troy, 24 before
the descent of the Heraclidae, 57 before the death of Codrus the last Athenian
King, 252 before the first Olympiad, A. M. 2877. After his death, together with
the possession of Celaenae, the Thebans quitted the Government of Kings, it
seeming good to them no longer to be Governed by a single person, but by many,
as Pausanias writes, from whom yet it appears not what kind of rule was
erected; whether an Oligarchy at first, or the whole power was assumed by the
people, which we know assuredly exercised it in after times, in a Democratical
way. Such was the Government when the Persians had obtained the Empire of the
East, and Greece it self most flourished; at which time, in the entire History
of this Country we shall hear further of the Thebans.

CHAP. VI. The Original, and Kingdom of Rome, Contemporary with the Babylonian
Empire.
SECT. I. The Original of the City of Rome.
The ancient inhabitants of Latium.
1. THe City of Rome was seated in Latium, the Western tract of Italy, upon the
River Tiber. The soil, for as much as can be known, (says Dionysius) was first
inhabited by the Siculi, Dionys. Halicarnasseus l. 1.
who held many other places of that Country. These were expelled by the
Aborigines, who being the posterity of the Oenotrians (who seized upon that
Tract lying near Tarentum) were Consecrated first to the gods, and according to
the custom of the Country, then sent out to seek them new seats, and fortunes.
The Oenotrians came out of Lycaonia (afterward called Arcadia) to seek a more
commodious habitation under conduct of Oenotrus, the son of Lycaon, from whom
they received their name. These Aborigines here settled, were forced to admit of
some Pelasgians to live amongst them that fled from Haemonia (since called
Thessaly) where, for some time they had continued, and afterward certain
Arcadians who followed Evander, son to Mercury, and the Nymph Themis, from a
Town of that Country called Palantium, which name they gave to an Hill on
which they fixed, afterward reckoned amongst the seven belonging to the City.
Not long after, the Greeks will have Hercules come into these parts, as he was
returning home from his expedition into Spain, and the Western Regions, and
here to have left some Peloponnesians, who settled themselves upon the Hill
called then Saturnius, and afterward Capitolinus, at what time Faunus reigned
over the Aborigines.

Pious.
2. The Father of Faunus is said to be Picus the son of Saturn, who flying out
of Crete from his son Jupiter, came into this Country, and here hiding himself,
gave occasion for the Region to be called Latium. Some say the Father of Picus
war rightly called Sterces, and Surnamed Saturn, from whom the Laurentine
Kingdom took it is beginning, Augustine. de Civitat. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 15.
named from Laurentum the Town, and that from Laurus or Laurel. Picus had this
name from the Bird Picus (a Wood-pecker) which he used, by it is flying to
foretell things to come, as Festus notes out of Verrius. Plutarch says, that
he was by the sorceries of his wife changed into this Bird, in the likeness of
which he gave forth Oracles, and answered questions; and agreeable hereto,
Dionysius of Halicarnassus compares this Bird with the Dove of Dodona, as
performing that to the Aborigines, which it did to the Thesprotes. But Servius
thinks all this feigned, because Picus was a Soothsayer, and observed the
flying of this kind of Bird; and Bochartus tells us, that Piccea in the
Phoenician dialect signifies a Seer or Prophet; whence, as Phix amongst the
Boeotians was taken for a cunning woman, so he for his skill in such matters,
might, according to the termination of Latin words, have the name of Picus.
This man, who in Suidas has the name of Jupiter, (except Jupiter of Crete,
that stole Io, Faunus.
was called Picus) begat Faunus or Fatuus; and a daughter named Fauna, and
Fatua, which being in a fury would also foretell things to come; whence such as
were thus taken, were said Fatuari. Being killed by Faunus her brother and
husband, as if seems, she was worshipped as a goddess, and called Bona Dea,
because she was so modest, that never any man saw her except her husband.
Dionysius makes this Faunus the son of Mars. He is feigned to have served
under Bacchus in his Expedition into the East; and this is their reason,
because indeed he was the same with Pan, the constant companion of Bacchus.
Aur. Victor de Orig. gentis Romans
One writes that he was called also Sylvanus Invius, and Pan by some. Servius
in Aen. l. 6.
Another says, his name in Latin was Invius, and in Greek Pan. So that his
reigning in Latium was a mere Fable, invented by some who knew not that he was
the same with Pan the Arcadian, whose Worship was brought into Italy by Evander.

Latinus.
3. After him reigned Latinus, as the story goes, whom Festus makes his son,
but others, as we have it from Dionysius, fathered on Hercules, who begat him
on a certain Hyperborean Virgin, which having received as an Hostage from her
Father, he kept untouched till he came into Latium, and afterward gave her in
marriage unto Faunus, therefore accounted the Father of Latinus. Fifty five
years after the departure of Hercules, and in the 35th of the reign of Latinus,
Aeneas with with the Trojans arrive in Italy.
Aeneas with his wandering Trojans arrived at Laurentum, not far from the Mouth
of Tiber. Livie says, it is most certain, that Troy being taken, the Graecians
raged against the other Inhabitants, but abstained from Antenor and Aeneas (the
son of Anchises, who was son to Capys, and grandson to Assaracus, the brother
of Ilus King of Troy) both for the friendship which had past betwixt them and
their families, and because they were ever for peace and the restitution of
Helena. But Dionysius, relates out of Hellanicus, that the lower part of the
City being taken, Aeneas with his associates that came from Ophyrynium and
Dardanus, to the aid of Ilium, timely perceiving it, retired into the Castle,
where were the Idols and much treasure, protected by the most valiant Soldiers.
A. M. 2821.
Hither also betook themselves such as escaped the fury of fire and sword; and
they easily repelled the force of the Enemy; but Aeneas considering that the
City could no way be preserved, resolved to quit the Castle as might stand with
the safety of the Company. He therefore sent out with a guard the aged an
infirm, in the mean time diverting the Enemy, and then marched out in order of
battle, when Neoptolemus and the Achaeans had now taken part of the
Fortifications. Whilst the Greeks were busied in plunder, they all escaped to
the Mount Ida, where, fortifying themselves, the same night others flocked to
them out of Dardanus, Opyhrynium, and the rest of the Trojan Towns, expecting
till the Enemy satisfied with the destruction of Ilium, would draw off and
return into his own Country.

4. But the Achaeans having wasted the City, and lesser Towns, provided also to
storm the Hills; when a Treaty was desired by the Trojans. It was there agreed,
that Aeneas and his Companions, with such things as they had, should depart out
of the Country under safe conduct; whereupon he first sent away his eldest son
Ascanius, with part of his associates (whereof the greater number was
Phrygians) to the Lake Ascanius, for that he was desired by the Inhabitants of
that Country to be their King. He continued not long with them, for the
Scamandridae, with others of the family of Hector, now dismissed out of Greece
by Neoptolemus the son of Achilles, coming to him, he returned with them to
Troy, and restored them to their Father's Principality. Aeneas with the rest of
his children, Anchises his Father, and his household, passed over the Hellespont
into a Peninsula called Pallene, whence he sailed to to the Island Delus,
thence to another named Cythera, over against Peloponnesus. Touching at the
promontory Cinaethium (so called for that Cinathus a Trojan was here buried)
they renewed their friendship with the Arcadians their kinsfolk, and passed on
to the Island Zacynthus, which was so named from Zacynthus one of the sons of
Dardanus. Thence they came to Actium, and so to Ambraciae, from which Bay
Anchises directed his course toward Batrotus an Haven of Epirus, and Aeneas by
land went two days journey to the Oracle of Dodoria, which having consulted
about new Seats, in four days he came to the Navy at Batrotus, From this Haven
sailing toward Italy, they touched upon some parts thereof, but passing into
the Straights of Sicilie, they fell also upon that Island, where leaving part
of their Company, they passed over and landed at Laurentum, the place appointed
to put an end to these wanderings. This account Dionysius gives us, as most
probable, amongst others which he briefly touches. Alexander the Ephesian, as
he is cited by Aurelius Victor, wrote that Ilium being betrayed by Antenor,
Aeneas took his Father upon his back, with his gods, and his little son in his
hand, and thus loaded made toward Ida, whither being suffered to come by the
Greeks (who were much moved at his piety) he there built ships, and by the
advice of an Oracle came into Italy. The piety of Aeneas is much spoken of, and
commended by many; and amongst others, by the pen of Xenophon, that Attick
Muse; but some wrote that he joined with Antenor in betraying the City.

5. The Trojans landing at Laurentum, there pitched their Tents in the place
called Troy from this occasion, distant from the Sea about half a mile. Dionys.
l. 1. Livius l. 1.
Taking their dinner on the ground, some laid their meat on Parsley, that there
grew, or, as some said, on crusts of Bread, which afterward they did also eat
up, and then understood that they had fulfilled the Oracle, which bad them go
so far Westward, as till they should eat up their Tables, and then take the
conduct of a Sow, which they should follow, till she lay down, and in that very
place build a City. Now was Latinus busy in War against the Rutuli his
neighbors, as some wrote, he was first overcome by Aeneas, and then made peace
with him; but others say, he first sent to expostulate the injury offered him
by these strangers in the invasion of his Kingdom, and then, understanding who
they were, agreed to give them all the ground lying five miles about the Hill
where the Sow lay down, upon their engagement to assist him in his War against
the Rutuli. This accord made, and Hostages delivered on both sides, they soon
utterly subdued the Rutuli, and then built up the Trojan City which was called
Lavinium, as the Romans said, -- Nam te jam septima portat Omnibus errantem
terris and fluctibus asta^. Aen. 1. A. M. 3824.
from the daughter of Latinus. Virgil too much indulging his Poetic fancy, in
imitation of Homer, brings Aeneas into Italy not till the eighth year after
the destruction of Troy. But Dionysius and Solinus (out of the Annals of
Cassius Haemina) write, that he arrived at Laurentum in the second year, and
the later says, with no more than 600 followers.

Aeneas succeeds Latinus.
6. Aeneas in the third year after his departure from Troy, and the second of
his abode in Italy, reigned only over the Trojans, but the next brought him
also the Kingdom of the Aborigines, by the right of his wife Lavinia, daughter
to Latinus now deceased, and the favor he had purchased of this people, by his
conduct against the Rutuli. For they had again revolted through the procurement
of a certain fugitive named Turnus, who being the Nephew of Amata, Latinus his
wife, out of indignation that a stranger should be preferred to the marriage of
Lavinia, before him, at the instigation of Amata and others, revolted to the
Rutuli with a party of men which he commanded. Livie makes him King of the
Rutuli, and to have made War upon Latinus, because he had first made him a
promise of his daughter. The Aborigines had the victory, but lost Latinus in
the battle. Dionysius says, that Turuus was now also slain with many others,
but Livie will have him again to renew the War, and to call in Mezentius King
of the Hetruscans, who was already jealous of the growing power of the Greeks.
Aeneas, to oblige his new Subjects, caused both them and his own Countrymen,
to be called by the common name of Latini; but engaging in another great and
bloody battle with Mezentius, which night only interrupted, he was never seen
more, by some thought to be taken up to Heaven, and by others drowned in the
River Numicon. This happened to him in the fourth year of his reign over the
Latins, and the seventh after the destruction of Troy. He was honored by a
Chapel dedicated to him, under the title of Jupiter Indiges.

Ascanius.
7. Ascanius his son succeeded him, who before was called Euryleon, till his
name came to be changed in their flight from Troy, as Dionysius writes. Some
thought him the same with the eldest son of Aeneas by Creusa, and called Iulus,
from whom the family of the Julii took it is name; but others accounted him
younger. Mezentius grew very high upon the death of Aeneas, and besieging
Lavinium, forced the Latins to submit themselves; but requiring all their wine
to be yearly sent as a tribute into Hetruria, they would not endure so harsh
terms, and encouraging themselves, fell upon their Enemies at unawares, and,
killing Lausus the King's son amongst many others, forced him to submit to
equal conditions. Thirty years after the founding of Laviuium, Ascanius led out
a new Colony, and built another City called Alba Longa built.
Alba Longa, whither he betook himself, A. M. 2852. ante Romans 400.
leaving the old to his Mother Lavinia, who, if his own Parent, managed the
Kingdom for him in his nonage. He died in the 28th year of his reign, and was
succeeded by Sylvius, whom some make his son, others his brother, saying, that
Lavinia being left with child by Aeneas, Ascanius his Successors in Alba.
for fear of Ascanius fled into the Woods, and there was delivered of this
child, who from the place of his birth had the name of Sylvius. Iulus the
eldest son of Ascanius contended with him for the Kingdom; but the people
conceiving it to belong to him of right, as the Nephew of Latinus, gave the
Priesthood to the other, in whose family it thenceforth continued. Frpm Sylvius
all his Successors were Surnamed Sylvii; whereof the first (after he had
reigned 29 years) was Aeneas Sylvius his Son. Aeneas having reigned so many,
left Latinus his Successor, whom after 51 followed Alba for 39. After Alba,
Capetus reigned 26 years, Capys 28, Calpetus, A. M. 3081.
or Carpentus, 13, and then Tiberinus eight, who being drowned in the River
Albula, bestowed on it the name of Tiber. After him Agrippa reigned 24 years,
then Alladius (called also Aremulus and Romulus Sylvius) 19, who was very
wicked and tyrannical, insomuch that he would counterfeit Thunder, desirous to
be accounted a god by his Subjects, and justly perished by Thunder and
inundation through excessive rains. Aventinus succeeded him, who gave name to
one of the seven Hills, and after 37 left Procas Sylvius his Successor.

8. Procas the thirteenth King of Alba left two Sons, A. M. 3209. Oziae 14.
Numitor and Amulius, whereof the later and younger violently thrust his
brother from the Kingdom, and that he might have no posterity to revenge the
injury, caused his son to be made away in a pretended hunting, and his daughter
Rhea to be devoted to the service of Vesta, and a single life. In the fourth
year of her Priesthood, as she was going to fetch water for the service of the
goddess, she was light upon by some one and ravished: some said by one of her
lovers, others by Amulius himself, who came disguised upon her, rather out of
desire to make an occasion against her, than for any affection; but for credit
of the cause the fact is laid upon Mars, in whose grove it was committed, and
who came to her as it is said in a terrible manner with Thunder and Lightning.
Rhea (called also Sylvia and Ilia) conceived with two boys, Rhea the daughter
of Numitor brings forth Twins.
and when they were born, she was either put to death, or condemned to
perpetual prison, and they were thrown into the River. A. M. 3235. Olymp. 2.
an. 4. Oziae 40.
At the fall of the water they were left upon the dry ground, and a Wolf moved
with their cries came and suckled them with her teats, till they were taken
notice of by Faustulus the King's Herdsman, who brought them home to his wife
Acca Laurentia, that had been newly brought to bed of a stilborn Child. Some
thought that Numitor, aware of his brother's intention to make them away,
caused other two to be brought in their rooms, and gave his two Nephews to be
nourished by this Faustulus. Others write that this Acca Laurentia was but the
Paramour of the Herdsman, and for the naughtiness of her life called Lupa
(Lupanaria amongst the Romans signifying brothel houses, and Lupa a Strumpet)
whence the fable arose that the Children were nourished by a Wolf. Their names
were Romulus and Remus.

Romulus and Remus
9. The boys grown up proved active and courageous suitably to their birth, but
being educated as was agreeable with the fortune and employment of their
Foster-father, they had occasion to fall out with the Herds-men, of Numitor,
and Remus being taken prisoner was carried before the King. Dionys.
Now did Faustulus reveal the whole matter to Romulus concerning their
Original, who got together a company of Herds-men, and therewith falling upon
the Palace slew Amulius, and restored their Grandfather to the Kingdom. After
things were settled at Alba, the young men had a desire to build a City in the
place where they had been brought up, which their Grandfather well approving
gave them the ground, with such of his subjects as he knew to be of his
brothers faction, and all others that of their own accord would willingly go
out in this new Colony. Lead out a Colony.
Most of the Trojans gave their names (whereof continued to the time of
Dionysius almost 50 families) the inhabitants of the place also as many as were
left about Palantium and Saturnia were taken in, and the multitude divided into
two parts, that by emulation the work might proceed with greater expedition.
But what was intended for a laudable contention grew to a greater
inconvenience; for hereby were two factions made, which preferring the brothers
each before the other raised in them ambitious desire of pre-eminence. This
soon appeared in that they could not agree about the place; Romulus would have
the Palatine Hill (or Palantian) to be taken in, and Remus contended for
Remuria, though on the other they were educated. The matter was brought before
their Grandfather, who advised them to go apart, and observe the flying of
Birds; and to whom happened the most lucky flight, he should be accounted the
Author of the Colony. Romulus went to the Palatine Hill, and Remus to the
Aventine near adjoining. Remus first had six vultures come flying by him; but
Romulus his flock doubled the number, so that both of them were saluted King,
and neither would give place to the other.

Remus killed.
10. The contention grew so sharp as to proceed to a fight, wherein Remus had
the worst of it, and was slain; which Dionysius thinks the most probable
opinion. Others write that he scoffed at the lowness of the Wall which his
brother had made, saying, it would easily be passed over by Enemies, and
therewith leaped over it himself, for which he was presently killed by one
Celer, who oversaw the work. Romulus compassed in the Palatine Hill, and made
that the Rudiments of the City, with an Heifer and a young Bullock joined
together plowing up a furrow where the Wall should be reared, which use was
afterward observed by the Romans, both in the building, and razing of Cities.
This is the most common, and received opinion about the Original of Rome,
Several opinions concerning the builder of Rome.
which some make built at another time, and by other founders. Cephalon
Gergithius a most ancient Historian wrote that it was built in the second age
after the Trojan War, by Romus, one of the four sons of Aenaeas; with whom many
other Authors agreed. Others made the founder of it to be Aeneas himself, whom
they will have come in company with Ulysses into Italy. Aristotle the
Philosopher wrote, that part of the Achaeans themselves, in their return from
Troy, were by Tempests driven upon Italy, and forced to plant themselves in
Latium. Callias the Historian, who Recorded the Acts of Agathocles, mentioned a
Trojan woman, called Roma, that being married to Latinus, King of the
Aborigenes, bare to him two sons, Remus and Romulus, who building the City,
named it Rome after their mother. Xenagoras reckoned up three sons of Ulysses
by Circe, Romus, Antias, and Ardea, all which built Cities of their own name.
Dionysius of Chalcis, with others, would have this Romus to be the son of
Ascanius; some of Emethion, and some of Italus by Electra the daughter of
Latinus. Besides these, many other Greek Authors dissented about the founders
of the City.

11. Neither have Roman Writers agreed amongst themselves. Some of them would
have the sons of Aeneas to be founders of the City, viz. Romulus and Remus;
others, his Nephews by his daughter, which he gave up as Hostages to Latinus,
King of the Aborigines. Some write how Ascanius being left Heir by his father,
divided his inheritance with Romulus and Remus his brethren: he himself built
Alba and other Towns, Romulus Capua, so called from Capys his great
Grandfather, Anchisa from Anchises his Grandfather, and that place afterward
called Janiculum, which he named after his father Aeneas; then lastly, Rome
after his own name, which being afterward desolate, the Albans repeopled by a
Colony led thither by Romulus and Remus. According to this History, this City
should have been twice founded: First, not long after the Trojan times, and
then again in the fifteenth age after; but more than this, Antiochus of
Syracuse mentioned a third Rome that must have been before the War of Troy,
writing, that from Rome came a certain Sicilian fugitive to Morges, the son of
Italus, King of Italy. By reason of this uncertainty of the founders, some,
whose prejudice against the Empire of the City moved them with envy, accounted
it no other than a receptacle, and fortress of Barbarians, Fugitives, and
Vagabounds, and were ready to call into question the History of Romulus, as a
mere invention made to hide the despicable Original of so great a Commonwealth.

12. Whether it was a new Plantation, or reparation of an old Town, there is
great variety of opinions concerning the time thereof. Timaeus the Sicilian
made its foundation contemporary with that of Carthage, and the 38 year before
the first Olympiad: Several opinions concerning the time of the building.
But of those which seem to approach nearer to truth, some place the foundation
of it in the sixth Olympiad; whereof Velleius Paterculus assigns the first
year, others the third; and Varro, from the opinion of Tarcutius a most
excellent Mathematician, the fourth; which opinion is followed by many Authors
of great note (besides Augustus, Claudius, Severus, and Philip, Emperors in
their Saecular Games) as Plutarch, Tacitus, Dio, Gellius, Censorinus,
Onuphrius, Caesar Baronius, Torniellus, Joseph Scaliger, and Jacobus Cappellus.
Solinus will have Pomponius Atticus, and Cicero, to reckon from the third year
of this Olympiad; but as Pliny, Paterculus and Livy, so Cicero varieth,
sometimes counting from the Calends of January of the foregoing, one while of
this, and another of the following year. M. Porcius Cato knowing that Rome was
built something before the seventh Olympiad, not standing upon minute and
scrupulous deductions, began the Era of the City from the first of January
that fell in the first year of that Olympiad; and so the year of his own
Consulship he said to be the 758 year of the City. This Era is followed by
the Fasti Capitolini, Solinus, Eusebius, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, (who
takes pains to prove the account good) Polybius, Sigonius, Pighius, Occo,
Goltzius, Isaacus Casaubonus upon Polybius, and others. Fabius Pictor wrote
that Rome was built in the eighth Olympiad, the reason whereof, as Cappellus
thinks, is, because Romulus might then have finished the Wall and Ditch; some
deriving the Era of a building from laying of a foundation, and others from
the finishing of the structure. Lastly, L. Cineius, as Dionysius informs us,
held that the City was built in the second year of the twelfth Olympiad. SECT.
2.
In this great variety of opinions we have rather more reason to approve that
of Varro the most learned of all Romans, A.M. 3252. Ol. 6. an. 4. Jothami 6.
Pekachi 7.
which places the beginning of Rome in the fourth year of the sixth Olympiad,
the sixth of Jotham King of Judah, and the seventh of Pekah King of Israel,
about the time that the Ephori were made at Sparta, in the days of Charops the
first Archon at Athens for ten years. A.M. 3252.

SECT. II. From the building of the City to the destruction of the Kingdom,
the space of 245 years.
The founding of Rome.
1. ROmulus being 18 years old, laid the foundation of the Walls on the Solinus
cap. 2. Cicero de divin. lib. 2. Plutarch in Romulo.
eleventh day before the Calends of May, (which answers to the fourth of
October, after the Julian account) betwixt the hours of two and three, The Sun
being in Libra, and the Moon in Taurus; Jupiter in Pisces; Saturn, Venus, Mars,
and Mercury in Scorpio, according to the Computation of Tarrutius the most
noble of Mathematicians. De re Rustica l. 2. c. 1.
Varro, Lib. 4. Fast. Vide Joseph. Scalig. de Emend. temp. l. 5. page 362.
Ovid, and several others write that Rome was founded on the Parilia, or
Palilia. Festus tells us that Parilia were so called a Pariendo, from
bringing forth; those Stars in the head of Taurus, (or which make up the head
of themselves as Gellius criticizeth against Tiro) named Hyades, and under
which Rome was founded, being also called Parilicium, and Palilicium Sydus.
Servius notes that Pales was the Roman Goddess of fodder, to whom a solemnity
being observed on the eleventh of the Calends of May, it had the name of
Palilia. Cappellus thinks that according to the mind of Tarrutius, the first
year of the City commenced from the first of January, and Capricorn, in the
new Moon, three months after the foundation was laid.

The number of the Colony.
2. The number of the Colony amounted scarce to 300 horsemen, and 3000 foot,
Dionys. lib. 2. Livius lib. 1.
wherewith Romulus (which some make but the diminutive of Romus his true name)
planted this new City, called Rome after himself. To increase the number of
his Citizens, he opened a Sanctuary to all malefactors, and discontented
persons, which then resorted to him in great numbers from the Countries
adjoining. Setting about the frame of the Commonwealth by his Grandfathers
advice, he remitted it to the choice of the people what kind of Government they
would have, whereby obtaining the Kingdom in way of gift his power became the
more plausible. He divided the people into three Tribes, The division and
distinction of Citizens.
every Tribe into ten Curiae, and every Curia into ten parts or Decuriae, over
all which he appointed Officers. According to the number of the Curiae he
divided the grounds into thirty parts, only excepting one portion for public
use, and another for superstitious Ceremonies. He made a distinction of his
people according to honor and dignity, giving to the better sort the name of
Patres, either for that they were elder, had Children, for the Nobility of
their stock, or if detractors may be heard, he therefore named these Patricii,
because they alone could show their fathers, the other multitude being a rabble
of fugitives that had no free and ingenuous parentage; wherefore when an
Assembly of the people was called by the King, the Patricians were by a Crier
cited by their own, and fathers name, but the inferior sort, or Plebeians,
were gathered together by the sound of Ox horns. Having distinguished his
subjects into these two ranks he ordered what each should do. The Patritii were
to take care of superstition, bear Offices of Magistracy, administer Justice,
and Govern the Commonwealth together with the King: The Plebeians till the
fields, feed Cattle, and exercise trades; lest by their meddling in the
Government, and by mutual contention of the poorer and richer sort, such
seditions might arise as were too visible in other Commonwealths.

3. To bind each to the other, he commended to the Patricians certain of the
Plebeians, Patrons and Clients.
whom they should protect and countenance; liberty being given to the common
sort to make choice of whom they would for their Patrons. This custom of
Patron and Client was very ancient in Greece, Dionysius.
especially amongst the Thessalians and Athenians, where yet the Clients were
very imperiously used, their Patrons imposing on them services ill beseeming
freemen, and beating them like slaves, if they disobeyed their commands: The
Athenians called them Thetae for their service, and the Thessalians Penestae,
upbraiding them with their fortune. But Romulus refined the use of Patronage,
rendering it profitable unto both. Patrons by him were ordered to advise their
Clients concerning Law, of which they were ignorant, and take care of them as
well absent as present, as their own children, in what concerned money and
contracts, undertaking suits for them when oppressed, and procuring them quiet
both as to public and private business. On the other hand it was the duty of
Clients, to help their Patrons with money in the marriage of their daughters,
if need should be, and redeem them, or their sons if taken captive: to bear the
charges of private suits, or public fines, and that at their own cost in way
of gratitude; to assist them with their purses in defraying the charge of
Magistracy, or honorable employments. This was common to both: that neither
ought to accuse the other, to give any testimony or suffrage, or to be reckoned
amongst his Enemies: which if any one did, he was held guilty of treason by
Romulus his Law, and it was lawful for any one to kill him. Hereby, for many
Ages, this Patronage continued in force, and was as effectual for love and
mutual help as consanguinity or alliance: it was the glory of the Nobility to
have many Clients devolved upon them from their Ancestors, and obtained by
their own virtue. But not only the Plebeians in the City found themselves
secured by this Patronage, but in process of time all Colonies, associate
Cities, and such as were subdued by war, had their Patrons, to whom many times
the Senate would remit such controversies as were brought before it from the
said Cities, or Commonwealths, and ratify their judgment. Lastly, such firm
concord followed this constitution of Romulus, that, for 730 years, as
Dionysius reckons, though many and great contests arose betwixt the Nobility
and Commons about the Commonwealth (as is usual in all both great and little
States) yet it never came to blood or slaughter, but, mutually yielding and
granting, all controversies were composed by civil expostulations; till Caius
Grachus, Tribune of the people, overthrew the peace of the City; after which,
they neither spared to kill and banish one another, nor to commit any other
wickedness, whereby they might compass Victory and their own devices.

4. After this, Romulus resolved to choose a Senate, which should assist him in
the Government, and from amongst the Patricians selected 100 after this manner.
Out of them all he first made choice of one particular man, to whom, Idem.
when he was constrained to be absent in the wars, he committed the Government
of the City: Then he commanded every Tribe to choose three men, such as were
eminent for birth and wisdom; The Senate.
and every Curia to elect three out of the Patricians. This number he called a
Senate, either for their age, or virtue; or because, as Festus will have it,
nothing was done without their permission, the Senate being named a Sinendo.
Perceiving after this, that he stood in need of a Guard for his own person, he
caused the Curiae by their suffrages, Celeres.
to choose him out 300 young men, (ten out of each) whom he called Celeres from
their readiness to execute his commands, as most have written, or according to
Valerius Antias, from their Captain, whose name was Celer. Under him were three
Centurions, and other inferior Officers: this Company with their Spears
defended the King in the City, and received his orders: in battles were the
first leaders and the keepers of his body, beginning the fight first, and
retreating last of all; which custom Dionysius thinks Romulus to have taken
from the Lacedaemonians. Things being thus appointed, The Office of King.
he limited unto all their work and honors. The King's duty was to take care
of their superstition; to look to the preservation of the Laws and Customs,
either natural or written; to decide the most weighty causes betwixt man and
man, and refer those of lesser consequence to the Senate, into which he was
also to have an inspection. He was to call together the Senate, assemble the
people, first to speak his opinion, and ratify what was approved by the major
part. This was the King's work at home, who in the Wars had absolute authority.
To the Senate this honor and power was given, to debate and resolve about such
things as the King propounded, Senate.
which were decreed by the greater number of voices, as agreeable to the
constitution of Lacedaemon, as our Author observes. People.
To the People he committed three things: to create Magistrates, make Laws, and
resolve about War what was propounded by the King; yet so, as that the
authority of the Senate interposed. All the whole multitude together gave not
their votes, but the Curiae apart, and whatsoever seemed good to most, was
referred to the Senate, which custom was afterward changed, when the Senate
did not confirm the Decrees of the People, but the People the resolves of the
Senate.

5. For the increase of the City, besides the opening of a Sanctuary (which
Dionysius ranketh after this setlement of the civil policy) he forbad, when any
Town was taken, Prisoners to be preserved.
that prisoners of ripe age should be slain or sold, or their grounds left
untilled; but commanded a Colony to be sent from Rome, to which part of them
should be assigned, and some of the strangers to be admitted to the freedom of
the City; which device our Author esteems of great weight and consequence. He
made many good and profitable Laws, Laws in reference to marriage.
whereof most were unwritten. He ordained in reference to marriage, that the
wife should be partaker of all that was her husband's, when chaste and modest.
If he died intestate, she was his absolute Heir, Consule Val. Max. l. 2. c. 1.
and if he left children, equally with them. When she offended, she was left to
his disposal for punishment, who admitted his kindred to judge with him
concerning the fault, if she either violated chastity, or drank wine, which
Romulus utterly condemned as an incentive to wantonness. So effectual became
this constitution to the preservation of the conjugal knot, that for 520 years
there happened not any divorce in Rome, till in the 137th Olympiad, when Marcus
Pomponius and Caius Papirius were Consuls, Sp. Caruilius an eminent man, put
away his wife; and then, though he swear to the Censors, that he did it only
to provide for posterity, yet was he ever hated by the people. He gave to
Fathers absolute power over their Sons, and that for all their lives, either to
imprison, Parents and their Children, etc.
beat, carry away bound to rustic labors, or kill; although the son bore the
greatest Office in the Commonwealth, or publicly commended and honored. By
virtue of this Law, some eminent Persons making Orations to the People in
opposition to the Senate, in the midst of popular applause, have by their
Parents been pulled down from their seats, and led away to be punished
according to their pleasure; and as they passed along the Forum, none could
deliver or rescue them; not the Consul, Tribune, nor multitude it self, which
they had flattered. And because of this absolute paternal dominion, several
valiant men have been put to death for their valor showed in some way against
the Enemy, contrary to the direction or Command of their Fathers.

6. He compelled parents to educate all their male children and their eldest
daughters: he permitted a child younger than three years to be made away, if it
was born defective in some member or monstrous; and yet then was it not to be
exposed without approbation of the five next neighbors. If any one broke this
Law, he, besides other punishment, forfeited half of his goods. The Father was
permitted by the Lawgiver to sell his Son, and that three times over, if it
happened that he recovered his liberty: a greater power than was had over slaves,
who if once made free, thenceforth so continued. All sordid Arts, and such as
were subservient to luxury he forbad, which being left to slaves and strangers,
for a long time the Romans scorned to meddle with. Two courses of life only he
enjoined them, Warfare and Husbandry, allowing a Market once in nine days. He
divided equally to them the grounds, slaves, and money, taken from the Enemy.
Concerning injuries, be presently decided all controversies, or referred them
unto others, inflicting punishment acording to the crime; and seeing the people
to be by fear best retained in order, he set up his Judgment Seat in the most
conspicuous place of the Forum, where his guard of 300 Celeres, and twelve
Sergeants, or Lictors, carrying rods and axes, and in the view of all men,
either beating or putting to death Malefactors, made a terrible show. This is
the form of the Commonwealth, as Romulus first established it, much admired by
Dionysius above all the constitutions of his own Countrymen the Graecians,
whose Religion also (as giving occasion to the vulgar sort to contemn their
gods involved in such misfortunes, or to abstain from no iniquity and
filthiness to which they heard that their deities were also abnoxious) he
esteems vain, frivolous, and dangerous, in comparison of that which was
instituted by the Roman Lawgiver.

7. Romulus, considering that there were several powerful Nations round about
him, which with evil eyes beheld the growth of his City, bethought with himself
how he might contract amity with them. Concluding, that affinity was the only
means; by the advice and consent of the Senate, he resolved upon a course to
provide wives for his Subjects. He caused at the suggestion of his Grandfather
Numitor, The Rape of the Sabine Virgins.
a Solemn Feast, and exercises in honor of Neptune, to be proclaimed
throughout the Country, to which many flocking with their wives and children,
upon sign given, his men laid hold on such Virgins as were come to see, and
violently carried them to their houses. The number of them amounted to 683, for
which Romulus chose out so many husbands, and married them after their own
Country Rites, making them covenant a Society or Communion of fire and water,
which custom continued for many Ages. Some write that this happened in the
first year of Romulus, but others assign the fourth of his reign for it, which
scarce could be done till matters were something settled. Some delivered, that
scarcity of women was the cause of this rape: others thought, that by it an
occasion was only sought for War; but a third party will have, that by this
violent act an affinity with the neighboring Cities was endeavored.

8. Some were grievously moved, and others put a good construction upon the
business: Romulus his defensive wars.
but at length the matter brake out into a manyfold War, of which that with the
Sabines was most grievous. The Cities Caenina, Antemna and Crustumium first
began, after they could not persuade the Sabines to join with them. The two
former, inhabited by the Aborigines, Romulus presently subdued, and afterward
the later also, which was a Colony of Alba; the grounds were divided betwixt
some Romans, sent thither to plant, and the old Inhabitants, of which such, as
would, were made free of the City, and without loss of their former estates,
reckoned amongst the Tribes and Curiae, to the number of 3000; so that now, the
Roman footmen were increased to 6000 men. Upon the Victory over Caenina and
Antemna, he first triumphed, and designed a plot for a Temple to Jupiter
Feretrius (so called from Romulus his bringing home in triumph the spoils of
Acron the King of Caenina, whom he slew; The spoils were named by the Romans
Opima Spolia) The plot of ground was about 15 foot long, and this was the
original of the Capitol. Having obtained a great name for his valor and
clemency, many eminent men went over to him with their families, amongst whom
was Caelius, who gave name to an hill in the City: and some whole people
committed themselves to his protection (having taken example from the
Medullini) and received Colonies from Rome. This success the Sabines sore
repined at, laying now the blame one upon another, that they had not withstood
the beginnings of the Roman greatness: wherefore they resolved to correct
their former carelessnesse by double diligence, and assembling together at
Cures, their Metropolis, decreed War against Rome for the spring following, and
made choice of T. Tatius their King to be General. Romulus made all possible
provision for resistance, fortifying the Capitoline, and Aventine hills. Lucumo
from Solonium, a City of Hetruria, brought Auxiliary forces, and Numitor was
not wanting to the assistance of his Grandson.

9. The Sabines having demanded restitution of their Virgins, and to have the
authors of the injury delivered up (that they might have a more specious
pretense for their actions) received no satisfactory answer, and therefore both
parties drew out into the field. The Sabines brought 25000 foot, and almost
1000 horse, and the Roman Army contained 2000 foot, and 800 horse, a very great
number for a new builded City. Tatius pitched his Tents betwixt the Quirinal
and Capitolian hill, where seeing all places strongly fortified, and small
hopes for him to attempt any great matter; as he despaired of doing any good,
one Tarpeia, the daughter of Tarpeius who kept the Capitol, called to his men
from above, and covenanted with them to betray the place into their hands.
Concerning the wages she was to receive, several stories, or fables, are
related. It is said, that she required to have what they wore on their left
arms, meaning their bracelets, but when she let them in, they threw their
Targets which they carried on their left arms upon her, and therewith pressed
her to death. Being Masters of the Capitol, they had thereby great advantage to
continue the War at their pleasure, and first some light Skirmishes insued; but
at length they resolved to do their utmost on both sides, and for several days
continued the fight, so long as till night severed them, for the most part with
equal success. This made the Sabines seriously bethink themselves, whether
they had best carry on the War or retreat; and the Romans were rather more to
seek how to hold out; yet neither party would stoop to desire a Treaty. Whilst
they remained in this anxious condition, those Sabine women that were married
to the Romans, and the cause of the War, through the persuasion of Hersilia,
one of the principal amongst them, The end of Sabine War.
became mediators, and made peace betwixt these Fathers and Sons in Law, after
the War had lasted six years. The conditions were, A. M. 2363. V. C. 12. Achazi
2.
that Romulus and Tatius should reign at Rome, with equal prerogative: that the
City from Romulus should be called Rome, but the Citizens Quirites from Cures
the native place of Tatius. Such of the Sabines as would, were made free of
Rome, and a respect was had of those Matrons that procured the peace, that they
which would live with their husbands, should be exempted from all work and
service, besides spinning and making of Cloth.

10. Some write, that from thirty of these women which undertook this
reconciliation, to perpetuate their memories, the Tribes were named; but
Terentius Varro denied it, alleging that they had names before, and that by
this honor given to thirty the rest of the women were not passed by and
discouraged. For five years the two Kings reigned peaceably together, and
jointly subdued the Camerini, a Colony of the Albans; but in the sixth, it
happened that some of Tatius his friends plundring the Lavinians, Tatius killed.
and by him being protected, notwithstanding Romulus and the Senate judged they
were to be given up: moreover killing the Ambassadors sent to demand them,
wherein they were also born out by him; when he went to Lavinium to sacrifize,
or persuade the injured persons to be quiet, the friends of the Ambassadors
fell upon and knocked him in the head. Romulus to his great contentment thus
freed from his partner, made satisfaction to the injured, and burying Tatius at
Rome very honorably, subdued Fidenae, a Town five miles off, which had seized
on provisions coming to Rome in a time of famine. Thither he sent some of his
own to inhabit, according to his custom, and then punished the Crustumini, who
had killed those Planters which he sent amongst them; The Veii overcome.
and over them he obtained his second triumph. The Veii, a most powerful people
of Hetruria inhabiting a City no less than Athens, situated upon a craggy
Rock, at some twelve miles distance from Rome, found themselves concerned in
what the Fidenates suffered, and by an Embassy required the Romans thence to
remove their Garrison, and restore the Inhabitants to their whole demesens.
This being denied, they met at Fidenae, and there fought two bloody battles,
wherein Romulus had the better, and triumphed the third time. Plutarch writes,
that the Veientes ridiculously challenged Fidenae to belong to them, and
receiving a scornful answer from Romulus, divided themselves into two parts,
whereof with one they fought the Fidenatae, and with the other went to meet
Romulus, who slew of them above 8000, with the loss of 2000 of his own men. In
the next battle he is fabulously reported to have killed 7000 with his own
hand, being half the number that was slain. The Veientes now betook themselves
to entreaties, and entered into a League with the Romans for an hundred years,
on these conditions: to quit a great part of their grounds, with the Salt Pits
near the River, and give up fifty Hostages of their most considerable families.
Romulus triumphed over them on the Ides of October, leading with him their
Captain an aged man, who had badly performed his office, for which he was
afterward personated by an old man in all Triumphs,

Romulus grown tyrannical,
11. This was the last War managed by Romulus, who being grown exceeding high
and tyrannical upon his success, enlarged his prerogative beyond those bounds
he had formerly set to it, and made use only of the Senate to ratify his
commands. Hereby he contracted the hatred of that Order, (though the Soldiers
loved him) which brought him to an untimely death. Some think he was torn in
pieces in the Senate house, Is made away by the Senators.
and the Senators by peece-meal carried out his body under their gowns, so that
it was never seen. Others wrote, that having drawn out the people to the place
called Caprae Palus, and there making an Oration to them, a sudden darkness
and Tempest happened, wherein he vanished and departed from amongst mortals. The
Senators took occasion from the secrecy of their fact, and concealment of his
body, to persuade the multitude that he was taken up amongst the gods; and
Julius Proculus, a man of prime Nobility and credit amongst the Patricians, put
all out of doubt, by swearing most religiously, that he appeared to him in the
highway, and told him, that it pleased the gods, from whom he came, so long to
let him continue amongst men, till he had founded a City, whose Empire and
glory should excel, and then again that he should return to heaven. He bade him
fa^ewel, and tell the Romans, that if they did but use temperance and valor,
Called Quirinus.
they should in power excel all mortals. And he would be a propitious god unto
them, under the name of Quirinus, He lived 55 years, and reigned 37, in which
space he much advanced the Sat of the City, which who first planted with him,
were not much above 2000 foot, and scarce 300 horse, but when he died, he left
of the one kind 46000, and almost 1000 of the other sort. After his
Grandfathers death, he succeeded in the Kingdom of Alba, which he governed by
Deputies, continuing his residence at Rome. The day on which he died, was the
Nones of Quintilis (afterward called July) which answers to the 26th of May,
as the Callendar was reformed by Julius Caesar. It was named Nonae Caprotinae,
from the place where he vanished, and F^ga Populi, because the people
astonished at the King's death took them to their heels. Tarrutius the
Mathematician, observed, that the life of this Prince was signalized by three
Eclypses of the Sun: one at his conception, which is also the first that is
observed by Authors; another the same day de founded Rome, and the third on the
day of his death; concerning which, for that the calculation of the former is
rather founded upon Astrological than Astronomical Principles, Jacobus
Cappellus is to be consulted.

An Inter-regnum for a year.
12. Romulus dying childlesse, the Senate for a years space retained the power
in their own hands, which is called an Inter-regnum. They governed by their
courses, each man five days; but the People murmuring, and giving out, that
for one tyrant they had got an hundred, at length they resolved that a King
should be chosen. The Sabines thought it reasonable he should be of their
Nation, not having had any since Tatius, and the other were averse to a
stranger, being desirous he should be some one of the Patricians; but at length
the Fathers fixed upon Numa Pompilius a Sabine, A. M. 3291. V. C. 40. Ezechia
17. Olymp. 16. an. 3.
a man of almost forty years of age, Numa.
and the most considerable for knowledge and ability of that time, who by
consent of the People was advanced to the Government. At first he excused
himself; but solicited by his Father, and Marcius his kindsman, not to let
slip so fair an opportunity of his own and Countrie's preferment, he accepted of
it. He thought it policy to raise that City by Laws, and religious customs
which had been founded by force and Arms, and to soften the Genius of it by
diversion from warfare, it being as necessary to employ a people well at home
as exercise them abroad. He built a Temple to Janus, which was to stand open in
time of War, and be shut in peace, as it continued all his reign. But it only
happened so to be twice from his time to that of Tiberius Caesar. The first
occasion was in the Consulship of Titus Manlius, and Marcus Attilius, after the
ending of the first Punick War; and the second in Augustus his reign, after he
had subdued Antonius and Cleopatra, at what time there was an Universal peace.
Numa disbanded the Royal Guard of the 300 Celeres, as standing in no need of
them. To the two Flamens of Jupiter and Mars he added the third of Romulus. To
him is also ascribed the bringing in of the Pontifies, whereof he himself was
one, and the Original of which name is so much controverted. He also ordained
the Vestal Nuns, and the Feciales a sort of Priests which judged concerning the
equity of War, His religion much suiting with that of the Pythagoreans.
and denounced it. His religion much suited, in the manner and strictness
thereof, with that of the Pythagoreans, which caused the report of his being
Contemporary, and conversing with Pythagoras; although this Philosopher was
born 100 years after his death. The reason of this mistake, besides the
ignorance of the times, was his familiarity with Pythagoras a Lacedaemonian,
who gave him advice concerning the ordering of his Kingdom, traveling in Italy
in the sixteenth Olympiad, the third year of which was the beginning of Numa's
reign, according to Plutarch.

13. As Pythagoras taught that the principle of all things is not to be
perceived by sense, or liable to motion, but invisible, immortal, and to be
apprehended by the understanding alone, so Numa forbad the Romans to use the
Image of any God whicn represented him after the form of a man, or any other
living Creature. Neither in these ancient times was there any painted, carved,
or molten image amongst them: but for the first 170 years, though they built
Temples and Sacred places, yet had they no image at all, because they thought
it wickedness to liken more excellent things to those below them, and thought
God no otherwise to be perceived than by the mind. Numa divided those grounds
amongst the poorer sort which Romulus had gained in his Wars, causing his
subjects to apply themselves to husbandry, to cultivate their minds as well as
the earth; and that he might take away the distinction of Roman, and Sabine,
which threatened the State with endless emulation and prejudice, he
distinguished them all according to their trades and occupations, making every
Art a particular Company and Fellowship. He abated the rigor of that Law made
by Romulus, concerning the power of Fathers over their Children, ordaining it
should not be lawful for them to sell such sons as by their leave had married,
because it was unjust that a woman which had married a freeman should be
constrained to live with a slave. He reformed the year which in the time of
Romulus was quite out of all order: some months had fewer then 20 days, some
had 35. and some above; the variety of the several courses of Sun and Moon was
not understood; but only this aimed at, that the year should consist of 360
days.

He reformeth the year.
14. Numa considering that a Solar year exceeded the Lunar by eleven days (the
one consisting of 354. and the other of 365) doubled these eleven days, and
every other year, inserted a month after February, consisting of 22 days, and
by the Romans called Mercedonius, because at that time wages were wont to be
paid. He changed the order of the months, assigning to March (formerly the
first) the third place; to January the first, and February the second; whereof
this was the last, and the other the 11th in the days of Romulus. Many have
been of opinion, that Numa added January and February to the rest of the
months, and that formerly the Romans had but 10. which appears by the name
of December, the last month, and because the fifth and sixth months from
March were called Quintilis and Sextilis. Thus March must have been the
beginning of the year, which Romulus so named from Mars his supposed father.
The second was April, so called from Venus, as some thought (because her
superstitious worship was performed in it, when the women were Crowned with
Myrtle as they washed) or, as others gathered, from the opening of Plants at
that time of the year. The third was May, named from Maia, and sacred to
Mercury; the fourth was June from Juno as some thought, others deriving the
names of these two from Majores and Juniores, the Elder and younger. The rest
had their names from their order, as Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October,
November, December. Afterward Quintilis was from Julius Caesar called July,
Sextilis August from Augustus. September and October, the Emperor Domitian
changed into his own names, but presently after he was killed they recovered
their former. Only the two last ever retained their first appellations. Of
those months which Numa either added, or ranked, February was so called from
the expiations which used to be in it, signified by the word Februa: then they
were wont to make parentations to the dead, and celebrate the Lupercalia,
certain Sacrifices and Games in honor of Pan, much like to the Sacrifice of
Expiations. January was named of Janus, which Numa seems to have set before
March, because he would show that Civil virtue is ever to be preferred before
what is exercised in War: For Janus was accounted one of the most ancient Gods,
or Kings, (from whom reigning in Italy, some make the Romans descended) very
studious for civil society and humane converse, and who changed the course of
man's life from brutish and savage to an humane and gentle kind. He is therefore
feigned to be double faced, because he brought in another fashion of life than
what formerly had been, and had a Temple built by Numa with two doors, that
were shut in peace, and open in war as was before said. These things Plutarch
relates in the life of Numa.

15. But Livie, and other considerable Authors, C. 3.
Solinus, Satur. lib. 1. c. 12.
Macrobius, and c. 20.
Censorinus, write that the first Roman year consisted but of ten months and
304 days; six of the months having 30 days, and the other four 31 apiece.
But this account differing from the course of the Sun, Numa, to make them
agree, added 51 days to the year. That he might make up the twelve months;
from the six, consisting of thirty days, he took one day apiece, and therewith
made up 57. which were divided into two months, whereof the one contained 29.
and the other 28 days, and so the year began to have 355. Of this opinion,
besides Junius Grauhanus and Fulvius, both Varro and Suetonius were, as
appears out of Censorinus. Yet Licinius Macer and Lucius Fenestella, by the
same testimony, (two ancient Writers of Annals) delivered that the first Roman
year consisted of 12 months, agreeable to the former opinion related by
Plutarch. This a Joseph Scaliger de Emendatione Temp. lib. 2. and Lidyatus de
variis annorum formis cap. 17.
noble pair of modern Critics prove to have been the truer opinion, affirming
that January and February were not added by Numa, but transferred from the end
to the beginning of the year, and endeavoring to show that they who would have
the year but to consist of 10 months make it no shorter than they that are for
12. distinguishing it not so much in number as placing of days; for the Romans
in Romulus his time filled up the year, either by assigning more days than
thirty to the months, or adding so many in the end thereof as seemed to be
wanting. But it suffices to have touched these things for the direction of
beginners.

16. Numa, to gain credit and obedience to his constitutions, feigned that he
had converse with the Goddess Egeria. He married Tatia, daughter to Tatius the
King, by which he had a daughter named Pompilia. Some said he neither had any
other wife nor any more Children: but others both as to wife and children
dissented from them. He lived above 80. reigned 43 years, and at his death was
buried with great honor. His body was not burned (which he forbad) but buried
in a stone Coffin under the Janiculum; and the Books of his Ceremonies laid by
him in another, which being twelve written in Latin, and as many in the Greek
tongue, were 400 years after, when Publius Cornelius, and Marcus Baebius were
Consuls, by water wrought out of the earth, and for that it was thought
wickedness to have such things discovered to the multitude, (from which he
also kept them, after the fashion of the Pythagoreans, not communicating
discipline by writing but only by word of mouth) burned by command of the
Senate. He kept the State in constant peace, and his ability herein contributed
to the general quiet of Italy; so that, by the example of his reign, Plutarch
judges that saying of Plato to be verified: that the only means whereby men
should be made happy, would be, to have a Philosophical mind, and regal power
concur in a Prince, who would make virtue superior to dishonesty. But the
fortune of the succeeding Kings added to the luster of his glory: For of the
five which followed, the last was cast out, and died in exile, and none of the
rest obtained a natural and quiet end, according to Plutarch.

Tullus Hostilius.
17. Numa being dead, and the Government devolved upon the Senate, after several
Interreges, at length Tullus Hostilius was created King, by the Universal
consent of the City. His Grandfather was that Hostilius, A. M. 3333. V.C. 82.
Olymp. 27. an. 1.
who most gallantly behaved himself against the Sabines at the Citadel, and
married of that Nation the daughter of Hersilia. After much valor shown he was
slain in battle, and left a young son, who at ripeness of age, of a noble
Matrone, begat this Tullus Hostilius the third King of Rome, whose beginning,
according to the account of Dionysius, was in the second year of the 27th
Olympiad wherein Eurybates the Athenian was Victor, when Leostratus was Archon
at Athens, in the 83 year of the City, and the 31 of Manasses King of Judah.
At his first beginning he purchased the favor of the poorer sort by dividing
unto them, man by man, that portion of Land which the two former Kings had kept
to bear their charges, saying, that his own inheritance would suffice for his
own expenses. Lest these should want room he took in the Hill Caelius, where
such as wanted habitation, and now had gotten grounds, built them houses, and
he also dwelt himself. He was not only of a different temper from Numa, but as
Livie describes him, more fiery than Romulus, being as well moved by his
proper inclination as the glory of his Grandfather, so that he sought, and
greedily embraced all occasions for War. It was not long ere one was presented
from the Albans, who made depredations in the Roman Territories, His War with
the Albans.
and were again robbed by the Romans. At that time Caius Cluilius Governed
Alba, who envying the growth of Rome, sought to stir up division, and raise War
betwixt the two Cities. Dionysius writes, that for this end he privately
procured some to prey upon the Romans, knowing they would revenge the injury,
and when they did so upon such as they could take, he persuaded the Albans that
they had received a great affront, and excited them to take up Arms.

18. Ambassadors were sent to Rome to demand restitution, Dionysius l. 3.
Livius l. 1.
and such as had been Authors of the injury to be given up into their hands.
This Hostilius being aware of, and knowing that they who first refused to make
satisfaction would bear the Odium of the War, caused some of his friends kindly
to entertain the Ambassadors, pretending he was by necessary occasions hindered
from giving them audience, till he first sent some of his own to Alba to demand
restitution. They received a sharp repulse from Cluilius, whereof Hostilius
having notice, then gave audience to the Albans, told them how those that he
sent, had already received such an answer as argued the league quite broken;
whereupon he denounced a just, and necessary War against the Albans, which he
would carry on not only with his domestic forces, but by the aid of his other
subjects and dependents. Both parties then made all possible preparations, and
drew out their forces to a place afterward called the Ditch of Cluilius, some
five miles distant from Rome. When they expected suddenly to decide the
quarrel, Cluilius was found dead in his Tent, whether by some secret practice
upon himself, by grief, or any other means is uncertain. Into his place was
chosen Metius Suffetius, a man of a turbulent spirit, and scarce able for
warlike matters, but thought fit for the place because as great an incendiary
as his predecessor. Yet sensible of danger that hung over his head from the
Fidenates, (who gaped after the destruction of both) he drew out the War in
length, and fearful to lose all, was inclinable to a present composure.
Hostilius was now also not averse to a determination of the business, being
desirous to punish the Fidenates and Veientes, who, formerly overcome by
Romulus, had submitted to the obedience of Rome, and in the days of Numa taken
occasion of his peaceable Grovernment, to provide for the absolute shaking off
of the yoke. This time they thought to present them with a fit opportunity; for
gathering together at Fidenae they were ready, when the Albans and Romans
should in battle have weakened each other, to fall upon both.

19. This plot discovered, wrought so upon both the Captains, that they came to
a conference, wherein much being alleged for the justice and right of both
parties, at length it was agreed, that three persons on each side should by
combat decide the quarrel, and that City, whose Champions should have the
better, obtain pre-eminence and command over the other. Whiles every Officer
desired to be one of the three, Suffetius bethought himself of two ternions of
brothers that were most fit, as he thought, to take it upon them, One Seguinius
of Alba had two daughters, whereof one he married to Curiatius his fellow
Citizen, The Horatii and Curiatii.
and the other to Horatus a Roman. It hapened that both being with child at the
same time, brought forth, each of them three sons at the first birth, which
their Parents educated as the hope of their Families: to these it was that
Suffetius thought the Combat concerning Principality was to be committed, being
of equal years, strength, and courage. The motion was embraced by the parties,
who dispensed with their private affection (no whit unsuitable to their
consanguinity) now that the honor and welfare of their Country was concerned.
In the Combat two of the Horatii were slain first, and the third left to deal
with three adversaries, spirited afresh by the great advantage they had of him;
but warily retreating, so as he might have but one upon him at a time, he slew
them all, and Rome in him remained Conqueror. As he returned into the City, he
was met by his Sister, that fell upon him with chiding and outrageous words,
for imbruing his hands in the blood of his Cousin-germans, whereof one was
contracted to her. Now elevated by his success, and transported with a certain
kind of Ecstatical love to his Country, he killed her in the place, as one that
preferring private respect before public good, was unworthy to live. Hereof he
was accused, and Tullus neither thinking it seemly to quit or condemn him, as
same say, created the Duumviri for capital Judgment, who condemed him; but, if
so, there lying appeal from these Officers to the People, the multitude granted
his life to the tears of his Father, who not only took not ill his daughters
death, but esteemed it an heroic act, and gave her an ignominious burial.

20. Hostilius dealt moderately with the Albans, but Metius Suffetius their
Dictator, or King, thinking his credit much impaired by the event of the
Combat, sought how he might betray the Romans, and wrest the power out of their
hands. He dealt therefore underhand with the Fidenates and Veientes, who now
called to account for their double-dealings, brake out into open rebellion, and
by promise of assistance, encouraged them in their enterprise. And when the
Romans and the other came to engage, he resolved to stand neuter till he saw
which party had the better, intending then to cloze with it. The Romans were
discouraged to see their friends stand aloof, suspecting the treachery, which
Tullus also apprehending, gave out, that it was by his order, as meaning by
some stratagem to surprise the Enemy, upon which report the Fidenates and their
companions were discouraged, and at length by the Romans, who resumed their
courage, put to the rout. After the Victory, he called the Albans together, and
laying open the treachery of Suffetius (which savoured the more of Treason,
because he had trusted him as his inward friend, and kept him three years in
his place) caused him to be pulled in pieces; having beforehand sent Marcus
Horatius to Alba, who rased the City, and translated the Inhabitants thereof to
Rome, after it had stood about 487 years, according to the account of
Dionysius, which is to be preferred before the other of Livie, or that of L.
Florus, an Author not to be relied on, either as to Chronology or order, and
disposition of matters; to say no more.

Alba destroyed.
21. To this end came Alba through the power of it is own Colony, A. M. 3051.
V.C. 100. Olymp. 31. an. 4. Manassis 48.
having flourished with riches, numbers of Inhabitants, and been the Mother of
thirty Latin Towns. After this, Tullus, having brought fully under the
Fidenates, moved War against the Sabines, for robbing such Romans as used to
traffic into the Country, and refused to make restitution of the goods: he
overthrew them at the Wood called Malitiosa Sylva, and forced them to beg
peace. Now also the Latins and Romans fell out, because they refused to yield
obedience to these, who challenged it as due to their City, which had conquered
the Metropolis. The War was managed for five years, with great moderation;
only, besides continual depredations, Hostilius punished Medallia for an
example, Livie.
which in the time of Romulus had received a Roman Colony. Otherwise no battle
was fought, Pliny.
nor any Town taken and plundered, which made both inclinable to peace. Plutarch.
But at this time Tullus Hostilius died, having reigned 32 years; some say by
Lightning, with his whole Family, for neglect of the Religion instituted by
Numa; but most believed him taken away by the practices of his Successor,
though Dionysius holds their opinion to be improbable.

22. After the death of Tullus, the state fell into an Inter-regnum, Dionys. l.
3.
according to the custom, Ancus Marcius.
and, by the Inter-rex and Senate, Ancus Marcius was elected King, who being
confirmed by the people, A. M. 3366. V.C. 115. Olymp. 35. an. 2. Josiae 6.
began his reign in the second year of the 35th Olympiad, wherein Sphaerus the
Lacedemonian was Victor, at what time Damasias was annual Archon at Athens. He
(who according to what Festus writes, had the Surname of Ancus from his
crooked arm, which he could not strech out in length) was Grandson to Numa,
Livius l. 1.
by his daughter Pompilia. She was married to Marcius, the son of that Marcius,
who being the kinsman of Numa, came with him to Rome, Plutarch in Numa.
after he had earnestly persuaded him to take upon him the Kingdom, being
elected into the Senate, after the King's death, stood in competition with
Hostilius for his place, and missing of it laid violent hands on himself.
Marcius his son marrying Pompilia the daughter of Numa (whether by Tatia or
Lucretia, is uncertain) begot on her this Ancus Marcius, who was five years old
at the death of both his Grandfathers. Ancus considering that much of the
superstition brought in by Numa was neglected, set himself to restore the use
thereof, alleging to the people, that the diseases, Pestilence, and other
innumerable calamities, which had lately fallen upon the City, together with
the disastrous end of Hostilius, proceeded from neglect of their gods. He
advised them to return to Husbandry, and other peaceable employments,
neglecting violence, and the profit that comes by War. The State being thus
restored, he thought as his Grandfather had lived, so to pass his time free
from all War and molestation; but he found his expectation crossed, for that he
was compelled to be a warrior against his will, and was never free from peril
and tumult. Scarce had he began to reign, and had modelled the Commonwealth,
when the Latins contemning him as a sluggard, and unfit for military
employment, made depredations upon the Roman Territories. Making preparation
for War, Livie writes, that he first denounced it, sending to the Latins
beforehand, and now constituted the Office of the Feciales, the Rules whereof
he took from the Equicoli an ancient people.

23. He surprised Politorium a Town of the Latins, Livius lib. 1.
the Inhabitants of which, he translated to Rome, where, (for that the ancient
Romans inbabited the Palatine, the Sabines the Capitoline, Dionys. l. 3.
and the Coelian had been given to the new Denizons of Alba) to them was
granted the Aventine hill to inhabit, other neighbors being added, when,
within a while, Tilene and Sicania were taken. The Latins much concerned at
this loss, conspired against him for the Spring following; but at several
times he defeated their united powers, and forced them to ask peace; so did he
the Fidenates, Volsci, Veientes, and such Sabines as, not yet having felt the
strength of Rome, sorely repined at the success of an upstart City. He laid a
wooden bridge over the River Tiber, and fortified the Janiculum on the other
side with a wall, having by a bridge united it to the City: and in the middle of
Rome he made a prison for Malefactors. Neither did he only extend the
Pomaerium or Area of the City, but enlarged it is dominion. For having taken
from the Veientes the Mesian Forest, his Territories reached to the Sea, upon
which, at the mouth of Tiber, he built a Town called Ostia, to secure the
profit of Navigation unto his Subjects; for thither Commodities being brought
by Ship, were in lesser Vessels conveyed to the City. Ancus Marcius reigned 24
years, coming behind the commendations of none of his Predecessors, either for
the glory of Peace or War.

24. Ancus being dead (of a natural death, as should seem by Historians, save
that Plutarch, as was said, included him in the number of those four that came
to untimely ends) the Senate received power from the People to order the
affairs of the Commonwealth, and created certain Inter-reges, who holding the
Assemblies for election, The pedigree of Tarquinius Priscus.
L. Tarquinius was chosen King, and began his reign about the second year of
the 41th Olympiad, wherein Cleonidas the Theban was Victor, Eniochides being
Archon at Athens, A. M. 3390. V. C. 139. Ol. 41. an. 2. Josiae 30.
the 139th of the City, and the 30th of Josiah King of Judah. This man being of
foreign extraction, what his Original was, why he came to Rome, and how he
attained to the Kingdom is to be considered. There was a Corithian, Demaratus
by name, of the race of the Bacchiadae, who trafficking much into Hetruria,
changed his Merchandise for Tuscan Commodities, and thereby growing very
wealthy, when troubles arose at home by means of Cypselus his Tyranny, with all
his goods sailed from Corinth, and fixed himself at Tarquinia a City of
Hetruria, where marrying a noble Matron, of her he begat two sons called by the
Hetruscan names of Aruns and Lucumon. Aruns died without hope of issue.
Demaratus for grief followed him not long after, so that Lucumo possessed of
the whole Inheritance, began to elevate his designs, and to look after some
place of Magistracy in his Country. Here he received a repulse, not being able
to procure any mean Office, at which sorely disdaining, he heard that Rome
received strangers with great courtesy, and gave them free admission unto
honors. He then resolved to remove thither with his goods and friends, and
after his arrival, was much made of by Ancus, to whom offering his Patrimony
for the public good, as exceeding that of a private man, he received freedom
of the City, for himself and followers, with ground to build houses, and for
their sustenance. Now he changed his name from Lucumon to Lucius, and his wife
from Tanaquil to Gaia Caecilia, Festus in voce Gaia.
and from the place of his birth superadded that of Tarquinius. During the
reign of Ancus, who chose him into the Senate, he flourished in great esteem
with him, and in the favor of the people; in War no man showing himself more
hardy, nor in Council more dextrous, prudent, or successful; and his integrity
seemed such unto the King, that he left him Guardian to his two sons, whereof
both were under age, and one but yet an infant.

25. He took advantage at the minority of the eldest, as yet scarce fourteen
years old, He obtains the Kingdom.
whom sending out of the way, under pretense of hunting, he made a Speech to
the People, says Livie, wherein he plainly begged the Kingdom, drawing to his
private interest the example of Tatius and Numa, whom being mere strangers,
they had chosen to reign over them; whereas he was not absolutely such, having
lived a good space in Rome, and been trained up both in civil and military
affairs, under Ancus: He urged then his liberality toward them; which things
not being merely pretended, he obtained his end, and was the first that came to
the Government through his own ambitious seeking. His first War was with the
Latins, from whom he took several Towns, and amongst the rest Collatia, His
Wars.
over which he placed Governor his Nephew Aruns Tarquinius, the posthume issue
of his brother, and Surnamed Egerius from his poverty (having no Patrimony) and
Collatinus from this place, which Surname continued to his Posterity. Having
forced the Latins to beg peace, notwithstanding their supplies out of
Hetruria, he turned his Arms against the Sabines, who after he had also forced
to submit, all Hetruria combined against him, because he retained such
prisoners as he had taken of the Auxiliaries sent by them to the Sabines. It
was decreed amongst them, that what Town soever refused to join against him
should not be accounted of their body, and they presently possessed themselves
of Fidenae a Roman Colony. But he so ordered the matter, that overthrowing them
in sundry battles and preparing for another expedition, they were humbled; to
purchase peace owned him for their Prince, and as tokens of fealty, and
allegiance. sent him the Ensigns of Sovereignty wherewith their Kings had wont
to be adorned. These were a Crown of Gold, an Ivory Chair, a Scepter on the top
of which was an Eagle, a Coat of purple wrought with Gold, and a purple Gown
pinked; like to the Roabs of the Lydian, and Persian Kings, save that it was
not foursquare, but of a semicircular figure. Some write also that they sent 12
Axes for so many Cities, it being their custom for every Magistrate in his own
Town to have an Axe with Rods carried before him, and in a common expedition
twelve to be born before their General. Others contended that Romulus used
these Axes and Rods as a Badge of his Authority to punish Offenders; but
Dionysius replieth, that Romulus might learn this custom of the Hetruscans, and
if not, yet might Tarquinius have these sent to him, seeing the people of Rome
afterward used to send Diadems, and Scepters to such Kings as they confirmed;
which these Princes received, although they had worn the same Ornaments before.

26. In nine years he finished the Hetruscan War, and then fell again upon the
Sabines (who alone contended with the Romans for superiority) a warlike
Nation, possessing a large and fertile Country not far distant from Rome. Over
them he obtained his third Triumph, and providing for another expedition they
prevented him by their entreaties, giving up themselves fully into his power,
whom he received on the same terms as formerly he had done the Hetruscans.
These were his military actions. At the beginning of his reign, that he might
bind the people to him, he chose out an hundred of the Plebeians, He increases
the Senate.
who for valor, or wisdom, were most eminent, and added them to the Senate,
which now first consisted of 300. Romulus at the beginning chose an 100 out of
the first planters, then added an 100 more of the most noble of the Sabines,
which with these of Tarquinius were called Patres conscripti, and the last
Patres minorum gentium. Zonaras agrees with Dionysius concerning the number of
Senators made by Romulus, adding, that Tatius and he at first consulted with
their Senators apart, but at length they were joined together; so that those
are not to be heard, who will have but 200 in all during the time of the Kings,
and 100 afterward added by Brutus. He increased the number of the Vestal Nuns
from four to seven, The Vestal Nuns.
adorned the forum, built the Walls of the City (before patched up in haste)
with 4 square stones, Cloacae, or Common sinks.
whereof each was a Cart-load. He caused the common sinks to be made for
voiding the filth of the City into Tiber; a work so admirable, that Dionysius
thinks, from the magnificence of it, as from the Aqueducts, and the high
cawsied ways, the amplitude of the Roman Empire appeared: and this is
manifested from what C. Aquilius wrote, that those sinks being once stopped,
the Censors spent 1000 Talents in cleansing of them. In the Circus Maximus (a
place dedicated to the beholding of Games, and exercises, betwixt the Palatine
and Aventine Hills) he caused seats to be raised for spectators, whereas
before, all stood; and he distinguished their places according to their dignity.

27. Tarquinius intended to add three Centuries of horsemen, named after
himself, and his friends, to the former three instituted by Romulus. That King
first chose 200 out of the three Tribes, or Legions, and, after the taking in
of the Sabines, increased the Legions, so that each contained 4000. (whence it
was called Quadrata, as Festus observes) yet afterward a Legion comprised
full so many men as were found convenient for the service of the Commonwealth.
Actius Naevius.
But he was forbidden by Actius Naevius to change the constitution of Romulus,
and therefore, without increase of the Centuries, doubled the number of the
men. This Naevius was the most famous Augur that Rome ever knew, and so well
versed in his Art, as he never missed in his predictions. Tarquinius on a time,
to try him, asked if that was possible to be done which he had in his thoughts,
who answering yea, he laughed him to scorn, saying that he had thought of
cutting a Whetstone with a Razor which he held in his hand; but Naevius still
replying he should do it, and bidding him to strike hard, he cut through it.
This much inhanced the reputation of his skill, and he flourished thenceforth
with great honor, till at length he was suddenly missing, and his body never
could be found, which turned to the disquiet of Tarquinius. For the sons of
Ancus Marcius, now grown men, grudged him their fathers Kingdom, and often
thought of thrusting him out, expecting much from martial men, who generally
bore love to their fathers memory. Now they accused him to the people of having
made away the Augur (because he had contradicted his devices) and created him
some trouble, till Tullius his son-in-law answered the objections, and cleared
him of the Calumny. Missing of their design this way, they counterfeited
repentance; and being easily reconciled to the old man, out of respect to their
father, cloaked their malice for three years. Then they clothed two of their
companions like Shepherds, who going to the Court, and pretending to be fallen
out, did beat each other, and called loud upon the King for Justice, having at
their backs other Conspirators apparelled also in rustic weeds, who offered
to give Testimony on both sides. Being called in to the King they wounded him
to death, and betaking themselves to their heels were caught, confessed who
were authors of the plot, Tarquinius murdered.
and received their just reward. To this end came Tarquinius (surnamed Priscus,
after his Grandson of the same name had obtained the Kingdom) about 80 years
old, when he had reigned 38 years, and done many and great good Offices for the
Commonwealth.

28. Tarquinius Priscus being dead, Servius Tullius his son-in-law succeeded
him in the fourth year of the 50th Olympiad, wherein Epitelides the Laconian
was Victor, Servius Tullius his descent and education.
when Archestratides was Archon at Athens: concerning whose Original, and
private life, something is first to be spoken. Dionysius l. 4. Livius l. 1.
Florus l. 1. c. 6.
A certain man of Corniculum, a Town in Latium, of Royal blood, was slain when
Tarquinius took the place, and left his wife Ocrisia big with Child, which
woman Tarquinius gave to his Queen Tanaquil. Ocrisia then was delivered of a
son in the Kings house, named Tullius, and surnamed Servius by her in
remembrance of her bondage. When being an Infant he lay in the Cradle a flame
of fire is said to have appeared, and encompassed his head, which raised great
expectation of him in Tanaquil a woman skillful in the mysteries of her
Country. She brought her husband into a great opinion of him, so that he was
educated by them, and answering what had been conceived of him at length was
made their son-in-law: then abroad he had Command in the Army, and at home
managed public Affairs for the King when grown old, in all things behaving
himself with such integrity, valor, and prudence, as purchased him the love of
all the people. Now whereas Tarquinius had at his death no sons (as Dionysius
makes most manifest) but left two Grand-sons both Infants, Tanaquil having a
desire that Tullius should succeed him, kept his death private for some time,
till he had procured the people to banish the Marcii, giving out that the King,
dangerously wounded though not dead, had referred all business to him
according to his custom. Being secure of the faction of the Marcii, he then
carried out Tarquinius to be buried, as newly dead, and as Tutor to the young
Children, executed the Office of King, which Tanaquil out of the window had
told the people, was her husband's will, when yet she feigned him to be living.
But the Patricians grudging Tullius this honor, conspired how, the next time
he assembled the Senate, they might constrain him to leave off all the royal
ensigns, and then go to an Election according to the usual manner.

29. He coming to the knowledge hereof Assembled the people, and producing the
two boys, pleaded their case and his own: he promised them to pay all their
debts, and divide to those that wanted the public grounds. Hereby retaining
the power under the notion Guardian; The Patritians were sore agrieved thereat,
but the wisest sort thought it not good to stir, though they plainly saw the
Authority of the Senate much infringed. For they considered, that if they
should make a King of their own body, the people would not approve the choice,
and if it were referred to the multitude, Tullius would assuredly be the man:
wherefore they thought it more wisdom to suffer him to reign in an unlawful
manner, that so they might ever have some just pretense against him, than by
stirring in the matter to procure him a legal Title. But he prevented this
their design, going with his mother, mother-in-law, and all his kindred in
mourning habits unto the Forum, where he showed the people how lamentable his
condition was through the plots of the Patritians against him, which he
deserved no otherwise than by his good deeds toward the commonality: he laid
to their charge that they would call in the Marcii that had murdered Tarquinius,
and expose his posterity, who had so well deserved of the State together with
himself, to the same cruelty, and in conclusion, offering to lay down all, if
such was the pleasure of the people, and undergo any hardship rather than be
troublesome, he offered to descend from the Tribunal. A great clamor then arose
mixed with prayers and tears of those that besought him to retain the
Government, and presently some that were provided beforehand began to cry out
that he was to be chosen King, and the Curiae were to be called to the Vote,
which thing was instantly resolved by the multitude. He gladly took hold of the
opportunity, thanked them that they were mindful of the benefits received from
him, promised larger if he were elected King, and appointed a day for the
Comitia, or Assembly, whereof he intended to have present those also that were
abroad in the Country. Obtains the Kingdom.
At the day appointed for the Assembly of the Curiae (called Curiata Comitia)
he was chosen King by the suffrages of them all, and so in despite of the
Conscript Fathers, who refused to confirm the choice, as the manner was,
obtained the principality.

30. A.M. 3427. V.C. 76. Olymp. 50. an. 3. Nebuch. 31.
Presently after his setlement he accomplished his promise concerning the
division of the public Land to such as were forced to preserve themselves by
daily labor in other men's grounds; and in the Curiata Comitia preferred fifty
Laws concerning contracts and injuries. He added two Hills to the former five:
viz. the Viminal and Esquiline, in the later whereof he lived himself, and was
the last man that enlarged the Pomaeria of the City, the Wall whereof was
never any further stretched out, though very large Suburbs were afterward
added. After he had compassed all the seven Hills within one Wall, he
distinguished the City into four parts, and instead of three, made four
Tribes. And as Romulus distinguished the people according to their Seats and
Communion in Sacrifices into Tribes and Curiae, so Servius making every one
give an account how much he was worth, according to their riches divided them
into six Ranks, or Classes. Of these, the first and highest consisted of such
as were worth, 110000 Asses (each of which answers to ob. 9. of our money)
the next four decreased in value a fourth part, and in the last were contained
all such whose Estates were of little, or no value.

The Census.
31. The Classes he did also so subdivide into Centuries, as 192 were made in
all; his design herein being to know certainly how many were fit to bear Arms,
and what Treasure might be supplied for Wars, or other occasions. He also first
ordained the Lustrum (so named a Luendo, (from paying) says Varro, Lustrum.
as Flustrum a Fluendo) to be celebrated after this Census, De Lingua Latina
lib. 5.
or value of each according to their substance. On a certain day after the
valuation he enacted that all the Citizens should meet in their Armor in the
Campus Martius, every one in his several Classis and Century; where by
sacrifice the City was expiated, or Lustrated. This solemnity was termed
Solitaurilia, Lib. 1. cap. 5.
(or rather Suovetaurilia), because an Hog, Sheep, and Ox were sacrificed, as
we read in Quintilian. These things being performed, the Lustrum was finished,
which, because of continual change of men's Estates, he ordained should be
reiterated every five years, so that he (who begun it according to Lipsius in
his twelfth year) celebrated it himself four times, according to Valerius
Maximus. Every fifth year the Tribute or Tax (called Census) was paid and
thence Lustrum seems to have had it is name. Lib. ^. c. 4.
After the banishment of the Kings, the Consuls managed this business, till
the Censors (Magistrates proper to the work) were brought in. Lastly, Joseph
Scaliger tells us, we must distinguish the old Roman Lustrum from the later,
or Julian, which is only a Systeme of four Julian years, whereof the last
consists of 366 days absolutely without any overplus of hours. De Legibus l.
3.
For the Old and Proper Lustrum contained five years complete, which that cited
by Cicero, concerning the Censors, out of the Laws of the twelve tables, Let
them be two, Let them obtain the Magistracy for five years, makes manifest; so
that this Lustrum cannot answer to an Olympiad, properly so called; of which
beginners are to take notice.

32. Of the six Classes, which contained 193 Centuries, Dionys. ut supra.
the first and richest was divided into 98; the Equites or Horsemen being
counted in: the second into 22, taking in Artificers; the third into 20: the
fourth 22: the fifth 30, and the sixth and last of the poorer sort, made up but
one Century. Men and moneys being levied, according to these Centuries, and not
by poll (each Century such a quantity) it came to pass, that the richest being
fewer, yet divided into more Centuries (here the word is not to be taken for
100 persons precisely, The Centuries and Cexturiata Comitia.
being made use of only to express such a division) were never free from
warfare, and contributed also more money than the rest: they that were but
moderately or meanly provided of wealth, being exceeded by the other in twenty
Centuries, went to the War by turns, and paid but little Tribute: and they that
had not any estate to speak on, underwent no burdens. This seemed very just
and equal to him, that they who were most concernd, should take most pains, and
bear the greatest cost; the Romans at that time maintaining themselves in the
Wars without any pay from the public. But the richer sort something grieved to
undergo all charge and danger, for the preservation of others as well as
themselves, Servius sufficiently satisfied and requited, by giving them in a
manner the whole prerogative in matters of State, the porer being almost wholly
removed from any power in the Commonwealth, though at first they did not
perceive it.

33. This secret lay in the Comitia or Assemblies, where the people resolved
about the most important affairs; these three things being in their power, viz.
Creation of Magistrates as well Military as Civil, making or abrogating Law,
and decreeing Peace or War; concerning which things the suffrages of the
several Curiae were wont to be gathered, and the vote of the porest availed as
much as that of the richest person: whence the poorer sort being much more
numerous than the rich, ever prevailed by their Multitudes. Tullius
understanding this, instead of those of the Curiae, called the Comitia of the
Centuries upon such occasions. First of all were called the Centuries of the
first or richest Classis, viz. the 18 of Knights or Horsemen, and the 80 of
Footmen, which being three more in number than all the rest besides, if they
all agreed they overcame in number, and there was no need of calling any of the
others to the vote. If they disagreed, the 22 Centuries of the second Classis
were called, and if need were, the third Classis, and the fourth, till 97
Centuries agreed in their suffrages. If this happened not after the calling of
the fifth; (192 Centuries being divided equally in number, and of several
opinions) then was the sixth Classis called containing the last Centurie, free
from Tributes and War; and to which side it joined, that overcame.

34. This rarely happened, and was almost impossible, the Comitia being ended
most commonly by the first call; but, however, seldom came it to the fourth
Classis, so that the two last were supervacaneous. By this constitution the
poorer sort were deceived, thinking it enough that every m^n, as well one as
another, gave his suffrage, and not considering that the suffrage of the whole
Centurie was but one, whether it contained more or fewer persons in it. But at
length, seeing themselves freed from danger and charge, they were content, and
the richer enjoying such privileges for their pains and cost, were well
satisfied; and this order was kept for many Ages, till afterward, by the
violent actings of some, the common sort got more power, as Dionysius himself
observed the innovation to have broken in, in his time. At the first Lustrum
were found 84700 Citizens; but to increase their number, he brought in the
custom of making Slaves free of the Commonwealth, whom being before manumitted
or set free, he distributed into the four Tribes of the City.

35. These Slaves were either made or born such, as Justinian the Emperor
distingisheth them. The custom of manumiting Slaves.
The former sort were either taken in War (then properly called Mancipia), or
bought of the public, or of some private man. The later, were those that were
born either of both Parents being such, or of the Mother only. At first they
obtained their liberty gratis, by well deserving some way of their Masters, or
some by payment of money earned by their honest labors, they having a certain
Peculium, though all was said to belong to their Masters. But in process of
time, when the Romans degenerated from their former worth and honor, some by
Roberies, others by breaking of houses and other villainies, got money, whereby
they purchased their freedom. Some by helping their Masters in these things
obtained liberty as a reward; others on condition to let them enjoy the monthly
allowance of Corn out of the public purse, or other Largesses conferred by
Princes upon poor Citizens. Sometimes they were manumitted through the levity
and vainglory of their Lords; some having by their Testaments set at liberty
all their Slaves, to obtain a fame of clemency after their death, and that
their Funerals might be celebrated by a great train of such as wore caps upon
that occasion; in which pomp a thousand Rogues have been seen, who much better
deserved hanging. This was laid to the charge of the Mistress of the World,
that challenging the Empire over all, she should defile her self with such
impure Citizens, which custom might have been reformed, as Dionysius observes,
by the care of the Censors, who inquiring into the lives of Senators and
Knights, never considered what persons were unfit to be admitted Freemen.

36. Tullus not only clipped the power of the Patritians and Senate, but took
away half of the King's Prerogative also Whereas the former Princes called
before themselves all controversies, Tullius clipeth the King's power.
and took cognizance of crimes as well committed against particular persons as
the public, he separated these causes, making himself Judge of such as
respected the Commonwealth, and referring the quarrels of private persons unto
others, to whom he prescribed Laws and Rules for to go by. After he had thus
ordered the Commonwealth, he caused the Latins to build a Temple at Rome to
Diana, upon the Aventine hill, whereat they should meet and feast every year,
and so preserve themselves as one body politic in unity and concord. If any
controversy arose betwixt particular Towns, it was to be decided by the
judgment of others, in such a manner as the Amphyctiones in Greece were wont
to proceed, the Council of the Ionians at the Temple of Ephesus, and that of
the Dorienses in the Temple of Apolla, built by common consent at Epitropium.
These things were done by Tullius at home, according to Dionysius, Livie, and
others; to which we may add from Pliny, that he first stamped money with the
image of Cattle, whence it was called Pecunia, whereas the Romans before his
time used it in a rude lump or Mass. As for his actions abroad; he warred with
the Hetruscans 20 years, who refused to obey him, as an obscure man, and
renounced the league formerly made. In all battles both with the united Nation
and particular Cities, he ever had the better, triumphed over them thrice, and
at length forced them to submit to the yoke, on the same terms as formerly
Tarquinius had imposed it, except that from three Towns that had been principal
in the revolt, he took part of their grounds, which he divided to those that
had newly been made free of the City. Is murdered by his son in Law and his own
daughter.
Having done these things at home and abroad, when he was grown old and not far
from the natural period of his life, he perished by the devices of Tarquinius
his son in law, and of his own daughter.

37. Tullius had two daughters by his wife Tarquinia, which he married to their
two Cousin-germans, the grand-sons of Tarquinius, joining them in wedlock
according to their age, as he thought it most equal and convenient. But it
happened that they were matched together with those of dispositions clean
contrary to one another. Lucius the elder, a man of a bold, arrogant, and
tyrannical nature, had an honest modest wife, and one most dutiful toward her
Father: on the contrary, Aruns Tarquinius the younger, being of a mild and
sweet disposition, light on a wicked woman, one of a bitter spirit against her
Father, ready for to attempt any thing. Lucius breaking out into passion
against his Father in Law, for keeping the Kingdom from him, was still appeased
by his wife, but Aruns being content to stay his time, and averse to any thing
that might favor of disrespect to Tullius, was importuned ever and disquieted
by his wive's earnest and tedious solicitations, to attempt the utmost, though
with the destruction of her Father, for the obtaining of the Sovereignty. This
woman being impatient of her husband's backwardness, and bewitched by the fury
of ambition, resolved to change husbands if it might be, and match her self to
the other Tarquin, who suited well with her own humor: she brake her mind to
Lucius, telling him of what a sordid spirit they were, to suffer an Usurper so
long to possess their Patrimony, railing against her own husband, as a man of a
poor and degenerate disposition, and at length made a profer for them two to
dispatch out of the way their present unequal yoak-fellows, and then unite
themselves in that relation, thereby to bring about their noble and gallant
design. He was not backward to a compliance, and the device was accordingly
brought about, after which, they resolved by force to expel Tullius from the
Kingdom, if he would not give place on his own accord, raising a faction of
the Patritians, that were discontented with the King's new modelling of the
State, and the poorest Plebeians, whose assistance they purchased openly,
without any respect to right or modesty. Tullius was not ignorant what they
intended, and feared also to be destroyed ere he could provide for his
defense; yet thinking it an unseemly thing to make War upon his son in Law, and
his own daughter, and punish them as Enemies, he indeavourd by fair means to
take them off, before their Friends, blaming, admonishing, and dehorting
Tarquinius from the intended injury.

38. Effecting nothing hereby, but the other saying, he would plead his cause
in the Senate, he called together the Fathers, and gave him liberty to speak.
Tarquin laid his claim to the Kingdom, as his Grandfathers Heir, and alleged,
that Tullius kept it from him unjustly, having got all his preferment from
their family, and obtained the place illegally, without the consent of the
Senate. Tullius replied, that the Kingdom was in the power of the People, to
dispose of it to whomsoever they would, which he proved from the example of
Tarquinius Priscus, who being a stranger, was preferred before the Marcii. He
mentioned how well he had deserved of him, by protecting and taking care of him
in his minority; and as for his coming to the Government without the ordinary
assent of the Senate, that concerned the Fathers and not him. He then appealed
to the Senate, whether ever he had wronged or carried himself arrogantly
toward any of them, that they should conspire with his son in Law against him,
and in conclusion told them, that if they thought Tarquinius the fitter man, he
should not be against the profit of the Commonwealth, but retire to a private
life, and let the World see, he could as readily obey as be obeyed, after he
had restored the honor to those from whom he had received it. Having struck a
great reverence of him into the Senate, he assembled the People, to whom, after
a great complaint against Tarquin, and a recital of what good things he had
performed for the Public, he offered to resign his place; but was confirmed
therein, and after he refused to give ear to such as would have Tarquin
dispatched, with great acclamations brought home to his house by the multitude.

30. Tarquin thus prevented of what he expected from the Patritians,
counterfeited repentance, and a desire to be reconciled to the King, which was
easily obtained. Covered with this Cloak he laid his designs anew, and being
continually solicited by his wife to attempt something worthy of a Kingdom,
took his opportunity on a day when most of the people were out of the City,
with the Roabs of Estate, and all Royal Ensigns as King, to go to the Senate
house. There he presumed to call together the Fathers, and, such being
Assembled as were appointed beforehand, took possession of the Kings Seat.
Tullius having notice hereof, unadvisedly with a few followers, hasted thither,
admiring the young man's impudence, whom seeing in his Chair, he fell of rating,
and received as bad language; then going about to thrust him out, Tarquin took
him up by the middle, and haling him to the door, threw him down the stairs
into the Comitium. The old man hardly recovering his spirits was led homewards,
when his daughter, and Tarquins wife, being come in her Chariot to see the
event, saluted her husband as King, but told him his principality would be but
uncertain, except, perfecting what he had begun, he would send some who should
overtake and dispatch Tullius. He took her advice, and the feat being done, she
presently returned home the same way. In her passage when she came to the place
where the body lay as yet almost gasping, her Chariot driver stood still,
confounded at the sight, and not having room to pass besides it. Hereat she
reviled him, and caused him to drive her over it, after she had first thrown
her footstool at his head. The place formerly called Cyprius Vicus, Dionys. and
Festus in voce Sceleratus Vicus.
was afterward named Sceleratus from that occasion. To this end came Servius
Tullius, after he had reigned 44 years, a man just and moderate, who abolished
the envy contracted in his illegal assumption, by his after acts, and was
thought, if he had not been prevented, to have intended to lay down his Office,
and restore absolute liberty with the care of the Commonwealth to the people,
which some of the Patritians perceiving, took in the interest of Tarquinius,
that they might preserve their own power.

40. Lucius Tarquinius obtained the Kingdom by violence, Dionys. lib. 4. Livius
l. 1. Florus l. 1. c. 7.
in the fourth year of the 61th Olympiad, wherein Agatharchus was Victor, when
Heraclius (or rather Heraclides) was Archon at Athens. Lucius Tarquinius,
surnamed Superbus.
By his Tyrannical, and imperious carriage he soon got the surname of Superbus,
as that of Priscus, for distinction, was given to his Grandfather. He would
not suffer his Father-in-law's body to be buried publicly for fear it should
give occasion to the people to rise against him, saying, that Romulus died
without burial. He murdered such as he suspected to favor the cause of
Tullius, and fearing what end his wickedness might bring upon him, got to him
a strong Guard which continually attended his person. A.M. 3471. V.C. 220.
Olymp. 61. an. 4. Cyri 26.
He reigned only by his own arbitrary will, neither standing upon the consent
of the Senate nor people. As for the former, he much dimished it by the murder
of the richer sort, whose wealth he seized on for his own use, and resolved to
choose no more in, that it might wear out, and grow contemptible. All
controversies he decided himself, assisted by his intimate friends, and took
cognizance of all offenses, so as he might kill, banish, or fine at his
pleasure. He sought to establish himself, and confirm his Tyranny by great
alliance, marrying his daughter to Octavius Mamilius, the greatest man amongst
the Latins, (being descended from Telegonus the son of Ulysses by Circe) and
by false accusation, and a cunning device caused them to stone Turnus
Herdonius, who had discovered to them his baseness and vilanies. He began a
War with the Volsci, which ended not with him, His Wars.
but lasted above 200 years; and subdued the Sabines who refused to obey him.
From the Volsci he took Suessa Pometia, (where getting much plunder he first
cast in his head the design of building a Temple to Jupiter, which his
Grandfather had formerly vowed) and afterward the City Gaebii by treachery,
making Sextus his eldest son to counterfeit flight from him for hard usage,
whereby he was made their General, and having according to the secret advice of
his father (who in imitation of Thrasybylus the Milesian carried the messenger
into the field, and cut down the tallest Poppies, dismissing him without any
other message) put to death the most principal Citizens, at length easily
betrayed it into his hands. After this he made peace with the Aequi, and
renewed the league with the Tuscans. Then went he forward with the work of the
Temple formerly designed.

41. Tarquinius Priscus, in his last War with the Sabines made a vow, that if
he got the Victory, Builds the Capitol.
he would build Temples to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva; and with great cost had
in his life time levelled the Rock, and formed a plot for the building; but
died before he could finish the work, Tarquinius his Grandson resolving to
perfect what he had begun with the plunder of Suessa, set on all sorts of
workmen, at which time as they were digging to lay the foundation, a man's head
was found bleeding afresh, which belonging to one called Tolus, thence the
building had the name of Capitol. He perfected a great part of the Temple, The
Capitol.
but could not consummate the work, being prevented by Exile, which was
finished by the City in the third Consulship after its freedom. It was seated
upon an high Cragge, eight Akers in compass, almost two hundred foot wide on
every side, and almost of the same length and breadth, as differing only in
fifteen feet. After it had stood 425 years from its Dedication, it was consumed
by fire in the days of Sylla, when L. Scipio and Caius Norbanus were Consuls,
as Tacitus writes: Yet it rose again with greater cost and Ornament on the
same foundation. Its front looking toward the South, had a Porch, Hist. l. 3.
c. 14.
or Gallery with three rows of Pillars: on each side were also a double row:
the three Temples were contained within the same Walls, the middle belonging to
Jupiter, and the other two to Juno and Minerva, under the same roof.

42. In the time of this Tarquinius, another great blessing, as it was counted,
happened to the Romans. A certain strange woman came to the King, Sibyls.
offering to sell nine books of the Oracles of Sibyl, which when he refused to
buy at her rate, she went away and burning three of them, returned and demanded
as much for the six, Being derided for a mad woman, she departed, and burning
half of them, returned with the other three, still asking as much as at the
first; whereat Tarquin astonished, sent for the Augures to know her meaning,
who answered that the nine ought to have been bought, and the three were to be
purchased at the same Rate. The woman after the sale and delivery vanished, and
never after could be seen. Tarquin chose two men out of the Nobility to keep
them, to whom he allowed two public servants. After his expulsion the people
Elected most Noble persons, Sibyls books.
who all their lives executing this Office were freed from all other burdens,
both Military and Civil, to whom only it was lawful to look in them. No
sacred thing was so carefully kept as these Sibylline Oracles. They were
consulted by decree of the Senate when the Commonwealth was disturbed by any
seditions, when any great overthrow was received in War, or any prodigies
happened. They were kept by the Decemviri, or ten men appointed to this Office
within a Vault under the Capitol, in a stone Chest, till they perished at the
burning of the place. Those that the Romans used afterward were Copied out of
such as belonged to other Cities, and private persons, wherein were some
supposititious things, which they distinguished by the difference of the
Acrosticks.

43. The woman that brought those books to Tarquin, having the name of Sibylla,
and there being many found to whom it has been given besides, something is to
be said of those women, for distinction. The first Sibylla, or woman
Prophetess (to which the (...).
Council of Jupiter was communicated, as the word imports) was a Persian,
according to Vide Ludov. Vivem in Augustine. de Civitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 23.
Varro, or else a Caldaean, or an Hebrewesse, born at Noe, a City near the
Red Sea; her name was Sambetha, her father called Barossus, and her mother
Erymantha. The second was a Lybian. Themis of Delphos was the third. The fourth
was called Cumaea, because she was born at Cimeriam, a Town of Campania in
Italy, near to Cuma. The fifth of Erythrae, a City of Ionia in Asia, at this
day called Cabo Bianco. The sixth was of the Island Samus; her name being
Phyto. The seventh of Cuma, and called Cumana, her proper name being Amalthea
according to some; but Herophile and Demophila according to others. Suidas
calls her Hierophile, and says she brought nine books to Tarquinius Priscus,
and demanded for them 300 Philippines, being Gold Coin of Philip King of
Macedonia. Pliny contrary to the common account of Writers mentions three
books, not nine, and writes that she burnt two of them. But the eighth was
called Hellespontiaca, being born in the Trojan Country upon the Hellespont,
in a Village named Marmissus near to Gergetium, which Heraclides of Pontus
affirmed to have flourished in the days of Solon and Cyrus. The ninth was a
Phrygian, and Prophesied at Ancyra. The tenth was of Tibur, by name Albanea,
being worshipped for a Goddess at that place, near the Banks of the River
Aniene, wherein her image is said to have been found holding a book in one
hand. These ten are reckoned by Varro. There were several others also. Lib. 14.
page 633.
Strabo makes two to have lived at Erythrae, whereof the later flourished in
the time of Alexander. There was another of Colophon, a City of Ionia. Elissa
and Cassandra, the daughter of Priamus, were accounted Sibyls. There were also
a Thessalian, Marto the daughter of Tiresias the Theban, and another of Epirus.
Moreover, Carmentis the Arcadian, the Mother of Evander and Fauna, or Fatua,
the sister and wife of Faunus, King of the Aborigenes in Italy, might be
reckoned in the number.

The siege of Ardea.
44. In the work of the Capitol Tarquin employed the people, and in other baser
works, wherewith he even tired them out; so that to appease them, and
especially to recruit his own Coffers, he made War against the Rutuli, and
besieged the rich City Ardea, five German miles, toward the East, distant from
Rome. The quarrel he pretended to be for that they received the Roman Exiles,
and endeavored to restore them; but the true cause was his thirst after the
riches of this most flourishing place, once the Metropolis of the Rutuli. While
he lay before this Town, taking great pains to gain it, and the other as
eagerly resisting (yet so as he seemed to have hope to carry it) an act of his
eldest son Sextus occasioned both the freedom of the one and other City.
Dionysius writes that he was sent to Collatia about some business concerning
the War, and going to the house of Tarquinius Collatinus his Kinsman (Grandson
to Egerius the Nephew of Priscus) he ravished his wife Lucretia, Sextus
Tarquinius ravisheth Lucretia.
the daughter of Lucretius a Noble Roman. Livy and Aurelius Victor relate that
the Courtiers drinking together in the Camp before Ardea, and with them
Tarquinius Collatinus the son of Egerius, they fell severally on praising each
one his own wife; in so much as proceeding to an earnest dispute, Collatinus
said there needed not many words, for that they might see within a few hours
how far his Lucretia excelled them all; and he desired them to ride to the
several places, and judge accordingly as they should find. Being well heated
with wine they agreed to this motion, and away they rode. They found not
Lucretia junketting, and idely spending her time as the Kings daughters in law,
but late at night hard at work amongst her maids, so that by consent of all she
far excelled the rest, and Collatinus nobly entertaining his Guests returned
with them to the siege.

45. Now was Sextus Tarquinius inflamed with a lustful desire after Lucretia
because of her beauty, and, as it happens toward difficult, or forbidden
things, the more because of her eminent chastity. Within few days, without the
knowledge of her husband, accompanied only with one servant he returned to
Collatia, where being kindly entertained by her, he was brought to his
bedchamber; but when he thought all asleep, having observed where she lay,
with a naked Dagger he went to her, and laying his hand on her breast,
threatened her with death if she offered to stir. He mixed threats with fair
words, but yet could not prevail, till he told her he would first kill her, and
then his slave, whom laying by her side he would report it was for having
surprised her in Adultery with him, whereby obtaining his prey, in the morning
he departed. When he was gone, she sent for her father from Rome, and her
husband from the Camp, (or say some, went her self to the City) desiring they
would call together some friends, for that a matter of great importance had
befallen her. With Lucretius came Publius Valerius, and with Collatinus, Junius
Brutus, who finding her in her chamber in a sad and afflicted condition,
Lucretia kills her self.
she told them the whole matter, refused to admit any comfort, and entreating
them to revenge her cause upon the Author of her sorrow, stabbed her self to
the heart before them, with a knife she had kept close about her for that
purpose.

Junius Brutus.
46. Lucius Junitus Surnamed Brutus, was the son of Marcus Junius, who being
descended from one of the Companions of Aeneas, and, for his Virtue, very
eminent amongst the Romans, married Tarquinia the daughter of Tarquinius
Priscus. of which he begat this Lucius. This Lucius was nobly educated,
instructed in all disciplines of the City, and of a pregnant wit. But after
that Tarquin had privily murdered his Father (not for any offense, but to
possess his great estate, as he did several others) and with him his eldest
brother, who seemed to bear such a mind as would revenge the injury; he being
young, and destitute of any assistance from his kindred, counterfeited himself
a fool, which he acted all along, and thence had the Surname of Brutus, this
being the sole remedy against the cruelty of the Tyrant, who thinking his folly
not feigned but real, despised the man, and having spoiled him of his
Patrimony, kept him as an Idiot in his house, and suffered him to converse with
his children, not out of respect as a kinsman, but to make them sport by his
ridiculous words and actions, as true Idiots are wont to do. On a time a great
Pestilence having seized on the City, he sent him to Delphos with his two sons
Sextus and Titus, to consult the Oracle. They were glad they had him to make
them merry, laughed at him for offering to Apollo a wooden staff, wherein yet
he had secretly put some gold, having made it hollow for that purpose. Having
privately enquired which of them should be Prince of Rome, it was answered, he
who first of all should kiss his Mother, which the young men misunderstanding,
agreed betwixt themselves, that at their return they would do it, and so reign
jointly together: but Brutus as soon as they arrived in Italy, knowing the
meaning of the Oracle, fell and kissed the Earth, which is mother of all. When
under the Vizard of a Fool, he waited for an opportunity to revenge himself and
family upon Tarquin, this disaster of Lucretia at length presented it self.

47. Being sent for beforehand, or coming in with Collatinus his kinsman after
the death of Lucretia, as Dionysius writes, while her husband and friends were
lamenting over the dead body, he told them it was not time now to weep, but to
study how to revenge the injury. He acquainted them with the cause of his
assuming the name and behavior of an Idiot, and manifesting himself to be a
most cunning man, desired they might unanimously join for the expulsion of
Tarquinius and his friends from the City, He urges the banishment of Tarquin.
speaking many things efficacious to persuade them to it. Finding every one
very ready, he said there was no need of words and promises but real deeds, if
they meant to perform any thing, and that he first would begin. Then went he to
the dead body, and taking the bloody knife in his hand, swear by Mars and the
rest of their gods, to cast out Tarquinius Superbus with his wicked wife and
progeny, to prosecute them or their friends with fire and sword, or any other
way, and never after that, to suffer the Tarquins or any other, to reign in
Rome. He made them all successively take the same Oath; then, for the way how
to bring the matter about, said the gates of the City should be safely kept,
that the King might not hear the least word, till he, who was Prince of the
Sacrificers, should, as he might by his place, assemble the people, to which
the dead body being exhibited, and Lucretius with Collatinus deploring their
condition, they might procure the banishent of Tarquin by a public decree,
that should be presently dispatched to the Army for it is concurrence.

48. But before Tarquinius should be removed, they thought it wisdom to
consider what Magistracy was fit to succeed his; lest they should pull down the
present dwelling before another house was prepared. Some were for Monarchy, as
indeed the best of Governments, others for Aristocracy, or the rule of the
Senate, and others would have the whole power put into the hands of the People;
each party bringing examples of good Government in the several kinds. Brutus
said the time was straight, and these matters required mature deliberation,
which neither at length could produce such a form as would be void of all
inconveniences: he said, he hoped that after the expulsion of the Tyrants, they
should have leisure to consider how they might best reform the Commonwealth, if
any better way could be found out than what Romulus, Pompilius, and the other
Kings had chalked out to them, wherein proceeding, till Tarquin forsook the
path, the City had been happy and famous, both for it is acts abroad, and
constitutions at home. This he could not for shame deny, yet however, he
thought those incommodities, as he called them, Prescribes a new model of
Government.
had procured the Kingly power to degenerate into tyranny, and therefore were
at present to be abolished, and to be taken heed of for the time to come. As
first, Dionysius.
because some men made a great matter of very names, he thought that of a
Kingdom was to be left, and the other of Commonwealth to be assumed; so that
for the title of King and Monarch, some more modest and popular was to be
invented. Then, the regal power he judged not safely to be entrusted with a
single person; but that two were to be chosen, who should govern with equal
command and authority, and so be a counter-poise each to other. Of all royal
ensigns or ornaments, such as procured the envy and grudge of the People were
to be laid aside: viz. Scepters, golden Crowns, and Purple Robes of Cloth of
gold, except upon Festival days, and in triumphal pompes, which rare use of
them would not be at all spoken against: but as for the Ivory Chair in which
they sat in Judgment, with the white Robe edged with purple, called Praetexta,
and the twelve Lictors, or Sargeants, bearing Rods and Axes, they were to be
continued. He added, that the main thing to keep these his Magistrates in
order, was to prevent their perpetual power, which would keep them from giving
account of their actions; wherefore he thought fit their Magistracy, after the
manner of Athens, should be but Annual, that so each one might learn as well to
be subject as to govern, and this would preserve the mind from being drunk with
too much liberty. Lastly, that the name of King might not utterly perish
(whence may be concluded, that his judgment was not against the Office though
his passion was) he would have the title given to one, who should be called Rex
Sacrorum, and having this honor for his life, with immunity from warfare,
should meddle with nothing else, but these superstitious Rites, of which the
Kings had charge before.

49. Having first got a decree of the Senate for the Kings banishment,
according to the custom of public proceeding, the Comitia were assembled by
Brutus, and the body of Lucretia brought in her gore into the meeting place,
where it was set for a spectacle to all. Brutus then discovered himself, told
them why he had seemed what he now appeared never to have been, and then
declared the occasion of their meeting to be, that the Patritians might have
their assent for banishing Tarquin, who having obtained the Principality
illegally, had abused it more than any Tyrant that was ever heard of. He
illustrated his assertion by a relation of his crimes; as of his poisoning his
own brother before he was King, together with his lawful wife, and marrying the
other sister that was partaker with him in his wickedness: his killing Servius
Tullius, and strangling his wife, whom he ought to have respected as Parents;
then his invading the Government without decree of Senate or Suffrages of the
people by force of Arms. He reckoned up the injuries received by the
Patritians, most of whom he had made away, and reduced the rest to the estate
of beggars; how from the Plebeians he had taken, Laws, Religious Meetings, the
Comitia and Suffrages, and used them no better than Slaves bought with woney.
He then demanded how long they should endure this bondage; whether no longer
than till the death of Tarquin, when as he had three sons more wicked and
mischievous than himself, especially the elder, which he proved by the
spectacle before their eyes, telling them then the whole story. This advantage
he improved to the utmost, showing how the King being now absent, and the
Patritians resolved, nothing could be wanting to them, if they had but courage
for the enterprise; not Men, Money, Arms, Captains, nor foreign aid; urging, that
it was a shame they should think of commanding the Volsci, Sabines, or others,
and be Slaves to others at home; or maintain so many Wars for to serve the
ambition of Tarquin, and undertake none for their own liberty. As for the Army
now at the Siege, there was no fear, but, for their own freedom and
accommodation, they would readily cloze with them; and if any should be found
to intend the Contrary, they had their wives and children as Hostages, in the
City, whereby they might easily draw them off.

50. The multitude being variously affected with hope of liberty, and fear to
miss of it, during his Speech, yet made acclamations to the particulars, and
at the end, with one voice desired he would give them Arms. He said he would,
if first they should confirm what was offered from the Fathers, as the
beginning of their liberty; and therewithal recited the form of this severe
Decree, The people decree Tarquinius his banishment.
that the Tarquinii should be banished with all their offspring, and be
capital for any one to speak or act for their return. The several Curiae being
called, confirmed it by all their Suffrages, which being done, he acquainted
them how it was agreed, that unto two men the Government should be committed,
whom they should elect in their Centuriate Comitia, which was also passed.
Then, according to the custom, by virtue of his Office formerly mentioned, he
named Sp. Lucretius to be Inter-rex for holding of the Comitia or Assembly,
who adjourned the meeting to the Campus Martius, where it was the custom for
the Romans in their Armor to elect Magistrates. There he named Brutus and
Collatinus (as was formerly agreed on betwixt the conspirators) for to have the
Regal power, and the Centuries confirmed them by their Suffrages. In the mean
time, whilst these things were done in the City, Tarquinius having heard by
such as escaped out ere the gates were shut, that Brutus called the people to
their liberty, making none acquainted but his sons and some trusty friends,
with them rode away post, to prevent the general defection, but finding the
gates fast shut, and the walls full of Armed men, in great grief returned to
the Camp. There now he could not be received; for Brutus foreseeing his sudden
coming, sent Letters to the Army (or went himself by another way than that he
knew he would come) wherein he acquainted them with the decree of the People,
and desired that they would revolt from the King. The letters were read to the
Soldiers by T. Herminius and M. Horatius, whom Tarquin had left to govern the
Army, and they being called to give their Suffrages also by Centuries, all
thought that what their friends at home had done, was to be approved, and would
not admit the King at his return. Frustrated of this hope, he went Caere in
Hetruria, says Livie, to Gabii says Dionysius, where he had made his son
Sextus King, now gray headed, He is driven into exile.
having reigned 25 years. Herminius and Horatius took truce with the Enemy for
15 years, and breaking up the Siege before Ardea, returned with the Army. This
happened in the 244th year of the City, after the account of Cato, but the
245th, A.M. 3496. V.C. 245. Olymp. 67. an. 4. Darii 13.
according to the computation of Terentius Varro, in the latter end of the 67th
Olympiad, or the beginning of the 68th, A. M. 3496. Pliny writes, that it was
the same year wherein the Pisistratidae were banished Athens, and Clemens
joyneth it with the recovery of Babylon by Darius Hystaspis. This was somewhat
above twenty years after the beginning of Cyrus, and the destruction of the
Babylonian Empire.

AN INSTITUTION OF General History. The First Part. BOOK II. Of the Persian
Empire, and the Affairs of the World Contemporary with it.
CHAP. I. The Persian Empire.
SECT. I. From the beginning of the Empire of Cyrus, to the death of Cambyses
his Son and Successor.
1. CYRUS having obtained the Empire of the East through the Conquest of
Babylon, after a three years siege, Ezra 1.11.
as is conjectured, was sensible of Gods providence therein (whom he understood
to have foretold it, and called him by name above 100 years before he was born)
and out of obedience to his decree, The Jews return out of Captivity.
gave leave to all the Jews that were in Captivity in his Dominions, to return
to their own Country, the 70 years of their exile foretold by Jeremiah the
Prophet being now expired. In compliance with this opportunity Zorubbabel the
son of Salathiel, and Grandson to Jechoniah as Captain, with Joshua the son of
Josedec (which Josedec was brother to Esdras, and son to Seraiah the Chief
Priest, SECT. 2.
who being Counselor to Zedekiah was slain by Nebuchadnesar, Antiqu. l. 11.
c. 1.
the year wherein Jerusalem was taken) and 42462 Jews (as Josephus reckons up
the number) departed, and went into Judaea. Though the other Tribes formerly
led into Captivity by Salmanasar might have the same liberty of returning, yet
having together with the memory of their ancient Country lost their affection
to their God, and it, regarded not the time, the Lord having only promised
liberty of returning to those that were exported by Nebuchadnesar. And a great
part of the Tribe of Judah it self (if not the greater) unwilling to leave
their possessions got in a strange Land, as also discouraged by the
difficulties and troubles they were to undergo, preferred perpetual banishment
before the seat and habitation of their Ancestors.

2. In the second year of the Persian Empire, and the second month, A.M. 3474.
V.C. 223. Olymp. 62. an. 2.
when all things were in a readiness, according to Commission given by the
King (who defrayed the charge out of his own Revenue, and restored the Golden
Vessels carried away by Nebuchadnesar) the Levites were set over the work of
the Lords house, and Zorubbabel laid the foundation of the second Temple, The
second Temple built at Jerusalem.
to the joy of the younger sort born in Captivity, but with the lamentation of
the elder, who had seen the glory of the former house. When the Chuthites (whom
Esarhaddon planted in Samaria) heard of their progress in the work, they first
fraudulently offered their assistance, pretending the same religion, and being
rejected so corrupted the Courtiers (who either kept the thing from Cyrus, or
he was then busied in his Wars, as Josephus writes) that the building was
hindered for several years, until the second of Darius, the son of Hystaspes.
For this the Prophet Daniel (who was yet alive, Dan. 10.
and nigh 90 years old, as having been carried into Captivity 73 years before)
mourned, and fasted three weeks, and had the great, and last Vision concerning
the future Kings of Persia, of Alexander the Great, and his Successors in Asia
and Egypt, until the time of the Hasmonaeans, or Maccabees. But whether he
lived past the third year of Cyrus or no is uncertain.

3. Concerning the end of Cyrus many and several things are written. According
to Herodotus, Trogus and others he invaded the Massagetes, and perished in
their Country. The end of Cyrus variously reported.
The Queen of this Scythian people named Tomyris he first made a pretense to
sue to for marriage, but she being aware of this design to entrap her forbad
him entrance; whereupon betaking himself from wiles to force he laid a bridge
over the River Araxes, and provided for the passing of his Army over. Whilst
he thus employed himself, she was so hardy as to send him a message, offering
him either to invade her Country, or else to permit her a passage into his.
Amazed at it, he referred the matter to his Council what should be done
therein, where some advised him to suffer her to pass the River, but Craesus
stiffly opposed it, showing the danger in case he were overthrown but in one
battle, and advised him after he had set over his men, and discovered the
enemy, to leave the weakest sort amongst his Army there in the Camp plentifully
provided of strong wines, with which liquor being utterly unacquainted, they
would make themselves drunk, and so might be easily destroyed. This advice
succeeded accordingly, and amongst the rest Spargapises the Queen's son was
taken prisoner, who as soon as he came to himself desired to be loosed, and put
an end to his life with his own hands, out of a deep sense of his condition.
His mother knowing nothing of his death, with threatening language required
Cyrus to dismiss him, and when she saw he returned not, gathered together all
her forces, wherewith counterfeiting flight she trained the King into
streights, and by an ambush laid in the Mountains, cut him off with his whole
Army to the number of 200000 men. His head she cast into a basin of blood,
upbraiding him with cruelty in these words: satisfy thy self with blood after
which thou have thirsted. Lib. 2.
To this story Diodorus adds that she nailed his body to a Cross.

4. But Ctesias wrote that the last War he made was against the Derbices, a
people also of Scythia, whom though he overcame, SECT. 1.
yet he received a wound in fight, of which he died three days after. Xenophon
says he died aged, and in peace, and how finding himself almost spent, he
called to him his friends, with his two sons Cambyses and Smerdis, or
Tanaoxares, whom (after a long Oration, wherein he discoursed much concerning
the immortality of the Soul, and the punishment and reward which is due to
things committed in this life) he exhorted by the strongest arguments to
perpetual concord and love. If so, he acted like one that had received the
knowledge of the true God, which he had opportunity also to know from Daniel
and others, being by them instructed in the Scriptures. Some think that the
variety of these reports proceeded from the study of the Persians to conceal
the shame of his being overthrown by the policy of a woman. Others observe,
that had he lost his whole Army in Scythia, it is scarce probable that his son
would have transported all his remaining Forces into Egypt so soon, and hereby
leave that side of his Kingdom destitute and naked, when the Scythian Nation
bordering upon Media was so victorious: not to add that Cambysses would not
have been able to undertake, and perform such a Conquest in so little a space.
Considerable certainly is that which the Writers of Alexander's Acts have
committed to memory, as Curtius, Plutarch, Arrianus, and even Aristobulus (who
by command of the King was an eye witness of it) as he is cited by Strabo:
Lib. 15. p. 730.
That he was buried in his own City Pasagardis in Persia, where his Epitaph
was plain to be read, in which after telling the Traveller who he was, he
desired him not to grudge him that earth wherewith his body was covered. Vide
Plutarch. in Alexandro.
The Tomb was opened by Alexander, either out of hope to find some Treasure, or
(what was pretended) out of desire to honor his dead body with some
Ceremonies, and in it were found an old Target, two Scythian Bows and a sword.
The Coffin wherein he lay Alexander caused to be covered with his own Roab, and
a Crown of Gold to be set thereon. These things something weaken the credit of
that opinion which Herodotus relates as the most probable of those that were
held in his time. But less credit is to be given to that Maleta.
which will have him slain in a Sea Fight against the inhabitants of Samus; and
Lucian in Macrobiis.
another that lengtheneth his life to 100 years, whereas he scarce passed 70.
Herodotus gives to his reign 29 years; but most agree that he reigned 30.
which must be counted from his first obtaining the Kingdom of Media.

5. What time passed from the Conquest of Babylon, and the beginning of his
Monarchy, unto his death, is controverted amongst learned Writers. Some reckon
ten years, or thereabouts, and others but three, of which number was once
Joseph Scaliger, who afterward retracted it as an error; but Ludovicus
Cappellus has renewed the assertion, making it probable by arguments drawn
from Scripture, who therefore is to be consulted in his sacred In notis ad Tab.
13.
Chronology. His issue.
Cyrus had issue two sons, Cambyses and Smerdis, or Tanaoxares, with three
daughters, Atossa, Meroe, and Artystona, to which Ctesias adds Amytis. Atossa
and Meroe their brother Cambyses afterward married; and Darius Hystaspis
obtained Artystona, as also Atossa after the death of Cambyses. Of the two
sons, to Cambyses he left his Kingdom, and to Smerdis or Tanaoxares assigned
the Government of Media, Armenia, and the Cadusians, according to Xenophon.

Cambyses makes War upon Egypt.
6. Cambyses presently after he came to the Government, made all possible
provision for a War with Egypt, the cause whereof is to be enquired after.
Herodotus tells a story how he sent to Amasis King of that Country to desire
his daughter Nitetis in marriage, Lib. 3. cap. 1.
which he not daring to deny because of the then formidable power of the
Persians, and not willing to gratify him absolutely, for that he conceived his
daughter would be entertained but as a Concubine, he found out a way as he
thought to satisfy Cambyses, A. M. 3476. Olymp. c. 2. an. 4. V.C. 225.
Cambysis 1.
and yet keep his daughter. There was one of Apries his predecessor's daughters
yet unmarried, her he sent to him under the name of his own, who when she had
sufficiently ingratiated her self with Cambyses, told him how indeed she was
nothing a kin to Amasis, but begotten by his Lord and Master; whereat the
Persian conceived such indignation, that, to be revenged on him, he invaded
Egypt. But that which moved Cambyses to send for this woman, seems something
strange. He had formerly desired from Amasis a Physician for the eyes, the best
that could be procured in Egypt, wherewith he gratifying him, the man took it
so ill of Amasis to be sent out of his native Country, that in way of revenge,
he moved the matter to Cambyses, concluding with himself, that the King of
Egypt would not send his own daughter: This was the saying of the Persians,
which Herodotus rather approves than what the Egyptians alleged, that
Cambryses was son to Nitetis the daughter of Apries, and that the Persians
ascribed that to the Son which beonged to the Father, Vide Polyaenum lib. 8.
because they would have Cambyses born of Cassan^ane the daughter of
Pharnaspes, of the noble race of Achaemenes; and yet he confesses there was a
report, that besides Cassandane, Cyrus kept Nitetis as his Concubine, whom he
most affected, and that to revenge his mother upon her, Cambyses when but young
threatened, and after his Father's death made War upon Ae^ypt. However things
might go in reference to the daughter of Apries, Cambyses seems to have
invaded that Kingdom, upon pretense of the right he had to it as Heir by
conquest to Nebucha^nesar, who subdued it, though it revolted from his
Successors; which might be concealed from Herodotus by the Priests, who spared
not to invent lies for a cover to the disgrace of their Country.

7. While Cambyses was yet busy in his preparations, Vide Herod. l. 3. cap. 4,
etc.
one Phanes an Halycarnassaean by birth, taking something in distaste from
Amasis, whom he served, fled out of Egypt by ship, and coming into Persia,
advised this King, that for his better passage of the sandy Deserts, he should
send to the King of the Arabians for sale conduct, who being no good friend to
the Egyptian, Pass^th thro^gh the S^ndie Deserts.
came and met him with Camels bearing abundance of water, which was necessary
for the sustenance of the Army in that hot and dry place. Ere Cambyses could
arrive in Egypt, Amasis had prevented captivity by a natural death, and
Psammen^tus his son having succeeded him, expected his coming at Pelusium one
of the mouths of Nile. Here a battle being fought, the Egyptians were
overthrown and fled to Memphis, whither Cambyses sent after them to yield up
themselves to him; but they tare in pieces the messengers, and then being
besieged, stood out for some time; but at length the City was taken. Conquereth
Egypt.
Psammenitus had his son put to death before his eyes, to try his patience,
though the Conqueror too late repented of it, and had given him his life with
the Kingdom to govern, as a Province, had he not attempted new matters, for
which he was forced to drink Bulls blood, and so died, having reigned six
months after his Father.

His extravagant practices.
8. This work done in Egypt, Cambyses betook himself to extravagant practices.
The dead body of Amasis he caused to be brought forth, to be beaten, pinched,
and then burnt, contrary to the practice as well of the Persians as Egyptians,
who abhorred such a thing, because the former accounted Fire a god, and the
later a ravenous beast, perishing with the thing devoured by it. Then resolved
he to make a threefold War: One upon the Carthaginians, another upon the
Ammonians, or the Inhabitants of the place situate about the Temple of Jupiter
Hammon, and the third against the long-lived Aethiopians, who inhabited Africa,
near to the Southern Sea. He resolved to send a Fleet against the
Carthaginians, an Army of Foot against the Ammonians, and as for the
Aethiopians, he would first send to discover their Country. While his
Messengers were dispatching toward Aethiopia, he gave order to the Phoenicians
(who having yielded themselves, were his only strength at Sea) to fight
against Cartha^e, which they flatly refused, because that City was a Colony of
their own, and thereby this design was d^shed. After the return of his
messengers, who brought him word how he was slighted by the Ethiopian King, in
great rage and haste he set forwards against him, without all thought of
victualling his Army, commanding all his foot to follow, His fruitless
Expeditions.
except the Graecians. When he was come to Thebes, he sent about 50000 men
against the Ammonians, with command after they had spoiled them to burn the
Temple; and so he marched on with the rest of the Army. But ere he had passed
the fifth part of his journey, all provisions failed, and all the beasts that
carried burdens were eaten up; yet did he not now recollect himself, but
proceeded till they were constrained to eat up every tenth man, and then
returned he with great loss and disgrace to Memphis, where he dismissed the
Greeks from his service. The forces sent against the Ammonians, never reached
thither, neither ever returned, being all overwhelmed, as was reported, in the
Sandy Wilderness.

9. Cambyses at his return to Memphis, found the Citizens in great mirth and
jollity, for that Apis their god had appeared to them lately; which he
interpreting as an expression of joy for his bad success, wounded the beast in
the thigh (thinking to strike him into the belly) of which he died. He derided
much the Egyptians for such deities: those that were found rejoicing, he
commanded to be slain, and the Priests to be beaten with rods. For such impiety
they accounted him stricken with that madness, which afterward appeared. For
not long after, he sent his brother Smerdis back into Persia, having conceived
great indignation against him, because he alone of all the Persians, could draw
a Bow that was brought him by his messengers out of Aethiopia. After this he
dreamed, that one came and told him how Smerdis sat on the Throne, and with
his head reached to Heaven, whereupon, he sent Prexaspes his greatest confident
to make him away, who murdered him in a pretended hunting, He murdered his
brother and sister.
or as some said, drowned him in the Red Sea. To this he added the murder of
his own Sister, whom, without any example, he had married, because she
upbraided him with their brother's death. Memorable is the answer of his
Judges, who, when he demanded, whether there was not a Law amongst the
Persians, that a man might marry his own Sister, answered, they found no such
Law, but one there was, viz. The King might do whatsoever he listed. Then
married he one Sister, and afterward another, whereof the younger he killed
being great with child, as the Egyptians reported, so that she miscarried
double.

10. To this rage and madness against his relations, he added fury toward
those that were nearest about him. Asking Prexaspes the minister of his
paricide, what his people thought of him, and receiving this answer, that they
thought him too much given to wine, that it might be seen how sober he was to
do mischief, he said it should be a demonstration, if he could shoot with an
arrow the son of Prexaspes right into the heart, which accordingly he did. The
day after he buried quick twelve other Persians for no sault at all, and
commanded Croesus the Lydian to be slain for admonishing him gravely concerning
such enormities, having dispatched him himself with an arrow, if he had not
taken him to his heels. His servants notwithstanding preserved Croesus alive,
expecting a reward if he should afterward repent of his death. And he really
rejoiced in his preservation, when he returned to himself; but put them to
death for their disobedience. Many more such like things he did whilst he
remained at Memphis, and raged against the Images and Temples of the Egyptians.

11. But whilst he thus spent his time, two of the Magi, Medians by birth,
conspired against him. One of them he had left Overseer of his household
affairs, The Magi usurp.
named Patizithes, who having certain knowledge of the death of Smerdes, though
it was kept very secret, took occasion thereat to rebel, because most of the
Persians thought this Prince yet living. For, having with him in the Kings
house a brother as like him in the lineaments and proportion of body as in
name, him he placed in the Throne, and sent up and down through the Empire, to
persuade every one rather to obey Smerdis the son of Cyrus than Cambyses. One
of these messengers coming down to the Army towars Egypt, found it at Ecbatane
in Syria, where standing in the midst, he proclaimed what was enjoined.
Cambyses being much startled, blamed Prexaspes for having neglected to execute
his commands; but he protesting his obedience therein, and that he had buried
his brother with his own hands, the messenger was persued and fetched back, out
of whom Prexaspes getting out that he had not himself seen Smerdis, SECT. 2.
but Patiz^thes had given him instructions as from him, easily conjectured what
was at the bottom, and therewith acquainted the King. Then too late did
Cambyses bewail his brother, and resolving with all speed to march for Susa, as
he mounted on horseback his Sword fell out of the Scabberd, and wounded him in
the thigh. Demanding the name of the place, he gave himself for lost, for that
it had been told him he should die in Ecbatane, which he had ever interpreted
of the place in Media so called, where he hoped it would be in his old age.
Twenty days after, he revealed the whole matter concerning his brother to the
Nobility about him, conjuring them not to suffer the Empire to return to the
Medes, but rather recover it the same way it had been betrayed. Not long after
his thigh bone being putrified, he died, when he had reigned seven years and
five months. Cambyses dies.
He left no issue, and so the direct line of Cyrus in him received it is period.

SECT. II. From the death of Cambyses to that of Xerxes.
1. SMerdis the Magician (called also Mardus, Lege Herod. l. 3. cap. 67., etc.
Sphendadates, and Oropastes) reigned those seven months which were wanting to
complete the eighth year of Cambyses, whom the Persians believed not as to his
brothers death, but thought that indeed he was alive and reigned, because
Prexaspes feared to confess that he killed him. In this time he, or rather his
brother, wonderfully pleased all men, except the Persians, remitting to other
Nations their tributes, and excusing them from War for three years. A.M. 3483.
Ol. 64. an. 3. V. C. 232.
But in the eighth month he was discovered by the means of Otanes, a man of
highest rank in Persia, who suspected him for a counterfeit, because he never
would appear in public, nor admit any of the Nobility into his presence. He
having a daughter then at Court, which had been Concubine to Cambyses, and now
was in the same quality to him that reigned, as all the rest of his wives; to
her he sent to know, whether it was indeed the son of Cyrus with whom she lay.
She having had no acquaintance with that Prince, The imposture of the Magi
discovered.
could give him no answer, and neither could she come near Atossa, who being
sister to Smerdis might easily know him, for that the Magician to prevent
intelligence, kept them severed one from another: This increasing the
suspicion, Otanes sent to her again, charging her as he lay asleep to know
whether he had any ears; for Cyrus had upon some account cut off the ears of
Smerdis the Magician. She obeyed her Father when it came to her course,
notwithstanding the danger, and the day following confirmed him fully in what
he had suspected.

2. Otanes presently discovered the matter to Aspathines and Gobryas, two men
of prime rank also among the Persians, who easily giving him credit, as having
suspected the same thing themselves, A conspiracy against them.
agreed to take three more, each of them one, into Council about it. Otanes
brought Intaphernes, Gobryas chose Megabysus, Aspathines took Hydarnes, and
Darius being then arrived at Susa from Persia, which his Father Hystaspes
governed, they also thought fit to add him to their number. Darius when
admitted, signified, that he had been assured of the cheat, how he was come to
Town upon no other account than to kill the impostor, and urged them to join
with him and attempt it speedily. Otanes was much against such hasty
proceedings, desiring further to consult about it, but Darius alleging the
danger of delay, for which cause, if they would not attempt something that very
day, he would go and discover rather than be discovered, at length they agreed
to him.

3. But while they were thus debating the matter, the Magi knowing that
Prexaspes had made away Smerdis the sone of Cyrus, and considering how nearly
it concerned them to make him their own, had sent for him, and by vast promises
endeavored to purchase his secrecy in that private affair. He seemed to
compile, and desired tha the Persians might be called together under the wall,
that he might persuade them, that he who now reigned was the true Smerdis. But
after he had mounted the turret, he began to reckon up the Pedigree of Cyrus
from Achaemenes, related his kindness and good turns done to the Persians, and
then telling the whole matter concerning Smerdis whom he had murdered, after he
had laid many curses upon them, except they recovered the Empire, and revenged
themselves upon the Magi, he threw himself down headlong and died. The seven
Conspirators utterly ignorant of this, arrived at the Court, at such time as
the Magi were consulting concerning what had happened, where the Porters easily
admitted them, because of their dignity, nothing being suspected of them. But
coming into the house, they were stopped by such Eunuchs as there waited,
whereupon they forced their passage with their Swords, and were encountered by
both the Magi, who having taken the Allarm, and perceived the matter, betook
themselves to their weapons. One of them wounded Aspathines in the thigh, and
put out the eye of Intaphernes: the other retired into another room, whither he
was pursued by Darius and Gobryas, The Magi slain.
Gobryas grapling with him, Darius stood idle for fear of wounding his friend;
but Gobryas bidding him strike though it were through his sides, he did it at
adventure, and slew the Magician. Both of them being slain, they cut off their
heads, and carrying them out, acquainted the Persians with what they had done.
Then fell they upon such Magicians as they could meet, which the Persians
taking as an example, did the like, so that if night had not intervened, all
that sort of men had perished, and this day was observed annually as a great
Festival, in which none of the Magicians stirred abroad. This was the end of
the usurpation, wherein seven Magi are said by some to have been partakers; but
if so, Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 2. Ammian. l. 23.
those two brothers are to be accounted the chief, one of them counterfeiting
the right Heir.

The Conspirators consult about a setlement.
4. This tumult being over in five days time, the seven Conspirators fell into
consultation about a setlement. Herod. l. 3. c. 80.
Otanes spoke for the taking away of Monarchy, which he urged, from the example
of Cambyses and the Magician, was apt to degenerate into Tyranny, and would
have had the Government remitted to the people in a Democratical way; Megabyzus
was for Oligarchie; but Darius of all the three sorts praeferred Monarchy, as
that into which at length the other would pass, through seditions and the
ambition of such particular men as should be able to advance themselves above
their neighbors. The other four subscribed to his opinion as best, which
therefore being agreed on by the major part, several capitulations were made in
order to the election. Otanes desired that both himself and family might be
exempted from the regal jurisdiction, Capitulations.
which was granted, and all possible honor further decreed to him for his
pains taken in the discovery. It was agreed amongst the other six, that it
should be lawful for them at any time to come into the Palace, except the King
were with his wife, and the King was prohibited to take a wife any where but
out of their families. As for the election, it was resolved, that all the next
morning by Sunrise riding into the Suburbs, he whose Horse first neighed,
should obtain the Empire of Cambyses.

Darius obtains the Kingdom.
5. Darius obtained it through the cunning of Oebares his Stable-Groom, Herod.
l. 3. c. 85.
who having knowledge from his Master of the business, the night before the
controversy was to be decided, put his Horse to Mare in the place whither they
were to ride. Valor. Max. L. 7. c. 3. Ext. Exemp. 2.
The Horse the next morning remembering his mate neighed for which, as coming by
accident, the other five adored Darius as King. Having thus obtained the
Kingdom, though he had children already by a daughter of Gobryas; yet the more
to strengthen his title, Justin lib. 1. Polyaenus Stratagem. l. 7.
he married the two daughters of Cyrus which remained; Atossa the wife of her
brother Cambyses, and of the Magician, and Artystona yet a Virgin: he also took
Parinys daughter to Smerdis the son of Cyrus, and Phoedaina the daughter of
Otanes. This he did, being also himself of regal extraction, Sulp. Severus.
Hist. Sacr. l. 2.
both allied to ancient and modern Kings. He was issued from Achaemenes; Cyrus
and his Father Hystaspes being brother's sons, the one to Cambyses, and the
other to Arsamnes, SECT. 1.
as some have reported. This translation of the Kingdom is said to have been
first revealed to Cyrus, at such time as having passed the river Araxes, he was
marching against the Massagetes; For he dreamed that he saw the eldest son of
Hystaspes (which was this; Herod. l. 1.
for he had three younger sons, Artabanus, Atarnes, and Artaphernes,) having
wings on his sholders wherewith he overshadowed Asia and Europe. At that time
he was about twenty years old, and Armor-bearer to Cyrus (according to Var.
Hist. lib. 12. c. 43.
Aelian) who sent him back into Persia, and as some said, caused him to be
imprisoned. After his death he was delivered out of Prison, and made Governor
of the Persian Magi, accompanied Cambyses into Egypt, and when he had
discovered the imposture of the Magi, joined with the other Princes against
them, and then either by the neighing of his Horse, or by strong hand, as some
have thought, obtained the Empire.

6. Though thus Darius obtained the Sovereignty; yet it seems to some, Vide
Usserium in Annal. Vet. Testam. page 157.
to have been as a perpetual Dictatorship, who think it probable, that the
other six had also by turns the exercise of Tribunitial jurisdiction, together
with him. First, because Aeschylus who fought against the Forces of Darius at
Marathon, names two Kings, viz. Maraphis and Artaphrenes, betwixt the
slaughter of the Magi and Empire of Darius, who seem no other than Mardonais
and Artaphernes, reckoned by Ctesias amongst the seven. Then in the Holy
Scripture, Esra 6.14.
together with the edict of Darius in the second year of his reign, the assent
of Artashashta King of Persia is joined, which may well enough be taken for the
said Artaphernes; though others do otherwise expound the place. And, to add
something not altogether so material, the other Conspirators foreseeing how
burdensome they should be to Darius (which in what other way could it be than
this?) bound him with an Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 2. extern. exempl. 6.
Oath most sacred amongst the Persians, that neither with poison, sword, any
other violence, nor by famine should he kill any of them; though it proved not
so sacred as to be inviolable.

7. In the second year of Darius the building of the Temple which had been
interrupted, The building of the Temple proceeds.
began again and proceeded. The Samaritans bribed the Courtiers in the time of
Cyrus, to hinder the work, and Cambyses having been formerly no friend to it,
when he came to reign stopped it by express command, through the calumniation
of such as bore the Jews no good will. The Magician also forbad it upon the
same account, it being clear from Scripture, that two several Princes named
Ahasuerus and Artaxerxes withstood it; and that betwixt the reigns of Cyrus and
Darius. Esra 4.
But when the Adversaries now betook themselves to Darius, expecting from him a
countermand to the Jews (who being reproved for their remissness by the
Prophet Haggai, were fallen again to build upon the foundation formerly laid)
he instead of any such inhibition, sent them an express command, not only not
to hinder, but at his own cost to further the Structure, allowing also to the
Priests expenses for the daily Sacrifices. The Jews therefore encouraged by
this new Edict, and confirmed by the Prophecies of Haggai and Zachariah,
proceeded prosperously in the building.

8. In the same year had the Prophet Zachariah a Vision, in which the Angel
interceding for Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, mentions the Lord's
having had indignation threescore and ten years. The rise or beginning of these
years Ludovicus Cappellus fetches from the destruction of the Temple. For from
the first Edict of Cyrus, and the end of the Captivity, to this time, passed
about eleven years ( Cyrus, according to his account, reigning but three after
the taking of Babylon, Cambyses together with the Magician eight, and Darius
one; from which must be deducted so much as the removal of the Jews would
require) even so many as passed from the beginning of the Captivity to the
desolation of the Temple, and so the Temple lay desolate full Severity years.
Hence is observable, that as the State and Policy of the Jewish Commonwealth
was broken, and much impaired eleven years before the destruction of the
Temple, so was it renewed at the end of the Captivity so many years before the
re-edifying of it, which hitherto had been attempted without success, but now
renewed, SECT. 2.
was happily finished in the sixth year of Darius, as to the house it self,
though three years more seem to have been taken up in the building the porches
and other appendices to it. And as the greatest part of the holy Vessels were
carried away in the Captivity of Jechoniah, eleven years before the destruction
of the Temple, so were they sent back again so many years before the
restoration of it. Lastly, this also is observed, that as from the destruction
of this typical Temple to the rebuilding of it, passed Seventy years, so from
the Conception of Christ the true and spiritual Temple, to the final desolation
of the shadow or typical one at Jerusalem, so many years passed, precisely
Seventy.

9. Darius after his setlement in the Kingdom, divided it into twenty Provinces
(which the Persians called Satrapies) over each of which he constituted a
Praesident, The Empire divided into twenty Provinces.
withal appointing what tribute each Nation should pay. For, hitherto, under
the two former Kings, nothing was appointed concerning tribute, the several
people contributing money by way of benevolence, whereupon, because of this new
imposition, they styled Darius an Huckster, Cambyses a Lord, and Cyrus a
Father. Cyrus was mild, and used them as children, striving to deserve well of
them; Cambyses was sharp and morose, Intaphernes put to death.
and Darius by all ways possible purveied for money. The next thing memorable
concerning Darius, is, his putting to death Intaphernes, one of the
Conspirators, for abusing the Porters, and violent intruding into the Palace,
contrary to the Capitulations agreed on amongst them. Having an intention to go
to the King, they that kept the gate stopped him, saying, that he was with his
wife, which he thinking to be a lie, drew his Sword, Herod. lib. 3. cap. 118,
119.
and cutting off their ears and noses, then tied the reigns of an horses bridle
to their necks and let them go. They presenting themselves in this case to the
King, he first suspected some treasonable design of all the six, but finding
that the rest knew nothing of the matter, he put Intaphernes to death, with all
his sons except the eldest, Vide Val. Maxim. lib. 9. cap. 2. extern. exemp. 6.
whom he granted to the entreaties of the Mother. But not only him, but all
the rest also who were burdensome to him, another tells us that he made away
by a new kind of death. All the Conspirators made away.
He caused many ashes to be laid betwixt some walls, over which laying a
rafter, thereupon he feasted them very nobly; but being fast asleep the floor
fell, and they therewith into the ashes, where they perished. If he destroyed
them in this strange manner, probable it is, that he desired to be rid of them,
because of some power to which they might pretend by virtue of a previous
agreement, not enduring any incombrance or restraint upon his prerogative; for
that Sovereignty is impatient of any competition in the throne.

Babylon rebelleth,
10. About the tenth year of his reign the City of Babylon rebelled against him,
having of late recovered that greatness of mind which sometime possessed it is
Inhabitants. Cyrus demolished not their walls, Herod. ut prius cap. 105.
but left them entire with the gates standing, which putting them in a posture
of defense, they took courage at the foreign Wars of Cambyses, and the stirs
that happened about the Magi. He gathered his forces together, with all speed,
and laid siege to it; but they being resolved to stand out to the utmost, chose
every one a woman to make ready their meat, and to save provisions, killed all
the rest of that Sex except their Mothers. Then, as if they had made themselves
impregnable, they derided the Persians, saying, they should be overcome when a
Mule foaled: And above nineteen months they held out, notwithstanding all
their attempts and devices. At length in the 20th, Zopyrus son to Megabyzus,
one of the chief Commanders in Darius his Army, being encouraged by his Mule
that foaled, mangled his face, cutting off his ears and nose, and in gore blood
counterfeited a flight to the besieged, as thus abused by the King. The
Babylonians believed, and according to his expectation chose him for their
General, after which, he made several sallies, and the besiegers according to
the former agreement fled; but within a while he betrayed the City to Darius.
And recovered.
He demolished the walls, and nailing 3000 of the principal actors unto
crosses, pardoned the rest, for whom 5000 women were sought, by whom they might
repair their decayed stock. Zopyrus was rewarded, as with other things in
greatest account amongst the Persians, so with the City of Babylon for his
life. The son of this Zopyrus was Megabyzus, who afterward conducted the
Persian Army against the Athenians and their companions: and son to this
Megabyzus was that Zopyrus, who revolted from the Persians to the Athenians.

11. After the recovery of Babylon, Darius wanting neither men not money, Darius
goes against the Scythians.
undertook an Expedition against the Scythians, to be revenged on them for
holding the Vide l. 1. c. 2. p. 21.
dominion of Asia 28 years, at such time as persuing the Cimmerians they
overthrew and kept under the Medes, whom they found Lords of all in the days
of their King Cyaxares. This Lib. 4. c. 1, etc.
Herodotus makes the pretended cause of the War, but Lib. 2.
Justin from Trogus relates, that it was because Lanthius the Scythian King
denied him his daughter in marriage. Darius caused a bridge to be laid over the
Bosphorus into Europe half a mile long, and thereon passing his forces over,
crossed the Sea himself by ship, and gave charge to the Ionians his Subjects
(who together with the Aeo^ians, and others that lived upon the Hellespont,
A.M. 3497. Olymp. 68. an. 1. V.C. 246. Darii 14.
made up the Navy) to sail up the Sea as far as the River Ister (which parted
Scythia from Thrace) over which he also enjoined them to make a bridge. In his
march through Thrace all submitted to him except the Getes, who out of
Ignorance withstood him. The Ionians prepared the bridge against his coming,
whom, after he had transported his forces, he commanded there to expect him
Sixty days, at the end of which if he returned not, he permitted them to
return into their own Country.

12. The Scythians had no constant dwelling or habitation, removing with their
wagons, wherein they lay, and cattle, from place to place, according as they
were furnished with grass, living upon milk and raw flesh, without Towns or
corn, and taking their conduct from the Pole Star, as the Chrim Tartars their
posterity at this day also live, the great Chrim himself having no other City
than an Agora, or one of the Carts. Having intelligence of his coming, they
sent their wives, children, and cattle toward the North, then stopped all the
wells, destroyed all fruits of the Earth, and sometimes appearing to the
Persians, again retired on purpose to deride them. Darius seeing himself thus
mocked, and despairing to come at them by reason of their perfect knowledge of
the Country, and his ignorance therein, fearing also his provisions might fail,
and especially lest the Ionians should forsake him at the bridge, now that the
Sixty days were expired, bethought how he might make a safe retreat. The
Scythians getting knowledge hereof, labored to remove the Ionians from the
bridge, telling them how good it would be for them to return home in safety;
for that now the time prefixed by the King was expired. They fell into
consultation hereupon, and Miltiades Tyrant or petty Prince of the Chersonesus
besought them, that, having this opportunity, they would not let it slip, but
free themselves from the Persian yoke. But Histiaeus Tyrant of Miletus a City
of Ionia, and others, who had enslaved their own Citizens at home, fearing,
lest if the power of the Persians, by which they were maintained, were broken,
they should be reduced into a private condition or worse by their own
Countrymen, resolved, that nothing more concerned them, than that the
greatness of that Empire might be established. Yet it was judged convenient to
break the bridge so far, as to be out of bow-shot from the Scythian side,
therein to comply with that People, who perhaps else might force them to do it.
Beginning therefore to break it, the Scythians believed their promise of
performing the whole, and returned to hunt out the Persians. Expecting them to
retreat that way which was best for Provisions, they missed of them; for Darius
returned the same he went, His retreat.
and with great difficulty recovered the banks of Ister. Here he arrived by
night, and was much discouraged when he found the bridge broken; but upon the
first shout Histiaeus came with all his Vessels and made it up for the
transportation of the Army.

13. Darius passing over his Army marched through Thrace unto Sestus, and
thence sailed over into Asia, leaving Megabysus in Europe with an Army of 80000
men. Megabyzus, according to order, subdued the Perinthians and Paeonians, whom
he translated into Asia, and having reduced to obedience all the Maritime
Coast, Earth and water demanded of Amyntas King of Macedonia.
Herod. l. 5. c. 1. etc. Justin. lib. 7.
sent into Macedonia to demand earth and water of Amyntas the King. These were
Symboles of subjection, signifying an acknowledgement of fealty, and voluntary
homage, the chief Sovereignty over all wherein propriety lay, being yielded up
with these two Elements. Darius had formerly sent to demand them of the
Scythians, and they in return sent him a Bird, Frog, Mouse, and five Arrows,
leaving him to make the interpretation, which he framing according to his own
wish, thought that they had yielded all those Elements wherein those Creatures
live, and their Weapons withal into his hands. But Gobryas construed the
meaning to be this: O ye Persians, get ye wings like Birds, dive under the
water, or creep into the holes of the Earth, for else our Arrows will overtake
you; which exposition was accordingly verified. Amyntas doubting of his own
strength, kindly entertained the Messengers, and granting what they came for,
magnificently feasted them, insomuch that being well heated with Wine they
desired that women, according to the custom of Persia, might be brought in to
them. He replied, that was not the fashion of Macedonia; but yet he would
gratify them therein, which being done, they began to be uncivil toward the
women, whereat he inwardly fretted, but for fear suppressed his indignation.
But his eldest son Alexander being present, a young man of prompt boldness and
little experience, desired him to quit the room, and let him alone to entertain
the Guests; and though he suspected him for his courage, and dissuaded him from
any rash attempt, yet did he withdraw accordingly. Alexander then told the
Persians they might have liberty to enjoy these women, but for that it now grew
late, he desired they would let them go out to wash, The Persian Ambassadors
killed.
and make themselves ready, which done, they should come again. They assenting,
he dressed so many barefaced young men in women's Clothes, who, being brought
in, when the Persians began to dally with them, according to his command
stabbed them with Daggers hid under their Clothes for that purpose. Megabyzus
hearing nothing of his Messengers, sent one Prubares a Persian down with an
Army to make diligent search after them, but him Alexander easily took off by
giving him his sister Gygaea in marriage, with whom he had falln in love; so
that he suffering the matter to rest in silence, no farther inquiry was made
after it.

14. The year following, being the 16th of his reign, Darius sent as Successor
to Megabyzus, Otanes the son of Sisamnes, who took in the Cities Chalcedon,
Byzantium, and Antander, with the Islands Lemnos, and Imber. He himself was now
returned to Susa, whither he carried along with him Histiaeus, Histiaeus.
who stood so much his friend at the Bridge of Ister. Histiaeus having begun to
build a City of his own in Thrace, Darius out of color of doing him honor,
and using his advice in his most important affairs, drew him away from it,
knowing his great abilities, and fearing his restless spirit. There he
continued for some years, till not being able to hear so much talk of Empire,
and rule, wherein he himself had no share, he much preferred his ancient
Dominion though but over one City, before this Real, though plausible
imprisonment, and therefore sought how he might kindle a fire in Ionia, that
for his interest in that Country he might obtain to be sent thither to quench
it, and so with his liberty get some notable advantage for a great
achievement. It happened that his endeavors did but tend to the blowing up of
that spark, which was already kindled without his knowledge, in Aristagoras his
son in Law, The occasion of the Ionian Rebellion.
who Governed Miletus in his absence. The first rise was occasioned by the
inhabitants of the Island Naxos, who having banished some of their principal
Citizens, the Exiles fled to Anaxagoras for protection and succor. He knowing
not well of himself how to restore them, Herod. l. 5. c. 30. etc.
sent to Artaphernes the brother of Darius, and his Lieutenant of Ionia then
resident at Sardis, proposing the Conquest of that Island to him, and offering
to subdue both it, and all the rest of the Cyclades to the obedience of the
Persian Empire. Artaphernes acquainted the King with the business, and he
approving of it, he lent him 200 ships under the conduct of Megabates his
Kinsman. A.M. 3500. Olyp. 68. An. 4. V.C. 249. Daii. 17.
They sailed together toward Naxos, and it happened in the way that Megabates
harshly used one of Aristagoras his followers, for which he sharply rebuked
him, as having no authority to punish those under his command. This the Persian
took so hainously, that he gave intelligence underhand to the Naxians of their
coming, who being forewarned were forearmed, so that no good could Anristagoras
do, but spending his time to no purpose, was forced at length to raise his
siege. For this fruitless attempt, feating disgrace, or worse from the
Persians, that he might prevent it, he studied how to revolt, and draw the
Ionians into Rebellion.

15. While he consulted with himself, a Message came from Histians, Idem c. 35.
Polyanus lib. 1.
who because the ways were so watched that he could send no Letters, shaved
close the head of his trusty Slave, and thereon with an hot iron ingraved such
marks as served to make out his sense, and after his hair was grown sent him to
Miletus. Aristagoras shaving his head again as he was commanded (which was all
the message that the slave carried by word of mouth) presently, and gladly
apprehended the matter, viz. that he should excite the Ionians to rebel. Going
now more cheerfully about his work, that the Milesians might more readily
receive the motion, he restored them to a show of liberty, and to oblige the
rest of the Cities, by one means or other abdicated the power of their petty
Princes, or Tyrants as they were called. But knowing how little able this
strength would be to graple with the whole power of Asia, which presently would
be upon them, he sailed to Lacedamon, there to desire assistance from Cleomenes
the King, who refusing to intermeddle, he thence went to Athens, where as
before he laid open the riches of Asia, with the imbecility of the Persians
the present masters thereof; and added, that the Milesians, as a Colony of the
Athenians, might justly expect relief from their hands.

16. The conjuncture of affairs at present were such at Athens, as he could not
have had a more convenient opportunity. Herodot. l. 5. c. 96, 97, 98.
It happened that Hippias the son of Pisistratus being expelled from Athens had
withdrawn himself to Sardis, where he labored with his whole might to make the
Athenians odious to Artaphernes, and bring the City into the command of
Darius, that so it might return to his own Dominion. They sent their
Ambassadors after him, praying Artaphernes that he would give no credit to
their Exiles; but he urging them, that, if they meant to secure themselves,
they would receive Hippias they chose rather to become Enemies to the Persian;
and therefore compiled with the motion of Aristagoras. The Athenians assist the
Ionians.
They agreed to send out 20 ships under the command of Melanthius, a man of
principal note amongst them, with which the Eretrians (out of way of requital
for aid formerly received from the Ionians) joined other 5. This was the
beginning of those many evils, which afterward fell both upon the Greeks and
Barbarians, and of such Wars as ended not till in the destruction of the
Persian Empire. It fell out in the 19th year of Darius, the second of the 69
Olympiad, 501 before the Era of Christ. A.M. 3502.

Aristagoras takes Sardis.
17. Aristagoras with this force went against Sardis, which he easily took, all
but the Castle wherein Artaphernes secured himself. A fire prevented the
plundering of the City, which was all turned into ashes by the means of a
Soldier's burning one particular house. The confusion being great, Capp. 99.
etc.
the Persians and Lydians met together in the Marketplace, through which ran
the River Pactolus having Golden Sands, and imbodying themselves prepared to
charge the Enemy, which when the Gracians perceived they fled for fear to the
Mountain Tmolus, and thence to their ships lying at Coresus in the Territories
of Ephesus. Defeated in his retreat.
The Persians in the pursuit slew a great part of them, amongst whom fell
Eualcides Captain of the Eretrians so much celebrated by Simonides the Ceian
Poet, and other eminent men: those that escaped dispersed themselves through
the Cities. Aristagoras could not by any means persuade the Athenians from
returning home; notwithstanding, for what had happened to Sardis, Darius was
exceedingly incensed against them; insomuch that he commanded one of his
servants where ever he sat at meat, thrice to sound these words in his eas,
Sir, remember the Athenians.

Cyprus revolteth,
18. At this time all Cyprus revolted from the Persians, except the Amathusians,
whom also the rebels besieged. Yet Darius, blinded by the specious pretenses of
Histiaeus, let him go, Capp. 103. etc.
thinking indeed that being present he might do him especial service in
extinguishing the Rebellion. Though the Ionians were forsaken by their friends
of Atheens, yet they proceeded, and crossing the Hellespont took Byzantium with
the Towns adjacent, and thence went into Caria, a great part whereof they drew
into society with them in the War. But the scene of affairs was presently
altered. Capp. 108. etc.
Artybius the Persian with a numerous Army was sent against Cyprus, and the
Ionians followed with a Flee, to the aid of Onesilus, who first procured the
revolt, and now lay before Amathusia. Both parties being well appointed by Sea
and Land, they engaged with their Fleets and land Armies. The Ionians had the
better by Sea, but on Land the Cypriots were betrayed by Stesanor, Tyrant of
the Carienses, and by the Salaminians, so that being utterly routed, Onesilus
was slain, and Aristo-Cyprus Prince of the Solians, and son to that
Philo-Cyprus whom Solon commended in his Verses above other Tyrants, or Reguli.
The Ionians receiving intelligence of this overthrow, and how all the Cities in
the Island were besieged, except Salamis (which the inhabitants had already
given up to Gorgus their ancient Prince) hasted away. Of all Towns Soli stood
longest out; And is recovered.
but in the fifth month was taken by the Persians, who undermined the Walls;
and thus Cyprus was reduced into its former bondage, a year after it had cast
off the yoke.

19. The Persian Lieutenants, or Satrapa, viz, Daurises, Hymees, and Otanes,
who had married the daughters of Darius, Capp. 124. etc.
after they had driven the Ionians to their ships, parted the revolted Cities
which each of them should fall on. The two former reduced many upon the
Hellespont and Propontis, and the later by the assistance of Artaphernes took
Clazomenae in Ionia, and Cumae in Aeolia, after which Aristagoras was utterly
discouraged, and thought of nothing but flight. Hecataeus the Historian, who
had formerly dissuaded him from Rebellion; now advised him to build a Fort in
the Island Lerus, where he might continue for some time, till it were
convenient for him to return to Miletus; but his resolution being bent for
Myrcinus, Town built by Histiaeus in Thrace upon the River Strymon, and amongst
the Edones, thither he soon after departed with as many Volunteers as would
follow him, leaving the Government of Miletus to Pythagoras, a man of the most
approved fidelity amongst the Townsmen. Aristagoras slain.
He obtained the Country thereabout without much trouble, but besieging the
Town was cut off by the Thracians with all his Forces.

20. Histiaeus being dismissed by Darius upon that account formerly mentioned
was ere this come to Sardis. Herodotus l. 6. adinitium.
Artaphernes demanding of him what should have moved the Ionians to Rebel, he
answered, that he knew not, but at wondered at the thing, whereto the other
replied, telling him plainly that he had made that shoe which Aristagoras had
put on. Fearing therefore to stay with him whom he perceived sufficiently to
understand the matter, he fled the night after, and conveyed himself into the
Island Chius, where the inhabitants supposing that be came to promote the
affairs of Darius, cast him into prison, but upon farther advice restored him
to liberty. Then sent he to some Persians lying at Sardis, who were partakers
of his conspiracy, willing them to rise, but Artaphernes having timely notice
thereof prevented it by putting them to death. This device failing, he procured
the Chians to convey him to Miletus; but there he could not be received, the
inhabitants rejoicing that they were rid both of him and Aristagoras; so that
endeavoring to get in by night he was wounded in the Thigh, and forced to
retire himself again to Chius. Here now not being able to procure any ships by
all his entreaties, he went over to Mitylene where he persuaded the Lesbians to
furnish him with 8 Vessels, with which he sailed to Byzantium; and at this Port
he intercepted all such ships of the Ionians as coming from Pontus refused to
obey him.

21. The Persian Generals having much weakened the power of the Carians, and
subdued all the Ionians that lived upon the Hellespont, were now ready to go
against Miletus both by Sea and Land. The Ionian Idem ibid. Capp. 6. etc.
Deputies assembling in Pavionium (the place of their public Councils)
resolved to levy no Land Army against them, Miletus besieged.
but withstand their violence from the walls of Miletus, and make as great and
strong a Fleet as possible. They ranged in order of battle near Laeda, a little
Island lying over against Miletus. The wing that looked toward the East the
Milesians themselves made up with 80 Sail; to them joined the Prienians with
twelve, and the Miusians with three. By them stood the Teians with seventeen,
and by them the Chians with 100 Vessels. Beyond these were placed the
Erythraeans with eight ships, and the Phocaeans with three. Next to them stood
the Lesbians with Seventy, and in the last place were seen the Samians making
up the Western wing with Sixty ships; the whole consisting of 353 Galleys with
three ranks or Oars. But the Persian Navy contained 600 of Phoenicians,
Cyprians, Egyptians, and Cilicians.

22. Though the Persian Fleet almost doubled the other in number of Vessels,
yet the Captains feared both the skill and valor of the Ionians, and therefore
betook themselves to politic Councils. They sent for the several Reguli or
Tyrants of the Cities, whom Aristagoras had deposed at the beginning of the
War, and desired that every one would endeavor to draw off his own Citizens.
While they were using their utmost endeavor herein, Dionysius the Phocian
Captain, and General of the whole Ionian Navy, exercising his men continually
for the fight, they being unaccustomed to such discipline, were after seven
days weary of it, and pitching their tents in the Island, therein shaded
themselves, and could not be got to their ships. The Samians doubting whitherto
their sluggishnesse might tend, though it wisdom to hearken to the propositions
made from the Persians by Aeaces the son of Syloson their Prince, who advised
them by a timely repentance to save their estates, rather than expose
themselves to the anger of the Persian, who though he were beaten at present,
was able to bring another Fleet five times as big, so that their labor and
danger would know no end. Their Captains therefore took occasion at the
disorder of the Ionians, to deny any further obedience, and, when the
Phoenicians began to tow their Fleet together to fall on, they hoised up their
Sails and departed. After this pattern the Lesbians and a great part of the
Ionians withdrew themselves; only the Chians stood to it, who taking many of
their Enemies ships, lost more of their own, and at length fled to Land. Some
of them running their Galleys on ground at Mycale, went on foot by night unto
Ephesus, where the women then celebrating the Thesmophoria, the Inhabitants
taking them for thieves issued out and slew many of them. But Dionysius having
light on the Persian Galleys, retreated not home, knowing his own Country would
go to wrack with the rest, but going into Phoenicia, there robbed certain ships
of burden of much wealth, and thus enriched sailed into Sicilie.

23. The Persians having thus done their work at Sea, presently laid siege to
Miletus, which by undermining the walls, and using all sorts of Batteries, It
is taken.
Idem ibid. Capp. 18, etc.
they utterly destroyed in the sixth year after the Rebellion was first begun
by Aristagoras. Some of those Inhabitants which survived their Country,
together with the Samians, transported themselves into Sicilie; the rest being
brought to Susa before Darius, he without any punishment inflicted on them,
placed in the City Ampia, situated where the River Tigris falls into the Red
Sea. As for their grounds, the Persians took to themselves the Champain
Country, and gave the Mountainous parts to the Carians of Pedasus. Histiaeus
seeing what was befallen Miletus with some Lesbians subdued Chius easily, being
weakened before, Capp. 26, etc.
whence with many Ionians and Aeolians, he undertook an Expedition against
Thasus; but hearing that the Phoenicians were gone from Miletus into the other
parts of Ionia, he returned back to Lesbus. Here his forces not trusting
themselves, he went over into the Province of Atarnes, as it were thence, and
from the Territories of the Mysians adjoining to gather forage, where Harpagas
the Persian then lying with a considerable force, Histiaeus taken and put to
death.
engaged with him in a fight at Malena, and having cut off the greater part of
his men, took him alive. Being carried to Susa unto Artaphernes, they nailed
his body to a cross, and sent his head as a present to Darius, who was
displeased that they had not presented him alive, and caused his head to be
buried, as of a friend, and one that had Well deserved of the Persians. Now not
only Caria, but all the Islands and Cities on the continent were also
recovered without much trouble: the most beautiful of the Boys being made
Eunuchs, and of the Girls sent to the Persian Court. And thus the Ionians were
subdued the third time; once by the Lydians, and twice by the Persians: the
tributes were established by Artaphernes, according to Darius his former
prescription, and all things settled at the cost of the revolters.

24. Two years after the destruction of Miletus, and in the 26th of his reign,
Darius withdrawing the commissions of all his late Captains, sent Mardonius the
son of Gobryas, who had married his daughter Artozestra, Capp. 43, 44, etc.
with a great power to the Sea. Mardonius coming into Cilicia, sent away all
his Land Forces toward the Hellespont, and passing by Sea into Ionia, there
dissolved all the Tyrannies, as they were called, or powers of single men, and
brought in the Democratical Government into the Cities. After this with his
Fleet he subdued the Thasians, and with his Land Army other Macedonians besides
them that formerly obeyed his Master; A. M. 3509. Ol. 71. an. 1. V.C. 258.
Dar^i 26.
but loosing from Acanthus and coasting by the Mountain Athos, such a Tempest
fell upon the Navy as sunk three hundred Vessels, wherein perished above 20000
men. Then quartering his Foot in Macedonia, the Thracians called Brygi, fell in
upon him by night, and killing many wounded him also; whereupon, he turned his
Forces upon them, and subduing them, carried back the Army into Asia. The year
following Darius constrained the Thasians, Capp. 46, etc.
who were accused by their neighbors of having an intention to revolt, to pull
down their walls, and carry all their ships to Abdera. Then to try of what
temper the Graecians were, he sent throughout Greece to demand Earth and Water.
The Lacedaemonians and Athenians threw the Messengers into pits, bidding them
thence to take Earth and Water to carry to their Master; Earth and Water
demanded by the Graecians.
but the Inhabitants of Aegina and other Islands out of fear complied, for
which they were accused by the Athenian Ambassadors at Sparta, as intending
with the Persians to fight against Athens. Hereupon Cleomenes one of the Kings,
was sent to chastize the principal revolters, but such a contention fell
betwixt him and his Colleague Demaratus about it, as ended at length in the
deprivation of the latter, who thus unjustly outed of his Patrimony, betook
himself to Darius, by whom he was bountifully entertained.

Darius sends forces into Greece.
25. When Darius sent into Greece to demand Earth and Water, he gave order to
the Cities upon the Seacoasts to build long ships and flat bottomed boats for
the transportation of Horse. The burning of Sardis by the means of the
Athenians and Eretrians, was thrice every time he went to meat still sounded in
his ears. Hippias the late Prince of Athens was yet provoking him against that
City, and at length procured forces to reduce him into his former place. Under
color of restoring him, Darius intended, if possible, to subdue all Greece,
and therefore removing Mardonius, under whom the Fleet had of late miscarried,
he put in his room Datis a Mede, and Artaphernes his brothers son, to whom he
gave in charge to lay waste Athens with Eretria, and bring the inhabitants
thereof prisoners into his presence. In their passage they burnt Naxos, took
some Forces and Hostages out of the Islands, and landed their Horse upon the
Coasts of Eretria. They prepared to fight; but, the Enemy keeping himself
within the walls, they strongly attempted the storming of the City for six
days, and on the seventh had it betrayed into their hands by Euphorbus and
Philagrus, two of the principal Citizens. The Athenians hearing of their
approach, sent Phidippides a famous, though ordinary Foot-post, to Lacedaemon,
to desire that State to hasten their succorurs. They resolved to send aid; but
said it was impossible speedily to do it, for that they could not break the
Law, which forbad them to go forth on the ninth day of the month Or, except
the Moon was at the full. Whilst they expected that season, the Athenians made
choice of ten Captains for the War, and by this time the Persians, now Masters
of Eretria, sailed into Attica, wherein they were conducted by Hippias, to the
plains of Marathon, as most convenient for Horse. After the Athenians had taken
the field, the Plataeans came in to their aid, but a great dispute there was
amongst the Captains, whether they should stand to the hazard of a battle.
Those that were for the Negative had carried it, but that Miltiades, who was
all for fighting, drew over Callimachus one of the Polemarchi to his party. The
major part of the votes then passing on his side, each Captain assigned his day
to him (who had formerly been Prince of the Chersonesus, and thence was
expelled by the Persians) committing the management of the fight to his
discretion.

26. Miltiades accepted of the charge, yet thought good not to fight till his
one day (which was the tenth) should be arrived. Then set he the Army in order,
and being at a miles distance from the Enemy, led very fast upon him, which the
Persians attributed to madness, seeing the other so few in comparison of
themselves, and badly provided both of Horse and Arms. The fight continued
long, wherein, in the middle battle the Persians put the other to flight; but
in both the wings the Graecians prevailed, and turning themselves upon those
that worsted their fellows, Are overthrown at Marathon.
made great slaughter of them as far as the Sea side, where they also seized
upon seven of their ships. Concerning the number of the slain, Writers do not
agree. Herodotus writes of 6400 of the Barbarians, and 192 of the Graecians.
On the one side fell Hippias, as Justin has recorded out of Trogus, Lib. 2. c.
9.
and Callimachus on the other. What year the battle was fought is not certainly
known, but in the second or third of the 72 Olympiad, and four or five before
the death of Darius.

27. Datis and Artaphernes returning into Persia, carried the Eretrians captive
along with them to Susa, where they presented them before Darius; Herod. l. 6.
c. 119, etc.
though Ctesias wrote that Datis was slain in the battle of Marathon, and that
his body was denied to be restored. Darius placed the Eretrians in Anderica in
Cissia, a Country so called, at 210 furlongs distance from Susa, the possession
whereof their posterity held a long time together with their own language.
Notwithstanding the defeat at Marathon, he left not off thoughts of conquering
Greece, making all possible provision for another invasion. But in the fourth
year after, more work fell into his hands; for though Diodorus tells, that
the Egyptians much honored him as one of their Lawgivers, Idem lib. 7. c. 1,
etc.
they now rebelled. The year following he was provided for both Expeditions,
and was about to undertake them, when the custom of the Country first required
that he should name his Successor. He had three children before he was King by
the daughter of Gobryas, whereof the eldest Artobazanes, (by others called
Artemenes and Ariamenes) challenged the Kingdom by virtue of his birthright.
Darius declares his Successor.
But it was judged due to Xerxes his eldest son by Mossa Cyrus his daughter,
who was founder of the Empire, Vide Justin. l. 2. c. 10. Plutarch. (...).
Apotheg. and in Artaxerxe.
and he accordingly was declared at this time; although some make this civil
and loving contest betwixt the two brothers, to have happened after their
Father's death, and been judged by Artaphernes their Uncle. But as Darius was
about setting forwards for Greece he was prevented by death, the first year
after the rebellion of Egypt ending, Dies.
after he had reigned 36 years complete, in the third year of the 73 Olympiad
ending, before the Era of Christ, 485. A. M. 3519.

28. Xerxes succeeded his Father in the third year of the third Olympiad,
Herodot. lib. 7. ad initium.
being the fourth King of Persia, the right to the Empire whereof he fetched
from Cyrus his Grandfather by the Mother's side. He was scarce settled in the
Throne, Xerxes.
when Mardonius his kinsman stirred him up with earnestness not to give over
the War which he had begun with Greece, promising to himself great command upon
the conquest of Europe, which he made Xerxes believe would be as readily
performed as spoken. He, though ambitious enough, was not at first of himself
very forward, but as it concerned him, thought first of recovering Egypt, for
which all things were left in readiness by his father, and in the year next
after his death turned his forces thither with present success. Recovereth
Egypt.
For, he reduced that Country under the yoke, which he laid heavier upon it
than formerly, and committed the Government thereof to his brother Achaemenes,
who was after many years slain by Inarus the Libyan.

29. Egypt being thus fortunately recovered, he was therewith much elevated,
and now had resolved to follow on the War with Greece; but to hear what his
Captains would say, he called them together to advise about it, to whom with
vanity enough he opened his mind, and was seconded by an indiscreet flattering
speech of Mardonius, who seemed with words to be able to blast the present
condition of Greece. Consulteth about renewing the War with Greece.
His Uncle Artabanus, a grave and long experienced man, strongly urged the
contrary, showing how vain humane confidence was, how britle and instable the
fortune of Princes and others, which appeared sufficiently in his fathers
expedition against the Scythians first, and since that, against the Athenians:
that the Greeks were not so weak a Nation he proved by the battle at Marathon,
that the thing which he attempted was most dangerous to be thought on again,
and again, that without mature deliberation the attempt would be rash however
the success should happen; that God many times pulls down the highest things,
and humbles the haughty that trust in their own strength, by making them to
fall into sudden calamities: and as for Mardonius, he chastised his youthful
and ambitious heat with a sharp reprehension, foretelling him what would be the
reward of his rashness. But this wise Counsel could not be heard from a grave
man, the ears of Xerxes being stopped by the suggestions of one more agreeable
to his headstrong, and youthful humor; so that he imputed to his Uncle
baseness of mind and cowardice, inflicting this punishment upon him for it,
that staying at home he should not partake of so glorious an expedition. To
this enterprise he was also stirred up by the Aleuadae, or Princes of Thessaly,
who grudged at the liberties of the Greeks: by the son of Pisistratus also
banished Athens, who living in his Court, abused his credulity by the help of a
Wizard, or Fortune Tellers.

30. Yet not long after, considering what Artabanus had said, he changed his
purpose, and calling his Council together again, after he had commended his
Uncles opinion, signified the same unto them, at which all the wiser sort much
rejoiced; but the thing running much in his mind, so that he was disturbed in
his sleep, he returned to his former resolution, and resolved on the
expedition. In the preparation for it three years ( Herodotus says four) were
taken up, all Asia being concerned therein so far, as to seem to be removed out
of its place. A Navy he provided out of all the Seacoasts of his Empire to the
number of above 1200 Vessels, which he commanded to meet at Cuma and Phocaea;
and having out of all his Provinces gathered great multitudes of horse and
foot, at length he moved from Susa in the fourth year of the 74th Olympiad, and
in the fifth year (not after the Egyptian expedition as Herodotus has it, but)
of his reign. All the land forces met at Critalae, with which he passed the
River Halys, and came to Celaenae, a City of Phrygia, where Pythius the Lydian
(or Bi^thynian as Pliny will have him) entertained him and his Army, and
presented him with a vast sum of money, which he returned with advantage. And
so at length he came to Sardis, whence he sent into Greece to demand earth and
water, as Symboles of subjection. Idem ibid. Capp. 22, 23, etc.
The Navy was come to the Chersonesus by this time, which that it might shun
the inconvenience which that formerly Governed by Mardonius had incurred, by
sailing about the Mountain, or Promontory of Athos, he caused the Mountain to
be cut off from the main, by a Ditch so broad as two Vessels might sail a
breast, through which the whole Navy passed. And wintring this year at Sardis,
He wintereth at Sardis.
he commanded a Bridge to be laid over the Hellespont (a mile over, wanting an
8th part) which being shattered and broken by a great Tempest, he took so
hainously, as he commanded 300 stripes to be given the Sea, and a pair of
Fetters to be cast into it in token of servitude, and causing the heads of the
workmen to be cut off, ordered other Bridges to be made.

31. In the beginning of the Spring he moved from Sardis with his whole Army
and came to Abydus, Ibid. Capp. 37, 38, etc.
the day being turned into night by a sudden darkness (though no stars
appeared) at his setting forth; with which portentous thing (being no true
eclypse) Pythius, who formerly entertained him, was so terrified, that of his
five sons listed in the Army, he desired the eldest, as the comfort of his old
age, might be left to him, at which the King was so angry, that he commanded
the young man to be cut in two, and the parts so to be laid asunder that the
Army might pass betwixt them. When he was come to Abydus he had an extreme
desire to view all his forces, for which purpose he had an high ascent raised
for him, where he also desired to see a Sea Fight, which in show was performed,
and wherein the Sidonians had the better: with the sight hereof, and all his
Land forces on the shore, he was elevated into a great passion of joy,
apprehending of how many thousands he was Master, and then presently again into
another of weeping, the cause of which Artabanus his Uncle demanding (who had
thus far accompanied him) he told him, it was in thinking that of so many
thousands not a man should be alive 100 years after. Hence that wise old man
took occasion to discourse to him most gravely of the vanity, and miseries of
this life, and being again importuned to tell his opinion concerning the
expedition, did it with the same faithfulness as formerly, after which he sent
him back to Susa to Govern as his Deputy in his absence.

Passes over into Europe.
32. Then prepared he for his passage into Europe, Ibid. Capp. 52, 53, etc.
and having performed his Heathenish Devotions to the Sun, by one of the
Bridges bending toward the Euxine, passed over his horse and foot, and by
another inclining toward the Aegean, his sl^ves and beasts, seven days, and
as many nights being taken up in the passage. The Fleet sailed Westward to the
Promontory of Sarpedon, the Land forces marching through the Chersonesus of
Thrace to Agora, and so bore down toward the Bay of Melana, A.M. 3525. Olymp.
75. an. 1. V.C. 274. Xerxis 6.
where a River of the same name failed them in drinking, as Scamander, and
several others in Asia are said to have done before. Passing over, and moving
Westward they came to Doriscus, where being a vast plain watered with the great
River Hebrus, there they pitched their Tents, and Xerxes mustered his whole
Army, both by Land and Sea.

33. The greatest number of men it contained that ever were seen listed under
the Banners of one man; Herodotus lib. 8. cap. 60, 87. Diodorus l. 11. ad
Olymp. 75. an. 1. Ctesias in excerptis. Orosius lib. 1. cap. 10. Aelian lib.
13. cap. 3. Corn. Nep. in Themistoc. Plin. lib. 33. cap. 10. Isocrat. in
Paratheniaco.
but yet great is the variety found in Writers about the true number: Herodotus
writes of 1700000 foot, and 80000. Horse, besides Camels, and Chariots;
Diodorus Siculus not half so many foot, viz. 800000. and yet what he assigns to
the foot, Ctesias attributes to the whole Army, which he writes to have
consisted of 80 Myriads, besides Chariots: Justin from Trogus, and Orosius out
of him, reckons 700000 men out of his own Dominions, and 300000 Auxiliaries.
Aelian writes of 700000 in all, Corneliu Nepos of 700000 foot, and 400000.
(perhaps rather 40000) Horse. Pliny 788000 (for the name of Darius, Xerxes
being to be read) and Isocrates agrees with Aelian, mentioning only 700000 in
all. As for the Navy there were found 1207 beaked ships, and other Vessels for
carrying of Horses, and for other uses 3000. according to Herodotus, from whom
Diodorus little dissenteth as to the number of the Galleys, writing, there were
found above 1200 of them, to which he adds 850 Horse-boats, and other Vessels
of burden of 30 Oars a piece 3000. with the former agrees Ctesias (though
often dissenting) and Cicero: with the later Isocrates and Lysias. Orosias
mentions 1200 beaked Galleys, and 3000 Vessels of burden; and as for that
place in Justin, which increases the number of the Fleet to 10000. there is no
doubt of its corruption. Herodotus by giving 200 men to every Gally, and
furnishing all the other Vessels, conjectures 517610 men to have been bestowed
in the whole Fleet, so that at this muster the Land and Sea-forces being added
together, with the 20000 Arabians that drove Camels, and the Libyans the
Chariots, at this rate would amount to 2317610. besides slaves and others that
followed the Camp.

34. Notwithstanding all this number, he commanded all the Nations in his
passage, from Doriscus toward Greece, to march along with him, so that hereby
came an accession of 120 ships to his Fleet, to which giving 200 men a piece,
the number will amount to 24000. and to his Land Army another of 30 Myriads, or
300000 men, as Herodotus gathers (though Diodorus thinks less something
then 20 Myriads) and so the whole number of his Asian and Europaean Soldiers
would on this account amount to 2641610. and yet he thinks the number of
slaves and attendants to have rather exceeded this, so that if it only be
doubled, the number of those persons that by Land came to Thermopyle, and by
Sea to Sepias; amounted to 5283220. And for the number of women that baked
meat, The number of his men.
and of Concubines and Eunuchs which followed, no man can assign them, of
carriage beasts, and for the Wagons, and of Indian Dogs no man could count; so
that no wonder it is that to this stupendous multitude some sorts of Rivers
failed to afford drink, or that Plutarch and Isocrates should write 5000000 to
have followed Xerxes into Greece; the wonder is, that no greater plague raged
amongst them, that any concord could be preserved amongst so many Nations, and
that provisions could be procured for the preservation of the lives of so many
Creatures.

35. The Graecians all this while having had intelligence, first of his design
all along from Demaratus the Spartan Exile, and then of his motions, were
according to their several interests variously affected. Some, as the Thebans,
and the rest of the Boeotians (except the Thespians, and them of Plataea) and
many Thessalians (persuaded by the Aleuadae) and several others, out of fear,
had underhand sent earth and water, as Symboles of subjection: Many also were
uncertain in their resolutions, The preparations of the Graecians for defense.
not knowing what to do. The rest meeting at the Isthmus, and consulting for
the public safety, resolved, and swore to join together in War against the
Persians, and with United power to defend the liberty of Greece, at the present
to wave all their private differences for that purpose, and to remit the moneys
owing to each other; to devote the tenth to Apollo, i.e. to do to death the
tenth man of all those that had already given up themselves to the Enemy. The
War which had often been patched up, and still brake out again, betwixt the
Athenians and them of Aegina, was composed. By occasion of this War the
Athenians of late had strengthened themselves exceedingly at Sea, through the
procurement of Themistocles the son of Neocles, a very wise man, who had
brought the people to lay out the money, which issued out of the Golden Mines
of Lauria, and was to be divided amongst the multitude man by man, upon
shipping, whereby the Fleet was increased to almost 200 sail, and Greece came
to be preserved. About the same time it happened that the Athenians asking
Counsel at Delphos, the Oracle answered, that Wooden Walls alone would be
security to them; which several enterpreting several ways, he expounded ships
to be meant by it, and pressed hard, that a Sea victory was promised them at
the Island Salamine, which being received by the greater part, they set
themselves with all their might to the strengthening of their Navy.

36. But those of the League finding it convenient to call in the help of their
friends, and Allies, sent into Sicily, Corcyra and Crete, to desire aid and
assistance of the Greek Colonies against the public Enemy; and to Argos to
excite them to join against him with the rest of their Neighbors. But all was
to no purpose; for Gelon, who then had all Sicily in his power, and was thought
to have more ships than all the associates put together, refused to give any
aid except he might be declared Captain General of the whole Army; the
Corcyraeans promised great matters, confessing their safety to be involved in
that of Greece; but resolving to make use of the success of either party, when
danger threatened Greece from Xerxes they sent 60 ships, under show of supply,
but commanded the Fleet to hover about Laconia, and apply it self to Xerxes, if
the Conqueror, as coming in to his assistance, which being observed, after the
fight the Officers excused themselves for being absent at the ^ight at
Salamine, because the Etesian winds blowing contrary, they could not double the
Cape of Malea. The Cretans very powerful at Sea put off the matter under
pretense of hearing an answer from the Oracle at Delphos, whither they said
they had sent: and the Argives out of hatred to the Lacedaemonians, proposed
such conditions as could not be admitted, and afflicted them sore with the rest
of the associates.

37. The Athenians then and Lacedaemonians being most engaged (against whom the
design of the Persian was most bent) applied themselves with all their might to
make resistance. Xerxes being about to pass over into Europe, the Thessalians
sent ^o them, demanding help to secure themselves, or else being unable to
stand out they must yield. The Council General at that time being assembled in
the Isthmus, thinking it wisdom to withstand him at the first entry into
Greece, rather than to defend it in broken parts, sent presently away by Sea
10000 men into Thessalia, under conduct of Evenetus a Spartan, and Themistocles
the Athenian, who in conjunction with the Thessalian Horse, at the River
Peneus, flowing betwixt the Straights of Ossa and Olympus, might hinder the
passage of the Persians; but after they came there, it being showed to them to
be but a vain thing there to oppose themselves against so great a multitude,
especially seeing there were other passages into Thessalie, by Alexander King
of Macedonia, they returned back again to the Isthmus, and the Thessalians thus
forsaken, gave themselves up to the Persians. Afterward the Council again
deliberating what should be done, resolved to seize upon the Straights of
Thermopylae, which are the only passage out of Thessalie into Greece, and
better to be maintained by far than the other, and concluded on sending 6000
Foot thither under command of Leonidas the valiant King of Sparta. Sea matters
were committed to the care of the Athenians and Aeginaetans especially, and it
was resolved, that the Fleet should sail to the Artemisian shore, toward the
North part of the Island Euboea, and not far from the Straights. Xerxes drawing
near, this was done accordingly, both as to Land and Sea Forces; but the Navy
receiving an Alarm, through a mischance of three of it is ships, retreated into
the Straights betwixt Euboea and Boeotia, where Euripus flows betwixt Chalcis
and Aulis; but understanding of a great Wrack suffered by the Persian Fleet,
wherein by tempestuous weather were lost 400 Vessels, with a great multitude of
men, and much treasure, it returned back after a few days; in the mean while
Xerxes drew down with his innumerous multitudes to the Straights.

38. He sent before a Spy to look how Leonidas and his men behaved themselves,
who bringing him word how he found the Spartans, who then kept watch,
exercising themselves in gymnick games, and dressing their heads as on some
Festival, he demanded of D^maratus their Countryman the reason thereof. He
told him they were fully resolved to die for their Country, and ready to fight
it out to the last man, if need required, whereat he derided him as before when
he spoke of the valor of his Countrymen, thinking they would be so skared at
his multitudes, as not to dare to come to hand-strokes. But finding no such
matter, but Demaratus his words to be true, on the fifth day after, he
commanded a party of Medes to fall upon them, who being with great slaughter
repulsed, he sent his Band of Persians, which being invincible as he thought,
he named immortal, and they, though wanting no courage under the eyes of the
King, who from an high throne beheld the fight, came off with the same
success; whereat he was astonished, grew melancholy, as being now sollicitous
for his whole Army. The next day the fight was renewed, but with the same
success, great slaughter being made of the Persians, so that the way being
more narrow by the carkeises, there was no room for a multitude to fight, which
being driven one upon another, the confusion and consequently the slaughter was
the greater. At this Xerxes was struck with great consternation, not knowing
what to do.

39. There was one in the Army, a Trachinian, named Epialtes or Ephialtes (as
Pausanias writeh it) who understanding his trouble went to him, and offered to
show a way over the Mountains, by which, though with much difficulty, he might
send a Party to come about, The fight at Thermoplae.
and fall on the backs of the Graecians. Being cheared with this, he sent as
many as showed themselves most forward, with him, under the command of
Hydarnes, who passing over the River Asopus, got in the dark of the night up
into the Mountain, where beating down the Guard of Phocians which there
watched, they began to come into the more plain and easy way, when the thing
was carried by some fugitives to the Graecians. They were stricken with great
terror at the report, all but Leonidas with his Spartans, who for that the
Lacedaemonians were told by an Oracle, that they must either lose their City or
one of their Kings, Justin.
was very ready to abide to the utmost. Wherefore he willingly gave way to his
associates to depart, bidding them to reserve themselves for the better
condition of their Country, who all presently falling off, except the
Thespians, and such Thebans as the rest of the Graecians had forced thither,
not so much to help them, as to keep them as Hostages; with them and his 300
Spartans he prepared himself to fight with a mind devoted already to death.
When the Sun was up, and the Persians not yet got down, those resolute Grecians
passing the Straights to redeem their lives at deerer rates, fell in upon the
multitudes of their enemies, with which being compassed about, they were all
cut off, with Leonidas, except such as retiring back into the Straights took an
hill, and fighting valiantly with those Persians whom Epialtes had led down
upon them, sold their lives as their fellows at a deer rate; 20000 of Xerxes
his Army with this handful of men being slain. The Thebans alone lifted up
their Targets begging quarter, crying out they were brought thither against
their wills, and that they were Xerxes his Subjects, yet were they slain, or
being taken were stigmatized for disgrace. The body of Leonidas being found was
nailed to a cross. These things happened at Thermopylae in the middle of Summer,
while some of the Graecians in Peloponnesus were celebrating the games of the
75th Olympiad, in the beginning of it is first year, wherein Callias was Archon
at Athens, as we are told from Diodorus Siculus, of whose history digested
according to the years of their solemnities, that part now extant begins
with this Expedition; at which time also Philosophy was translated out of Ionia
to Athens by Anaxagoras the Clazomenian, Scholar to Anaximenes the Milesian,
Laertius in vita Clemens Stromat. lib. 1.
who now being twenty years old began to profess it in that City, way being
made for Learning there by the Library collected through the industry of
Pisistratus.

40. Xerxes having now had experience of what Demaratus had said to him, asked
his advice for carrying on the War: being in great doubt what to do, after he
had heard how they of Sparta were able to arm well-nigh 8000 men of such temper
as the former; and that the other Lacedaemonians though inferior to those were
very valiant. Demaratus being of this opinion, that all the Landforces would
assemble together at the Isthmus, to defend that entry into Peloponnesus,
advised him to send 300 ships well manned to spoil the Country of Laconia,
thereby to keep the Lacedaemonians and their neighbors entangled at home,
whilst having subdued the rest, he might afterward fall upon them, who would
be then too weak of themselves to sustain his power: he farther also advised,
that 300 Vessels should seize upon Cythera the Island, which lying near the
Coasts of Laconia, might serve as a place of retreat or randezvouze for their
own security, and endamaging of the Enemy; Chil^n the Lacedaemonian having been
wont to say, that it were better for them to have it drowned in the Sea, than
to stand so as it did for their disadvantage. But Achaemenes the brother of
Xerxes stiffly impugned this advise, lest by the severing of the Fleet after
such loss by the Tempest, they might prove too weak for the Graecians at Sea;
and to this out of fear, the King submitted, hoping his Land-Army and Fleet
should stand each the other in good stead, both holding one course, and not
lying far asunder.

41. The Fleet of the Graecians stood all this while at Artemisium, Herodotus
l. 8.
as a bullwark to Euboea, commanded by Eurybiades the Lacedaemonian, to whom
the Athenians for quietness and safety gave place. But now the Peloponnesians
having every one an eye upon his own Country, longed to go farther into Greece,
and were only stayed by the cunning of Themistocles, till such time as the
Euboeans could secure their wives and children, with the principal of their
goods. In the mean time the Persians thinking to incompasse them, sent 200 sail
to come behind about the Island, they lying in the Straights betwixt it and the
Main. They had knowledge of this devise, and not ignorant of the loss
sustained by the Persian Fleet in the last tempest, set sail at midnight, and
met these 200 ships with a counter-surprise, took and sunk thirty of them, and
forced the rest to take the Sea, where by foul weather they were driven upon
the Rocks, and all cast away. The news of this was brought to the Graecians by
53 Athenian ships, sent in to increase the Fleet, which doubled the joy
thereof, so that elevated with new hopes, they set next day upon some Cilician
ships, which were severed from the rest of the Fleet, and damnifying them much,
returned to Artemisium.

42. The Persians taking this in great indignation, and fearing the anger of
Xerxes, resolved to redeem their credit with some notable exployt, and for that
purpose the next day in the form of a crescent invaded the Graecians. They
cheerfully gave them battle, and the fight endured from noon till night, ending
with equal loss to both parties. A Sea fight.
For though more of the Persian Vessels were lost, yet, the lesser damage fell
as heavy upon the other, which being smaller could less bear it, though they
fought most manfully for their Liberty and Country, the Athenians deserving
best amongst them, and amongst the Athenians, Clinias the Father of Alcibiades,
a famous man in the next Age. Amongst the Persians the Egyptians fought most
stoutly; and these things happened at Sea those same three days in which the
Land-action was at Thermopghylae, in both the Straights the Greeks endeavoring
to hinder the Enemies access into their Country. But shortly after they had
intelligence by one sent out on purpose, what was become of Leonidas and those
with him, they would needs depart from Artemisium, and draw their Navy, much
battered in the former Fights, more inwards and nearer home. Themistocles
seeing their resolution, before they weighed Anchor, persuaded them to kill up
the Cattle of the Euboeans, and bring the meat on shipboard, Idem ibid.
Plutarch in Themistoc.
rather than to leave them a prey to the Enemy, and engraved upon stones upon
the shore, and at the watering-places, where he knew the Ionians would come, an
exhortation to revolt to the Greeks, and side with their Mother Country, or
else stand neutral in the fight, or fight coldly. This he hoped would either
prevail with them, or at least render them suspected with the Persian.

43. From Artemisium they sailed to the Coast of Attica, and at the desire of
the Athenians took up their harbor at the Island Salamine: the Persian Fleet
removed to Artemisium and the Coast adjoining to Histaeotis. Xerxes now having
passed the Streights of Thermopylae, marched through the Country of Doris into
Phocis, which being forsaken of it is Inhabitants he wasted, and when he came to
Panopaea a Town thereof, he divided his Army into two parts. With the one he
invaded Greece, and the other he sent to rifle and burn the famous Temple of
Delphos, but, as it is said, this party was almost wholly destroyed without
humane help, A party sent by Xerxes to destroy the Temple of Delphos, consumed
with Thunder and Lightning.
by Thunder and Lightning, and two Rocks, which breaking off from the Mountain
Parnassus, overwhelmed it: those that escaped were generally killed by the
Phocians, who having fled into the Mountain for fear of Xerxes, fell upon them;
so that few remained and escaped to their Friends in Boeotia. Xerxes now
marched through Boeotia the Country of his allies into Attica, with intention
to do his utmost against the City of Athens it self.

44. In the mean time the Grecian Fleet lying at Salamine, though strengthened
with a new accession of ships at the Coast of Traezene, could hardly be
contained there; for every one being sollicitous for his own Country, and
despairing of Attica, and the rest of Greece without the Isthmus, was busy in
fortifying it, and labored thither to bring the Navy, whence there might be a
safe retreat into Peloponn^sus if need were; This the Athenians understanding,
were sore troubled, as having justly expected that the Peloponnesians would
join with them, and the rest of the associates in defending Attica, as they had
fought for them at Artemisium; but making the best use of it they could, begged
of them so long to stay there till they could provide some way for themselves.
The Athenians remove.
Having obtained this, they published an Edict by the procurement of
Themistoc^es (who improved the Oracle formerly mentioned to this purpose, and
invented other devices) that all fit by age should come aboard, and transport
their wives and children out of the City, with their slaves, and what they
could, which was done, most carrying them to Traezene, where they were kindly
entertained: and that Aristides, a man famous for wisdom, justice, and
integrity, but lately banished for a time by the Ostracism, by the potent
faction of Themistocles, might return home; Plutarch ut supra.
by the same procurement another Order was made to recall all such as were so
banished, that they might now in time of need serve their Country, and out of
fear lest they should join themselves to the Enemy.

45. In the Fleet now at Salamine were 358 armed ships, besides other vessels
of less importance, of which 180 were provided and furnished by the Athenians,
161 only by the Lacedaemonians, the Corinthians sent 40. the inhabitants of
Aegina 30. which were notable for swiftness, the Megarians 20. they of Chalcis
furnished as many, having the Vessels of the Athenians: the rest were supplied
in lesser numbers by the Chians, Naxians, Melians, and Seriphians Islanders.
Whilst the Officers were in Council about the place of battle, news came that
the Enemy was entered Attica, wasting all with fire and sword: for having in
Boeotia burned the Towns of the Thespians, and Plataeans, who had forsaken
their habitations, he hasted into Attica, where consuming all things, he entered
Athens three months after he had passed over his forces into Europe. The
Castle some few who would not leave their ancient seat held out to the last,
and were all put to the sword, having refused quarter upon a vain confidence of
the Oracle, that the City should be defended with wooden Walls, and thinking
they fulfilled the same by fortifying themselves with Boards and Pallisadoes:
the Temple of Minerva in the Castle he burnt to ashes. The message being
brought, the Captains departed every man to his ship, decreeing nothing, and
all the rest of the Peloponnesians determined to sail to the Isthmus.

46. This resolution might have proved fatal to all Greece, Herodotus and
Plutarch ut prius.
had it not been prevented by the wisdom of Themistocles, who being stirred up
by Mnesiphilus of Athens followed Eurybiades the Admiral into his ship, and
obtained of him again to Assemble the Council. Here he overcame him by his
mildness, who lifting up his Rod in an heat to strike him, he bade him strike
so he would but hear. When he came to speak of staying at Salamine, one
Adimantys upbraided him with the loss of his Country, saying, It was not fit
that such an one should give Counsel to them that had theirs remaining to them;
to whom he boldly replied, that though they, the Athenians, had left their
houses* and vvalls, dead things, and not to be valued at their liberty, yet
they had a City left them, than which there was none greater in Greece, viz.
200 ships, which as yet was present, and ready to help their associats; but if
they would depart, and betray them, he would have them know they should
presently hear that the Athenians had both a free City and Territories as good
as that they had left, meaning Siris, a Town in Italy, in their power:
Eurybiades hearing this, and fearing to be deprived of the Athenian Fleet, so
necessary for their support, inclined to his opinion, insomuch that the
Graecians resolved to stay, and prepared themselves for the fight; but the
Persian Fleet drawing down to Phalerus the Athenian Port, and the Land army to
the Seaside, the Peloponnesians were so afrighted thereat, that having all
their minds upon the Isthmus, the advice of Themistocles was not at all
regarded, and they resolved to weigh Anchors, and to be gone that night, and
notice hereof was given to the Mariners.

47. For now Xerxes his Fleet was drawn down so repaired, and increased by a
new Accession of ships, that it was altogether as considerable as before the
shipwreck at Sep^as, and taking all Nations as he passed along with them, his
Land Army contained as great a number as heretofore at Thermopylae. The King
came down from Athens to Phalerus the Port, and called a Council to deliberate
what should be done. All the Captains were for a Sea Fight, the Kings of Tire
and Sidon being first asked their opinions by Mardonius; only a woman,
Artemisia Queen of Halicarnassus, a wise and valiant woman, who had followed
Xerxes in this expedition with five ships, with grave and important arguments
dissuaded a Sea Fight, and advised him to enter Peloponnesus with his Land
Army, for thereby he would presently dissolve the Greekish Fleet, and finish
the War. Though this advice followed would have been enough, and Xerxes could
not but commend it, yet the major and worse part carried it, and it was
resolved to fight the Graecians out of hand at Salamine. The Anchors then were
weighed, and the Fleet made thitherwards; but night coming on suffered them not
that day to reach the Island.

48. At this time were the Peloponnesians ready to depart homewards, Plutarch
in Themistoc.
and thereby the Estate of Greece to be ruined, by their breaking their united
power, and reducing themselves into their particular and inconsiderable
conditions, had not Themistocles, born for the preservation of his Country,
relieved it by his wisdom in its great necessity. There was one Sicinus a
Persian, who, taken prisoner, was a great lover of Themistocles, and taught his
Children. Him he sent privately to the King, to tell him, that he preferring
his good before that of the Graecians, gave him now first to understand that
they were about to fly, and advised him not to suffer it, but prevent them, and
set upon them whilst they were disordered, and the Fleet was severed from
their Land Army. Xerxes gladly hearing the message, as believing it to proceed
out of Themistocles his affection to him, communicated it to his Officers, and
whilst the rest could be furnished with Soldiers, sent 200 ships about the
Island to block up the Straights, so that none of the Enemies might escape.
Themistocles communicated what he had done to Aristides, who approving of it,
went to persuade the Greeks to fight, when presently, whilst theit minds hung
in suspense, came a ship of Tenedos from the Persian Fleet, and acquainted them
with what was done in the Straights, so that necessity completed what was but
half effected by the speech of Aristides.

49. Then prepared they themselves unanimously to the battle. Idem and Herod.
ut prius.
Themistocles made a speech unto them, wherein he showed where their
concernments lay, exhorting them to fight manfully for their Country and
Liberty; for their Parents, Wives, Children, and whatsoever was dear to them,
with which being provoked they applied themselves to their ships, and put forth
the Fleet into the Main. Xerxes placed himself on an high Throne to behold the
fight over against Salamine, and had some with him to write down the
particulars thereof. A bloody fight was fought with great earnestness on both
sides, the one fighting under the eyes of their King, who marked every passage,
and accordingly was affected, and the other for as much as could be dear to
them in so dangerous a condition. Herein the Greeks had the advantage, that
they were more exercised in Sea matters, and having all they had lying at the
stake, they did it with the more earnestness, and in that they fought with
greater order: the Persian with so great a multitude of ships, fought in
disorder, and hindered one another, and if the Vessels sunk were all lost,
whereas their Enemies by their skill in swimming saved themselves. At length
their Ionians, solicited as was said, by little and little withdrawing
themselves from the fight, Xerxes his Fleet defeated.
the rest, what by that discouraged, and overcome by the pertinacious valor of
their enemies, began to fly; the Athenians pressing hard upon them, and
destroying many of their ships; of such as fled toward Phalerus, many were
intercepted by the Aegenaetans, the Emulators of the other in deserving well of
Greece; such as escaped them, and got to the Port, thence withdrew themselves
to the Land Army.

50. Of all the Graecians the Athenians and Aeginaetans deserved best, and
amongst them Themistocles, the Captains of the Fleet each one, when upon their
Oaths they pronounced who merited most, naming him after themselves. Amongst
the Persians the valor of Artemisia the Queen was most conspicuous,
acknowledged by Xerxes himself, who thereupon said, that his men were turned
women, and women became men: she was saved as it happened, and escaped to
Phalerus. Many Noble Persians fell, amongst the rest Ariabignes the Kings
brother, few of the Graecians. Xerxes exceedingly discouraged with this great
loss, considered of his safe retreat out of Europe, fearing the Ionians might
break the bridge laid over the Hellespont; yet that he might color any such
intention, he began a new project by casting earth into the Straights, to join
the Island Salamina with the Continent. But Mardonius understanding his temper,
and bethinking himself in what case he himself might stand for being the first
adviser to the War, went to him, and extenuating the loss, the Land Army being
left entire, at length proposed to him, to leave to him 300000 men, with which
he would engage to revenge him upon Greece, and reduce it all under his power,
if he pleased to depart himself into Asia, being nothing tainted in honor for
that things had not so well succeeded in this encounter, because the
miscarriage was procured by the Cowardice of the Egyptians, Phoenicians,
Cilicians, and others no better than slaves, the Persians having gallantly
enough behaved themselves, and he, their Prince, having subdued already the
greater part of Greece, and taken Athens it self, against which the War was
principally intended.

51. He liked very well the motion, but still dissembled the matter, answering,
he would refer it to his Council, which he accordingly called, and asked the
advice particularly of Artemisia. She approved of Mardonius his Counsel, for
that if he should subdue Greece it would be to the Kings advantage, and if he
miscarried it would be no disgrace to him, who in his own person had
accomplished the main design of the expedition, in taking, and wasting Athens;
he was pleased therewith, sent her beforehand away with his sons he had brought
with him, and gave liberty to Mardonius to make choice of what, and how many
Forces he pleased; all this being done the same day with the fight at Salamis.
The night following in great fear and disorder the Fleet loosed from Phalerus,
and fled amain toward the Hellespont, which the Graecians seeing, persued them
as far as Andros one of the Cyclades, and took in there, for that they could
then no more discern them, and that Island had been of the Persian faction.
Here it being debated in the Council of Officers whether the Enemy should be
any further persued, Eurybiades the General, for several grave and urgent
reasons, dissuaded it, a Bridge being rather to be laid for him, insomuch that
he convinced the rest, and Themistocles, who as Herodotus says, was formerly
for the persute, or else dissembled, for that which followed, changed his mind,
and restrained the Athenians.

52. And further foreseeing that through their inconstancy, Herodotus,
Plutarch. Diodorus ut supra.
and known ingratitude, he might have cause in time to come to use friends,
that now he might make one of Xerxes, and therein also further provide for the
good of his Country, he betook himself to his wonted craft and policy. He
dispatched away to him his former trusty Messenger, to acquaint him how
careful he was for his safety, in dissuading the Graecians from persuing him,
and to advise him by all means to make toward the Hellespont, ere the Bridge
should be broken down, which he thought would be within a small time. He being
much afrighted hereat retreated presently with all his Forces the same way he
came, into Thessaly, where delivering to Mardonius 300000 men picked out of the
whole Army, and settling other matters, with a small and obscure train fittest
for haste (all the rest being commanded to follow) he hasted through Macedonia
and Thrace to the Hellespont, where he arrived after 45 days. Here, whether he
found the Bridge whole, and so passed over it, or (what the Graecians have
believed) broken in pieces by Tempests, and so passed over obscurely in a
fishers Boat, observable is the great change upon him, who with so great pride
had formerly beaten the Sea, and cast Fetters into it. His Army following was a
great part consumed by the plague, famine, and other casualties, so that the
fowls of the air continually followed it, the way being full of carkeises.
Being shipped also over to Abydus, very many died by intemperate use of diet,
and drinking too much in the dysenterie, wherewith they were sorely grieved.
Those that remained, by slow journies reached to their King lying at Sardis.

53. Artabazus, a man of prime note amongst the Persians, accompanied Xerxes to
the Hellespont, with a party of 60000 men taken out of Mardonius his Army, He
flies.
who finding at his return the Inhabitants of Potidaea in Macedonia to have
revolted, fearing the Pallenians round about would do the same, and suspecting
also Olynthus, which then was inhabited by the Bottiaeans, he besieged both
Towns, of which the latter he took, and killing the Townsmen gave it to one
Critobulus of Chalcis to govern, after which, they of that place inhabited it.
He then more strongly besieged Potidaea, but after three months having layn
before it to no purpose, many of his men being lost in the Sea, which broke in
with an unusual Tide, he rose up and departed to Mardonius, who, for that
Winter was at hand, had taken up his quarters in Thessali, and the adjoining
places of Macedonia, The Persian Fleet being returned to the Coast of Asia,
wintred at Cumae, for the greatest part, only some ships at Samos, whither in
the Spring they all sailed, being increased to the number of 300 by the
addition of the Ionians, on whose Coast now they lay to keep them in obedience,
being little desirous of sailing any more Westward, for the experience they had
lately had of the Graecians at Salamina, and being in as little fear of their
coming to them, whom they expected to be kept in awe, so as not to stir far
from home, because of Mardonius.

54. They stirred not about providing any Landforces wherewith to oppose
Mardonius; but very busy they were at Aegina in rigging their Fleet, over
which Leutychides King of Sparta (issued from Procles, and put into the place
of Demeratus,) was made Admiral: Xanthippus Father to Pericles being General of
the Athenian Fleet, which contained the most ships. Whilst they abode here,
came six men from Chios, who having conspired against Strathes their Tyrant,
upon discovery of the plot, fled, beseeching them that they would undertake the
freeing of Ionia; and so far they prevailed, as to get them to Delus; but no
further would they go, because unacquainted as yet with the affairs of Asia,
they feared the Persians, so that both parties stood in awe of each other.

Mardonius left behind.
55. Mardonius thinking of his promise made to his Master, consulted the
Oracles, but they refusing to answer, he sent Alexander King of Macedonia, now
in great grace with the Persians, through the marriage of his Sister to
Butaris, in embassage to the Athenians, to take them off from the society with
the rest of Greece. He knew they gave the most mortal blows in the battle at
Salamina, and thought, that if they could be taken off, the rest would be
conquered with little or no difficulty. The fame of this Embassage flying
abroad, came to Sparta, which netled the Lacedaemonians, and made them with all
speed to dispatch away Ambassadors of their own, to prevent the alliance so
dangerous to all Greece, and the Athenians refused to give audience to
Alexander, till they were arrived, that they might also be present thereat.
Alexander told them how Xerxes had given order to Mardonius to signify to them
how willing he was to remit what was past, to restore them their Territories,
and more than them if they would, to leave them to their own freedom, and
repair up their Temples at his own charges, if they would enter into a league
of amity with him, otherwise they could not be ignorant how great
inconveniences they drew upon themselves from so potent a Prince, able to send
other Armies if they now with Mardonius should be overthrown: to these things
spoken as from Mardonius, the Ambassador added as a friend, not to let slip
such an oppoptunity. After him the Ambassadors of Sparta spoke, and showed how
unworthy a thing it would be for the Athenians of all others, to forsake the
public cause, they having been the causers of the War, and their Ancestors
been so renouned for setting others at liberty, wherefore they hoped that they
would not be accessory to the slavery of all Greece. Their answer was to
Alexander, that so long as the Sun should hold his course, they would never
enter into alliante with Xerxes, but resist his forces with their own; and him
they desired, whom they respected as a friend, not any more to bring such an
unwelcome message, lest he might suffer something from the angry people. To the
Spartans they answered to this purpose: That they would never any of them as
long as they lived enter into confederacy with the Persian; they thanked them
for their kind offer to maintain their wives and children in case of necessity,
which they hoped they should not have much cause to need, so as to be
troublesome to them, and desired them to hasten away to them their supplies,
for that they thought the Barbarian would not lose time after the report of
their answer, but presently invade them; and they thought it most convenient to
meet him in Boeotia.

56. Mardonius having received this answer from Athens, Herod. lib. 9.
in great wrath marched thitherwards out of Thessalie. When he came to Thebes,
the Inhabitants advised him to go no farther, for that he should never subdue
Greece united together, but stay there in a commodious place, and corrupt with
money those that were most prevalent in each City, whereby he might divide the
Graecians into factions, and so easily mastering the dissenters, subdue the
whole Country. But he not hearkening to this advice, proceeded, hoping by fires
made in the Islands, to give notice to Xerxes still lying at Sardis, that he
was again got into Athens, which the Inhabitants upon his approach, and the
Peloponnesians deferring to send their succors, again quitted and departed to
Salamine. He entered Athens the tenth month being now completed after Xerxes
had the possession of that City, and having so done, sent to Salamine to the
owners of it, once more offering them the same conditions he had formerly
proposed by Alexander of Macedonia, hoping, that upon this extremity to which
they were once again reduced, they might change their stubbornness for a more
complying disposition.

57. But they were so far from harkening to what he offered, that they stoned
one Lycidas a Senator, for saying it deserved to be taken into consideration,
and to be proposed to the whole body of the people, and his wife and children
were used in the same manner by the women. Then sent they (together with the
Megarians and Plataeans) seriously to expostulate with the Lacedaemonians for
the nonperformance of their promise, whereby their Country was again exposed
to the will and pleasure of the Enemy, and plainly to tell them, that except
their associates would better stand to their word, and dispatch away their
succors in time, they must needs provide for themselves apart, for as much as
yet a way was open for their entry into confederacy with the common Enemy. The
Ambassadors found them celebrating annual games, and understood that the
Peloponnonesians were only intent upon their perfecting the wall at the
Isthmus, having no regard at all to them, whereof they highly complained to the
Ephori. They promised them an answer the next day, but deferred from day to
day, until after ten days the wall of the Isthmus was perfected.

58. After this time came a man of Tegea to them, and blaming them for their
neglect of their allies, convinced them of the vanity of the wall, in case the
Athenians should join with Mardonius, for they could with ease convey him
otherwise than by the Isthmus into Peloponnesus, wherewith being startled, in
the dead time of the night, and without privity of the Ambassadors, they sent
out 5000 men besides 7000 of the Heilots or public Slaves, under the conduct
of Cleombrotus Tutor to Plistarchus the young King. In the morning the
Ambassadors came again to them expostulating as before, whereto the Ephori
answered, that their succors were already on their way, whom then the other
understanding the matter, followed, and with them other 5000 gathered out of
the places bordering upon Sparta. Mardonius having intelligence how things went
in Peloponnesus from the Argives, Burns Athens, and goes into Boeotia.
who all this while were of his party, was something abashed, having till now
had some hopes of the Athenians their compliance, for which reason he had
spared their Territories. But now he destroyed all he could both in City and
Country, and forsaking Attica as a Country dangerous to his Army, by reason of
the unevenness of the ground, and hard to be quitted suddenly in time of
danger, he returned into Boeotia a Champain Country, and in alliance with him,
where in the Territories of the Thebans he pitched his Tents at the River
Asopus, bringing much damage to his friends round about, in taking up such
things as were but necessary to the sustenance of his Army. The Spartans in the
mean time lying at the Isthmus, the other Peloponnesians after their example
came also thither, whence they marched to Eleusine. Thither came the Athenians
from Salamine, and joined with them, whence they followed Mardonius into
Boeotia, and sat down over against his Camp at the foot of the Mountain
Cithaeron.

59. The Greeks brought into the field 11 Myriads or 110000, according to
Herodotus, from which number Diodorus, Justin, Orosius.
others take the odd thousands, and make them just 100000. The number of the
Persian Army Amounted to 30 Myriads or 300000, besides the Greek Auxiliaries,
which he conjectureth to have been about five Myriads more; the 300000 are
owned by Plutarch, another Aemilius Probus in Aristide.
numbereth but 200000 Foot, and 20000 Horse, but Diodorus on the contrary
says, that besides these Forces drawn out of Xerxes his Army, Mardonius had
out of Macedonia and Thrace, and the associate States, about 20 Myriads, and
that his whole Army contained 50 Myriads or 500000 men. Mardonius when the
Graecians were encamped, Herodotus ut supra*
sent a party of his Horse to assail them, which objecting cowardice to them,
and provoking them, very light skirmishes ensued, wherewith the Megarians were
sore put to it, being on disadvantagious ground, but being relieved by 300
stout Athenians, all others refusing, a sharp encounter followed, in which
Masistius who commanded the Party of the Persians was slain. A great contest
followed about the body, the Persians laboring with all their might to redeem
it, all the Persian Horse coming in to the quarrel, and then the whole Army of
the Graecians; but at length they were fain to return without it, and it was
carried in triumph about the Greekish Camp. This as it brought great sorrow to
the Persians, so the other were much elevated in their minds thereby, and
removed their Camp into the Territories of Plataeae, whither Mardonius also
followed them, and encamped over against them, both parties neglecting to fight
(only excepting such Skirmishes as was made by the Persian Horse) for ten
days.

60. On the eleventh, it being palpable that the Greekish Army daily wasted, by
the revolt of many of their Countrymen, and yet that the Persian groaned under
it is own burden, Mardonius called a Council of his Officers to consult what
was to be done. Artabazus the son of Pharnaces, a man of great Nobility, and an
emulator of the General, contended with him, urging that the best was to
decline the fight, and march to Thebes, where they might have plenty of
provision, here wanting, and whence by sending money into the principal Cities
of Greece (according to the advice formerly given by the Thebans) they might
dispatch the War with ease. But Mardonius being more hot and earnest, thinking
his Army to be for the present stronger than the Enemy, resolved to fight, not
suffering himself by any persuasions to be removed from his purpose, for that
because of his authority the rest durst not contradict it, and it was resolved
to fall on the next morning by break of day. Notice hereof was given by
Alexander the Macedonian to the Athenians, who advised them in case Mardonius
should not fight to stay it out; for the Persians were straightned for
provisions. The Athenians bring this news to Pausanias the General, who being
something struck therewith, he desired them to change places, because they were
better acquainted with the Persian manner of fighting since the battle at
Marathon, and the Spartans were more used to the Thessalians and Boeotians now
opposed to the Athenians; they soon condescended hereunto, but Mardonius having
notice of it, made his Persians change place with the Boeotians and the other;
and though Pausanius again reduced his men into the former place, yet was
neither this hid from Mardonius, who still to prevent him did the like.

61. Mardonius upon this sent and upbraided Pausanias and his Spartans with
cowardice, especially seeing he had made a challenge to fight with them with
his Persians, either a certain number of each, or all together, both which were
refused. Then sent he his Horse upon them, which with darts sore troubled the
whole Army, and most of all in that it hindered the fetching of water, that the
Graecians were constrained to change the place, and resolved to pass into an
Island compassed about with the River, and near the Walls of the City, which
was very convenient for watering* and lay also well for provisions. By night
they removed, but most missing of the place went to the Temple of Juno in the
high way to Plataea, and there encamped themselves, whom the Spartans being
commanded to follow, much trouble arose thereupon by the means of one
Amompharetus a valiant man, who for some time would not stir with his Regiment,
crying out, it was contrary to the Laconick Discipline to fly from the Enemy,
and supposing Pausanias and the rest durst not forsake him. But toward morning
he came off from his resolution, and so all marched to the Temple of Ceres,
situate upon the River Moloe, being followed close by the Persian Horse.

62. The Sun being risen, Mardonius grievously inveighing against the cowardice
of the Graecians, and Artabazus for his late opinion, marched with his whole
Army, as to pursue the Enemy flying, and all his Horse began sore to press
upon the backs of the Spartans and Tegeatans, joined with them at the Chapel of
Ceres, The battle at Plataea, and Mardonius slain.
so that then ensued a sharp fight betwixt them, and betwixt the Athenians who
came in to their succor, and such Greeks as were confederate with the
Persians. The Tegeatans charged the Persian infantry, in which after much toil
and bloodshed, Mardonius fighting on a white Horse in the midst of 1000 choice
men, was slain by Armnest^s the most valiant Spartan. After his death, his men
discouraged, were slaughtred in great numbers, and put to the rout, which
Artabazus seeing, shifted for himself with a party of 40000 commanded by him,
and fled toward the Hellespont: the Greeks that assisted Mardonius, though
nothing inferior to their Countrymen for valor, were put to flight; and 300
of Thebans, who most stoutly behaved themselves, were slain upon the place.

63. In the mean time the Corinthians, Megarians, Phliasians, and the rest, who
had taken up their station at the Chapel of Juno, hearing of the victory of
their friends hasted to the place all out of order, the Corinthians over Hill
and Dale the nearest way; but the rest through the plain, who were circumvented
by the Theban horse, and many of them cut off. The Persians fled into their
Camp, which they had fenced with a Rampire for security, whither they were
followed by the Spartans, who labored with all their might to storm the place,
but were stoutly repulsed by the Defendants, till the Athenians coming in, and
better exercised in such attempts, brake into the Camp. The Tegeatans followed
with great violence, and took, and plundered the Pavilion of Mardonius with his
brazen manger, and then followed an unspeakable slaughter of the Persians, so
that of those 300000 left to Mardonius by Xerxes, excepting those 40000. which
fled with Artabazus, not 3000 remained, 100000 according to Diodorus, without
mercy being put to death within the Rampire. Of the Graecians not many were
slain, according to Herodotus, who reckons 31 Spartans, 16 Tegeatans, and 52
Athenians, mentioned at large by him; In Aristide.
but Plutarch mentions 1360 of the Greekish Army to have been slain, and
Diodorus increases the number to above 10000. The Mantineans and Eleans came
after the victory, at which they were so ashamed, that returning home they
banished their Captains as authors of the delay. The Conquerours thence marched
to Thebes, where the inhabitants gave up the authors of their revolt to the
Barbaridus, whom being carried to Corinth, all but Attaginus that escaped, he
there put to death.

64. Whilst these things were thus done in Boeotia, the Greekish Fleet of
which Leutychides the Spartan King was Admiral, harbored at the Island Delos:
Hither came three Ambassadors from Samus, desiring aid against the Barbarians,
and their Tyrant imposed upon them, showing that it was most equal that
Graecians should one vindicate the liberty of another, and that this Enterprise
would be without difficulty, for as much as if the Ionians did but once see
their Fleet, they would revolt from the Persians, of whom such as were amongst
them would either fly, or might easily be made a prey; Lastly, if the
Ambassadors were mistrusted as not representing things according to their
Commission, they offered themselves as Hostages, till the truth might be
cleared. Leutychides taking an Oath of them that they came empowered from the
Samians, retained Hegesistratus (because his name he took for a good omen) who
had been the mouth of the rest, and sending the other two before followed the
next day to Samus. The Seamen that were there, stricken with great fear at the
report of the Fleet approaching, dismissed the Phoenician Vessels, and fled with
the rest to the Continent, hoping to keep them safe under the protection of the
60000 Foot left on the Coasts by Xerxes to keep Ionia in obedience, over whom
Tigranes was General, a man of a most proper and amiable personage.

65. The Persians having drawn their ships under the foot of the Mountain
Mycale, near the Temple of Ceres Eleusinian, and barricaded them with great
stones, wood, and other materials, came the Graecians with their Fleet prepared
for a fight. But understanding what was done, Leutychides coming near the
shore, by the voice of a crier aloud (as Themistocles had done before)
endeavored either to make the Ionians revolt, or at least to render them
suspected to the Enemy; which being done, presently he landed all his men,
resolving to try the event of a Land battle. The Persians suspecting the
Samians disarmed them, and sent the Milesians to keep the passages leading up
into the Mountain. As the Armies were going to meet, a sudden rumor was
spreadabroad through that of the Graecians, that Mardonius with his forces were
cut off, which elevated their spirits, and made them to charge with greater
alacrity, which was also increased, for that they were now to fight at the
Temple of the same Goddess, as they heard their friends had done with
Mardonius in Boeotia. The battle at Mycale.
Then charged they the Persians in a double body, the Athenians with the
Corinthians and others, on the plain by the Seashore; the Lacedaemonians, and
others joined with them, through the mountainous and precipitous places, who
whilst they were getting up, the Athenians fell on, and calling on one another
to endeavor to deprive the Lacedaemonians of the honor of the victory,
charged the Enemy so furiously, that at length they beat them back, and forced
them into their Camp, whither also they brake in with them.

66. Hereupon ensuing a bloody fight, all the rest fled except the Persians,
who fighting with great resolution, were yet cut off and defeated upon the
coming in of the Lacedaemonians and the rest. Two of the Sea Captains were
slain, two escaped, and with the rest fell Tigranes, the General of the foot,
and of the Greeks perished not a few. The Samians, though disarmed, and other
Ionians came in and helped their friends, and the Milesians set to Guard the
passages of Mycale fell down upon the Persians another way, and made great
slaughter of them. So was Ionia rent from the Persian Empire again, Ionia
revolteth.
and joined to the Graecians. After this performed by Land, the Conquerours
burnt all the Persian ships in the Haven, and being enriched with great spoil
returned to Samus. It was found out afterward that this victory at Mycale was
obtained on the self same day as the other at Plaetaea in Boeotia, the later in
the morning, and the former at evening, which caused the wonder how
intelligence could be given to these that fought at Mycale of the success of
their Contrymen so far of. Diodorus ad Olymp. 75. an. 2. Polyaenus str. l.
1. Front. lib. 1. cap. 11. Exemp. 7.
This happened often in following times as will be seen, although some have
thought that no report was brought any way to the Army of the victory of
Plataea, but that it was so given out on purpose as a stratagem by Leutychides
to animate his Soldiers, who then being wholely ignorant of any such thing, he
invented that which afterward proved accordingly. These two battles, and
victories, happened on the third or fourth day of the month Boedromion, in the
second year after the invasion of Greece by Xerxes.

67. The Graecians lying at Samus fell into dispute about translating the
Ionians, and Aeolians, out of Asia into Greece, for that they could not be
always in a readiness to defend them, and they could not subsist of
themselves; Herodotus ut prius lib. 9. cap. 105. and Diodorus ut prius.
and the Spartans moved that those who had revolted to the Persian should be
cast out, and they placed in their rooms; but the Athenians fearing to be
deprived of the right of their Colony, which yet the Ionians acknowledging
themselves, might own the rest of the associates for their patrons, upon such a
change, dashed the project. Then were the Samians, Chians, Lesbians, and
others, who had revolted, religiously and solemnly sworn to the observation of
the league, and the Graecians departed toward the Hellespont to break the
Bridge there, which when they found broken to their hands, they consulted about
returning home. The Athenians were for going into the Cherronesus of Thrace to
recover it out of the hands of the Persians, and, though the Peloponnesians
returned, proceeding in their resolution went and besieged Sestus an Aeolian
Town, situate in the Chersonesus, over against Abydus. Before this Town they
continued till the Autumn was far spent, and then pined out the inhabitants,
who forsook the Town, but were overtaken, and either slain, or made prisoners,
amongst the later sort of which was Artagetes the Governor, who because he had
violated the sepulcher of the Chapel of Protesilaus, a great Saint in that
place, saw first his son stoned before his face, and then was hanged by command
of Xanthippus the Athenian Admiral. Then returned the Navy home to Athens, The
Median War ends after two years.^
and nothing was done further this year, which was the second of the 75
Olympiad, and the 7th of the reign of Xerxes, of the World 3526. and before
Christ the 477.

68. Xerxes all this while lay at Sardis, and thither those few that escaped
from Mycale betook themselves. In the way Masistes brother to the King fell
foul upon Artayntes, one of the Captains of the Fleet, amongst other
reproachful words telling him that he had in this behaved himself more
cowardly than a woman, whereupon the other drew his Dagger, and had stabbed
him, but that one Xenagoras an Halicarnassean interposed himself, whom for this
saving of his brother, Xerxes rewarded with the Government of Cilicia. Whilst
he lay still at Sardis he fell in love with the wife of Masistes, but she being
too honest for his adulterous intentions, he married her, and his brothers
daughter Artaynta to his son Darius, hoping to enjoy her this way, which
Ceremony being over, he returns home, leaving part of his Forces to continue
the War with the Graecians. In his Strabo lib. 14.
flight he burned all the Temples of Asia except the Ephesian, out of
indignation at his late bad success, and amongst the rest the Oracle of
Didymean Apollo amongst the Branchidans, who because they betrayed the
Treasures of their God to him, durst not stay behind but followed him.
Herodotus.
Some say he went to Susa, others to Ecbatane, a Diodorus.
third, that by Babylon into Persia. That in his way back from Graece he
Ctesias. Arrianus lib. 7. Herodotus ut prius cap. 183. Strab. lib. 16.
destroyed the Temple of Belus in that City, we also read, with all the other
religious places of the Babylonians, taking away a Statue off that Wall of
twelve Cubits, and all of beaten Gold, and killing the Priest who offered to
hinder the removal of it.

Xerxes his incontinence.
69. Being returned to Susa, he fell from the Mother to the Daughter too, being
in love with Artaynta his Daughter-in-law, whom incestuously he used
constantly. She begged of him a Coat which with much art and industry Amestris
his wife had made for him. By her wearing of this the Queen knew how matters
went, and thence followed the destruction of the whole house of Masistes; for
on Xerxes his birthday, when he used not to deny her any request, she asked
Masistes wife to be given up into her power, which he doing, she cut off her
breasts, nose, ears, lips, and tongue, and in this case sent her home. Masistes
enraged at this barbarous usage, conspired with his Children how to be
revenged, and resolved to fly into Bactria, of which he was Governor, then
to stir up that Province, and the Sacae with whom he was very gracious, into
rebellion against his brother. But Xerxes coming to the knowledge of the matter
sent a party after him, which cut him off with his Children, and all his
retinue. These things happened about a year after his return, with which ends
the history of Herodotus the Father of history (as Cicero called him) seeing he
is the most ancient of all Heathen Writers now extant.

70. The same year being the third of the 75th Olympiad, Diodorus ad Olymp. 75.
an. 3. Thucid. lib. 1.
and the eighth of the reign of Xerxes, a year after the finishing of the
Median War, so called by the Graecians, the Lacedaemonians sent Pausanias,
famous for his Generalship at the battle of Plataea, to set at liberty such
Greek Cities as yet were under the Persian, who accordingly with 50 Galleys set
sail out of Peloponnesus, and taking 30 more out from Athens, commanded by
Aristides, first went to Cyprus, where he set at liberty such Towns as were yet
held by Persian Garrisons, and thence to the Hellespont, where he took
Byzantium, and therein many Noble prisoners of the Persians, whom he delivered
to one Gangylus an Eretrian, to be kept as he pretended, to be put to death,
but indeed to restore them to Xerxes. For he sent this man secretly to the
King, and bargained for his daughter to be given him in marriage to betray
Sparta and all into his hands. He gladly received the message, and wrote back
again to him by Artabazus the son of Pharnaces whom he sent to the Seacoasts
to hold intelligence with him, and for that purpose gave him the Government of
Dascylis, recalling Magabates who was over that Province. But Pausanias growing
more insolent, hereupon was suspected, and afterward at length discovered, and
punished for his treason, as farther is to be discovered in it is proper place.

71. In the third year of the 77th Olympiad, and the sixteenth of Xerxes,
Diodorus ad Olymp. 77. an. 3.
Demotion beng Archon, or chief Magistrate at Athens, the Athenians made choice
of Cimon the son of Miltiades for their General, and with a considerable force
sent him into the Maritime Coasts of Asia, with order to relieve the
Associates, and set at liberty such as were still under the slavery of Persian
Garrisons. He bends his course toward Byzantium, and took Eione and Scyrus,
inhabited by Pelasgians and Dolopians, and divided the grounds thereof by lot;
then casting in his mind greater designs, sailed back to the Piraeus, and
furnishing himself with more ships, increased his Navy to the number of 200,
to which he added of the associates 100 more, and with all this power sailed
toward Caria. Here all the Maritime Greek Cities revolted to him, and what did
not, he subdued by strong hand, which having done, he sailed to Lycia, where he
had the same success, and now requiring ships to be provided by such as had
joined themselves in society with the Athenians, he thereby mightily increased
his Navy.

72. The Persians now levied both a Land and Sea-Army, the former within
themselves, and the latter out of Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Cilicia, Vide
Plutarch. in Cimone.
the General being Tithraustes the base son of Xerxes, who by some other is
said to have only had command of the Fleet, and that Phaerendates was over the
Landforces, though this place by another is given to Ariomandes the son of
Gobryas. Cimon having made discovery that the Persian Fleet rode nigh to
Cyprus, sailed thither, and with 250 ships made head against 340, whereupon
ensued a sharp fight, both parties fighting with great courage and animosity,
till at length the Athenians overpowerd the other, and spoiling many of their
Vessels, took about 100 with the men in them, the rest escaping to Land at
Cyprus, the men saved themselves by flight, but the ships fell into the hands
of the Graecians. Cimon not contented with this Victory, sailed toward the
Land-Army of the Persians, then lying upon the River Eurymedon. Idem ibid.
Diodorus ut prius. Polyaenus l. 1. Frontinus Stratag. lib. ult. cap. ult.
exempl. ultim.
To deceive the Enemy, he put his most valiant men aboard those Vessels lately
taken in the fight, adorned and clothed after the Persian fashion, so that the
Persians not doubting at all but that it was their own Fleet, kindly welcomed
these counterfeits as their friends. Hereby Cimon received as such, landed his
men by night and fell upon the Enemies Camp, whence ensued great fear and
tumult, his men presently killing all they meet, and amongst the rest
Pheredates Nephew to the King by his brother. Of the common sort many were
slain, others sorely wounded, and shortly all put to flight, yet they knew not
by whom, not suspecting the Graecians to have any Land-Army and therefore
concluding themselves surprised by the Pisidians upon whom they bordered.

73. Suspecting therefore this storm to come from the continent, they betook
themselves to their ships, and the Moon then not shining, and the night being
very dark, the error was the more increased, so that not discerning any thing
they ran upon their own ruin, and great slaughter was made of them on all
sides. All things being thus in confusion, the Grecian General fearing the
straggling of his Soldiers too far for booty, according to former order, that
when he set out a Light they should all come back to that place, gave out that
sign by the ships, upon sight of which they withdrew themselves thither.
Notwithstanding these two Victories, which in some sense seemed to excel those
of Salamina and Pla^aea, being fought on the same day, yet would he add one
thing more as a supplement to them. Plutarch ibid.
Understanding that 80 Phoenician ships (expected as Plutarch says, by the
Navy at Eurymedon, which was the cause why he set upon it so soon, being
unwilling they should join) to be arrived at Hydrus, he sailed hastily thither,
where as yet the news had not arrived, but now the Phoenicians suspecting the
truth, and thereby discouraged, he easily overcame, took and sunk all their
ships, and therein the greatest part of themselves miscarried. Hereupon ensued
a certain agreement betwixt the King and the Graecians.

74. The next thing considerable concerning Xerxes, is his death, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 78. an. 4. Justin lib. 3. cap. 1. Ctesiac.
placed in the fifth year after the former transactions, by Diodorus. There was
one Artabanus an Hyrcanian by birth, of great power about him, as Captain of
his Guard, who consulted about making him away, and transferring the Kingdom to
himself, and for that purpose inveagled Mithridates the Eunuch the King's
Chamberlain, by whom being let in by night with his seven sons, they strangled
him in his bed. He reigned 21 years, or 20 with odd months, Xerxes murdered.
though some there be that cut off nine years from that number. Usher.
Their ground is, for that Themistocles the Athenian being banished his
Country, came to Artaxerxes, then the new King of Persia, according to
Thucydides, so that Xerxes must at that time have been dead. Now the same
Author places this flight of Themistocles betwixt the Siege of Naxus which the
Athenians subdued, and the former exploits of Cimon, so that his Expedition
must have happened also not in the days of Xerxes as we have fixed it
according to Diodorus, but in the reign of Artaxerxes his successor: and
Eusebius placing the flight of Themistocles in the fourth year of the 76th
Olympiad (though Diodorus in the second of the 77th) hence it must follow, that
the beginning of the reign of Artaxerxes must be placed higher by near to nine
years. The authority of that grave Author is in no wise to be despised, yet
notwithstanding, this shortning of the reign Xerxes which must necessarily
follow, is not agreeable to the testimony of other Writers: especially it is to
be considered what difficulty will arise hereby to the Chronology of the sacred
story, it being most probable, that the seventy weeks of Daniel commencing in
the seventh year of Artaxerxes, end at the death of Jesus Christ; which cannot
be, if their beginning be to be assigned nine years higher. This may incline us
to believe, that some reason Diodorus had (who could not but have opportunity
to see and compare several histories) not to follow Thucydides, and make us
rather subscribe to the number of years by general consent ascribed unto the
reign of Xerxes.

SECT. 3.
SECT. III. From the death of Xerxes, and the beginning of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, to the death of Artaxerxes Mnemon, containing the space of 103
years.
1. XERXES left three sons, Darius, and Artaxerxes, Diodorus ibid.
both of them at the time of his death resident in his Court, and Hystaspes,
who was absent in his Government of Bactria. See Justin.
Artabanus having murdered their Father, presently in the dead time of the
night went to Artaxerxes, and made him believe that his elder brother Darius
had made him away, out of ambition to reign himself, counseled him to provide
for his own safety and honor, Artaxerxes.
before he should establish himself, and offered him the guard to rid him of
him, whereby he being persuaded, sent and slew his brother. When this was done,
Artabanus called his sons together, telling them this was the time of obtaining
the Kingdom, and drew his sword with an intention now also to kill Artaxerxes.
But he being only lightly wounded, laid so about him, that he slew him upon
the place, as we have it from one; though others with more reason defer the
time of Artabanus his death, to whom also seven months in the Empire are
attributed by * Eusebius. In Chron.


2. It is probable, that for that time the treason of Artabanus not being
discovered, or for some reasons winked at, he might by a Vicegerency govern the
Kingdom. By his means came Artaxerxes to it in his youth, a Prince of a great
spirit, and yet of a mild nature, Surnamed (...), or Longimanus, because his
right hand was longer than the other, in the fourth year of the 78th Olympiad,
or in the beginning of the 79th, Lysitheus being then Archon at Athens. A. M.
3540, 463 years before the birth of Christ. Within a while Artabanus laid in
wait for his life also, communicating his design to Megabyzus, who had married
the daughter of Xerxes, Ctesias.
and for her loose life was fallen into a discontent, Megabyzus swore secrecy
as well as he, Artabanus put to death.
but revealed the whole matter, so that Artabanus finding not the same success
as in his other treasons, was sent the same way, and by the same means with
which he intended to dispatch Artaxerxes. Now came out the whole truth
concerning Xerxes and his son Darius, and Spamitres (or Aspamitres) the Eunuch,
who was accessory to the murders, was tortured to death. Justin tells us, how
the King fearing the number, and power of Artabanus his Sons, commanded his
Soldiers to be ready armed the next morning, both for a muster, and to exercise
them. Amongst the rest appeared he according to his place, with whom Artaxerxes
desired to change his coat armor, pretending his was too short for him, which
to do, he first putting his off, the King took the advantage and ran him through
with his sword.

3. After his death, his party being strong, great troubles ensued, which ended
at length in the destruction thereof, three of his sons falling in fight, and
Megabyzus who opposed them being sorely wounded, for whom now great lamentation
was made through the Court, till at length he escaped the danger by the skill
and industry of Apollonides the Physician, native of the Island Cos. The
Bactrians also, according to Ctesias, revolted, with another of the King's
Officers named Artabanus, who seems to have had some other command than over
Bactria. For we are told elsewhere, that Hystaspes the son of Xerxes was
Satrapas or Governor of that Province, and thence may almost conclude him to
have been the principal cause of the revolt, out of indignation that being the
second brother, the youngest of all the three should be preferred before him.
Two battles were fought in this quarrel, in the latter of which the wind being
full in the faces of the Bactrians, so disturbed them, that thereby Artaxerxes
became Victor, and reduced all that Country into obedience. Bactria recovered.
Diodorus ad Olymp. 79 an. 2. Thucyd. lib. 1.
Artaxerxes having thus revenged his Father's and Brother's death, and brought
Artabanus and his accomplices to condign punishment, and recoverd Bactria, settled
the affairs of his Kingdom. He took care of his revenue, settled the Militia,
displaced suspicious Governors of Provinces, and carrying all things with much
moderation and Justice, gained great Authority from his subjects. In the mean
while the Egyptians hearing of the death of Xerxes, and in what disturbance the
affairs of the Persians were, out of desire to recover their liberty, hearkened
to the Counsel and persuasions of one Inarus King of Libya, the son of
Psammetichus, so that the greater part of the Country revolted, and making him
their Prince, sent about to crave aid, The Egyptians revolt.
and amongst others to the Athenians. They thought it their interest to impair
all ways possible the interest of Persia, and concluding it not amiss to get
some footing in Egypt, resolved upon sending three hundred ships, and prepared
for the setting of them forward with all earnestness. Artaxerxes hearing on
the other hand how things went in Egypt, determined to overmatch the revolters
in provisions for the War, and for that end levied Forces throughout his
Dominions, Rigged his Fleet, and omitted nothing requisite for an expedition of
that moment.

4. He thought first of going down himself, but being overruled by his friends
sent Achaemenides his brother, according to Ctesias, but according to Diodorus,
Achaemenes the son of Darius, and his great Uncle, with an Army of above
300000. says Diodorus, or 400000 foot, and 80 ships, who marching as far as
the River Nile there pitched his Tents, refreshed his Soldiers, and prepared
all things for a battle. The Egyptians assisted by the Libyans expected the
Athenian Fleet, which at length arrived, and got possession of the River.
Presently after this a Land battle ensued, in which, though the Persians for a
time prevailed by their multitudes, yet the Athenians, who were now acquainted
with their manner of fighting, pressing sore upon that Wing with which they
joined, did such execution as put it to flight, The Persians defeated.
at which all the rest out of fear betook them to their heels. Great slaughters
were then made in the persute, the greatest number of the Barbarians fell, and
the rest betook themselves to a Fort called White-wall, whither the Athenians
persuing, took two parts of Memphis, and besieged them in the 3d division
called by that name, of 400000 that came into Egypt, Ctesias writes 100000 to
have been slain, and with them their Captain, killed by the hands of Inarus,
whose body was sent back to Artaxerxes. That Achaemenes the son of Darius was
slain with many Persians, Lib. 7. cap. 82.
Herodotus tells us by an anticipation of the story.

5. Artaxerxes understanding what bad success his affairs had in Egypt,
Diodorus ad Olymp. 79. an. 3. Thucyd. ut supra.
and knowing the main blow to have been given from the Athenians, sent
Megabyzus with a great sum of money to Lacedaemon to hire that State to make
War upon them, and give them something to do at home, to divert them from the
assistance of his Rebels. The Lacedaemonians would not be bribed to fall our
with Athens, and refused to hearken to any thing else the Ambassador offered
on his masters behalf, so that he recalled him home, and gave in charge to
Megabyzus the son of that Zopyrus who recovered Babylon to Darius, to prepare
for another expedition, with whom he also joined Artabazus, making choice of
them both out of respect to their great valor, and skill in Military matters.

They by the Spring having got together an Army of (above 300000 men, Diodorus
ad Olymp. 80. an. 1. Thucyd.
says Diodorus, 200000 only says Ctesias) marched down into Cilicia, where,
and in Phoenicia they rested their men, and caused the inhabitants of these
places, together with the Cyprians, to provide a Navy, which being done, to the
number of 300 ships, they furnished them with the ablest Soldiers, and all
sorts of Weapons, and whatsoever was requisite for a Sea Fight, and in this
preparation, together with the exercising, and training of their men, spent
they almost all the Summer. In the mean while the Athenians labored to storm
the White-wall wherein the Persians were besieged, but they made such effectual
resistance as they kept them out all this year. When Winter was over, Megabyzus
and his Colleague led down their Army through Syria and Phoenicia, the Navy
Coasting all along not far off; and at length came to Memphis, where the fear
of them presently loosed the siege of their Contrymen, whom joining to
themselves they gave battle to the Egyptians and their Associates. Many fell on
both sides, but most of the Egyptians; Ctesias.
at length Megabyzus wounded Inarus in his Thigh, and put him to flight, who
betook himself to Byblus, a Town situate in an Island of Nile, called
Prosopitis, and with him such Greeks as had escaped the fight, after which the
Egyptians returned into obedience, making their peace with Megabyzus. Egypt
recovered.


6. Megabyzus persuing them, besieged the place, Thucyd. lib. 1. Diod. Ibid.
Ctesias.
which yet was so defended that they held it out a year and six months in
despite of him. The Athenian Fleet lay in the River before the Town, which the
Persians at length considering, and how it was possible by Ditches to drain the
water, and derive that course thereof another way, set about it, and so drained
the Chanel that the Island was now joined to the Main, and the ships rested on
dry Land. Now Diodorus says, the Egyptians forsook their confederates, and
returned to obedience, which the Athenians understanding, and how their ships
by this stratageme of the Enemy were rendered useless, burnt them all, and
nothing afrighted with so great a danger in which they were involved, called
upon one another with exhortations not to commit any thing unworthy of their
former noble achievements, so that excelling those their Contrymen if
possible, who lost their lives at Thermopylae, they resolved to fight. The
Persian Commanders seeing their courage, and considering their own losses
already great, having lost many thousands, though they had recovered the
Island, yet gave them these terms to return with safety out of Egypt. Their
number being something above 6000. they returned home by Cyrene above their
expectations, having consumed six years in this War to no good purpose, Inarus
taken and Crucified; Artaxerxes then recovered all Egypt except some fenny
parts, near which Amyrtaeus reigned, who by reason of the difficulty of the
place, and the fierceness of the people, could not be reduced into order.

In the mean time, whilst the Athenians traveled homewards, Thucyd. ibid.
came 50 ships more to their relief, which being utterly ignorant of what had
passed, took up their harbor at Mendesium, one of the mouths of Nile. Here
they were set upon by the Persians on Land, and the Phoenicians by Sea, and
lost most of their Vessels, a few only escaping home, and such was the end of
this expedition of the Athenians with their associates into Egypt.

7. Artaxerxes in the seventh year of his reign made a decree in the behalf of
the Jews, that whosoever of them would, Esra 7.12.
might go up with Ezra to Jerusalem and inhabit it. He and his Counselors
contributed much Treasure, and gave them liberty to Collect what they could,
and commanded his Treasurers beyond the River Euphrates to furnish him yearly
with what he wanted, as far as 100 Talents of silver, 100 measures of Wheat,
100 Baths of Wine, 100 Baths of Oil, and Salt without measure, for the
sacrifices and other uses, according to the discretion of Esra. He commanded
that all things should be done according to the mind and will of the God of
heaven, lest his anger might break out against the Kingdom of him and his sons:
the Priests and Levites he made free from all impositions, and gave power to
Esdras to constitute Judges and Governors over the people, for the setlement
of the Polity or Commonwealth.

8. Now though here in this Edict be no express mention of repairing the Walls
of Jerusalem, or of the Request of Esra in that behalf, yet is it probable
enough that he would desire it, because of the often incursions of their
Enemies, the Samaritans, and others, neither could their habitation in the
City be secure, nor the work of the Temple go on with safety: and in what
could all that Treasure be spent but in Fortifications? So that we may even
conclude sufficient License and Authority to be included in this Decree, and
that Esra began to build the Walls, but was either hindered by other occasions,
or the negligence of the Jews, or (more probably) the molestations of their
Enemies; who because the License was not expressed, took thence occasion to
interrupt the work till thirteen years after it was renewed, and perfected by
the procurement and industry of Nehemiah, who obtained a confirmation rather of
the former Edict, than any new Decree; So though Syrus had first of all granted
License for the rebuilding of the Temple, yet because the work was hindered by
the Enemies of the Jews, there was need of another Edict granted out by Darius.
As the decrees of these two Kings were in effect the same, so also those were
only put in execution afterward by Nehemiah, because the execution of it, as
to the rebuilding of the Walls, was either remitted by negligence, or by malice
of the Borderers.

9. If so, the beginning of the seventy weeks of Daniel, fitly may be taken
hence, ending most probably in the death of our Savious Jesus Christ. Daniel
9.24
Seventy weeks says the Angel, are determine upon thy people, and upon thy
holy City, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
and to seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. Know
therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment, to
restore, and to rebuild Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven
weeks, and threescore and two weeks: and the street shall be built again, and
the Wall, even in troublous times. And after 62 weeks shall Messiah be cut off,
but not for himself: and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall
destroy the City and the Sanctuary, and the end thereef shall be with a Flood,
and unto the end of the War desolations are determined. And he shall confirm
the Covenant with many in one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause
the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of
abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that
determined shall be powered upon the desolate. Thus the Oracle, in which is
contained a Prophecy concerning the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the coming of
Christ, who should bring unconceivable benefits along with him, and yet at
length be put to death, not for himself, but others, and this should be all
accomplished within 70 weeks of years, which contain 490. Lastly, it foretells,
that for that horrible sin of the Jews in murdering the Messiah, they should
lose both Principality and Priesthood, and be punished with perpetual Exile,
and the utter and unreparable desolation of the City.

10. Many are the opinions concerning the beginning and end of these seventy
weeks amongst Chronologers. Some begin them in the first year of the Empire of
Cyrus, and end them in the Nativity of Christ. Others fetch their rise from the
second of Darius Nothus (Successor to Artaxerxes) and conclude them with the
destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus Vespasian. Some make them Commence from the
20 of Artaxerxes (when Nehemiah obtained another Decree of him) and to conclude
with the passion and death of Christ; and others will have them begin in the
20th year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, and end in the desolation of the City by the
Romans. But many there are who rejecting all these, with best reason, fix the
beginning of them in the seventh of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and their conclusion
in the death of Christ, in which termination most of the Learned, both ancient
and modern, agree.

11. For if we seriously consider the account of time, and judge of it
according to the best approved Authors, The beginning of Daniel's seventy weeks.
the three former opinions will be found either to exceed, or come short of the
number. From the beginning of the Persian Empire to Christ's Nativity passed
about 530 years. From the second of Darius Nothus indeed to the destruction of
Jerusalem, near upon 490 years intervened; but concerning any Edict made by
that Prince, there is not a word in Scripture. From the 20th of Artaxerxes
Longimanus to the death and passion of Christ, are found 476. or 477. which
come too short by thirteen of the 490. and betwixt the twentieth of Artaxerxes
Mnemor, and the destruction of Jerusalem, are found but about 450. which come
far short of the true account; as also the Chronology of such as would fetch
the rise of the 290 from the first of Darius Medus; and the second or sixth of
Darius the son of Hystaspes. And although the Angel mentions the punishment
to be inflicted on the Jews, yet does he not comprise it in the 490 years, the
end of which he signalizeth by the anointing and sufferings of the M^ssias,
but assigns half a week or of seven years for the accomplishment of those
plagues, which in such a quantity of time were to be inflicted upon his
murderers. Vide Ludovic. Cappelli tabulas in Chron. Sacra.


12. But if we reckon from this seventh of Artaxerexes Longimanus down by his
Successors in the Persian Empire, the Ptolomies of Egypt, after that of
Alexander the Great, and then by the Assamonaeans or Jewish Princes till we
come at length to Herod the Great, and so to Christ, the just number of 290 we
shall find accomplished at his death, with such small difference, as is
pardonable to so many Authors handling so many things. Or if we reckon by the
years of the Olympiads and the building of Rome, we shall find Christ to have
died in the 490th year after the promulgation of this decree. The seventh year
of Artaxerxes Longimanus fell in with the second and third of the 80th
Olympiad, according to Eusebius, and the 295, or 296th of the City, from which
continuing to the second year of the 202d Olympiad, and the 785th of the City
(in which Christ was crucified) 289 years or ^90 are precisely found; so that
farther we shall not enquire about these seventy weeks, having therein already
satisfied what this design and work requires, leaving the further enquiry
thereof to the studious Reader, and the judgment to the Learned.

13. In the fifteenth year of Artaxerxes the Athenians having recalled Cimon,
whom for ten years they had banished by the Ostracism, Thucyd. lib. 1. Diodorus
ad Olymp. 82. an. 3.
sent him with a Fleet of 200 Sail against Cyprus subject to the Persian. Sixty
of these ships he sent into Egypt to the aid of Amyrtaeus, who still was up in
the marshes, and with the rest he set upon Citium a Town in the Island.
Plutarch. in Cimone.
At this time were Artabazus and Megabysus still Generals of the Forces of
Persia: the former lay with 300 ships in the Road of Cyprus, and the other with
a Land-Army of 300000 men quartered in Cilicia. Cimon when he had besieged
Citium sent some messengers to Delphos to enquire something of the Oracle, but
ere they got to their journeyes end, he died before the place, either of
sickness, Cimon dies in Cyprus.
or by some wound, both which are affirmed. When he saw he should die, he
counseled his men forthwith to depart, and conceal his death, and they doing
so, it happened that neither the Enemy, nor Associates knew any thing of it. At
this time came back the Fleet sent into Egypt, so that all joining together
again, they sailed to Salamine a Town in Cyprus, where they fought with the
Phoenicians and Cilicians, who were come to aid their friends of Cyprus. In a
Sea Fight they sunk many of their Vessels, took 100 with the men in them, and
pursued the rest as far as Phoenicia. The Persians with that part of the Fleet
which yet remained, fled into Cilicia, where Megabysus lay, but the Athenians
followed them with speed, and landing fell upon them, and making great
slaughter, amongst the rest slew Anaxicrates the Sea-Captain, who most
gallantly fought whilst life lasted. Then the Greeks victorious got them to
their ships and sailed home.

14. The King understanding what loss he had received in Cyprus, Diodorus ad
Olymp. ejusdem ann. 4.
called a Council to deliberate what should be done thereupon, at which, when
all was considered, it was resolved that it was requisite to procure a Peace if
possible. He wrote then to his Captains about Cyprus, to make peace upon as
good terms as might be; according to which order Artabazus and Megabyzus sent
to Athens to treat about it. The Athenians not being averse from harkening to
them, both sides sent their Commissioners with full power to conclude; Herod.
lib. 7. cap. 101.
at which time also the Argives sent to Artaxerxes to demand of him whether the
confederacy into which they entered with his Father remained, or they were
accounted by him as Enemies; to which he answered, that he did not doubt of
it is continuance, and as for his part he accounted no City more friendly to him
than that of Argos.

The Articles of Peace concluded with the Athenians were, That all the Greek
Cities in Asia should be free: Plutarch and Diodorus ut prius.
though in the Peace with Lacedaemon it was agreed they should be under the
Persian; that the Persian Generals should not come within three days journey of
the Sea, that none of the Persian Subjects should come with a long ship between
the Cyanian and Chelidonian Islands. The Athenians on the other part took an
Oath, not to invade the King's Territories. For the joy conceived about this
Peace, they built an Altar of Peace, and graced Callias the principal of the
Embassy with the greatest honors. Cimon was dead, and with him in a manner
the true gallantry of the Greekish Nation; for none of their Captains after him
did any thing to purpose against the Barbarians (as they termed all except
themselves) but being drawn by their Orators to intestine differences, Diod. ad
Olymp. 84. 3.
and none after him being left to take them up, they fell one upon another, and
so afforded an happy occasion to the Persian to breath himself, and for a good
time to effect his own security with the impairment of their interest. For
though Agesilaus afterward (as will be seen) passed over his Army into Asia,
and made a short War with the Persian Commanders on the Seacoasts, yet without
doing any thing of much consequence, was he recalled by Seditions at home,
leaving the Persian Officers behind him, who exacted impositions from the
Cities confederate with Greece: whereas whilst Cimon was in command, not so
much as a Carrier appeared in these quarters, nor an Horse came within 400
furlongs distant from the Sea.

15. In the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, Nehem. 1.11, etc.
Nehemiah his Cup Bearer the son of Hachaliah the Jew received a message, that
the remnant of the Captivity left in Judaea were in great affliction and
reproach: that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the gates thereof
burnt with fire. Because of this he wept, Nehemiah obtains leave to repair
Jerusalem.
fasted, and mourned certain days, and praying to God to make the King
favorable to him, obtained to be sent with ample commission to build up the
walls. Now was no new Edict promulgated in behalf of the Jews, which had been
done sufficiently thirteen years before by the consent of the Princes: only
letters were written to the Keeper of the King's Forest, to furnish Nehemiah
with wood sufficient for the building of the gates and walls of the City, for
the Temple, and an house for himself; and the Governors beyond the river were
ordered to convey him over till he came into Judah. By virtue of this authority
he came to Jerusalem, and notwithstanding the indignation and opposition of the
Enemies of the Jews, by his great diligence and valor, finished the work of
the wall in 52 days. From the new Moon of the month Nisan, which followed
this repairing of the walls, to that New Mood of the same month in which
Christ suffered, passed 475 Julian years, which make up 490 Lunar years,
consisting each of twelve Lunar months. This being not without a providence,
that as from the going out of the decree to the death of Christ intervened 490
Solar years; so also from the rebuilding of the walls to his death, should
intervene so many consisting each of twelve Lunary months. This gave occasion
to many eminent men both Ancient and Modern to follow the opinion of Africanus,
in placing the beginning of the 70 weeks in the twentieth year of this King,
and concluding them with the death of Christ: although he reckons from that
time to the fifteenth of Tiberius 475 years; whereas there are to be accounted
but 472; and Christ died not in the fifteenth year of his reign, but was then
baptized.

16. Nehemiah not thinking it sufficient to repair the walls whilst the frame
of the State was out of frame, Nehem. 7, etc.
restored both the Ecclesiastical and Civil Polity thereof. Taking notice how
all ranks of men, and especially the Priests were out of order, no certainly
being of their Pedigrees; he caused to be sought for, and read, the Register of
those who returned with Zorubbabel, from which whosoever could not prove his
descent from some Priestly Family was cast off from the Priesthood. Twelve
years stayed he at Jerusalem, governing with great moderation, and self-denial,
and reforming abuses both in Religion and the State. The Rulers of the People
dwelt at Jerusalem, the rest of the People cast lots to bring one of ten to
dwell therein, for that it was little inhabited, and nine parts to dwell in
other places, the People blessing all such as willingly offered themselves to
dwell in Jerusalem. Then returned he to the King, from whom he yet obtained
leave to come again into Judah, where he seems to have lived until the
sixteenth year of Darius Nothus, in which the first part of the seventy weeks
ends, consisting of 49 years, viz. seven weeks, which are thought to be those
of which the Angel spoke, that the street should be built again and the wall,
even in troublous times.

17. After Artaxerxes had made peace with the Graecians, he fell into civil and
intestine broils with Megabyzus, who had done him such service in Egypt and
elsewhere, if credit be given to Ctesias, from whom we have a relation of these
transactions. This Megabyzus, after he had quieted Egypt, and committed it to
the Government of Sartamas, departed thence and went to the King, Artaxerxes
his civil War with Megabysus.
leading along with him Inarus and some Greekish prisoners, after he had
obtained a promise from him that no punishment should be inflicted on them,
though Amytis (or rather Amestris) the King's Mother had so layn upon him to
deliver into her hands not only them, but Megabyzus himself her son in Law,
being enraged for the death of Achaemenes, who in the former Expedition was
slain by the Ionians. For five years he endured her importunity without
yielding, but at length being wearied and overcome, he gave up the Greeks and
Inarus into her power. His body she nailed overthwart to three crosses, and
beheaded 50 of the Greeks, which were all she could take. That Inarus was
crucified Thucydides witnesses, though nothing of this time or manner; and
Herodotus reports, Lib. 3. cap. 15.
that his son Thannyras was restored by the Persians to the Principality of his
Father.

18. Megabyzus being sorely moved with the usage of his prisoners, concealed
his displeasure for a time; but getting leave to depart to his Government in
Syria, whither he had privately sent some Greeks beforehand, broke out into
open Rebellion, and got an Army together of 150000 men. Against him then was
sent Osiris with 200000, who joining battle with him wounded him in the thigh,
but received two wounds from him, one in his thigh and the other in his
shoulder, with the anguish whereof, and loss of blood, he fell from his Horse
and was taken prisoner; and though his men well behaved themselves, yet were
they overthrown, and Megabyzus getting the Victory used him very courteously,
and sent him back to the King who desired it. After this was sent more forces,
commanded by Mexistenes Nephew to Artaxerxes, by his Brother Artarius the
Governor of Babylon. He also giving battle to Megabyzus, was wounded by him
both in shoulder and head though not mortally, and being put to flight
Megabyzus obtained another famous Victory.

19. Things going thus, Artarius dealt with him by Messengers, then Artoxares
the Eunuch Governor of Paphlagonia, and Amestris also advised him yet to be
reconciled to the King, afterward Artarius himself, Amytis his wife, and
Artoxares (now twenty years of age) were sent to him to persuade him to go to
him: Being persuaded, after his return the King signified to him by a message,
that he freely pardoned him all that was past, but going on a time a hunting
with him, when a Lion set upon the King, as he raised himself up Megabyzus slew
him, whereat Artaxerxes was in a great rage that he had stricken him before he
could touch him, and commanded his head to be cut off. But by the intercession
of Amestris, Amytis, and others, his life was spared, yet was he banished to
Cyrta, a Town upon the Red Sea, and Artoxares the Eunuch into Armenia for
speaking freely to the King in his behalf.

Five years he then continued in exile, at the end of which feigning himself to
be a Pisagas (which in the Persian tongue signifies a Leper at whom no man
might come) he fled away and came to his wife Amytis at his own house, by whom
scarcely being known, he was by her means and the help of Amestris reconciled
once again to the King, who made him eat at his own table as formerly, and so
continued in great favor till his death at 76 years of age, for which the King
was much troubled.

20. Whilst the Graecians were busy with one another in the Peloponnesian War,
of which now several years had passed, Thucyd. l. 4.
Artaxerxes sent Artaphernes a Persian to the Lacedaemonians, with a Letter
written in Assyrian Characters, in which, amongst other things, he desired to
know plainly of them how they stood affected, for that he was utterly ignorant
of what they thought, many Ambassadors coming, and no one of them agreeing
with another, wherefore he desired, that if they intended to declare
themselves, they would send some of their own back with Artaphernes. What was
effected hereby is not known, but we find elsewhere, Diodorus. ad Olymp. 84.
an. 3.
that the Lacedaemonians entered into a League with him in one main matter,
contrary to that formerly made with the Athenians. For whereas it was provided
first in the one, that the Greekish Cities in Asia should be left to their own
liberty, in the other they were expressly left under his Dominion; such
influence had then the Civil Wars of Greece upon the matters of Asia; perhaps
because the Lacedaemonians were jealous of the Ionians, Artaxerxes dies.
as the Colony of their adversaries the Athenians, who, if not now, entered into
War with them, were much suspected, jealousies abounding betwixt them. Not long
after this Message, Artaxerxes died, Ad Olymp. 88. an. 4.
having reigned according to Diodorus forty years complete, according to
Sulpicius Severus 41. but after Ctesias 42. amongst which opinions it is
probable that he died in the beginning of the 42 year, after the death of
Xerxes, in the second year of the 89 Olympiad. A. M. 3582. 421 years before the
birth of Christ.

21. Artaxerxes had only one legitimate son by his wife Damaspia, Ctesias in
Excerptis Histor. Persic.
named Xerxes, but 17 by Concubines, amongst which were Sogdianus, Ochus, and
Arsites. Xerxes succeeded his father, but was slain by Secundianus, as he was
drunk, in the 45th day after his death. Secundianus then became King, but
causing Bagorazus the Eunuch to be stoned for something done about his fathers
body, incurred the displeasure of the Army, which because of this, and his
brothers death, could never be taken off by all the gifts he bestowed on them.
Being jealous of his brother Ochus, whom his father had made Governor of the
Hyrcanians, he sent for him; but he refused to come, and so did several times,
till he had got a considerable Army. For Arberius General of the horse revolted
to him, then Arxanes the Viceroy of Egypt, and Artoxares coming out of Armenia
caused him to take the Cidaris (or Citaris) a Cap peculiar to the Kings and
Priests of Persia.

Ochus.
Ochus thus taking the Royal Ensign and Title of King, Idem.
changed his name into Dariaeus, and was also most commonly called Darius
Nothus. By the advice of Parysatis his wife, he enticed by all means
Secundianus to come to him, not sparing Oaths, or any other ways to get him
into his hands, and so far prevailed, that though Menostanes the Eunuch
counseled Secundianus not to trust himself, yet he came to him, and being cast
into ashes he died the same way as Darius the son of Hystaspes formerly made
away his Emulators, Jacobus Cappellus.
though some think this Darius to have been the first inventor of this
punishment, and that it is falsely ascribed by Valerius Maximus, to the son of
Hystaspes. Then reigned he alone by himself after his brother had reigned six
months and twenty days. The three Eunuchs, Artoxares, Artibarxanes, and
Atho^us were in great power with him; but especially, he was advised by his
wife, His Children.
by whom he had two Children, Amistris a daughter, and Arsaces a son (called
afterward Artaxerxes) before he came to the Kingdom. Afterward he begot of
her another son, called Cyrus, from the Sun; and others to the number of 13.
But all the rest died young, except these two and his fourth son named Oxendras.

Ctesias. Stirs in his time.
22. After this Arsites his own brother, both by father and mother, and
Artyphius the son of Megabyzus revolted from him. Artasyras was sent with an
Army against them, who falling upon Artyphius, was worsted in two battles; but
in the third overthrew him, and corrupting the Greeks that fought for him, drew
away all his Company, except three Milesians; so that upon the Oath of
Artasyras for his security, for that Arsites could not be found, he yielded
himself to the King. He was minded to put him to death, but Parysatis his wife
persuaded him to spare him for a time, for Arsites seeing him unpunished would
also be moved to yield himself, and then he might rid himself of them both
together, which accordingly came to pass, both being cast into the ashes;
though Darius was hardly brought by her persuasions to make away his brother:
now also Pharnacyas, who with Secundianus had slain Xerxes, was put to death,
and Menostanes being apprehended shunned the same punishment by laying violent
hands upon himself.

This Rebellion was followed by the revolt of Pisathnes the Governor of Lydia,
against whom Tissaphernes and others being sent, he met them, having in his
Army Lycon the Athenian, with such Greeks as he had brought with him, who being
corrupted by the Kings Captains revolted from him, so that with fair words he
was drawn in, and carried to the King, who cast him into the ashes, and gave
his Government to Tissaphernes, and the Cities with the regions adjoining to
Lycon for a reward of his treachery. After this followed the treason of
Artoxares in great power with Darius, who conspired about killing him, and
transferring the Kingdom to himself. For this purpose being an Eunuch, he
caused his wife to make him a beard, that he might seem no other than a perfect
man; but the matter being revealed by her, he was delivered up into the hands
of Parasytis, who put him to death.

23. Arsaces (afterward called Artaxerxes) the eldest son of Darius, married
Statira, the daughter of Idarnes, a man of prime rank amongst the Persians; and
Terituchmes the son of Idarnes, who after his death succeeded in his
Government, married Amistris daughter to the King. She had a sister named
Roxana, who being very beautiful, and well skilled in shooting, Terituchmes
fell in love with her, and having to do with her detested his wife, insomuch as
he resolved to murder her by the help of 300 men, with whom he practiced to
revolt. Whilst he thought hereof, one Udiastes, a man in great power about
him, being promised great matters if he could deliver the Kings daughter from
so great a danger, slew him; but the son of this Udiastes, who was
Armor-bearer to Terituchmes, and was not present at his death, after he had
notice thereof cursed his father, and seizing upon the City Zaris delivered it
up to Terituchmes his son. Then did Parysatis bury alive the Mother, Brethren,
and Sisters of Terituchmes, and commanded Roxana to be cut in pieces alive.
Darius would have had her to have made away Statira his daughter-in-law
together with the rest; but through the importunity of Arsaces her husband, she
spared her; of which Darius told her, that afterward she would sorely repent,
as it came to pass.

From the second year of this King, Hist. sacr. lib. 2.
Sulpicius Severus, and Josephus Scaliger, Edu. Livelaeus, Junius.
many learned men with him, count the beginning of the seventy weeks of Daniel,
ending them with the destruction of Jerusalem, because the number of years do
agree, and the Angel makes mention of that desolation; though nothing be
spoken in any place concerning any going out of a Decree during the reign of
this Prince, from which those weeks must needs have commenced. They must needs
allow the work now to have been carried on by the solicitation of the Prophets
Haggai and Zachariah, which had been interrupted for 115 years, ever since the
second year of the return of Zerubbabel and Jeshua, at which time they began to
build. But now at this time, and before this, lived Malachias the last of all
the Prophets, who exhorts not the people to the building of the Temple as the
others did, which is an evidence of the finishing of it before; but reprehends
those corruptions which Cap. ult.
Nehemiah in his second Government had observed amongst the Jews, viz.
marriages with strangers, unjust detention of Tithes, and corruption of Divine
worship. And because the succession of Prophets was no more to be expected; in
the later end of his Prophecy he exhorts the people to keep the Law of Moses,
until such time as the great Prophet the Messiah should be revealed, before
whom John Baptist was to come, in the spirit and power of Elias. The ending of
the Canon of holy Scripture is by Eusebius placed in the 32th year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus. After these Prophets the Hebrews held the men of the
great Synagogue to have succeeded; but the later Jews reckon the three last
Prophets amongst them, and Esra as the President of the Council.

24. Against this Darius the Medes rebelled, but were after some time reduced
again into obedience. At this time the States of G^eece being plunged deep in
the Peloponnesian War, Xenoph. Hellenic. 10.
he made his advantage thereof as much as he could, siding with the
Lacedaemonians against the Athenians, who did him most hurt in Asia, both by
their great skill and practice in Navigation, and being allied to the Ionians,
whom as their Colonies they helped against him; so that much intercourse, and
great transactions passed betwixt Tissaphernes his Lieutenant, and those of
Sparta, which are involved in the affairs of Greece. Idem ibid. and Exped. Cyri
lib. 1. Diodorus ad Olymp. 93. an. 1. ad Olymp 94 a^. 2. Justin. lib. 5.
In the 17th year of his reign he sent his son Cyrus (born since he came to the
Government) down to the Seaside as Satrapa, or Lieutenant, with a kind of
power over the other his Lieutenants there, and Captain General of all the
forces which were wont to muster at the plains of Castolus: giving him in
charge to assist the Lacedaemonians in the War against the Athenians, and by
his help did they recover to the hopes of their former fortune. When he had
continued in his charge a year or two, he grew so high that he killed his two
Cousin Germans, Autobaesaces and Mitraeus, because they came not to him with
their hands folded under their Clothes, which Ceremony was only observed in
the presence of a King. Cyrus for his misdemeanors sent for.
Their Parents of this complaining highly to his father, and alleging how
unjust it was to connive at such practices, he sent for him to come to him,
alleging he was not well, lying then encamped in the Country of the Medes,
against the Cadusians, bordering thereupon, who had revolted.

25. Leaving the command of the Cities, with all his Treasure, Xenoph. ibid.
and the assignment of his Tributes to Lysander the Spartan, he went up, taking
along with him Tissaphernes as his friend, with 300 Greeks, under the leading
of Xenias the Parrhasian. His father lived not long after he came to him, whom
in his sickness Parasytis his wife having ruled him all his life, loving Cyrus
above her eldest son, urged him to leave him his Successor, A.M. 3600. Ol. 93.
an. 4. V.C. 349.
as Darius the son of Hystaspes did Xerxes, for that he was born to him being a
King, and the other but a private person. But he thinking it not just refused
to do it, but left him those Cities over which he had made him Governor, and
his Kingdom to Arsaces, Ochus dies.
or Artaxerxes his eldest son, and so died after he had reigned 19 years, in
the fourth of the 93th Olympiad, the 27th of the Peloponnesian War now ending.
A. M. 3600. 403 years before the birth of Christ.

Arsaces then, by the pleasure of his father, Artaxerxes M^^mo^ succeeds.
Clesias.
or his interest in the great ones, obtained the Kingdom, and changed his name
into Artaxerxes, being for the excellency of his memory surnamed Mnemon. When
he had made sure his possession, his wife Statira thinking it then time to
revenge the death of her brother, and the rest of her kindred, caused Udiastes,
who slew Teritachmes, to have his tongue drawn backwards through his neck, and
cut off, and got his son Mitridates, who had delivered the City Zaris into the
hands of Teritachmes his son, to succeed in his Government. Not long after his
fathers death Artaxerxes went to Pasargada, Plutarch. in Artaxerx.
there to be initiated by the Persian Priests in the royal mysteries. There was
a Temple dedicated to some warlike Goddess, thought to be Diana, whose Temple
he that was to be initiated entering must put off his own Clothes, and put upon
him a Garment worn by Cyrus the Great, before he came to the Empire; there was
he to eat such a quantity of Figs, to drink Milk mingled with Vinegar, and
perhaps used some other unknown Ceremonies. Whilst the King was about these
things came Tissaphernes unto him, Cyrus attempting his brothers death.
and with him a Certain Priest, who having been appointed tne instructor of his
brother Cyrus had taught him the Magical Arts. He accusing him of treasonable
practices, had more credit given to him, because Cyrus had resolved to set upon
the King in the Temple, and kill him as he should put off his Clothes; some say
he was apprehended upon this accusation, others, that he came indeed into the
Temple, and being hid by the Priest, was discovered and taken. Idem and Xenoph.
Expedit. Cyri lib. 1.


26. The King was minded to put him to death, and out of reverence to his
Family caused him to be bound in golden chains, but their mother took him in
her arms, wrapped him in her hair, laid her neck to his, and with great
lamentations and entreaties prevailed for his pardon, Idem and Xenoph. Expedit.
Cyri, lib. 1.
and sent him back again into his former Province of Lydia, and the Seacoasts.
When he came there, not at all contented with this command, Is pardoned but
nor so much as remembering that he was saved by his mother's intercession, as
that he was taken and bound by his brothers, burned more than ever with a
desire of reigning. And to this purpose as secretly as he could gathered forces
of the Greeks; and under one pretense or other, laid out for foreign aid both
far and near, hoping to surprise his brother, The Ionian Cities given up now
into the hands of Tissaphernes revolted to him, all except Miletus, the
Inhabitants of which he finding to practice the same, killed some, and drove
away the rest, who flying to Cyrus, he besieged the City both by Sea and Land,
endeavoring to restore them. Then wrote he submissively to his brother,
desiring he might have the Government of those Cities rather than Tissaphernes,
and herein he was furthered by his Mother, Practizeth new matters.
who lying as it were his Lieger at Court, made the best of all things. Hence
was Artaxerxes deluded, suspecting nothing, but accounting these forces to be
kept together against Tissaphernes, betwixt whom and Cyrus he little regarded
though there were a War, and the rather, because Cyrus sent him the Tributes
due from the Cities, which Tissaphernes had formerly kept in his hands.

27. Clearchus at this time being banished from Lacedaemon, came to Cyrus, who
after conference with him admired the man, Idem ibid.
and gave him 10000 Daricks, wherewith he levied an Army, and passing out of
Cherronesus wared upon the Thracians that inhabited above the Hellespont,
thereby greatly promoting the affairs of the Greek Cities, insomuch that they
willingly furnished him with money to maintain his Forces which were only
raised for Cyrus, though thus employed for a cover to the design, and till he
could be in a readiness. There was also one Aristippus a Thessalian a guest of
Cyrus, who being overpowered by his Countrymen of the contrary faction, came
to him, and requested him to spare him 2000 Mercenaries and three months pay,
alleging that thereby he should be able to overcome his adversaries. He granted
his request, and doubled both the number of men and sum of money, desiring him
withal, not to agree with his adversaries till they two had had conference
together; and so this Army in Thessalie (though not discovered) was kept on
foot and maintained for him. Further he sent to Proxenus the Boeotian, his
friend, to bring unto him as many men as he might, under pretense of warring
against the Pisidians, who spoiled his Country; and Sophaenetus the
Stymphalian, with Socrates the Achaean, who likewise were both his Guests, to
come to him with as many men as they could make, under color, together with
the banished Milesians, of making War upon Tissaphernes.

28. When he was now resolved to march up into the higher Provinces against his
brother, and for that purpose must gather all his Forces together, he gave out,
that his purpose was to chase the Pisidians wholly out of the Country, and so,
as for that intent, assembled both his Barbarian and Grecian Troops. He
commanded Clearchus with the Army he led to come unto him, Aristippus to
compound with his adversaries, and send him his Forces, and Xenias the Arcadian
(whom he had appointed General of the Mercenaries that lay in Garrison in the
Cities) leaving only so many as should be necessary to keep the Cittadels,
gathered those Forces together, and brought them to Sardis, being about 4000
armed Foot. He sent for those that lay before Miletus, and invited the banished
men to his service, promising, if his affairs succeeded, not to give over till
he had restored them, which they gladly accepted of. Proxenus came with 1500
heavy-armed and 500 light-armed foot. Sophaenetus the Stymphalian brought 1000
armed, Socrates the Achaean about 500, Pasion the Megarean 300, and as many
Peltasts or Targetiers.

29. He had before this sent to Lacedaemon, desiring of that State, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 94. ann. 4.
that as he had formerly aided them against the Athenians, so they would not
refuse now in his need to do the same for him: boasting in his letters, that if
they sent him Footmen, he would provide for them Horses, if Horsemen,
Chariots, if they had before of their own certain pieces of ground, he would
give them whole Villages, and that he would not count but measure their pay to
them. Plutarch in Artaxerxe.
They counting it but just and agreeable enough to their own interest (not
considering against whom they engaged) decreed aid to be sent to him, thinking
hereby if he overcame to ingratiate themselves with him; Justin. lib. 1.
but if Artaxerxes should get the better, to excuse themselves well enough, as
having decreed nothing against him absolutely. The Ephori then presently wrote
to their Admiral, to do whatsoever he should command, who accordingly went to
Ephesus and joined himself with Tamos the Egyptian and Admiral to Cyrus, with
whom he sailed into Cilicia, and there prevailed that Syennesis the Prince of
that Country hindered not Cyrus as he passed by Land against his brother.
Xenoph. Expedit. Cyri, lib. 1.
Tissaphernes conceiving that these preparations were greater than fitted the
War against the Pisidians, with a Party of 500 Horse hasted to the King with
all possible speed, who as soon as by him he had the intelligence, made
contrary preparations. Diodorus.
Cyrus after he had committed the care of Lydia to some Persians of his kndred,
and given the charge of Lydia, Aeolis, and the parts adjacent to Tamos of
Memphis his faithful friend, he presently set forwards toward Cilicia and
Pisidia, it being bruted up and down that some of these people had revolted.
From Sardis he marched through Lydia, and after four encampings, came 112 miles
and an half to Colosse, a great, rich, and well inhabited City, where he stayed
seven days, and Menon the Thessalian came to him with 1000 armed Foot, and 500
Dolopian, Aenian, and Olynthians Peltasts. Xenoph. ibid.
From thence he marched in three encampings 75 miles and an half to Celaene a
great and rich City of Phrygia, where he rested thirty days, and Clearchus the
Lacedaemonian came to him with 1000 armed Foot, and 800 Thracian Peltasts, and
200 Cretian Archers; and Sosias the Syracusian brought 1000 armed Foot, and
Sophaenetus the Arcadian the same number. Here he also mustred the Greeks, and
found them to be 11000 Armed, and about 200 Peltasts or Targetiers.

Cyrus marches up against his brother.
30. From Celaene he marched in two encampings ten Parasangs, or thirty seven
miles and an half, and came to Peltae, where he stayed three days; and thence
in two encampings 45 miles, and arrived at the Market of the Ceramanians, a
City full of People, and the last in the Country of Mysia: and hence in three
encampings he marched 30 Parasangs 112 miles, and reached to the Plain of
Cayster, a City well peopled, where he rested his Army five days. Here the
Army made much ado for pay, being more than three months behind, which he was
enabled to pay them, with a month over, by the coming of Epiaxia wife to
Syennesis King of Cilicia, who brought good store of treasure with her. From
thence in four encampings he proceeded 75 miles as far a Tyriaeum, a City full
of people, and hence in three encampings 75 miles and arrived at Iconium the
last City of Phrygia. He stayed here three days, and then marched in five
encampings through Lycaonia 112 miles, which Country he suffered the Greeks to
spoil as Enemy. Now he sent away the Cilician Queen by the nearest way into her
own Country, and with her Menon the Thessalian and his Regiment, to make way
for his passage into that Country.

31. Cyrus with the rest marched through Cappadocia 25 Parasangs, or 93 miles
and an half in four days, and came to Dana a great and wealthy City, where he
put to death two Persians for treason against himself. From hence attempt was
made to break into Cilicia, but the Streights were so narrow, that one Chariot
could but pass at once, and withal exceeding steep, so that if resistance was
made it was impossible, which Syennesis the King was said to be ready to make
at the height of the Streights, and the Army, for that reason staid in the
Plain. But the next day word was brought that he had quitted the passage, after
he perceived Menon's Troops to be got into Cilicia beyond the Mountains, and
heard how a Fleet of Lacedaemonian Galleys were with those of Cyrus, under sail
to pass from Ionia thither, under conduct of Tamon. Then ascended he the
Mountain without any opposition, from which descending, in four encampings he
marched 93 miles and an half, and came to Tarsus and a great rich City of
Cilicia, where was the Palace of Syennesis, and through which runs Cydnus, a
River two hundred foot in breadth.

32. The Inhabitants thereof, except such as bought and sold, fled with their
King to the tops of the Mountains, leaving the City to be sacked with the
Palace by the Soldiers, enraged for the loss of 100 of their Companions of
Menon's Regiment. Cyrus sent for the King to come to him, who refused it, till
overcome by the persuasions of his wife, and then he gave him great sums of
money to uphold his Army, and received back such gifts as were accounted most
honorable amongst Kings, as an Horse with a golden bit, a Chain of gold,
Bracelets, a sword decked with gold, a Persian Garment, and Freedom of his Land
from spoil; as also restitution of Slaves taken in spoil by the Soldiers
wheresoever they could be found. Here the soldiers now imagining that they were
lead against the King flatly refused to go any farther, it being, as they said,
no part of their agreement. Clearchus went about to force his men to proceed,
but they, as soon as he offered to go forwards, cast stones at him and at his
carriage beasts, whereby he was forced to betake himself to a fair and politic
way, and to effect it (which with trouble enough he did) Cyrus gave out that he
went against Abrocamas an Enemy of his, who lay upon the River Euphrates about
twelve encampings from thence, that if he found him there, he would be revenged
on him, and if he fled away they should deliberate what to do. Hereupon, though
they suspected the matter, yet they resolved to hold on, and upon demanding
more pay, he promised them half as much more as formerly they had: viz. a
Darick and an half instead of one Darick to every Soldier. All this while no
man heard in public they were led against the King.

33. From Tarsus in five encampings he marched about 83 miles to Issos, the
last City of Cilicia, well peopled, large, and rich, and situated upon the Sea,
where he remained three days. Hither out of Peloponnesus came to Cyrus 35
Lacedaemonian ships, under the command of Pythagoras, together with Tamos, who
brought from Ephesus 25 of Cyrus his ships, wherewith he had besieged Miletus,
and Cherisophus the Lacedaemonian whom Cyrus had sent for, and who brought with
him 700 armed Foot. Whilst the Army lay here, the Grecian Mercenaries that
served Abrocamus, viz. 400 armed Foot revolted and came to Cyrus. From hence in
one encamping he came about eighteen miles to the Streights of Cilicia and
Syria, defended with a wall on each side, betwixt which ran the River Kersos
100 foot broad. The distance betwixt the walls was three furlongs, admitting no
passage by force, the neither way toward the Sea being narrow and fenced with
strong walls, and the upper nothing but inaccessible Rocks, in either wall
there being set a gate. This passage Cyrus suspecting to be stopped by
Abrocamas, sent for his ships to transport so many men as might force it: but
he upon hearing of Cyrus his coming into Cilicia, returned with all speed out
of Phoenicia to the King, though reported to have an Army of 300000 men.

34. From the Streights he marched in one encamping eighteen miles, and
upwards, and came to Myriandrum a City of Syria, inhabited by the Phoenicians,
upon the Sea, being a place of traffic, where many ships of burden then rode
in the Haven. Here he remained seven days, and Xenias the Arcadian Colonel,
with Pasion of Megara shipping themselves sailed homewards, discontented, as
was thought, because Cyrus suffered Clearchus to keep their Soldiers, which
refusing to go any further against the King, removed into his Camp, with intent
to return into Greece. From thence in four encampings he marched 75 miles to
the River Chatos, 100 foot broad, which was full of great tame Fish, which the
Syrians counted gods, and therefore suffered them not to be harmed no more than
Pigeons. The Villages wherein they encamped belonged to Parisatis, being
assigned her for her maintenance. Thence in eight encampings he marched 168
miles to the River Euphrates, whose breadth was 3 furlongs, and upon which was
built the great and rich City Thapsacus, where the Army remained 5 days.

35. Here it was openly declared to the Greeks, that they were led against the
King, for which they were very angry with their Officers, who, they said they
were sure, knew it before, for not acquainting them sooner with the design; and
refused to stir one foot forwarder, except upon promise of as much as their
Contrymen had, who formerly waited on Cyrus to his father. (...).
He promised to give every man five pounds of silver (of the value of 14. l.
11. s. 8. d. sterling) as soon as they came to Babylon, and to continue their
whole pay, till they should be sent back into Ionia, to which conditions most
of them yielded, and Menon prevailing with his Regiment to pass over the River
first, whilst the other were yet in consultation, thereby to gain greater
favor with Cyrus, all the Army followed, not a man being wet above the breasts
in wading over; so that this passage seemed to be miraculous, and to portend
more good to Cyrus than followed, the River giving way to him, which they of
Thapsacus reported never to have been passed over on foot before, but only
with shipping, which Abrocamus had burnt to hinder him in the passage. Thence
in nine encampings he marched fifty parasangs, or 187 miles and upwards through
Syria, and came to the River Araxes. Here they stayed three days, and made
provision of victuals, and then departing thence, marched through the
Wilderness of Arabia, 130 miles in five encampings, having Euphrates on the
right hand, and proceeding through this Country came to the River Masca, where
they stayed three days in making provision for the army; whence in 13
encampings they marched through the desert 90 parasangs, or 337 miles and an
half, and came to the Straights.

36. Proceeding in their journey hence, they might discover the footings, and
dung of horses; for a party had been sent of about 2000. which going before the
Kings Camp, burnt up the fodder, and made havoc of all things profitable for
use. Now came Orontes a Persian to Cyrus, whom having sought to betray him in
times past, and pardoned by him, attempted now to do the like, but was
discovered, and put to death. Marching still forward they proceeded in three
encampings 45 miles through the Country of Babylon. In the third encamping at
midnight Cyrus set his men in order, thinking his brother to be near, and would
give him battle the next morning. The Graecians were in number 10400 Armed, and
2400 Targetiers, the Barbarians with Cyrus were ten Myriads (or 100000) besides
about 200 sythed Chariots. From hence in order of battle he marched some twelve
miles, thinking the King would have fought that day, because at the end of this
half days journey he found a Trench cast five fathoms broad, and three deep,
running up 45 miles into the Country, as far as the Wall of Media, where the
four Channels begin that derived out of the River Tigris, fall into Euphrates.
This Trench the King caused to be made after he heard that Cyrus was stirring,
who now passing it without any disturbance, he and all his Army were strongly
persuaded that the King determined not to fight; whence he had not so great
care of his March the next day, and the third day after he advanced sitting in
his Chariot: the most of his Army marched confusedly, many of the Soldiers
having their Arms laid upon the wains, and carriage of beasts.

37. Now it was time, the Market was full, and the place of encamping where
they should quarter was at hand, when Patagyas a Persian, one of the
faithfullest of Cyrus his Train was seen to come upon the spur, his horse
dropping with sweat, crying out in the Persian and Greek language that the King
was hard by, with an huge Army, ready and prepared for fight. This news made a
great confusion, all thinking they should be charged in that disorder, Cyrus
leaping from his Chariot, put on his Curace, and mounting on horsback, took his
Darts in his hand, and commanded the rest to Arm, and every man to take his
place. Clearchus stood in the point of the right Wing, by the River Euphrates,
Menon and his Regiment held the point of the left, and Cyrus himself the midst
with 600 hors-men Armed with great Curaces, and Tases, and all of them with
Casks, except he alone, who stood waiting the fight with his head unarmed,
according to the custom of Persia. The King had with him 90 Myriads (or 900000)
and 150 Chariots, having on both sides sythes prominent, and bearing straight
forth from the Axle-trees, and some from the former seat of the Chariot with
their points turned toward the ground, that they might cut in pieces whatsoever
they met and struck upon: His purpose was to send them with high speed against
the Ranks of the Graecians, to break and rent them asunder.

38. The Kings Army came on an equal and slow pace, in great silence,
quietness, and order, which amassed, and discouraged Cyrus, and the Graecians,
Artaxerxes and Cyrus join battle.
little expecting any such thing. Cyrus now galloping up to the right Wing,
cried out to Clearchus to lead the Graecians against the midst of the Enemies
battle, because the King was there, saying, that if he were overcome, there
would be no more for them to do. Clearchus seeing the midst of the battle,
and hearing from him that the King, by reason of his multitudes which stretched
out the body, was far without the point of the left Wing of the Grecian
Phalang, would not for all that draw away the right Wing from the River,
fearing to be confronted, and encompassed on both sides: but answered, he would
have a care that all things should go well. The word was betrayed before they
joined, so that they were forced to change it to Jupiter the savior, and
victory, after the giving of which the Graecians singing the Paean, and running
on with a shout, the Barbarians, before they came within an Arrows shot turned
their horses and fled, the other following the Chase with all speed, and crying
to one another not to haste too much, but to follow in good order. The Chariots
void of Guides were carried, some upon the Enemies themselves, some upon the
Graecians, who upon a forecast opened, and let them pass through, only some
were overthrown by fear, who notwithstanding were reported to have had no harm,
nor yet any other Grecian in this whole fight, one only excepted, who was
stricken with an Arrow in the left side.

Cyrus worshipped as King.
39. Cyrus beholding this sight much rejoiced, and was now worshipped as King by
those about him; notwithstanding he followed not the Chase, but keeping by him
his 600 horse, observed what the King would do, who being in the midst of his
Phalang, without the point of Cyrus his left Wing, and seeing no man to fight
against him on the contrary part, wound, and turned his battle to the left
hand, to overwing, and encompasse in his Enemies. Cyrus perceiving it, and
fearing, lest coming on the backs of the Graecians he should cut them in
pieces, galloped forth, and met him in front, and charging with his 600.
overcame, and put to flight the 6000 that were ordered before him, and with his
own hands (as was reported) slew Artagerses, one of his Generals. His 600
pursuing hotly were dispersed, except a few that were left with him, for the
most part such as usually sat at his Table, with which being accompanied, he
espied the King, and the Troup about him, and after he had said I see the man,
flew out directly against him, struck him on the breast, and wounded him
through the Curace, as Ctesias of Gnidus the Kings Physician related, who
reported also that he cured the Wound. Whilst Cyrus thus fought, one with a
Dart hit him a sore blow under the eye.

40. The King and Cyrus with their followers in defense of either of them thus
coping together, Cyrus was slain by the King, as his flatterers said, Xenoph.
ut supra and Plutarch. in Artaxerxe.
as others by a Carian, though Ctesias writes his death to have happened after
the King had withdrawn himself to an Hill, being first wounded besides the eye,
and then dispatched by a thrust into his left Leg, by a Caunian of a base
condition, who with other of his Companions had thrust himself, it being now
dark, Cyrus slain.
in amongst his followers. Here he died in the battle of Cunaxa a place distant
from Babylon 500 furlongs, or 60 odd miles, a man in the opinion of such as had
acquaintance with him, of a most Kingly disposition, and most worthy a Crown of
all the Persians that succeeded Cyrus the Great. Clearchus before the fight
advised him to keep himself behind the Army, and not to venture into danger, to
whom he replied as one who wished him to carry himself unworthy a Kingdom
whilst he fought for one. In the opinion of Plutarch, not so much his
rashness (though inexcusable) as the laziness, not to say cowardice, of
Clearchus is to be condemned, who having marched so many miles for no other
purpose than to place him in the Throne, not so much endeavored his safety and
Conquest, as his own ease and secu^ity: The event of the fight showed, that
none of those about the King would have endured the least brunt from the
Graecians, and that after they had been put to flight, and he with them, or
else killed in the place, the victory and Kingdom must have remained to Cyrus.
But this advantage was lost by Clearchus, who so placed his men that Artaxerxes
could not have desired a more convenient order, on his part, they being at
greatest distance from him and his Army, insomuch that he neither perceived
himself overcome by them, A.M. 3607. V.C. 353. Xenoph. and Plutarch. ut prius
and in Pericle.
and Cyrus was sooner slain than they could reap any fruit of their victory.
This battle was fought about the beginning of the fourth year of the 95
Olympiad, Epaenetus (or Xenaenaetus) being Archon at Athens, in the third
ending, or fourth beginning of Artaxerxes.

41. Artaxerxes commanded the head, and right hand of Cyrus to be cut off, and
following the Chase, chanced upon his Camp, which they plundered, and took
thence his Phocaean Concubine, called the wise and beautiful, whose name in
her own Country was Mitto, but by Cyrus called Aspasia, whom the King most
loved, and kept amongst his 360 Concubines. Now were he and the Graecians near
four miles asunder; these last giving Chase to such Enemies as stood before
them, as if they had been Conquerours of the whole Army; the other rifling the
Camp of the Graecians, as if his Army had gained the victory. After this, both
parties rallied again for a new engagement, but the Barbarians received not the
Graecians, but fled with greater speed than before. The Graecians having the
better in the battle, are ignorant of Cyrus his death.
Having persued them some way, the Graecians made an Holt, and rested
themselves, wondering they saw not Cyrus, being ignorant what was befallen him.
Then after some consultation what was to be done they returned to the Camp
about Supper time, where they found the most of their other goods rifled, and
especially the meat and drink, and the 400 Wains laden with Meal and Wine,
which Cyrus had prepared to relieve them, in case the Army should at any time
be driven to want. The most of them therefore were supperlesse, having also
wanted their Dinner that day: for that the King came in sight before they could
refresh themselves. Thus this day ended, and together with the story the first
book of the Ascent of Cyrus commonly ascribed to Xenophon as the Author.

42. The Graecians hearing of Cyrus his death were much troubled, Xenoph. An.
lib. 2.
and offered Ariaeus (a Persian, who followed Cyrus, and commanded his left
Wing) to place him in the Throne; but he refused it, for that, as he said,
there were many Persians in all respects better than he, who would never endure
that he should be King. Artaxerxes sent a Message to them to lay down their
Arms, and to repair to his Gate, there to submit themselves to his mercy. The
Coronels were divided in their opinions concerning it, and gave several answers
according to their apprehensions, but Clearchus, for all a doubtful one, viz.
that if they might be accounted as his friends, they should be better friends
having Arms, than delivering them up to any man; if no remedy there was but
War, they should better make War with Arms, than without, after they had
rendered them up. And whereas he offered them Truce, as long as they abode in
the same place, but threatened War if they stirred thence, he replied only,
that they would expect accordingly. Then resolved he, after he knew Ariaeus his
answer, and how he invited them to march back again into Ionia, They join with
Ariaeus, and retreat.
for that the sacrifice killed about marching against the King was not
prospitious, to join the Army unto his, which accordingly he did, Ariaeus, and
the Officers of the Graecians taking an Oath to be friends, confederates, and
not to betray one another. The League was entered into on this manner: They
killed a Boar, a Bull, a Wolf, and a Ram; and the Graecians dipped the point of
a sword, the Barbarians of a Spear in the blood of these beasts, being powered
out into the hollownesse of a Target.

43. The length of the journey from Ephesus in Ionia to the place of the battle
was 93 encampings, 535 parasangs, 16030 furlongs, Xenoph. Ascens. Cyri, lib. 2.
and Diodorus ad ann. 4. Olymp. 94.
2000 miles and above, which though very long, yet resolved they to take
another and longer way through Paphlagonia, because the former was destitute of
provisions. Then set they forward that way, marching more slowly for the better
gathering of necessaries, and after the King had somewhat recovered of his
wound, he pursued them, and pitched his Tents hard by theirs; but with the
noise of them his men were so affrighted, that some of the nearest to them
removed their Tents, The King pursues and is forced to dismiss them.
and on the next day setting their men in order for battle, he who before had
made such large demands, sent and offered them truce, and covenanted to let
them have free passage through his Territories till they came to the Sea, and
afforded them provisions for their money, which was also granted to all the
Mercenaries who served under Ariaeus (or Aridaeus) and Clearchus. Then
proceeded the Greeks on their journey, and the King returned to Babylon, where
rewarding those that had best deserved on him in the last battle, he judged the
service of Tissaphernes to have been most eminent, therefore as a reward
(amongst several other noble gifts) he gave him his own daughter to wife, and
the government of such places as formerly had been under Cyrus, binding him to
him thereby so, as he proved ever most faithful to him.

44. Tissaphernes seeing how the King was incensed against the Graecians,
promised him to destroy them all, if he were but furnished with Forces to that
purpose, Tissaphernes intrappeth their officers.
and could but withdraw Ariaeus from them, by whom he doubted not but they
might easily be betrayed. The King accepting his offer, gave him leave to choose
of the most valiant of his Army as many as he would, with which he followed
after, and incamping near to them, sent for Clearchus and the other Coronels to
come to him, pretending he had somewhat for their good to say to them. They
with the Captains of the several Companies going to him, with 200 more (who
went to buy Victuals) he secured the Coronels called into his Tent, and killed
the Captains at the door with the other 200, of which one chanced to escape
with the news thereof to the Camp. The Coronels were sent to the King, who put
them all to death except Menon. The Soldiers at first greatly terrified, having
now no body left to command or lead them, by the advice of Xenophon made choice
of other Leaders, amonst whom Cheirisophus was chief, and he himself was one,
being elected into the place of Proxenus, Xenoph. Exped. lib. 3.
who being his ancient friend and guest sent for him, and promised him if he
would come, to make Cyrus his friend, who, as he esteemed him, would be more to
be prized than his own Country. He communicated the matter to Socrates the
Philosopher and his Master, who, for that Cyrus his interest seemed cross to
that of the City of Athens, The Soldiers make a new choice, in which Xenophon
is one.
seeming to stand with the Lacedaemonians, advised him to consult the Oracle of
Delphos. Thither he went, and enquired how he might best accomplish his journey,
to which was answered, that he must sacrifize to those gods to whom he ought to
sacrifize, which he reporting again to Socrates, he blamed him for so
propounding his question, alleging he ought to have asked whether he should
travel or no, and not as one resolved already to do it; but seeing it was so,
he must do as he was bidden, and accordingly he followed Cyrus to Sardis, where
Proxenus presented him to him.

45. The Graecians marching on toward Paphlagonia, Idem ibid. and Diodorus ut
prius.
were dogged at the heels by Tissaphernes, who being afraid of the valor of
desperate men, never durst engage in any battle with them, but only flancked
them or fell in upon their Rear, as he could have opportunity, and yet followed
them as far as the borders of the Carduchians, after which, seeing he could not
do them any considerable hurt, he departed with his men toward Ionia another
way. The Carducians a warlike Nation and at Enmity with the King, and much
exercised in slinging of great and massy stones, Xenoph. lib. 4 Diorus.
much disturbed the Graecians in their passage of their Country, and in the
passing the Mountains thereof were spent seven days. With great difficulty and
danger having passed it, they went over the River Centritis into Armenia; of
which Artabazus being then Governor, entered into league with them, and
suffered them quietly to pass; but in traveling through the Mountains they
were near all being overwhelmed in the snow, the discerning of ways being
taken away thereby. The whole Army had perished also by extreme cold, had they
not light upon some Villages near hand, wherein being furnished with plenty of
necessaries, they refreshed themselves. The houses stood within the ground,
into which the Men descended by stairs, and their Cattle by desents made for
that purpose. Having here stayed eight days, they journyed thence to the River
Phasis

46. Having continued four days at this River, they marched through the
Country of the Tacchi and Phasiani, by whom being opposed, they fought, and
made great slaughter of them, and then seized upon their Villages, which were
plentifully furnished with such things as they wanted, they there rested
fifteen days. Thence marching through the Territories of the Chalcidensians,
in seven encampings they came to the River Harpasus, and thence coming into the
Plains of the Tascutin, they there refreshed themselves three days, and
proceeding, in four encampings they arrived at a great City called Gymnasia.
The Prince of this Country entering into a League with them, furnished them with
Guides to the Sea, of which, after fifteen days being got up to the hill
Chenius, they got a sight afar of, at which the Front shouted so for joy, that
those in the Rear thinking they had been set upon by some Enemy, prepared
themselves for a Fight, and there laid they a great heap of stones as a
Monument to Posterity, of the spoils obtained from the Barbarians, and the
immortal memory of their Expedition.

47. Then came they into the Country of the Macri, with whom they made a
League, by taking and receiving a Spear, according to the custom of these
Barbarians. Having got over their Mountains they came into the Territories of
the Coleti, where a great multitude opposing them, they made no small slaughter
of the Inhabitants, and made great spoil, where they found a kind of Honey, of
which whosoever did eat, became according to the quantity eaten, drunken, mad,
or as dead, but the next day at the same hour returned to their right Senses,
and after three or four days arose as having received some Medicine. Thence in
two encampings they come to Trapezond a Grecian City well inhabited, They came
to Trapezond upon the Euxine Sea.
situate upon the Euxine Sea, being a Colony of the Sinopeans, placed in the
Colchian Country. Here Jason with his Companions are reported to have arrived
with their ship Argos. They sacrifized to Hercules and Jupiter, and celebrated
Games of Exercise, Exped. Cyri, l. 5.
and hence was Cherisophus sent to Byzantium to provide ships for the
transportation of them home, and for him here they stayed thirty days, but
after that term he returning not, their provisions growing scarce, Diodorus ut
supra.
though they had made excursions both by Sea and Land, they put on shipboard
(having obtained a little shipping of the Trapezuntans) the sick, all those
above forty years of age, with the women and children, and passed in three
days to Cerasunt a Grecian City situate upon the Sea, being also a Colony of
the Sinopeans in the Colchian Country. Here they remained ten days, and taking
a muster, found 8600 remaining of those that ascended with Cyrus into Persia,
the rest being consumed by the Enemies hand, or Snow, or sickness. Here also
they divided the money that arose out of the sale of Captives, the tenth part
of which the Officers took into their hands, being severed as an offering to be
made to Apollo and Diana of Ephesus; every one keeping and preserving a share
for his gods.

48. From Cerasunt they came into the Country of the Mesynecans, the veriest
Barbarians they had met with in the whole journey, which they passed by force in
eight encampings, and in three more that of the Tibarenes through which they
came to Cotyora a Grecian Colony also of the Sinopaeans. Thus far the Army
marched on foot, the whole length of the retreat from the place of the battle
in the Babylonian Territories hither, being 122 encampings, 620 parasangs,
10820 furlongs, 1352 miles and something more. At Cotyora they continued 50
days, making encursions upon the neighboring people of Paphlagonia. Then the
Heracleans and Synopeans, a Colony of the Milesians in Paphlagonia, furnished
hem with shipping, into which they put themselves and their baggage, and sailed
away, Xenoph. lib. 6. Diodorus.
Cherisophus meeting them with a few Vessels. Holding on their course they
sailed by Jason's shore, where the Ship Argo is said to have anchored, and by
the mouths of the Rivers Thermodon, Halys, and Parthenius, by which after they
had passed, they arrived at Heraclea a Grecian City and Colony of the
Megaraeans, situate in the Territory of the Maryandens, and came to anchor near
the Cherronnesus or Peninsula of Acherousia, where Hercules is said to have
fetched the Dog Cerberus out of Hell; the marks being there shown of his
descent, and the depth of the place, being more than two furlongs.

49. Here the Soldiers, through the persuasion of Lycen an Achaian, making
unreasonable demands of money from the Heracleans, they shut their gates upon
them, They part asunder at Heraclea.
and provided for their own defense, which bred a sedition in the Army, so that
they parted asunder. The Arcadians and Achaeans being more than 4500 all heavy
armed, sailed away first, having got shipping of the Heracleans, that falling
suddenly upon the Bithynians, they might prevent the rest, and make the
greatest prey. Cherisophus a little before chosen General, having 1300 armed,
and 700 Peltasts, (who were the Thracians that followed Clearchus) marched on
foot from Heraclea, and as soon as he entered Thrace, led along by the Seacoast
being now sick, and presently dead of a Medicine he took in an Ague. Xenophon
with 1700 Armed, 300 Peltasts, and 40 Horse, taking shipping, landed in the
confines of Thrace, and marched through the midst of the Land. With great
difficulty passed they through the Country on foot, the Thracians of Asia and
the Bithynians, grievously afflicting them, till meeting together again, they
resolved no more to part, and decreed it should be death for any one to move
such a thing. Then came they safe, though with great difficulty, to Chrysopolis
a City in Chalcedonia, whence without much trouble some returned home, Xenoph.
l. 7. Diodorus.
others were employed by Seuthes the King of Thrace; and after that Thymbro
joining them to the rest of the Grecian Forces, They return home.
made War with them against Tissaphernes.

50. The Governors of the King's Provinces through which they journyed were
Artymas of Lydia, Artacamas of Phrygia, Mithridates of Lycaonia and Cappadocia;
of Cilicia Syenesis, of Phoenicia and Arabia Dernes, of Syria and Assyria
Belesis, of Babylonia Roparas, of Media Arbacas, of the Phasiens and Hesperites
Teribazus. The Governors of the King's Provinces at their return.
The Carduchans, Chalybes, Chaldaeans, Macrons, Cholcans, Mosynaecans, Coitans,
and Tibarens, were free people, and under no man's subjection. Paphlagonia was
ruled by Corylas, the Bithynians by Pharnabazus, the Europaean Thracians by
Seuthes. The total number of the Ascent and Descent, was 212 encampings, 1150
parasangs, 34255 furlongs, 4281 miles and more. The time of the Ascent and
Descent one year and three months. Thus these Strangers wanting all things,
ignorant of the Countries through which they passed, over precipitous
Mountains, straight and (almost) impassable ways, notwithstanding the malice
of Enemies, sharpness of air, and difficulty of the Soil, by the wonderful
Providence of God, and singular prudence of Xenophon, returned home into
Greece, as we have it described by Xenophon himself, though the seven Books of
this Expedition, notwithstanding the constant opinion of Antiquity, are
adjudged by a late Learned Man (by reason of the disagreement of their manner
of writing from his other works) from him, and are ascribed to Themistogenes
the Syracusian, whom Hellen. 3o.
elsewhere he mentions to have related these matters. However this service
performed to Cyrus cost him the loss of his Country, being for that banished
by the Athenians his Countrymen; but the Lacedaemonians taking pity of him,
gave him some Lands in the Country of Elis and the Territories of Triphyllis,
whence we may very well fetch an account of his writing that elegant Treatise
of the form of their Commonwealth. Plutarch in Artaxerxe.


51. In this mean time whilst the Graecians were on their way homewards,
Parysatis the Queen Mother of Persia greatly lamented the death of her son
Cyrus, and meditated nothing but revenge upon such as had been instruments in
his death, whom one way or other getting into her hands, she killed with most
exquisite torments. Parysatis rages against such as had any hand in the death
of her son Cyrus.
The Carian, who vaunted he, and no other, had killed him being designed by
Artaxerxes to be beheaded, because he robbed him of the glory of so valiant an
action, she begged of the King, that she might have the punishing him, and so
delivered him to those, who for ten days tormented him; then dug out his
eyes, and lastly made an end of him by pouring melted brass into his ears.
Mithridates guilty of the same Crime of boasting, and thereby greatly incensing
the King, who would have had all men to believe that he alone in a single Duel
had slain his brother, was condemned to be put to death after an odd kind of
punishment full of cruelty then in use in Persia. The Malefactor was laid on
his back between two hollow things, in form like to Boats, so fitted together
that his head, hands, and feet might^ly out, and the rest of the body be
contained within. Being thus made fast meat was given to him, and if he would
not receive it, he was forced to eat by pricking of his eyes; and when he did
eat, instead of drink, honey and milk mixed together were powered into him,
being so placed as ever to have his eyes against the Sun. Hereby it came to
pass, that his face would be wholely covered with flies; and doing that within
the Engine, which a man needs must who keeps constantly eating and drinking,
from the putrefaction of the Excrements were Maggots and Worms bred, which
creeping up into the entrails fed upon the body, so that the miserable man
being dead, and the upper part of the Engine removed, they might see the flesh
devoured, and swarms of filth sticking on the Carcass: After this manner was
Mithridates by degrees extinct, after seventeen days.

52. Parysatis after this, having won from Artaxerxes her son at Dice, Idem
ibid.
the Eunuch Megates, who had cut off the head and hands of Cyrus, caused him to
be flead alive. Her study then was how to rid herself of Statira her
daughter-in-law, whom she never cared for, now hated mortally, and emulated her
by reason of her hatred against Cyrus, and her power with the King her husband,
so as she resolved in the procurement of her destraction to hazard her own
safety. Being now in appearance reconciled, and all old things forgotten, so as
they met and supped together, she thence took occasion secretly to work her
death. The Bird Rhyntaces, wherein Parysatis poysoneth Statira.
There was a bird in Persia, called Rhyntaces, in which being nothing
superfluous, or of excrement, all the inward parts were filled with fat. This,
as Ctefias wrote, she cut it in two with a knife, whereof the one side was
only poisoned, and then taking the clear half to her self, she gave the other
which the poison had touched unto Statira, who suspecting nothing, for that she
see her eat herself of the bird before her, did eat it up, and died after great
convulsions and torment. She suspected her before her death, and possessed the
King with the matter, who knew sufficiently the cruel, and implacable
disposition of his mother. He presently with Tortures examined her nearest
servants, but she kept Gygis a woman who had been accessory to the fact, and
would not give her up to him, till at length having notice that she should go
out of the house by night, he surprised, and condemned her to die the death due
to poysoners by the Persian Law, which was, that the head of the Malefactor
being laid on a great stone, with another it was broken and flatted. As for his
Mother he hurt her not at all, either by word or deed, but she desiring to go
to Babylon, he sent her, adding only this, that he would not see that City so
long as she lived. This was the state of the Domestic affairs of Artaxerxes.

53. After the overthrow of Cyrus, Diodorus ad an. 1. Olymp. 95.
he sent down Tissaphernes (not Pharnabazus, as is falsely written in Diodorus)
to the Seacoasts to recover them into his power, the Governors of which
fearing now to pay dearly for their compliance with Cyrus, sent to make their
peace with this new General, and sought all ways possible to be received into
his favor. But Tamos a man of prime note amongst them, and Governor of Ionia,
shipping his goods, and all his sons (except one, named Cyaos, who afterward
became Captain of the Kings forces) sailed for fear of Tissaphernes into Egypt
to Psammitichus the King, hoping for former courtesies to be received; but he,
without consideration of former benefits, to get his ships and money to
himself, murdered his friend with his Children.

In the mean time the Ionians fearing Tissaphernes, Idem ibid. Xenoph. Hellen.
lib. 3. Justin. lib. 6. init.
and desirous to enjoy their liberty, sent to the Lacedaemonians, now the
chiefest State in Greece, desiring, that being the Captains, and Protectors of
all Greece, they would not neglect them Originally of the same stock, but
endeavor that they might enjoy their liberty, retain their Lands, and not
utterly be destroyed, as danger seemed to threaten them from Tissaphernes, whom
they had incensed by revolting from him to Cyrus. They, who were nothing
contented with the doubling of their power by the accession of that of Athens
lately subdued, but still according to the nature of men desiring more, began
to cast in their heads how they might attain to the Empire of Asia, being also
encouraged by the retreat of their Contrymen, did not unwillingly receive
the embassy; but promising them speedy relief, first sent to Tissaphernes,
desiring him not to offer any violence to the Greek Towns, but he neglecting
their Message, and falling upon Cumae, in the Territories of which he did much
harm, and took many prisoners, they then created Thymbro their Captain General
against the King, giving him 1000 of their own Citizens, and order to take up
as many from amongst their associates as he should think convenient.

Thimbro sent to the aid of the Greek Cities, falls on Magnesia.
54. Thimbro then with these marched to Corinth, Diodorus and Xenoph. ut prius.
where making them up to the number of 5000. besides 300 Athenian horse, he
thence sailed to Ephesus. Having there out of the Associates and others, raised
2000 men more, he removed, and fell upon Magnesia, a Town subject to
Tissaphernes, which he took at the first onset, and presently after attempted
Tralles, a Town of Ionia; but it being to no purpose, he retreated to Magnesia,
which being Fortified with no Wall, fearing that Tissaphernes might after his
departure recover it, he removed it to an Hill hard by, named Thorax. Then
invaded he, and harazed the Enemies country, but hearing that Tissaphernes was
coming toward him with a great power of horse, he thought himself unable to
graple with him, and therefore returned unto Ephesus. Not long after upon
promise of pay he procured Xenophon his forces to join with him, with which
then he took the field against Tissaphernes, whereupon Pergamus yielded to him,
together with Teuthrania, and Halisarnia Governed by Eurysthenes and Procles,
who were descended from Demaratus the Lacedaemonian. Other Towns also were
delivered up to him, and some he took by force, till at length he sat down
before Larissa, called the Egyptian, which attempting for some time to no
purpose, his Superiors at Lacedaemon were nothing satisfied with his
management of the War, so that he received orders from the Ephori to leave
Larissa, and remove the Army into Caria. He obeyed, and when he was come on his
way as far as Ephesus, Dercyllidas (a man so famous for his rare invention and
cunning, Dercyllidas succeeds him.
that he got the surname of Sisyphus) being appointed his Successor, there met
him, and discharged him of his employment. Returning home, he was accused by
the Associates for giving his Soldiers liberty to spoil the friends and
confederates of the State, and for that was banished. Xenoph. ibid. Justin.
lib. 6. init. Diodorus ad Olymp. 95. an. 2.


55. Dercyllidas taking the Army into his hands, and not ignorant how he had to
do with two Persian Lieutenants, Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus, who feared and
hated each other; lest he should be overmatched with both, he resolved if he
could to make peace with one of them. He had conceived some distaste against
the later for an affront he put upon him, when he formerly served under
Lysander in Asia: wherefore he made peace with Tissaphernes upon certain
conditions, and lead his Army into Aeolis, without any hurt to the confederates
in the way, which was under the Command of Pharnabazus, where taking nine
Cities in eight days, and getting into his hands all the Cities of Troas, he
consulted by what means he might so quarter his Soldiers in Winter, as not to
be burthensom to the Associates as Thimbro was, and yet prevent Pharnabazus
from troubling the Cities with the excursions of horse, of which he had good
store. He sent then presently to Pharnabazus to offer him either war, or
peace, who making choice of a Truce, for that he stood in fear of Phrygia,
which bordered upon Aeolis, and where he had his seat, he thereupon lead his
forces into Bithynia to Winter there; the other not being unwilling he should
so do, because the Bithynians were often troublesome to him.

56. In the beginning of Spring Dercyllidas marching out of Bithynia came to
Lampsacus, where he met with three Lacedaemonians sent from the State to
signify to him the Prorogation of his Command for another year, who also by
order from the Ephori, rebuked the Soldiers for the injuries offered by them
to the associates in the time of Thimbro, and commended them for their great
moderation last year, warning them for the time to come, to which one of the
Officers answered (who had followed Cyrus) that the Soldiers were one and the
same, but that the change of Generals produced a change in their behavior. The
messengers being departed out of Asia, he sent again to Pharnabazus, offering
him either peace, or war, as before, who making the same choice, he out off
hand passed over the Hellespont, and by the hands of his Soldiers, amongst
whom the work was divided, fortified the Isthmus of the Cherronesus of Thrace
with a Wall, thereby to defend it from incursions of the Thracians, who now had
falln upon it, and whom to repel he was sent for. He so encouraged the minds
of the Soldiers by hope of reward, that the work being began in Spring was
finished before Autumn, being thenceforth a great advantage to the inhabitants.
After this he returned into Asia, where visiting the Cities he found that the
Exiles of Chius having seized upon Atarna, there lurked, and lived upon such
booty as they could make out of Ionia; wherefore he besieged the place, though
strong, and well victualled, and after a siege of eight months forcing them to
yield, he committed the care of the Town to Draco a Pellenian, and returned
unto Ephesus.

57. In the mean while Pharnabazus, after he had made Truce with him, Diodorus
ibid. Justia. ibid. Pausan. in Atticis and Isocrates in Evagora and ad Philip.
went up to the King, to whom he accused Tissaphernes, as not having repelled
the Lacedaemonians out of Asia, but suffered them there to continue at his cost
and damage, alleging how unworthy a thing it was to fight more with money than
Arms, and to restrain an Enemy more with rewards than valor. He advised him to
make ready a Fleet, and give the Command thereof to Conon the Athenian, a man
of great experience in things that concerned War, who since the disaster of his
Country sojourned with Evagoras the King of Cyprus. Artaxerxes yielding, gave
him 500 Talents to provide ships; and Conon hoping by this means to do some
special service for his Country, undertook the charge, but the Fleet being not
yet ready, he sailed with forty Phoenician Vessels into Cilicia, Conon the
Athenian is made Admiral to Artaxerxes.
there to set all things in order. About the same time the Ionians sent to
Lacedaemon to declare to that State, that if Caria were invaded in which
Tissaphernes his principal seat was, there might be hope that he would leave
them to their Laws and Liberty. This so wrought with the Spartans, that the
Ephori thereupon sent order to Dercyllidas to lead his forces into that
Country, and to Pharaces their Admiral to sail thither with his Fleet.

Tissaphernes though impeached by Pharnabazus continued in his power.
58. Notwithstanding the secret accusations of Pharnabazus, Xenoph. and Diodorus
ut supra.
yet still was Tissaphernes trusted by the King, and so far as with the Chief
power in the War against the Graecians; insomuch that Pharnabazus, though much
against his will, was forced to come to him at such time as Dercyllidas invaded
Caria. He first carried him thither, where taking what order their affairs
required, and re-inforcing their Garrisons, they returned into Ionia, and
Dercyllidas perceiving they had crossed the River Maeander, after he had
consulted with Pharaces the Admiral about the preservation of the Ionians at
that time but naked of defense, he also passed the River after them. The
Persian forces were in number 20000 foor, and 10000 horse; Dercyllidas his
whole Army amounted but to 7000, and though the Peloponnesians well enough
behaved themselves, yet such as came from Priene, and out of the Ionian Cities
and Islands had listed themselves under him, some of them throwing their Arms
into the Corn (which grew plentifully by the River,) took them to their heels,
and the rest sufficiently evidenced what they would do if they came to fight.
Yet Tissaphernes having not forgot how such Greeks as followed Cyrus had put
them to it, and judging all their Countrymen to be of the same metal, would by
no means hear of fighting, which Pharnabazus sore pressed him to; Dercyllidas
makes an agreement with them.
but sent to Dercyllidas, desiring to come to interview. After Hostages given
and received on both sides, they met, and an accommodation was made on these
terms: That the King should leave all the Greek Cities to their own liberty;
that the Greekish Forces should all depart out of his dominions, with all
Lacedaemonian Governors from his Cities, and that a truce should be for so
long a time, till both parties could hear from their Superiors, concerning
their resolutions herein. Then marched away the Armies to their quarters, the
Persian to Tralles, and that of the Greeks to Lexcophrys.

59. Notwithstanding this truce entered into by these Captains, Xenoph. Hellen.
lib. 3. Plutarch. and Aemilius Probus in Agesilao.
yet the rigging of a new Fleet went forwards in Phoenicia, and nothing do we
hear concerning the confirmation of the Treaty by the King. It happening that one
Herodas a Syracusan, living with a Seaman in Phoenicia, and taking notice how
great diligence was used in preparing a Fleet, which he heard should be
completed to the number of 300 Vessels, he took the first opportunity of a
ship and sailed into Greece, giving notice that such a Navy was providing by
the King, and Tissaphernes, though he knew not, as he said, upon what design.
The Lacedaeminians hereat startled, began to look about them, when Agesilaus
one of their Kings, through the persuasion of Lysander, offered himself to
undertake an Expedition into Asia against the Persian, provided they would send
with him thirty of his choosing, by whose advice he might manage affairs;
Agesilaus the Lacedaemoninn King invadeth Asia.
give him 2000 men from home, and 6000 more of the associates, which being
granted him, together with provisions for half a year, he sailed with Lysander
(who had procured himself to be one of the 300, hoping by this means to restore
the Decemvirates in the Asian Cities, which he having erected, the Ephori had
again dissolved) unto Ephesus with such speed, that he landed his Forces before
the Persian Lieutenants knew so much as of his coming, and thereby took them at
unawares.

60. At Ephesus he raised new Forces to the number of 4000, Xenoph. ibid. and
in Agesilao cum Plutarcho and Aemilio Probo, sive Cor. Nepot.
and increased his Army to 10000 Foot and 400 Horse, with which he took the
field, a great company of rascally men, not inferior in number to the other,
following the Camp out of greediness for prey. Tissaphernes sent to him to
know the cause of his coming into Asia, to whom he answered, that it was to
restore the Greek Cities to their liberty; to which the other replied, desiring
a cessation of Arms for so long a time, as he could send to the King, hoping to
obtain from him that which he required. Agesilaus gave little credit to his
bare word, thinking, as indeed it was, that he protracted only the time; but
swearing most solemnly, that without any deceit he would do what in him lay to
procure a Peace, he also upon this condition swear to hold the Truce; but
Tissaphernes having little regard of his oath, sent only to the King for new
forces to join with his old ones, which though Agesilaus sufficiently knew, yet
kept he his Faith inviolable in preservation of the Truce; and when he
denounced war against him, except he would forthwith quit Asia, he gave notice
thereof joyfully to his Soldiers, and sent to the Ionians, Aeolians, and the
Greeks living upon the Hellespont, to dispatch their supplies unto Ephesus.
Contrary then to the expectation of Tissaphernes (who thought he would have
made for Caria) he invaded Phrygia, where setting upon the Cities at unawares,
he got much booty, and without any loss came to the confines of Daschylium,
where his Forlorn-hope meeting with a Party of Horse belonging to Pharnabazus,
were worsted, losing twelve Men, and two Horses, till he with the Infantry
coming in to their relief, the Barbarians retired with the loss of one Man,
and Agesilaus spending the greatest part of Summer in wasting Phrygia, marched
back with his Army mightily enriched, and came back in Autumn unto Ephesus,
where he took up his Winter quarters. Diodorus ad Olymp. 96. ann. 1.


61. Whilst the Lacedaemonians thus acted in Asia against Artaxerxes, that they
might strengthen their interest abroad, they sent to Nephereus the King of
Egypt, which now for a good space had revolted from the Persian Empire, to
procure him to join with them in the War, who sent them 100 Galleys, and 500000
measures of Wheat for a supply. Pharax then with a Navy consisting of 120
Sail departing from Rhodes, sailed to Caunus, where he set upon Conon, who
there had forty Ships lying at anchor; but Artaphernes and Pharnabazus coming
in to the relief of the Ships and Place with great Forces, he retired back to
Rhodes, the Inhabitants of which not long after expelled his Fleet, and
revolting to the Persians received Conon and his Navy. It happened after this
revolt, that those that brought the Corn from Egypt being gnorant of what had
happened, thrust their Ships into the Haven, which Conon and the Rhodians
seizing upon, thereby well furnished the City. Afterward came in to Conon 90
Galleys more: 10 from Cilicia, and the rest out of Phoenicia, of which the
petty King of Sidon had the charge. And here the soldiers of Conon mutinied for
want of pay, Justin lib. 6.
who therefore more earnestly called for their Arrears, because their service
was the stricter under so great a Captain.

62. Agesilaus knowing that without Horse he could not well carry on the War,
in Champain places, in the Wintertime took order about it, Xenoph. Plutarch.
and Aemilius Probus ut prius.
permitting such rich men in the City as would not fight themselves, to furnish
him with each of them an Horse and a Man in their stead. Then upon the approach
of the Spring, drawing together all his Forces to Ephesus, he trained and
exercised them in the management of Arms, that City serving them as the shop of
War, during these Exercises. When he had thus prepared their minds, and
encouraged them by rewards, and otherwise, he gave out he would march straight
into the most fortified places of the Enemies Country, further to exercise them
for the Fight. Tissaphernes thinking this rumor to be spread on purpose to
deceive him, again marched into Caria, whither he thought indeed he meant to
go; but Agesilaus, as he said, invaded the Territories about Sardis, which
wasting round about, on the fourth day his men straggling about for plunder,
were set upon by the Enemies Horse, which slew many of them. He going in to
their relief, understanding the Persians had no Foot there, and considering how
he had all things in a readiness, resolved to make something of it, so that
falling on in good earnest, he got a considerable Victory near the River
Pactolus, and plundering the enemies Camp, from what belonged to friend and
foe, got booty worth above 70 talents, amongst which was Camels which he
carried with him into Greece.

63. Tissaphernes at the time of this engagement (if we may believe Xenophon,
who accompanied Agesilaus in this Expedition, Diodorus and Justin ut supra.
Aemil. Probus in Conone.
rather than Diododorus or Pausanias) was at Sardis, and upon that account was
accused by the Persians to have forsaken and betrayed them. About this time it
happened that Conon the Admiral of the Persian Fleet, having to no purpose for
a long time solicited the King by letters, for money to pay his men, resolved
now himself to go to him, Pharnabazus egging him on that he might accuse
Tissaphernes of treachery. Leaving then his Fleet to the care of two Athenians,
he came to Thapsacus in Syria, and passing down Euphrates unto Babylon, made
application to Tithraustes, to whom he signified that he would speak with the
King. But none being to be admitted to his presence, except he adored him, he
transacted his business by letters and messengers, and prevailed to have
Tissaphernes adjudged an enemy, the Lacedaemonians to be prosecuted with War,
and to choose whom he pleased for the paying of moneys; and with great gifts
returned he to the Sea, having commission to charge the Phoenicians, Cyprians,
and other maritime Inhabitants, with long ships, and having Pharnabazus for his
associate, according to his desire, to provide a Navy for the defense of the
Seas against the next Summer.

64. These accusations of Tissaphernes were so prosecuted by Parysatis who bore
him mortal hatred in the behalf of her son Cyrus, that Artaxerxes made
Tithraustes Captain General of the War in his stead, Xenoph. Diodorus ut prius.
Plutarch. in Artaxerxe and Agesilao. Polyaenus Stragem. lib. 7.
enjoining him to make him away, and granting letters to all the Cities and
Lieutenants to be obedient to him. He gave him two letters at parting, whereof
the one was written to Tissaphernes, being a pretended Commission to him to
have full and absolute power in the War: the other to Ariaeus Lieutenant of
Larissa, commanding him to assist Tithraustes in the apprehending of him. He
delivered the letter as soon as he came to Collosse in Phrygia, whither Ariaeus
procured Tissaphernes to come, as to advise together about the War, and as he
was in the Bath having laid by his scimiter, caused his servants to take him,
and sent him to Tithraustes, who carrying him as far as Celaenae cut off his
head, which he conveyed to the King. Tissaphernes put to death.
He sent it to his Mother, who greatly rejoiced at the sight, with her also the
Grecian women who had lost their sons or husbands through his fraud; and the
whole Nation in the death of their mortal Enemy.

65. Tithraustes now sent to Agesilaus to acquaint how the incendiary betwixt
the King and the Graecians was deservedly punished, so that his Master thought
it reasonable that he would withdraw his Forces out of Asia, Xenoph. Hellen. 3o.
and the Greek Cities being left to their own laws, should pay their accustomed
tribute to him. He denied to do any thing herein without consent of the
Lacedaemonian State, Plutarch. in Agesilao. Pausan. in Lacon.
whereupon they agreed that Tithraustes paying him thirty talents for the
maintenance of his Army, he should depart into the parts subject to
Pharnabazus, till such time as he understood the will of his Superiors. Then
led he toward Phrygia, when in the way he met with an order come from
Lacedaemon, whereby not only the power at Land, but over the Navy also was
given unto him, over which he might make Admiral whomsoever he pleased. He then
to gratify the Cities and those who at home studied to pleasure him, made up a
Navy of 120 ships, over which he set Pisander his wives brother, a man indeed
greedy of honor, and of prompt boldness, but of little experience in such
great concernments.

66. Tithraustus taking notice hereof, and how Agesilaus did not intend to quit
Asia, but rather conceived great hopes of overthrowing the King, resolved there
was no way to be taken but to find his Countrymen such work at home, that they
must necessarily recall him. Xenoph. ibid. Plutarch. in Artax. and Agesilao.
Pausan. ibid.
To this purpose he sent one Timocrates a Rhodian into Greece, with gold to the
value of 50 Talents, to the intent that he might therewith corrupt the leading
and the principal men of the several Cities, and engage them into a War with
the Athenians against Lacedaemon, which was accordingly brought about.
Agesilaus in the mean time entering Phrygia, which was subject to Pharnabazus,
about Autumn, spoiled the Country, and by fair or foul means took many Cities.
Thence marched he into Paphlagonia, which he withdrew from the obedience of the
Persian, and received 1000 Horse and 2000 Foot from Cotys the King, and after
this he went to Dascylium, where Pharnabazus his Palace was, and there, it
being a place plentious of provisions, he took up his Winter Quarters.

67. Whilst his Soldiers straggled abroad for booty in great contempt of the
Barbarians, Pharnabazus light on a Party of Horse, and thereof slew 100. Three
or four days after Herippidas (the principal of the 30 Counselors who
accompanied Agesilaus) having notice from Spithridates, that Pharnabazus lay
encamped in a large Village named Cave, 20 miles of, procured of Agesilaus 4000
Foot and as many Horsemen as he could persuade to accompany him, Pharnabazus
defeated.
with which beginning his march as soon as it was dark, by break of day he fell
in upon the Enemies Camp, killing most of the Mysians who kept the watch before
it. Then the Persians fled; Pharnabazus fearing to be besieged, so that he
wandered from place to place like the Scythian Nomades, and Herippidas got much
rich plunder, amongst which the costly stuff of Pharnabazus, but seeking out
too austerely all the concealed prey, he took from Spithridates and the
Paphlagonians all that they had gotten; with which disgrace being exceedingly
affected, they went away by night to Ariaeus lying at Sardis, who had formerly
rebelled and waged War with Cyrus against the King. At this departure of
Spithridates and Megabates his son (who was most dear to him) Agesilaus was so
troubled, as also at that of the Paphlagonian Forces, that nothing more vexed
him of all things that fell out in this Isiatick Expedition.

68. Afterward Agesilaus and Pharnabazus met together to treat about a Peace
by the procurement of Apollophanes of Cyzicus, Plutarch in Agesilao, Artax. and
Apotheg. Laconicis. Xenoph. Hellen. lib. 4o.
who was guest unto them both. Pharnabazus professed that if he were not made
General of the War he would revolt from the King; but if he should be, he would
carry it on against the other with all his might, and to his utmost ability.
Agesilaus on the other side promised he would speedily depart out of his
Territotories, and as long as any other remained to make War upon, would spare
him and his estate. Upon the approaching of Spring, he led down his Forces into
the Plains of Thebes, where pitching his Tents near the Temple of Dian^
Astyrina, he levied all the Forces he could; for he intended an Expedition into
the upper Countries, being confident to turn all in his passage from their
obedience to the King, his fame being spread abroad far and near, having spent
now two years in the War. But the gold sent into Greece the last year by
Tithraustes, had by this time so wrought upon the humors of the several States
there, that they conspired together in a great and dangerous War against the
Lacedaemonians, who thereupon sent to Agesilans, setting him a day by which he
must needs be at home with his Army for the preservation of his Country.
Agesilaus called home through the device of Tithraustes.
It troubled him much to leave Asia, for the conquest of which he was in so
fair a way, yet he resolved to obey the call of his distressed Country, seeing
(as he himself expressed in his answer to the Ephori) a General then truly and
justly commands, when he obeys the Laws, and the Ephori or whatsoever
Magistrates else are in the City. At his departure he is reported to have said,
that the King expelled him Asia by 30000 Archers, wittily intimating the same
number of Daricks stamped with the effigies of an archer, whereby he had
procured the conspiracy of the Grecian Cities against Lacedaemon.

69. Having passed the Hellespont, and being come to Amphipolis, he received
news of a Victory obtained by the Lacedaemonians about Corinth, whereupon he
dispatched Dercyllidas presently back into Asia, Xenoph. ibid. Plutarch in
Agesilao. Xenoph. Hellen. lib. 4. Diodorus ad ann. 2. Olymp. 96. Corn. Nepos i^
Conone.
by these tidings to confirm the associated Cities. In the mean time while he
marched through Macedonia and Thessalie toward the Straights of Thermopylae,
Conon the Athenian and Pharnabazus, Admirals of the Persian Fleet, lay about
Doryma a place in the Chersonesus, with about 90 Galleys, who having notice
that the enemies Fleet were about Gnidus, prepared themselves for an
engagement. Periarchus (or Periander) the Lacedaemonian Admiral weying anchor
sailed from Gnidus with 120 ships to Physeus another place in the Chersonesus,
and thence directed his course strait against the Kings Fleet, and at the first
had the better of it, but the Persian Galleys coming in apace to the relief of
their friends, the Lacedaemonian confederates began to shift for themselves.
Justin lib. 6.
The Admiral thought it unseemely and unworthy of the Spartan valor to run
away, and therefore directed his ship to the front of the Enemy, where first
killing many of his Enemies, at length he was slain. Then the followers of
Conon pursuing the Lacedaemonians to the contnent, Conon the Athenian obtains
a Victory against the Lacedaemonians.
took 50 Vessels, and 500 men, the most part swimming to shore and saving
themselves; and the rest of the Galleys with safety recovered Gnidus. By this
victory of Conon (who made use of the Kings Forces for the recovery of the
estate of his own country) Athens and all Greece which heretofore were under
the Lacedaemonian yoke, again recovered their liberty. Diodorus places it in
the second year of the 96th Olympiad, when Diophantus was Archon at Athens; bur
Lycias in the year following, being under the government of Eubulides, and the
eleventh of Artaxerxes.

70. Pharnabazus and Conon for the improvement of this Victory, Idem ut supra,
and Plutarch in Apotheg. Laconicis.
labored with the Islands and Maritime Towns of Ionia, to revolt from the
Lacedaemonians, which they effected, some casting out the Garrisons, and
maintaining themselves in their ancient liberty, others yielding unto Conon,
only Dercyllidas lying at Abydus at the time of the fight, retained that
place, and Sestos over against it, still in hostility against the Persians,
though endeavored also to be reduced. In the next Spring the two Persian
Generals invaded the Maritime parts of Laconia, which after they had wasted as
they might, and now were about to return, Conon persuaded the other to let him
have the Navy, with which he said he would sail to Athens, and there build up
again the long walls, and the Piraeus or Haven, than which he affirmed nothing
could happen more disagreeable to the Lacedaemonians. This he easily obtained,
and money also to rebuild the walls, for which sailing thither with 80 Galleys
he took order; giving those 50 Talents which he had received of Pharnabazus
unto the Athenians.

The Lacedaemonians having notice of this, Idem cum Diodoro Olymp. 96. an. 3.
being very fearful the Athenian State should again recover it is ancient power,
sent away Antalcidas to Teribazus another of the Persian Lieutenants who
governed Sardis, if possible to draw him to their Party, and reconcile them to
the King. After this was known at Athens, they also sent Conon and others to
him, and with them joined several other States, as the Boeotians, Corinthians,
and Argives, Antalcidas sent from the Spartans to Artaxerxes.
who were weary of the power of the Spartans. Antalcides declared how those
that sent him were ready to embrace a Peace upon such terms as the King
pleased, for that they would no longer contend with him about the Greek Cities
in Asia, thinking it sufficient, that the rest which were elsewhere situated
might be left to their own Laws and liberty: he also labored earnestly to
render Conon suspected to the King, alleging, that at the King's cost he only
promoted the affairs of his own Country, seeking with his Forces to obtain as
many Cities as he could for the Athenians, to whom underhand he went about to
restore Ionia and Aeolia also. This offer concerning the leaving of the Greek
Cities to the King's disposal, so nearly concerned his affairs, that the other
Ambassadors in no case admitting it, for private respects returned home,
without any thing concluded of; and though Teribazus durst not without
commission join himself to the Lacedaemonians, yet gave he privately moneys to
Antaclidas to enable them to build a Fleet, wherewithal to constrain their
adversaries to submit to an accommodation, and laying hold of Conon committed
him to custody, till such time as going himself to the King he might know his
pleasure concerning these things.

71. Some have reported how Conon was carried to the King, Isocrat. in Panegyr.
Aemil. Probus in Conone. Diodorus ad Olymp. 97. ann. 3.
and by him put to death, but others that he made an escape. Whilst Teribazus
was yet with the King, he sent Struthas into Asia the less, to take care of
the Seacoasts, who showing himself very bitter against the Lacedaemonians for
the evils which the Provinces had suffered of Agesilaus, and favorable upon
that account to the Athenians, the Spartans sent over Thymbro to make War upon
him. He with 8000 men took Coressus the high hill some five miles distant from
Ephesus, whence he made excursions into the King's Dominions; but Struthas
lying not far from him with a great power of Horse, besides Foot, at such time
as with a Party he was ranging about for booty, fell upon him, killed him
amongst many others, and putting the rest to flight, took many; the other
securing themselves where they might best do it. Xenoph. ut supra.
The year after, the Lacedaemonians sending Ecdicus to the aid of the exiles of
Rhodes with eight ships, dispatched away with him one Diphridas, with order to
pass into Asia, there to gather up the remnant of the Forces, with which, and
as many more as he could raise, he was to protect those Cities which had
received Thymbro, and to grapple with Struthas. He acted accordingly, and so
ordered his affairs, that he proved hard enough for Struthas, and amongst other
commendable actions took prisoner Tigranes his Son in Law, as he was going with
his wife to Sardis, whom releasing for a great ransom, he seasonably made use
of the money for the payment of his Soldiers.

72. Whilst these things passed betwixt Artaxerxes and the Commonwealth of
Sparta, he was also employed about the affairs of Cyprus, Diodorus ad an. 2.
Olymp. 97. Isocrates ^in Evagora.
which he strove to get into his hands. There was in that Island one Evagoras
of great birth (being descended from those who first built Salamine the
principal City therein) who being lately expelled through a Sedition, returned
with a little force of Auxiliaries, Artaxerxes looks after Cyprus.
and expelling Abdemon the Tyrian, who then had the power over the City, and a
great friend of the King of Persia, made himself King of Salamine, and within a
short time growing very rich gathered forces, and by the help of his son
Protagoras subdued almost the whole Island. But the Amathusians with the
Solians and Citians stood out against him, and by their Ambassadors solicited
Artaxerxes for aid, accusing Evagoras for the death of Agyres, who had been
confederate with the King, and offering him their help for the possessing
himself of the whole Island. He being jealous of the growth of Evagoras, and
considering how convenient this Island might be, by reason of its situation,
for the promoting of his affairs at Sea, by which especially Asia could be
defended, resolved to assist them, and dismissing the Ambassadors to their
content, gave order to the Cities upon the Seacoasts to build ships with all
speed, he himself traveling into the upper Provinces for the raising of a
great Land Army.

73. Till he had composed matters with the Graecians, no considerable thing
could he attempt upon Cyprus, and though they favored the cause of Evagoras in
opposition to him, yet their enmity one against another hindered that effect
which their Union might have produced, to the great impairment of his affairs.
The Athenians sent ten ships to the aid of Evagoras; Xenoph. ut supra.
but it happening that Teleutias being sent by the Lacedaemonians at that time to
succeed Ecdicus in the Fleet, and to defend their interest in Asia, Diodorus ad
annum 2. Olymp. 98. Plutarch. in Artaxerxe.
met with them, and intercepted them all, whereby it happened that those who were
Enemies to Artaxerxes overthrew those who went to make War against him. After
this these two Commonwealths contending sore with each other at Sea to their
mutual damage, Antalcidas concludes a peace with him.
at length Antalcidas was sent by the Lacedaemonians to the Government of the
Fleet, because they knew him to be in great grace with Teribazus. He coming to
Ephesus, left Nicolochus his Lieutenant, and according to his private
instructions went with Teribazus to Artaxerxes about a peace, toward whom he
so behaved himself (to please him casting off the Spartan gravity, and not
refusing to dance before him) that the King, who before could not endure the
Spartans, as counting them the most impudent of all men, embraced him with
singular respect and courtesy.

74. He concluded of a peace with him for the Lacedaemonian State, Xenoph.
Hellen. lib. 5. Diodorus and Plutarch. ut prius.
in case the other Graecians would not consent to such overtures as the King
made, and returned with Teribazus, who giving notice that all who would might
accept of the conditions which his master proposed, they dispatched their
several Deputies to him. He showing them the Kings Seals, opened the Letters,
wherein was contained, that Artaxernes the King accounted it meet that the
Cities in Asia, and the Islands Clazomenae (since joined to the Continent) and
Cyprus, should be under his Dominion: as for the other Greek Cities, both great
and small, that they should be left to their own liberty; except Lemnus,
Imbrus, and Scyrus, which having been subject to the Athenians time out of
mind, be thought it reasonable they should so continue. Those that should not
receive this peace, he with the rest who would embrace it would prosecute with
War to his utmost power, both at Sea and Land. The Ambassadors went home, and
made report of what was proposed to the several Commonwealths, who grudged it
much that the Cities of Asia, for whose liberty Agesilaus had taken so much
pains, should be so unworthily again betrayed. But being necessitated to
submit, they accepted of the conditions; and the peace was sworn to at length
by all Greece, in the second year of the 96th Olympiad, A. M. 3618.
and the 18th year of Artaxerxes. A. M. 3618.

75. Artaxerxes being thus freed from this tedious controversy with the
Graecians, set himself to a preparation for the Wars of Cyprus, Diodorus l. 16.
ad Olymp. 98. ann. 3.
from which as yet he had been diverted. Evagoras by this time, through the
assistance of Chabrias, whom the Athenians had sent to his aid with 800
Peltasts, and ten Galleys, had brought under the whole Island, having got
together also a most numerous Army, whilst the King was kept in play by the
Graecians. For he entered into society with Acoris King of Egypt, Artaxerxes
turns his forces from the Graecians against Cyprus.
who furnished him with great store of money, and Hecatomnus the Viceroy of
Caria underhand supplied him with some for the hiring of foreign Soldiers; and
the King of Arabia with others, who bore no good will to Artaxerxes, sent a
great power of men. He had in a readiness 90 Galleys, whereof twenty lay at
Tire in Phoenicia, which with other Cities he had got into his hands, and the
rest anchored readily furnished before Cyprus. The King gathered together both
his Land and Sea forces, the former consisting of 300000 men, and the later of
300 Galleys. Over his Land Army he appointed General Orontes his son-in-law,
and Teribazus Admiral of his Navy, who taking up their forces out of Phocaea
and Cuma, marched down into Cilicia, whence passing over into Cyprus with great
industry they began the War.

76. Evagoras having 6000 men of his own, many more Auxiliaries, and having
hired a great force of strangers over and above, (money being very plentiful
with him) first with his Pinnaces well Armed set upon the Enemies ships as they
brought in provisions, whereof some he took, others he sunk, or chaced away.
Hereby it came to pass, that no Commodities being imported into the Island, a
great dearth ensued in the Persian Camp; and hereby a mutiny of the Soldiers,
especially of the mercenaries, who fell upon their Officers, and killed some of
them. This put Glos the Admiral upon a resolution to sail with the whole Fleet
into Cilicia, whence he brought sufficient supply; which Evagoras seeing, and
considering his Navy to be far inferior to the Persian, he got ready other
sixty ships, and procuring fifty more from Acoris (who readily furnished him
with all things necessary for the War) he made up his Fleet 200 sail. Gets a
victory at Sea against Evagoras.
Then exercised he his men often to prepare them for a fight, and that to the
terror of the Enemy who beheld it, and at length as the Persian Fleet sailed by
Citium he fell upon it, taking some Vessels, and sinking others, but the
Admiral and other Commanders standing close to their tackling, a sharp conflict
ensued, in which though Evagoras at the first prevailed, yet Glos with all his
power, and with great earnestness and valor grapling with him, he was at
length after great loss put to flight.

77. The Persians after this victory mustered all their forces, both by Sea and
Land at Citium, and presently both ways laid siege to Salamine. Now Evagoras,
though he had had the better of it formerly in some sallies out upon the
besiegers, cooled in his courage after this defeat. Though the siege was very
straight and pressing, yet resolving to continue the War, he left his son
Pythagoras for the defense of the City, with full Authority, and departed by
night with ten Galleys into Egypt, where he labored hard with Acoris the King,
to persuade him to carry on the War with him, and that with all his power. He
granted him some money; Diodorus ad ann. 4. Olymp. 98.
but for that he was discouraged by the late defeat, nothing according to his
expectation, so that returning, and finding the City very much straightned,
and himself destitute of succor, he was forced to send about an accommodation:
Teribazus offered his consent upon these terms, that quitting all the Cities
except Salamine, he should for that pay a yearly Tribute to the King, and be at
his command as a servant to his Lord; which though hard, he consented to,
except the last, thinking it a great disgrace to be at his back as a servant,
and more reasonable to be subject to him as one King to another.

His Captains disagree, and peace is made.
78. Teribazus not admitting of this exception, Orontes his colleague, and
emulator, accused him by secret Letters to the King, as well for other matters,
as that having an opportunity sufficient to take Salamine, he did not use it,
but spent his time in treaties with the Enemy; he farther laid to his charge
privately entering into friendship with Lacedaemon sending to consult the Oracle
about warring against the King, and especially alluring the Officers by
honors, gifts, and promises. Artaxerxes believing these things, wrote back to
Orontes to arrest Teribazus, and send him presently unto him, who accordingly
sent, earnestly desired to be brought to his trial, but being for the present
committed to prison, and the King employed in the Cadusian War, his judgment
was still delayed. In the mean time Orontes being now General with full power
and authority in Cyprus, finding that Evagoras with great courage still held
out, and that his own Soldiers taking ill the imprisonment of Teribazus
refused to obey him, sent to Evagoras to treat of peace, offering him the same
conditions he was formerly willing to admit of from Teribazus. He being thus
delivered beyond hope, concluded a peace on these terms; to pay yearly Tribute
for the Kingdom of Salamine, and as King, to be obedient to the King of Persia.
Isocrates in Evagora.
And thus the Cyprian War ended ten years after the first preparation for it,
and after it had been managed 2 years. Artaxerxes after all this time, and the
expense of 50 Talents, leaving Evagoras in effect, in the same condition he was
before.

79. Gaus the Persian Admiral, after this War, Diodorus ut supra.
having married the daughter of Teribazus, fearing, lest because of his
affinity, he should be suspected also by the King, and suffer upon that
account, resolved for a prevention to fortify himself against him by entering
into league with his Enemies. This he did presently with Acoris of Egypt, Gaus
out of fear conspireth with the Lacedaemonians against the King.
and wrote to the Lacedaemonians to excite them to break the peace, making
large offers of what he could do for Greece. They had of late as before cast in
their heads how to make themselves masters of all Greece, and finding that they
heard ill for the peace concluded with Artaxerxes, in which the interests of
their Contrymen were betrayed, they sought for, upon a new advice, a fit
opportunity to renew the War against the Persians, and therefore now not
unwillingly accepted of this confederacy with Gaus.

80. At this time Artaxerxes made War upon the Cadusians, Plutarch. in Artax.
cum Diodoro ad Olymp. 98. ann. 4.
leading against them an Army of 300000 foot, and 10000 horse. He cast himself
into great straights marching into a Country uneven, rainy, and bringing no
Corn, but nourishing only its inhabitants with Pears, Aples, and such like
fruits; so that finding there no provision, and not able to come by it from
elsewhere, the carriage beasts were killed for meat, an Asses head could scarce
be bought for 60 drachms, Artaxerxes invadeth the Cadusians to no purpose.
the Kings set meals were laid down, and very few horses remained; the rest
being all eaten up. Then Teribazus under disgrace saved the King and his whole
Army; for there being two Kings of the Cadusians, he himself went to one of
them, and sent his son to the other, each of them signifying to him whom he
went to, that his Colleague had sent about a peace to Artaxerxes, having left
him out, wherefore his advise was, that they should send with him Ambassadors
to treat, and conclude a pacification first, which, being both deceived, they
did, and a League was entered into by both apart. Then returned he homewards,
and in the way, to give a good example to others, alighted from his horse, and
with Quiver and Target upon him traveled on foot over the mountainous, and
rough places, and coming at length to a place called the Kings Inn, compassed
with pleasant Gardens and Groves, because of the extremity of cold, he gave
leave to the Soldiers to cut down the Cypresses and other Trees, which because
they out of modesty refused, he took an Axe, and himself cut down the most
beautiful. But coming home, and upon sense of his great loss, both of men and
horses, suspecting he was contemned for his ill success, he slew many of his
principal subjects, of whom he thought he had cause to be jealous.

81. The Cadusian War being finished, he caused Teribazus to come to his trial,
commending the matter to three of his most eminent Judges, who upon
consideration of what was alleged, pro and con, and of his former great merits,
absolved him, to the satisfaction of the King, who then bestowing on him the
greatest honors, expunged the name of Orontes his false accuser out of the
Catalogue of his friends, and cast upon him the greatest ignominy. About the
same time, following herein the example of Cambyses his Predecessor, he caused
certain Judges convicted of unjust Decrees to be flead alive, and their skins
spread over the judgment seat, where the rest heard, and determined causes,
that they might have a constant Memento before their eyes.

Not long after Gaos the Persian Admiral, who, as before was said, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 99. ann. 2. Gaos slain.
had entered into society with the Lacedaemonians, and the King of Egypt,
whilst he was managing his revolt, was slain by some that cunningly laid in
wait for him. One Tachos undertook the carrying on of his design, and
fortifying himself with an Army, built a City in an high Rock upon the Sea,
called Leuca, where was a Chapel dedicated to Apollo; but he dying a little
after, great controversy happened about the place betwixt the Clazomenians and
Cumaeans (whereof the former obtained it) and thereby those rebellions in Asia
fell of themselves, and the Lacedaemonians, thinking it best to intermedle no
more with Persian matters, gave their minds wholly to establish their power in
Greece, got into their hands several Cities by one means or other, and not
obscurely sought after the Empire of all Greece, contrary to the form of the
League, made by the means of the Persian King at the procurement of Antaleidas,
amongst all the Graecians, as Diodorus tells us.

82. Acoris the King of Egypt, Idem ad Olymp. 100. ann. 4.
who of late had entered into society with Gaus, and before had given assistance
to Evagoras against Artaxerxes, as one who laid claim unto his Kingdom, to
strengthen himself raised a great Army of Strangers, and for that he gave very
good pay, and sought otherwise to deserve well of Military men, many Graecians
gave their names and listed themselves in his service. Acoris of Egypt
strengthens himself against Artaxerxes.
But wanting still some famous and expert General, he procured Chabrias the
Athenian, a man of great command and no less valor; though without the
consent of the people. Artaxerxes made Pharnabazus (now of late his Son in Law)
the General of his Forces, who furnished with money made great preparations for
the War, and sent to Athens to complain of Chabrias, who as he said, by his
service to the Egyptian, alienated the Kings affection from that State; and
desired that they would send Iphicrates to be a Captain in his Wars. The
Athenians being desirous to have both the King and Pharnabazus their friend,
presently recalled Chabrias, and gave order to Iphicrates to assist the
Persians.

83. Pharnabazus spent several years in preparation for the War, Idem ad ann.
3. and 2. Olymp. 101.
of which Iphicrates being weary, told him he wondered, that he being so quick
in speaking should be so slow in doing, to which he answered, that the reason
was, that he himself was master of his words, but the King of his actions.
Artaxerxes against him.
The Graecians were again fallen into civil dissentions, the former Peace being
not long continued through the ambitious practices of the Lacedaemonians; which
Artaxerxes considering, and how needful their help was to him in this Egyptian
Expedition, he sent to them to mediate and take up their differences, which
they all liked well and accepted, except the Thebans. At length after three or
four years spent in preparation, the King's Forces were drawn down into Ace a
Town of Syria, Pharnabazus and Iphicrates sent against Acoris.
where being a general Muster, three were found 200000 Barbarians, under the
command of Pharnabazus, and 20000 Greeks under the Ensigns of Iphicrates: the
Navy amounted to the number of 300 Galleys, besides a great number of Vessels
of burden. In the beginning then of Summer they marched for Egypt; the Fleet
sailing along the Coasts, and coming near the mouths of Nile, found the
Egyptians furnished sufficiently for a War; warning enough having been given
them by the delay of Pharnabazus, who (as other Persian Generals) having not
the full disposal of things in his power, was constrained to send to the King,
to know his pleasure concerning particulars, whose answer not being quickly
obtained at a great distance, procured much slownesse in all Expeditions. Idem
ad Olymp. 101. ann. 3.


84. Nectanebis the King of Egypt (for Acoris was now dead) sent to spy out
the number of the Persian Army; but his chiefest hope was in the strength of
the Country, which was mightily fortified against any invasion, by the seven
mouths of Nile, whereof each strengthened with a Castle, and a wodden bridge to
hinder the passage of any ships up the River. But especially he took care of
Pelusium the readiest passage from Syria, stopping up such places as might be
passed by water, and drowning such as gave access by Land. The Egyptians
defeated.
Pharnabazus his Officers finding Pelusium so strongly fortified, resolved
there was no passing there, and to carry the Fleet up to the Mendesian mouth of
the River, where landing 3000 men, Pharnabazus and Iphicrates set upon the
Castle. The Egyptians brought in 3000 Horse and Foot to the relief of it, and
thereby ensued a most sharp encounter; but being at length overpowered by the
number of Persians which coming in continually to the fight, encompassed them;
a great slaughter was made of them, and many taken alive. The rest betaking
themselves to the Fort, Iphicrates his men brake in with them, took it, and
razing it, carried the Defendants away prisoners.

85. Iphicrates now understood by these Prisoners, that the Garrison was called
out of Memphis the strongest City in Egypt; whereupon he advised Pharnabazus
with all speed to sail thither, before the Egyptians should have time to unite
their Forces. Pharnabazus answered, he would first stay till all his Army
arrived, by the which the taking of Memphis would be more easy; but the other
replied, that if he would but let him have all the Mercenaries only in the
Army, he would promise to reduce the City. Pharnabazus hereupon grew jealous of
his valor, and fearing he might thereby, from his skill and courage bring
Aegept into subjection, denied him what he required; Emulation betwixt
Pharnabazus and Iphicrates frustrateth their design.
to which refusal he opposed this solemn protestation, that if the Persians
should let slip out of their hands this fair opportunity, this Expedition
through their fault would prove successlesse. Nothing being procured hereby but
hatred and ill words, the Egyptians by the means of this delay reinforced the
Garrison of Memphis, and with all their Forces came to the Fort which the
Persians had demolished; when dividing their men into several parties, they set
upon the Enemy, and prevailed so much upon him, that making great slaughters,
the Persian Generals, having spent much time about the Place, and now the Nile
swelling, and beginning to overflow all the grounds about them; lest they
should seem to strive with Nature it self, resolved to retreat out of the
Country: And this was the fruit of so long a preparation, and so much expense.

86. Being returned into Asia, the differences betwixt them brake out afresh,
insomuch that Iphicrates fearing lest he might be attached as Conon formerly
had been, withdrew himself by night, and returned to Athens. Thither
Pharnabazus sent after him, to accuse him as guilty of the miscariage of the
Expedition, to which the Athenians answered, that if they found him guilty,
they would punish him; but within a while they gave him the command of their
Fleet. This year Nicocles the Eunuch slew Evagoras the King of Salamine, and
seized on the Kingdom, according to Diodorus, who in no case is to be believed,
as to the Author of the Paricide; for though it be confirmed by one Aristot.
Potit. lib. 5. cap. 10.
that he was killed by an Eunuch; yet it appears from another, that his name
was Thrasydaens; seeing it is clear from Isocrates, that Nicocles (to whom he
wrote one Oration; Theopompus apud Photium Biblioth. number. 176.
another concerning the Office of a King he styled by his name; and made a
Funeral one concerning Evagoras) was the very son of Evagoras, and succeeded
him in the Kingdom, and is not to be reckoned amongst Eunuchs.

87. The next year, Diodorus ad Olymp. 102. ann. 1.
Artaxerxes understanding how Greece was shaken with intestine broiles, which
he still looked upon as by it is help to recover Egypt, sent to compose the
differences amongst the several States. They all assented to his offers, except
the Thebans, who having a design to be Masters of all Boeotia, would not enter
with the rest into the League, which the Lacedaemonians ill resenting, and
suspecting their ambitious practices for the dominion of all Greece, invaded
them as the public Enemies, Hereupon ensued a great and bloody battle at
Leuctra, Xenoph. Hellen. lib. 6. Plutarch in Artaxerxe.
in which the Thebans had the better, through the conduct of Epaminondas, who
so abated the strenght of the Spartans, that they sent Agesilaus their King
into Egypt, and Antalcidas to Artaxernes, to desire a supply of money. But the
King, either because they sought to his Rebels the Egyptians, or upon some
other account, slighted the Message, and rejected Antalcidas, insomuch that
returning home, when he found that he was laughed at by his Enemies, and
fearing the severity of the Ephori, he starved himself to death.

88. Yet still did the King endeavor to reconcile the Graecians, Xenoph.
Hellen. lib. 7. Diodorus ad Olymp 102. ann. 4.
for that as long as they exercised mutual feud, he could not have any
considerable supply from them. This year on the former message Philiscas of
Abydus was sent to them, who procured both the Thebans and their associates,
and the Lacedaemonians to meet at Delphos; but the controversy resting about
Messene, and the Thebans refusing to consent that it should be under the
Lacedaemonians, the Treaty had again the same success: which so offended
Philiscus, that he left 2000 Soldiers he had hired to the Lacedaemonians, and
returned into Asia. The Thebans not long after having a design to bring all
Greece into subjection, and knowing their endeavors to be vain, except they
made Artaxerxes their friend, or at least induced him to stand neuter, resolved
to send Ambassadors to him. Calling together then their associates, they
pretended the thing to be necessary, because Euthycles the Lacedaemonian was
already there, and dispatched away Pelopidas from themselves, Antiochus from
the Arcadians, Archidamus for the Eleans, and another for the Argives, which
being known at Athens, they also sent Timagoras and Leon from their State.

89. Pelopidas found the most favor at the King's hands, Xenoph. ibid.
pleading (and not falsely) that the Thebans had only assisted the Persians at
Plataea, and since that had never fought against that Kingdom; and that for
this only cause were they invaded by the Lacedaemonians, because they refused
to follow Agesilaus against the King, having also prohibited him to sacrifize
at Aulis, where Agamemnon sacrifized when he passed into Asia and took Troy.
The late Victory of the Thebans at Leuctra, and the invasion of the
Lacedaemonian Territories, did not a little add to the esteem of Pelopidas, who
to inhance the renown of his Country, stuck not also to aver, that the reason
why the Argives and Arcadians had of late been overthrown by the
Lacedaemonians, was, because the Thebans were not at the battle. He obtained of
the King, that Messene being exempted from the jurisdiction of the
Lacedaemonians, should be left to it is own liberty, and that the Athenians
should withdraw their ships, or else War was to be made upon them, which being
read to the public Ministers of the other Republics, Leon the Athenian openly
said, that the Athenians must find out another friend besides the King, who
replied, that if they knew any more equal thing, they should acquaint him
therewith.

90. With Pelopidas was joined in Commission Ismenias the Theban, In Artax. and
vide Aelian. var. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 21.
as we have it from Plutarch. He being brought by Tithraustes a Colonel into
the King's presence, and commanded, according to the custom, to adore him, took
off his Ring secretly from his finger, and cast it down at his feet, and then
stooping down to take it up, as he thereby satisfied the King, and obtained his
request; so he thought he provided sufficiently for the credit of himself and
Country. Timagoras the Athenian communicated by letter some secrets to
Artaxerxes, for which he was rewarded with 1000 Daricks, a costly Supper, and
80 Cows to find him with milk for his health; with a costly Bed and furniture
to it, and some Persians that knew how to make it, the Greeks being accounted
ignorant in these things. But returning home with the rest of the Ambassadors
he was put to death; either because he accepted of these gifts, as Plutarch
believed; or for that he adored the King after the Persian manner, Val. Max. l.
6. c. 3. exter. exemp. 2. Xenoph. ut prius.
wherewith they counted their whole State to be reflected on, or (what is most
likely) because of this intercourse betwixt him and Artaxerxes they questioned
his fidelity; his Colleague moreover impeaching him at their return for
refusing his company, and imparting all the secret of their negotiation to
Pelopidas.

91. After the return of the Ambassadors, Idem ibid.
the Thebans sent for the Deputies of the several Cities, whom, when the
letters from the King were read, they commanded, all that would be accounted
his and their friends, to swear to the contents of them. The Deputies answered,
their Commissions were to hear, and not to take any Oath, which if they would
exact from the Cities, they must send to them. This they did, hoping that the
particular States would not dare to refuse the society of the King and them;
but the Messengers first coming to Corinth, and that City refusing to swear,
the rest followed their example, and so this device of the Thebans came to
nothing. Then fell the Graecians into great broyls again, making havoc of the
Territories, and goods of one another, which Artaxerxes still looking upon as
against his design for the recovery of Egypt, sent once more and procured a
Peace betwixt them, whereby the Laconick, Diodorus ad Olymp. 103. ann. 3.
or Boeotian War (as it was called) ended, after it had endured about five
years from the first beginning, in the 39th year of Artaxerxes.

92. This Peace yet effected nothing on his behalf, the interests of the
several States being at this time so contrary, Idem ad Olymp. 104. ann. 3.
that they presently after broke out afresh into civil Wars; and what Forces
could be spared out of Greece, being not employed for, but against him. For,
three or four years after, the maritime parts of Asia revolted from him, and
Tachos now King of Egypt made great provision for the War, both by Land and
Sea; and hiring many Soldiers out of several Republics in Greece, drew also to
his party the Lacedaemonians, A defection from Artaxerxes.
who had conceived displeasure against Artaxerxes, because he made Messene to
be comprehended in the general Peace. At the same time had he then to deal with
the Egyptians, the Greek Cities in Asia, and the Lacedaemonians; and besides
them several of his Lieutenants in Asia revolted; amongst whom were
Ariobarzanes of Phrygia (who had lately seized upon that Country after the
death of Mithridates) Mausolus of Caria, a powerful Prince, having many strong
places, especially Halicarnassus, in his power; with whom joined Orontes of
Mysia, Autophradates of Lydia, and of the Ionian race, the Lycians, Pisidians,
Pamphylians, Cilicians: and besides these the Syrians, Phoenicians, and almost
all that bounded upon the Sea. The General command over all was given to
Orontes. By this so general a defection, half of the Tributes were withdrawn
from the King; and the other half sufficed not for warlike preparations.

93. But Orontes having got the chief command, and therewith received a years
pay for 20000 men, betrayed those that had entrusted him with so great a power.
For promising himself no small matters from the King, he first sent up to him
those that brought him the money, and then betrayed many Towns, and a Band of
Mercenaries to those who were sent from him for that purpose. At the same time
things went in the same course in Cappadocia, accompanied with some memorable
circumstances. Artabazus the King's General invaded that Country with an
numerous Army, and Datames the Governor thereof, who had revolted, meeting him
with a great Party of Horse, and 20000 Foot, pitched his Tents against him. The
Captain of Datames his Horse was his Father in Law, who to ingratiate himself
with the King, and to provide for his own safety, having first agreed with
Artabazus, by night passed over with all his Troops unto him. But Datames not
at all discouraged hereby, exhorted his Mercenaries to constancy, and promising
them a large donative, presently led them against the Revolters, whom he fell
upon just as they were joining with the Enemy, and with great violence made
great slaughter of both. Artabazus being ignorant of the matter, suspected that
the Revolters went about again to betray him, and return to Datamus, and
therefore gave order to his Soldiers to fall upon the Horse approaching;
whence Mithrobarzanes (for so was the Revolter called) being shut up in the
midst, whilst one part labored to repel the Traitor, and the other to be
revenged upon him for his treachery, was reduced into great straights, and out
of extreme despair made great slaughter on both sides, till at length having
lost 10000 men, the rest were put to flight by Datames, to whom some returned
and asked pardon; others betook themselves to a place, whence being not able to
stir they were killed, to the number of 500 men.

94. Whilst these things were thus carried on, Rheomithres was sent into Egypt
to Tachos for aid, from whom obtaining 500 Talents, and 50 Galleys, he returned
to Leuca, a City in Asia, where sending for many of the Officers of the
revolters, he laid hands on them all, and sent them up to the King, by which
Treachery he reconciled himself unto him. Tachos by this time had prepared all
things for the War, having obtained out of Greece 200 Galleys, 10000 most
valiant Soldiers, and out of Egypt it self raised 80000 foot. Agesilaus the
King of Lacedaemon he also procured to come to him, Xenoph. and Plutarch. and
Aemilius Probus in Agesilao.
promising him the command of all his forces. Upon the report of his landing,
all sorts of presents were dispatched to him; but the Courtiers finding no
Train, nor any thing of State about him, only an old man, little of stature,
not at all trimmed, but with coarse and old Clothes, sitting on the shore upon
the grass, they greatly despised him, and were seized with wonder at his
poorness of spirit, when they beheld how amongst the presents, taking the
Meal, Calves, and Geese to himself, he gave the sweet Meats and Ointments to be
divided amongst the slaves. Tachos King of Egypt strengthens himself.
And Tachos himself gave him not the chief command according to his promise,
deriding him for the smalnesse of his stature, and saying, that the fable was
fulfilled in him, the Mountains are in Travel, and a Mouse is brought forth; to
which with anger and scorn he answered, that afterward he should have cause to
think him a Lion.

Diod. and Plutarch.
95. With Tachos also was Chabrias the Athenian, though not sent from the State
as was Agesilaus, but on his own account, who advised him wanting Treasure, to
command his richest sort of subjects to furnish him with as much money as they
could spare, and he would repay them out of his yearly Tributes, which course
he following got great store of money, and yet injured no man. To him he
committed his Fleet, to Agesilaus the conduct of the 10000 mercenary Graecians,
to Nectanebus his son (or rather the son of his brother, (...).
or sister, being called his Nephew;) reserving to himself the command over
all; and though Agesilaus advised him rather to manage the War by his
Lieutenants, Nectanebus King of Egypt.
and stay in Egypt, he sailed into Phoenicia, the Spartan following him, though
against his dignity and disposition. Coming into Phoenicia, he sent Nectanebus
against the Cities in Syria, to whom came a message from the Viceroy of Egypt
left there by Tachos, signifying that he had revolted, and now invited him to
seize upon the Kingdom; to which he consenting, drew presently to his party,
all the Officers by gifts, and the Soldiers by large promises. Tachos now
being in fear of his own servants, and Agesilaus whom he derided, betook
himself to Sidon, and thence to Artaxerxes, by whom he was courteously
entertained, though not declared General in the Egyptian War, (and so by the
help of Agesilaus recovered his Kingdom) as Diodorus writes.

96. Another King besides these two was made by the Egyptians of Mendesium, of
whom 10000 arose, and for him made War upon Nectanebus. Plutarch. Xenoph.
Cornelius Nepos and Diodorus ut supra.
The case being thus, Agesilaus took part with Nectanebus, whom he thought more
to favor the Graecians, took the other prisoner, and confirmed him in the
Kingdom, who importuning him to stay and winter with him, he refused, hasting
homewards, Agesilaus having served him, in his return dies.
for that he knew the Lacedaemonian State to be at this time engaged in a War,
destitute of Treasure, and yet to keep strangers in constant pay for want of
their own men. Nectanebus when he would not stay, dismissed him with great
gifts and honors, giving him 220. or 230 Talents for the maintenance of the
War at home, with which taking ship, he sailed homewards, though in the midst
of Winter; making haste, lest through his absence the State should do nothing
the next Summer; but being carried by Tempest into a desert place, called the
Haven of Menelaus, lying betwixt Cyrene and Egypt, he there fell sick and died.
His friends laying his Corpse in Wax, for want of Honey, carried it to
Lacedaemon, where it was buried according to his worth, and dignity.

97. About the time of his death died also Artaxerxes the King of Persia,
Plutarch. in Artaxerxe, Justin. lib. 10.
after he had reigned 43 years. He had 115 sons, of which three only were
legitimate; Darius, Ariaspes, and Ochus, the rest being begotten of Concubines,
Artaxerxes dies, having before his death made Darius King, who plotting
against him.
of which he kept 360. with which yet he could not be contented without the
addition of Atossa his own daughter, his own mother to please him becoming a
Bawd to his incestuous affections. When he was grown old, perceiving his sons
to strive about the succession, and especially Ochus (who although the
youngest, hoped by the means of Atossa to procure the Kingdom of him) fearing
lest after his death he might do as his Uncle Cyrus had formerly done, contrary
to the custom of Persia, which admitted not of two Kings at the same time, he
made Darius the eldest, now 50 years old King, whilst he lived, lest his death
should involve the Empire in civil broils. It was the fashion for him that was
made King, to ask, and receive something at the hands of him that made him,
according to which Darius asked Aspasia to wife, which formerly having been
Concubine to Cyrus, Artaxerxes took, and afterward married. He out of
indulgence to him first granted his request, for that she being a free woman,
and no slave, might choose whether she would have him, and hoping she would
refuse; but she willingly accepting of the thing, and he then repenting of what
he had rashly promised, consecrated her as a Nun to Diana, that she might live
for the remainder of her days a single life. Darius hereby incensed, through
the provocation of Tiribazus, (who bore Artaxerxes malice for defrauding him of
his daughter Amistris, whom he promised to him, but married her himself) entered
with 50 of his brethren into a conspiracy against the life of his father, Is
put to death.
and the plot being revealed by an Eunuch, was put to death with his accomplices.

Darius being removed out of the way, Ochus was more inflamed with a desire of
reigning, to which he was more incensed by Atossa his sister. But he feared two
of his brothers; Ariaspes legitimate, and the elder, and one Arsames, who
though base born, and the younger, yet was much esteemed for his wisdom, and
especially beloved by his father. Both of them he resolved to destroy; Ochus
his wicked practices for the Kingdom.
the former by his cunning, and the later by downright cruelty; for he hired
some who never ceased to tell Ariaspes, as a great secret, that his father was
resolved to make him away by a cruel, and shameful death, and so often
inculcating it unto him as speedily to be done, drove him to that fear and
desperation that he poisoned himself. Artaxerxes mourned for him, but knowing
the kind of his death, and suspecting the cause, yet through extreme age was
unable to search into the matter and find it out: only he embraced Arsarmes
more affectionatly than ever, and not obscurely signified that he only could
trust, and rely upon him. Ochus judging then that no delay was to be used,
procured Harpates the son of Ieribazus (who fell in the treason of Darius) to
murder him. Artaxerxes was already so spent with age that he seemed to want but
the least furtherance to his death, so that word being brought him of the death
of Arsames, he was not able to bear it, but died heart-broken with sorrow,
after he had lived 94 years, in the 43th of his reign; in the third of the 104
Olympiad. A. M. 3644. about 360 before the birth of Christ. He was esteemed
mild and loving toward his subjects, which opinion was mightily confirmed by
the cruelty and paricide of his successor.

SECT. IV. From the death of Artaxerxes Mnemon, and the beginning of Ochus, to
the death of Darius Codomannus, containing the space of 32 years.
1. OChus succeeded his father, Diodorus.
after whom he was also named Artaxerxes, and whose name the Persians put upon
his Successors for a memorial of his mild and prosperous Government. Some think
him by the Persians to have been called Ochosueros, Ochus succeeds.
or Achosueros; and that he is to be taken for that Achesuerus, or Ahasuerus
the husband of Esther, mentioned in Scripture, who by the seventy, and Josephus
after them, is named Artaxerxes. Some have thought Cambyses to have been the
man, Jacobus Cappellus, alii.
but he reigned only seven years, whereas above twelve are given to Ahasuerus.
Neither could Darius the son of Hystaspes be he, if the Jews with others
rightly accounted the book of Esther to have been the last in order of all the
Canonical Scripture of the Old Testament, and for that Vashti his wife is
thought to be Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, it cannot be, because he never put
away A^ossa, on whom he begat Xerxes. And although some plead hard for Xerxes,
because his wife is called by Herodotus, Amestris, which they take in the
Persian tongue to be only Ham-Esther; yet it is apparent out of the same
Author, that she was the daughter of Otanes a Persian Satrapa, by Religion an
Heathen, and of a most cruel disposition. Besides, Ahasuerus in the seventh
year of his reign was at Sushan; but Xerxes in the seventh of his reign was
absent in the War with Greece, and though the Greeks corrupted foreign names,
and might call Xer^es him, whom the Persians named Actachsasta, or Artachas-ta,
yet not one in his own language called Achoschverosch. Esther's husband.
Neither is it probable that Longimanus could be the man, who is both in
sacred, and profane story called Artach-sasta and Artaxerxes; but no where
Achasuerus. The same may be said of Nothus, who both by Nehemiah and Greek
writers is called Darius, and of Artaxerxes Mnemon, concerning whose wife
Statira, such things are written as can neither agree with Vashti nor Esther.
Now if that of Esther be the last Canonical book; and Nehemiah lived to the
time of Darius Nothus, then is it probable, that Esther lived in the reign of
his son, or Grandson, and cannot so conveniently be assigned for a wife to any
as to Ochus.

2. Ochus knowing of how great Autho^ity his fathers name was to his subjects,
and how contemptible he should be after his death was known, Polyaenus
Stratagem, lib. 7.
procured of the Eunuchs, Chamberlains and Colonels to conceal it for ten
months, and in the mean time sending about the Royal Seal commanded in his
fathers name, to proclaim Ochus King. When all owned, and obeyed him as King,
he then confessed his fathers death, and commanded a general mourning,
according to the custom of Persia, and presently took away all Competition,
filled Justin. lib. 10.
the Court with the blood of his kindred, and relations, no regard being had,
either to Sex or Age. Amongst the rest he put to death his Valerius Max. lib.
9. cap. 2. Ext. ex. 7. Lib. 10. cap. ^.
sister Ocha, being also his mother-in-law, with cruel torments, and his Uncle
with his two sons and Nephews, he caused to be set in an empty place, and
killed with Darts, who seems well to have been father to Sisigambis (mother
to Darius the last Persian King) whose 80 brethren together with their father
Curtius reports to have been murdered by Ochus.

3. From Ochus revolted Artabazus, Diodorus ad Olymp. 106. ann. 1. and 4.
against whom were sent some of the Persian Satrapaes with 70000 men, and yet
by the help of Chares the Athenian he overthrew them, and rewarded Chares with
a great sum of money, Artabazus revolteth from him.
which he laid out in the paying of his Soldiers. Ochus knowing of this,
expostulated seriously with the Athenians about it, who hearing that he
intended with 300 ships to assist their Enemies (with whom they were now
engaged in the social War) presently clap't up a peace with them. Artabazus
being forsaken of the Athenians, betook himself to the Thebans, who ordered
Pammenes with 500 men to pass over into Asia to assist him; by whose help
Artabazus again overthrew the King's forces sent against him in two great and
bloody battles, which got no small credit to Pammenes, and his Boeotians. Yet a
few years after, Idem ad Olymp. 107. ann. 2.
when the Thebans were engaged in the Phocian War, and reduced to extremity for
want of money, they sent to Artaxerxes Ochus, and obtained of him 300 Talents,
which he did as it seems to put an obligation upon them to assist him in the
War, which he renewed against the Egyptians.

4. Although Egypt had long before this revolted from the Persian Empire, yet
Ochus not at all affecting War kept himself quiet; for, having sent some Armies
thither, by the treachery, or ignorance of their Captains, they miscarried, so
that having several times badly sped, though despised on that account by the
Egyptians, yet being a lover of his ease and quiet he submitted to the
disgrace. But now at this time (about the eleventh year of his reign) the
Phoenicians and Cyprians taking heart, and rebelling also, he resolved to
chastise them all with Arms, and that in his own person; and making great
provision of all things for the War, raised 300000 foot, 30000 horse, He
invadeth Phoenicia.
and 300 Galleys, besides Vessels of burden. The first Tempest of the War fell
upon Phoenicia, which revolted upon this occasion. A famous City there was
therein named Tripolis, consisting, according to it is name, SECT. 4.
of three Cities distant a furlong from each other, and inhabited by Tyrians,
Sidonians, and Arcadians, in which the assembly General of the Phoenicians met
and resolved of their most important affairs. Herein the Persian Satrapaes and
Ambassadors, behaving themselves very uncivilly, and abusing the Sidonians,
they thereupon resolved to rebel, and persuading the other Phoenicians to side
with them for the obtaining of their liberty, sent to Nectanebus King of Egypt
to desire him to receive them into confederacy against Ochus. Then to begin
their hostility they cut down the Paradise wherein the Kings of Persia, when
they came that way, used to divert themselves; burnt the hay which the
Satrapaes had gathered for use in War, and punished such Officers as by whom
they had been abused.

5. Ochus having notice of this, longed to be revenged of all the Phoenicians,
but especially on them of Sidon; and gathering his Forces together at Babylon,
set out thence against them. In the mean time whilst he was on his way, the
President of Syria and Mazaeus Governor of Cilicia, with joint Forces set upon
the Phoenicians; but Tennes King of Sidon, having received out of Egypt a
supply of 4000 Graecians, over which Mentor the Rhodian was General, with them
and his Citizens together, fell upon the Satrapaes, worsted, and expelled them
out of Phoenicia. Whilst things were thus carried there; another War arose to
the Persians out of Cyprus, wherein were nine Cities of good account, having
the lesser Towns in their subjection, and each of them a King; but all Subjects
to the Persian, all which now, imitating the Phoenicians, revolted. Ochus
receiving tidings hereof, wrote to Adrieus Prince of Caria (who being newly
come to the Government, was by the tenure of his Principality a friend and
associate in war to the Persian Empire) to provide Forces both for Sea and Land
against them, who accordingly with great expedition making ready 40 Galleys and
8000 Mercenaries, sent them into Cyprus, under the conduct of Phocion, the
Athenian, and Evagoras, who heretofore had held the Island as King. These two
landing their men, laid close siege to Salamine both by Land and Sea, and the
Island having been quiet of late, and for that reason abounding with riches,
great numbers flocked out of desire of plunder from Syria and Cilicia, insomuch
that the number of the besiegers was doubled. Hereupon all the other Cities
submitted themselves; only Protagoras held out still, and Evagoras thought by
force to re-invest himself of that Kingdom, devolved upon him from his
Ancestors: But at length Protagoras also submitting, obtained Salamine still;
and Evagoras contented himself with a larger Dominion given him in Asia, which
ill governing, he fled again into Cyprus, and there taken was put to death.

Mentor the Rhodian offers to betray Sidon to him.
6. The King was on his march toward Phoenicia, when Mentor the Rhodian
understanding what strength he had, and how unable the Rebels were to make
tesistance, sent one to him privately, offering to betray Sidon into his hands,
and to do him especial service in the conquest of Egypt, being very well
skilled in that Country and the River. Ochus not only promised him indemnity,
but a large reward, if he would perform what he promised, and placing his
greatest felicity in the recovery of Egypt, sent to the chiefest of the
Grecian States, to desire aid. The Athenians and Lacedaemonians signified
their desire to retain amity and a good correspondence with him, but at present
could yield him no assistance; but the Thebans sent him 1000 men, the Argives
3000, and the Greeks in Asia willing to show their readiness, furnished him
with 6000. Before their arrival the King was got into Phoenicia, and sat down
not far from Sidon, which the Inhabitants had by this time strongly manned
within, and fortified with a threefold large ditch, and high walls, besides a
Fleet of 100 Galleys. For they exceeded by far all their neighbors in riches.

7. But Tennes their King had associated himself with Mentor to betray the
City, whom leaving therein with command of a part thereof for the better
carrying on of the treachery, he himself with 500 Soldiers went out, pretending
to go to the public convention of the Phoenicians, having with him 100 of the
prime Citizens as his Counselors. These he brought straight to Ochus, Tennes
King of Sidon joyneth with him, and yet put to death by Ochus.
who put them all to death as authors of the rebellion, and after them 500
more, who came as Suppliants with Olives in their hands, after he had
understood from Tennes that the City should be surrendered to him without any
conditions, thereby to strike a terror into the other Towns. After this, Tennes
easily prevailed with the mercenary Egyptians to let him and the King into the
Town, which being done, and Ochus having it in his power, judging him now to be
of no use to him, he commanded him also to be slain. The Sidonians before the
King approached had burnt all their ships, lest any private person should
convey himself away during the Siege. Sidon taken and burnt by the Inhabitants.
Now seeing themselves betrayed, and their City full of the Enemy which swarmed
on every side, they set fire on their houses, and therein burnt themselves with
their wives and children, so that (accounting slaves) above 40000 are thought
to have perished in the flames. The King sold the rubbish thereof for many
talents, much gold and silver being found, because it had flourished with great
riches. By this Tragedy of Sidon the other Cities being terrified, yielded
themselves unto the Persian.

8. The Diodorus ^ Olymp. 107. ann. 3.
Auxiliaries out of Greece being come to Ochus after the taking of Sidon, he
set forward with his whole Army toward Egypt, Solinus cap. 35. Aristus de 70.
Interp.
taking Jericho a City of Judaea (as its probable) in his way, and drawing many
Jews along with him in his Expedition. Coming Diodorus ibid.
to the Lake Sirbonis, he lost part of his Army in the Whirl-pits and Bogs,
through ignorance of the place, and a length arrrived at Pelusium the first
frontier-town, which was held with a Garrison of 1000 men. Now the King divided
the Grecian Forces into three bodies, and over each constituted a Captain of
their own Nation, and joined a Persian with him: the other Forces he kept in
his own Command, being greatly intent about the main business. On the other
side Nectanebus was not a whit discouraged, Ochus invadeth Egypt.
having in pay 20000 Graecians, and as many Africans, besides 60000 of his own
Egyptians, and an innumerable Compapany of boats for the River. But by his
conceitednesse and want of skill he miscarried, having formerly prospered whilst
he used the conduct of the Grecian Captains, but now his Fortune changing upon
his sole managing the War, for which he thought himself sufficiently able.
After then he had fortified his Garrisons, with 30000 Egyptians, 5000 Greeks,
and half of the Africans, he seized upon such places, as were most advantageous
for passage into the Country.

9. Things standing thus betwixt them, Nicostratus the Captain of the Argives
getting some Egyptians for Guides, passed with the Fleet through a ditch, and
in a place something remote and out of sight landed his men, and pitched his
tents; which being known by the Garrison, a party issued out, and fell upon
them; but the Graecians, after a sharp contest, slew their Captain, and of them
about 5000 nem. Nectanebus upon report made of this defeat was greatly
discouraged, fearing all the rest of the Persian Army might be easily
transported, and suspecting lest the Enemy should bend his utmost strength
against Memphis the Metropolis, was especially concerned for it, and with that
party which accompanied him returned thither. In the mean time Lacrates the
Theban, General and principal of all the Grecian Captains drained the Chanel
by cutting a ditch, and passing over his Soldiers raised a battery against
Pelusium, by which the walls being much broken the defendants raised still
Pallisadoes in the place, and the Graecians within stoutly defending the Fort,
a great contest happened for several days. But as soon as they heard of the
Kings departure, they desired a Parley, and Lacrates interposing an Oath, that
upon yielding of the place, they should depart with such things as they brought
out of Greece, they presently yielded. Then Artaxerxes sent Bagoas an Eunuch of
great authority with him, with a party of Barbarians to take possession of
Pelusium, who meeting the Graecians took from them many things contrary to the
agreement. This they received in great disdain, and called to their gods as
witnesses of the Oath, which to keep Lacrates fell upon the Barbarians, put
them to flight with the loss of some, and defended his Countrymen, for which
being accused by Bagoas, the King defended what he had done, and punished the
Authors of the violence.

10. Pelusium being taken, the other Towns were easily reduced by this
stratagem of Mentor the Rhodian, the third Captain of the Graecians. These
places being held by Garrisons consisting of two sorts of Nations, Graecians
and Egyptians, he caused this rumor to be spread abroad, that Artaxerxes had
resolved to deal mildly with all those who should deliver up any Towns, but
such as should withstand him, he would prosecute with as great severity as the
Sidonias; and he gave in chrrge to the Sentinels to let as many Citizens go out
as would. By this means this report was presenly spread all over Egypt, and
thereupon mutinies followed betwixt the Strangers and Natives in every
Garrison, each endeavoring first to betray their trust, and gain credit of the
Conquerours by their speedy treachery. Accordingly when Mentor and Bagoas laid
siege to Bubastis, the Egyptians secretly sent to the latter to yield to him
the Town upon security of a free dismission. The Graecians suspecting the
matter, persued the Messenger, and getting from him the whole truth, in a great
great rage fell upon the Egyptians, whereof some they slew, others they
wounded, and drove the rest into a corner of the Town. They signified this to
Bagoas, and desired him with all speed to come and take possession of the Town,
and in the mean time a messenger was sent to Mentor from the Graecians, who
advised them as soon as Bagoas should enter the Town to fall upon the
Barbarians. As soon therefore as part of his Soldiers with him was entered, they
shut the gates, and killing all the Soldiers, took Bagoas himself prisoner.

11. Bagoas Diodorus ut supra.
seeing his only hope to be in Mentor, earnestly besought him to be the means
of his deliverance, promising him to do nothing for the future without his
approbation, who procuring his release, and having the Town delivered up into
his own hands, as he got the credit of the enterprise, so engaged he Bagoas to
him, who entered by Oath into friendship and endearednesse, which he also kept
to the last, and by which union they both became afterward the most powerful
of all the King's Officers. After the surrender of Bubastis, the other Cities
made their peace, but Nectanebus lying at Memphis, and seeing what progress
the Enemy made in his conquest, would not endanger his personal safety for a
Kingdom, Nectanebus flies out of Egypt.
but packing up all his treasures got him away into Aethiopia. Then became
Artaxerxes Master of all Egypt, and demolishing the walls of the greater
Towns, spoiled the Temples, and got much treasure. He carried away the Writings
of the Priests, which afterward Bagoas restored to them for a great sum of
money, he Sulp. Severus Hist. Sacr. lib. 2.
derided Apis and all their gods, and for that the Egyptians had for his
dullness Aelian. var. Hist. lib. 4. c. 8. Suid. in Ocho.
called him an Ass, he sacrifized Apis being taken by violence, to an Ass,
making his flesh also be dressed up for meat. Then rewarded he the Graecians
with great munificence, according to their particular merits, and making
Phoerendates Satrapa of Egypt, he returned laden with glory and spoil unto
Babylon, taking Orosius l. 3. cap. 7. quaere Diodorus ad Olymp. 107. ann. 4.
in his way a great number of Jews captive, of whom some he placed at Babylon,
and others in Hyrcania upon the Caspian Sea.

12. Ochus rewarded Mentor the Rhodian with 100 talents of silver, and much
costly housholdstuff, and making him governor of the Coasts of Asia, gave him
full power to make war upon his Rebels. He used his power moderately toward
Artabazus and Memnon, who formerly had revolted, and now were fled to Philip
King of Macedonia: those he reconciled to the King, and sent for them both with
their Families; for Artabazus had by the Sister of Mentor and Memnon eleven
Sons and ten Daughters, by which number Mentor being much affected, not only
procured him his pardon, but preferred by degrees all the youths to honorable
command in the Army. Idem ibid. Polyaenus lib 6. Strabo lib. 13.
After this promise of pardon he allured Hermias the Eunuch Governor of
Atarnus into his hands, whom casting into prison, he took his Ring and
therewith signed letters, wherein was commanded in his name, that such as had
command of any Castles or Towns should deliver them up into the hands of the
bearers, which was accordingly done, and then sent he Hermias up to the King,
who caused him to be hanged, Aristotle the Philosopher and Xenocrates the
Chalcedonian, (whom he had sent for to him) made their escape out of such
places as the Persians had got into their hands. Afterward Mentor either by
force or policy, reduced all such Captains as had revolted.

13. Philip the son of Amyntas at this time reigning in Macedonia, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 109. ann. 4.
grew very potent, and besieged Perinthus, a Town in Thrace, situate upon the
Propontis, with 30000 men, and very strong provision for War; so that he
straightly pressed the inhabitants, giving them no rest through his continual
attempts. This Artaxerxes Ochus taking notice of, Philip King of Macedonia
opposed by Ochus.
and being very jealous of his sudden growth, commanded the Satrapaes of the
Maritime Coasts of Asia to relieve the Perinthians as effectually as might be,
which they so performed as he missed of his design; and this afterward was
objected as a sufficient cause, amongst others, for the invasion of Asia.

14. In the reign of Ochus, as some think, happened those things which are
Josephus Antiquit. lib. 11. cap. 7.
said to have been done in Judaea, during the reign of Artaxerxes, and to have
given an occasion of imposing a Tribute upon that Country. After the death of
Eliashib the Priest, his son John succeeded him in his Office according to his
birthright, Affairs of Judaea in the time of Ochus.
who had a brother named Joshua. This Joshua being in great favor with
Bagoses, the Kings General, had a promise from him that he should have the
Priesthood, by which he was so heartned as to strive with John in the Temple,
and so far provoked him as he slew him there. Bagoses hearing this, endeavored
to enter the Temple, and when he was forbidden asked if they counted him more
impure than the Carkess that lay within, and entering by force, took thence
occasion to punish the Jews seven years for the death of Joshua. For two Lambs
being daily offered in the constant sacrifices, he imposed upon every one a
Tribute of fifty drachms, which amounted to the yearly rate of sixty Attick
Talents. But if these things happened in the time of this Artaxerxes, and he be
taken for Ahasuerus, then must this murder have been committed toward the
beginning of his reign, and this Tribute of seven years been exacted before
Mordecai the Jew came in favor, which was after the fall of Haman, in the
twelfth year of Ahasuerus.

15. During the reign of Ochus, in his ninth year, Diodorus ad Olymp. 106. ann.
4.
died Mausolus the petty King of Caria, more famous after his death than
whilst living, to whom his wife Artemisia succeeding, because he left no
Children, burned with such affection toward him, Strabo lib. 14. Gellius lib.
10. cap. 18.
that reducing his bones and ashes into powder she drunk it, desiring to become
a quick and breathing monument of her husband. She proposed great rewards to
such Orators as would speak eloquently in his commendation, Mausolus his
monument.
in which did several notable men of that time. For the preservation of his
memory she raised such a monument as deserved to be reckoned amongst the seven
wonders of the World, and in the work whereof the most exquisite artificers
that then could be found were employed. Scopas on the East part, Bryaxes on the
North, Plinius lib. 36. cap. 5.
Timotheus on the South, and Leochares on the West, who notwithstanding
Artemisia died of melancholy before the work was completed, yet proceeded to
the finishing of it, intending it as a monument, not only of Mausolus (upon
which account the Pausan. in Arcadicis.
Romans called their most exquisite pieces of Architecture Mausolea) but also
of the excellency of their Art; to transmit their own names as well as his
posterity.

16. Bagoas had risen to that power with Ochus, that he ruled all things at his
pleasure, the King doing nothing without his consent. Diodorus ad Olymp. 111.
ann. 2. Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Yet either misdoubting of his security through the cruel disposition of the
King, or willing to have a greater power, owing Ochus also some displeasure for
killing the Egyptian God Apis (he belonging to that Country) poisoned him by
the means of a Physician, after he had reigned 23 years. Being dead, he cast
him to the Cats to be devoured, another being buried in the Royal Sepulcher, in
his stead, Bagoas kills Ochus, and setting up Arses makes him away within a
while.
and that he might express his cruel disposition, of his Thigh-bones he caused
sword hilts to be made. In his stead he made King his youngest son Arses,
killing all his other sons, that the new King being destitute of kindred and
friends, might yield the more obedience to himself. In reality he now reigned,
usurping all, except the mere Title; but Arses beginning to look to himself,
when he had ground to suspect that he intended to call him to an account for
his wickedness, he made him away also with all his Children in the third year
after he had set him up.

Darius Codomannus.
17. All the Children of Arses perishing with him, and the Royal family thereby
being desolate, Bagoas made choice of one Diodorus. Strabo lib. 15. and
Plutarch. in Alexand. alibi, Diodorus, Arrianus, Curtius.
Codomannus his friend, and placed him in the Throne, whom some Authors would
have not at all to be descended of the Royal line, being a Carrier of Letters,
but others make him the son of Arsames (brother to Ochus) by Sisygambis his
sister, according to the custom of the Persian marriages. Whilst a private man
in the Cadusian War he showed himself valiant, killing an Enemy, who challenged
any one of Ochus his Army to a single Combat, and thereby for the present
procuring great rewards, honor, and the Government of Armenia, after Arses his
death came to be remembered by the people, Justin. lib. 10.
which made choice also of him for their King, and that nothing of Royal
Majesty might be wanting to him gave him the name of Darius. Not long after his
preferment Bagoas repented him of what he had done, and being much versed in
King killing, provided a potion to send him after Ochus and Arses, which he
having notice of, called him to him, and in a pleasant humor offered it to
himself to drink, and thereto compelled him, satisfying the people sufficiently
in that he thus requited him, Curtius lib. 6. cap. 6.
who sought the same way to entrap him.

By this Darius was sent into Samaria, as a Satrapa, Sanballet, Josephus
Antiquit. lib. 11. cap. 7.
a Cuthaean by birth, and so of the same Original the Samaritans themselves
were. He thinking it good policy to procure Amity with the Jews, his
Neighbors, married his daughter Nicaso to Manasses the brother of Jaddus the
High Priest.

18. Darius with the Empire of Persia was necessitated to espouse a quarrel
with the greatest Monarch then known in the World except himself, and with such
a people in combination with him, Together with his Kingdom espouseth a quarrel
with the King of Macedonia.
as easily excelled all others in Military skill and valor. The quarrels which
happened betwixt the Persians and Graecians had been many, and as many bickerings
and contests in the field had ensued thereupon, wherein as the Greeks both at
home and abroad had constantly had success agreeable to their dexterity, so
each foil of the Persians gave as great a stroke to their credit, insomuch as
they were slighted by the other, especially after the retreat of those that
assisted Cyrus, who in despite of all Artaxerxes could do, marched through the
midst of his Territories as Conquerours, and having seen the great riches of
those Countries through which they passed, carried home a longing desire after
them, and an indignation that such things should be enjoyed by those who seemed
not in capacity to defend them.

19. The disadvantage of the Persians was the rising of the Kingdom of
Macedonia, to that high pitch of greatness to which it had been of late
advanced by the abilities of Philip the present King, who though he might have
pretended a cause where none was, yet was there some occasion of offense given
him, though but counted a necessary allay to his rising fortune so terrible to
the Persian Empire: Vide Arrianum lib. 1. page 41.
For when with great preparations he had besieged Periathus a City of Thrace,
Ochus gave order to his Lieutenants to assist the besieged, which was so
powerfully done, as his design miscarried. Yet he having brought all Greece to
his beck, and established his interest sufficiently in Europe, resolved upon
Asia, and assembling the estates at Corinth, procured himself to be declared
General of all Greece for the Persian War; for which he made mighty
preparations, imposing a certain number of Soldiers upon every City. The next
Spring he sent over as before him into Asia three Captains, Parmenio, Amyntas,
and Attalus, under pretense of freeing the Greek Cities there, which happened the
same year that Arses died, and he lived himself not long after, being stabbed
by one Pausanias, as he was solemnizing the nuptials of his daughter Cleopatra,
with Alexander King of Epirus. Hereupon Darius, who before studied how to turn
the War into Macedonia, thought himself secure, despising the youth of
Alexander his son and Successor, who exceeded not the age of 20 years.

20. But Alexander being a young man of a great and restless spirit, and of
wisdom and valor far above his age, overcame all difficulties, both in Greece
and Asia, which his Enemies had raised (getting himself to be chosen in a
little time General of the one, as his father had been, and in the other
suppressing betimes the sedition of the Army of Attalus, by taking of him out
of the way) and most vehemently burnt with a desire of the Conquest of the
Persian Empire; from an endeavor after which he might by no means be diverted.
Having either by fair, or foul means settled his matters in Europe, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 111. ann. 3. Justin. lib. 11. Arrianus lib. 1.
he passed over into Asia two years after his fathers death, and landed at
Troas with a Fleet of sixty long ships. He first cast a spear out upon the
shore, and leaped out in a frisking manner, as taking possession of the
Continent. Then presently he made a visit to the Tombs of Achilles and Ajax, to
whom he made a parentation, and mustered the Army he had brought over with him.
Concerning the number of Forces, those that were there present themselves have
not agreed in their relation, but according to the greatest probability, there
were of foot 13000 Macedonians, Alexander of Macedonia invadeth Asia.
of the Associates 7000. and 5000 Mercenaries, besides of Odrysae, Triballi,
and Illyrians 5000. and 1000 Archers, with such as fought with Darts. Of horse
there were 1800 Macedonians, 1800 Thessalonians, and of other Graecians 600.
besides a Guard of 900 Thracians and Paeonians. Diodorus ad Olymp. 111. ann. 2.


21. Darius after he had heard how Alexander was declared General of Greece,
and was much spoken of for his valor, shook off his former security and
buckled himself to preparation for resistance. He got together a considerable
Navy, and raised great Forces, for command of which he made choice of most
expert Captains, and amongst the rest of Memnon the Rhodian, a man very
excellent in Military matters, whom he sent into Phrygia with a band of 5000
Mercenaries to reduce Cyzicus to his obedience. He passed over the Hill Ida,
and on a sudden set upon the City, and had well-nigh taken it; but the
Defendants making strong resistance, he plundered the Territories adjacent, and
then retreated with much booty. In the mean while Parmenio, one of the three
Captains sent into Asia by Philip, and who stood close to the interest of
Alexander, took by storm Strynium, a Town of Phrygia, and sold the inhabitants.
From thence he went to Pitanes to attempt the same upon it, but Memnon coming
upon him struck such a terror into his men that he was forced to raise his
siege. After this, Callas with a band of Macedonians and Mercenaries engaged
with the Persians in a battle at Troas, but being overmatched in numbers, he
was worsted, and betook himself to Rhaeteum. These things fell out before the
passage of Alexander into Asia.

22. After Diodorus ad Olymp. 111. ann. 3.
Alexander was landed, the Persian Captains met to consult about carrying on
the War, whom Memnon advised by no means to hazard a battle with him; but to
lay waste the Country before him, thereby to hinder his march any farther for
want of necessaries, and then to pass all their Forces over into Macedonia,
and so to transfer the seat of the War into Europe. This wholesome Counsel was
rejected as below the Persian courage, and a resolution taken to engage, so
that gathering their forces together they marched into Phrygia toward the
Hellespont, and pitched their Tents upon the River Granicus (which runs
through the plains of Adrastea) intending it as a defense to them. Valor.
Maximus l. 7. cap. 3. Exter Exemp. 4. Pausan. Eliac. lib. 2.
Alexander in his way thither passed by Lampsacus, the inhabitants of which
either having already revolted to the Persian, or else suspected of such an
intent he resolved utterly to destroy. As he was thus minded Anaximenes an
Historian of that place, well known formerly to his father, and also to him,
presented himself to him, to whom he swore in so many words, that he would not
grant what he was about to ask, which the other readily apprehending, desired
of him that he would destroy Lampsacus, so that with his sharpness of wit
being circumvented, he was constrained to spare it against his will.

23. Alexander having with great trouble and danger passed the River Granicus,
then Diodorus ibid.
engaged with the Persians in a great and bloody battle, wherein much valor
was shown on both sides. The battle of Granicus.
Spithrobates, a Persian Satrapa of Ionia, and Son in Law to Darius, a man of a
great courage, with a strong body of Horse fell upon the Macedonians, whom no
one being able to sustain, Alexander himself grapled with him, a fierce combat
ensued, he wounding the King, who yet at length slew him. But Rosaces his
brother coming in upon Alexander, gave him such a blow on the head as broke his
helmet and lightly wounded him, and a second had killed him outright but that
Clitus, Surnamed Niger, a Macedonian, putting spurs to his Horse, in good time
cut off the hand of the Barbarian. A great conflict then ensued betwixt the
principal Persians and Macedonians, and many of the former lost their lives
upon the place; amongst which of most special note were Atyxes and Pharna^es,
brother to the wife of Darius, and Mithrobarzanes Captain of the Cappadocians.
These being slain, those that opposed Alexander began to fly, and afterward
all the rest; of the 100000 foot which the Persians brought into the field
about 10000 being slain^ and of the 20000 Horse, 2000. Of Alexander his Army
one Justin ex Trogo.
reports nine Footmen, and 120 Horsemen to have fallen, but Plutarch. ex
Aristobulo.
another only 34 in all, amongst which were nine Footmen. The King by
confession of all deserved most commendation for his valor, and next to him
the Thessalian Horsemen. Arrianus lib. 1.
Arsites the Persian fled into Phrygia, and there killed himself, because
through his advice, he seemed to have been author of this overthrow.

24. After he had refreshed his Army, Alexander marched through Lydia, Diodorus
ut prius.
having Sardis delivered up to him, and came to Ephesus, where he dissolved the
Oligarchical form of Government, and set up a Democratical one in its room,
commanding the same to be done in all Greek Cities, which he ordered to be left
to their own Laws. The Persians which had escaped at Granicus were come to
Miletus with Memnon the Rhodian, against which City he went and besieged it
both by Land and Sea, and by his Engines making great breaches in the walls,
the Inhabitants yielded themselves to his mercy, to whom he gave both life and
freedom, but such Barbarians as he took he either slew or scattered them up and
down in the quality of slaves. A little after he dissolved his Fleet,
consisting of 160 Ships or more, only reserving a certain number for the
conveying of Engines and other instruments for a siege, amongst which were
twenty Auxiliary Vessels belonging to Athens.

25. Memnon, after the taking of Miletus, with the most considerable Persian
Officers, and a multitude of Mercenaries, betook themselves to Halicarnassus,
the greatest and most elegant City in Caria, which he took upon him to defend
for the King, to whom he sent as Hostages his Wife and Children, and thereupon
command was given to all the Maritime parts of Asia, to obey him as their
Captain General in the War. Alexander seteth at liberty all Greek Cities.
Alexander in the mean time sent his Engines thither by water, together with
provision for his Army, and marched himself by Land thitherwards with his whole
Force, setting at liberty in his way all the Greek Cities, which he left to
their own Laws, and freed from Tribute, professing that he undertook this
Expedition for the freedom of the Greeks. In his way he was met by Ada the
Queen of Caria, who after the death of her Husband Idrieus, was deposed by her
Brother Pexodarus. She delivered up Alinda, the strongest City in the Country
wherein she dwelt, into his hands, and imploring his help for the recovery of
the Kingdom, adopted him for her son. He despised it not, and left her the
Government of Caria, over which he declared her Queen, by which courtesy the
Cities being overcome, sent him Crowns of gold, and delivered up themselves
into his power.

26. Orontobates a Persian, Son in Law to Pexodarus, after his death kept
possession of Halicarnassus, Diodorus and Arrianus ut supra.
with whom Memnon the Rhodian and other Persians, after the taking of Miletus,
joined themselves. Alexander now besieged it, and with all his might
endeavored the taking of it by assault; but such was the pertinaciousnesse of
the defendants, that they held him out, and making a sallie had given him a
defeat, if the old Soldiers buckling their Arms to them had not come in in good
time, He takes and razeth Halicarnassus.
and repulsed them with great slaughter; after which the Soldiers forsook the
City, and so he took it, and levelled it with the ground. The Castle he
fortified with a wall, and a notable ditch, in which for the defense of Caria
he left 3000 foreign Foot, and 200 Horse, under the command of Ptolomy; and
restored to his adoptive Mother Ada, the Principality of the Country. From
thence he proceeded toward Lycia and Pamphylia, that reducing the Seacoasts
into his power, he might render the Enemies Navy unserviceable to him, which he
in a good measure performed, and came in the midst of Winter into Mylias a
Region of Phrygia, where he entered into League with the Ambassadors sent to him
from Phaselis, and the lower Lycia, who surrendered all the Cities into his
hands. Afterward he went into Phaselis, where he stormed a Castle built by the
Pisidians, to infest the Country.

27. Whilst Arrianus lib. 1.
he here remained, he understood of a plot against his life, by Alexander
Aeropus, called also Luncestes (from Lyncus a Town of Epirus, as it is probable)
who was promised by Darius the Kingdom of Macedonia, The treason of Alexander
Lyncestes.
and 1000 talents of Gold besides, if he could any way procure his death. His
Mother had by letters advised him to take heed of him, and the thing being
confessed by Asisines a Persian, whom Darius under a show of a Message to the
Governor of Phrygia, had sent to deal with him in this matter, he committed
him to custody, not thinking it safe to put him to death, lest thereupon some
trouble should follow, in Macedonia. From Phaselus he marched to Perga on the
shore of the Pamphylian Sea, concerning which many ancient Historians reported,
that it by an extraordinary providence gave way to him, and herein Josephus
has rather been too credulous, whereas Strabo lib. 14.
at a low water the place used to be dry, and gave way to passengers; only
Alexander happening to come thither in Winter-season, and trusting all to the
goodness of his Fortune, would march through before the water was fallen off,
so that his men waded all the day in water up to the navel. Arrianus ibid.
Subduing all in his passage, at length he came to the Lake of Ascania in
Phrygia, and thence in five Encampings to Celaenae, the Castle of which being
held by the Satrapa of Phrygia with 1000 Carians, and 100 mercenary Graecians,
after 60 days truce (in which they had in vain expected relief from Darius)
was yielded unto him.

28. In Celaenae he left a Garrison of 1500 Soldiers, and declaring Antigonus
Satrapa of Phrygia, went forward for Gordium, having wrote to Parmenio to meet
him there with his Forces, who accordingly came; Curtius lib. 3. Arrianus lib.
1. and 2. Plutarch in Alexand. Justin lib. 11. Curtius l. 3. c. 2.
and there arrived also a supply of 1650 men out of Greece. This Gordium a
City in Phrygia, had been the regal City of Midas the Son of Gordius King of
this Country (concerning whom notable Stories are related) and herein was a
Temple of Jupiter, wherein Alexander heard that there was a yoke belonging to
Gordius, the bands of which whosoever could untie, the Oracles promised him the
Empire of all Asia. When he had taken the Town he came into the Temple, He
cutteth in two the Gordian knot.
and asked for the yoke, which being brought to him, when he could not find the
ends of the thongs which were hid amongst the knots, lest his frustrate
endeavor should be ominous, he cut them in pieces, with his sword, and thereby
either eluded or fulfilled the Oracle.

29. Darius this while sent a great sum of money to Memnon, Diodorus ad Olymp.
111. ann. 4.
whom he had declared General of all his Forces, wherewith he raising many men
all over where he came, and rigging a Navy of 300 ships, betook himself
seriously to his work. He presently reduced Chins, and sailing to Lesbus easily
took Antissa, Methymnus, Phyrrhus, and Eressus; but Lesbus and Mitylene more
strongly fortified, with great loss of men. His name being blazed abroad by
these actions, Arrianus l. 2.
most of the Islands Cyclades sent their Ambassadors about a Peace, and a
rumor being spread that he intended to fall upon Euboea, a great fear seized
upon the Inhabitants thereof, and many of the Graecians who envied the Fortune
of Alexander, began to take courage, and conceive new hopes, amongst which were
the Lacedaemonians, who always had despised both his alliance and that with
his Father. Thus prosperously succeeded Darius his affairs under the management
of Memnon; Memnon Darius his General dies.
but Providence having otherwise determined concerning his estate, Memnon died
shortly after, and with him the King's success was even extinct. He was in
good hope that the War would have been translated out of Asia into Europe, by
necessitating Alexander to return; but understanding of his death, he consulted
with his Friends whether he should manage the War by his Lieutenants, or go
himself in person, and give the Macedonians battle.

30. The Persians persuaded him to march in the head of the Army, Diodorus
ibid. Curtius lib. 3.
which thereby would fight with more alacrity, but Charidemus (or Eudemus) an
Athenian, a man much admired for valor and prudence (who by the command of
Alexander being banished his Country, was come to the Persian Court) advised
him not rashly to commit the fortune of his Empire to the hazard of his own
life, but keeping the chief power in his own hands to send some expert
Lieutenant to the War. He told him that 100000 men would be sufficient for this
enterprise; a third part of them being Graecians, with which he doubted not to
engage to perfect what already was well begun by Memnon. The King at first gave
ear to what he said; but the Persians obstinately opposed it, and so
interpreted his words as if he affected the chief command, for that end, that
he might betray the Empire to the Macedonians. Hereat he grew angry, and in his
passion upbraided the Persians with cowardice, which so far incensed the King,
before this exasperated against him, that his anger overtopping his reason, he
cast a belt about him after the Persian manner, and commanded him to be put to
death, who foreseing his ruin, cried out as he was led away, that shortly he
would repent it, and pay sufficiently for so unjust proceedings. After the
cooling of his passion he repented too late of his rashness, and considering
the valor of the Lacedaemonians, bethought himself what man of worth he might
find fit to succeed Memnon; but finding none to whom he might commit so great a
trust, was necessitated to expose himself to danger for the preservation of his
Kingdom. Then raised he Forces in all places, which he commanded should meet at
Babylon, where accordingly were found 400000 Foot, and above 100000 Horse, and
with this number (taking his Mother, Wife, one Son of six years of age, and two
Daughters marriageable along with him) he marched toward Cilicia.

31. Alexander in the mean while placed Satrapaes over Paphlagonia and
Cappadocia, which voluntarily yielded themselves, Arrianus and Curtius ut supra.
and hastened toward the Straights of Cilicia called Pylae, which being quitted
by those that were there placed to maintain them, he easily passed, and came to
Tarsus, which Arsames the Persian also forsook, and wasting Cilicia to
straighten the Macedonian Army of provisions, fled amain to the King. Here he
fell sick of a disease, which Aristobulus.
one wrote he got by too much toil, Diodorus.
others assign no particular cause at all; but according to the general
tradition, Justin l. 11. Curtius. Plutarch. Arrianus and Val. Maximus lib. 3.
cap. 8. extern. exemp. ult.
he contracted it by casting himself all hot and sweaty into the River Cydnus,
whence such a cold seized upon his Nerves that he fell speechless, and so
small hopes there were of recovery, that little probability was conceived of
protracting the danger. Only one Physician named Philip an Acarnanian, who
used a speedy and desperate kind of course in his practice, undertook the cure.
But by letters from Parmenio he was lately advised to beware of him, as being
corrupted by Darius for a great sum of money to make him away. Yet he counting
it safer to commit himself to the doubtful fidelity of the man than perish by a
certain disease, put himself into his hands, and taking the potion, gave him
the letters of Parmenio to read, fixing his eyes upon him as he drank, whom as
he saw nothing troubled at the matter, he took more courage, and recovered the
fourth day after.

32. Darius having notice of the sickness of Alexander hasted toward
Euphrates, thinking to prevent him, and seize upon Cilicia. Ameus Curtius ibid.
But he sending Parmen^o before to possess himself of the Pylae, or Straights
that part Cilicia and Syria, followed from Tarsus, and came to Anchiale built
by Sardanapalus; and thence to Solus, where he placed a Garrison, and fined the
inhabitants 200 Talents of silver for their affection to the Persians. Hence be
marched against the Cilicians, inhabiting the Mountains, which having brought
under, he returned, and understanding how Ptolomy and Asander his Lieutenants
had overthrown Orontobaces the Persian, who held the Castle of Halicarnassus,
whereby the parts adjacent were reduced to obedience; upon this good news he
sacrifized to Aesculapius, and restored the Democratical Government to the
Solians. Then giving order to Philotas to lead about the horse to the River
Pyramus, he marched with the foot by the Seacoasts, and came thither, whence
he passed over to the City Ma^los, where he had notice that Darius lay at
Sochus, a place distant two days march from the Straights. From Mallos he
passed to the City Issus, which being forsaken by the Persians, Parmenio had
seized on, and cleared the passage thither, where he consulted whether he had
better pass forwards, or there expect his supplies out of Macedonia. Parmenio
persuaded him that no place could be more convenient for him to fight in than
that straight one about Issus, because both their Armies would then be equal in
effect, such narrow places being incapable to receive a multitude. After three
days he passed the Straights and came to Myriander, where much rain falling
held the Macedonians in their Tents.

33. Darius in the mean while by the persuasion of some Graecians about him,
had made choice of the plains of Syria, most capable to receive his multitudes,
and opportune for the horse to charge in; and for some time here he continued;
but Alexander delaying his march, he was persuaded by his Courtiers that he
dared not to adventure any further, or look him in the face, and because Winter
approached he would lose no time, and therefore sending away his money and
stuff of most value, with such as were not fit for War, unto Damascus, he
hasted into Cilicia, where he supposed Alexander to have possessed himself of
the difficult passages, as not daring to try battle in open field. Supposing
that he pretended sickness, and hid himself in the straights, he passed over
the Mountain, and went to Issus, most imprudently passing by, and leaving him
at his back. Taking this place, and therein such of the Enemy as being sick and
weak were there left, he cut off their hands, and then searing their Arms sent
them away to tell their King what they had seen; for he thought now the Enemy
to have left Issus, and fled for fear of him, and for that reason hasted over
the Hill Pinarus, thinking to fall upon him in the Rear. Alexander knowing for
certain that he was passed by, took thence occasion to encourage his Soldiers,
who now could not be overmatched by multitudes, and sending a party of horse to
view the straights, returned thither by night, and repossessed himself of them.
Then refreshing his men for the rest of the night, he set a strong watch upon
the Rock, and in the morning went down into the path, and set his Army in order
for a battle.

The battle of Issus.
34. This being done, the Armies joined ere long, and Alexander seeing where
Darius was, made toward him, which when Oxyathres the brother of Darius saw,
to prevent him, he placed a Company of most valiant hors-men before the
Chariot, which cut off many of Alexander his men, who pressed forwards. But the
Macedonians giving way to none in valor, with great violence broke in amongst
them, and then a mighty slaughter followed, and a great heap of Carkases lay
before Darius his Chariot. Many of the most noble Captains amongst the Persians
fell, some of the Macedonians, and Alexander himself received a wound in his
Thigh. Darius his Chariot horses being wounded with spears began to fling, and
threatened the overturning of him, when fearing he should be taken alive he
leaped out, and mounting an horse ready for him, he cast away his Royal
apparel, and shifted for himself, after which his horse was put to the rout and
ran away. The Infantry discouraged herewith made no considerable opposition,
the great multitudes being unserviceable in so straight and precipitous a
place, and being put to the rout so hindered the flight, and trod one another
down, that more damage accrued hence than from the mere strength of the Enemy.
Of the Persian horse Arrianus writes 10000 to have been slain, and of the foot
90000. with whom others consent as to the number of the horse, but as to the
foot there is little agreement, some accounting more, and others less: 40000
are reported to have been taken.

35. Of Alexander's men 504. Curtius says were wounded; 32 footmen were
slain, and of hors-men 150. which some reckon less by 20. though another
increases them to 300. Alexander following the Chase was forced to pass with
his phalange over the Enemies dead bodies, and with 1000 horse did great
execution, but was not able to reach Darius, who rode upon a Mare that had a
Foal left at home, and therefore ran with more speed, he being accustomed to
have some kept for such necessities. His Tents were easily taken, and therein
his Mother, Wife, Son, and two daughters; but of money not above 30000 Talents;
the rest being sent beforehand to Damascus. The women hearing that Alexander
was returned with the Robe of Darius, made great lamentation, which he
understanding, sent Leonatus to them to put them out of fear as to his death;
to promise them the maintenance of their former dignity, and a Visit from him
to be made the next morning. As soon as it was light, he went to them with
Hephaestion his greatest favorite, both whom when the Mother of Darius saw,
and knew not which was the King, she made reverence to Hephaestion, as seeming
to her from the worth of his Clothes to be the greater person, which when she
understood to have been amiss, was troubled at it, and asked his pardon; to
which he answered, smiling: Be not troubled Mother, for he also is Alexander.
A. M. 3672. Olymp. 111. ann. 4. Darii 4. Alexand. 4.
This battle of Issus was fought in the month Maemacterion, Nicostratus (or
Nicocrates) being Archon at Athens, in the fourth year of the 111 Olympiad, the
fo^^th of the reign of Darius, and the fourth of Alexander. A. M. 3672.

36. Alexander, after this victory, marched for Syria, and sent Parmenio before
him to Damascus to seize upon Darius his Treasure, Curtius lib. 3.
which by Cophenes the Keeper thereof was betrayed into his hands, and for that
was rewarded with death by one of his Accomplices, who sent his head to Darius.
Of Coin here was found 2600 Talents, besides 500 pound weight of Bullion, and a
World of other riches. Of men and women 30000 were also taken, with 7000 beasts
that carried burdens. Darius his Lieutenants revolt to Alexander.
Then was Parmenio sent to seize upon the Persian Fleet, and others to take in
the Cities of Syria, which upon the report of the success of the battle at
Issus was easily done, the Governors of Darius yielding themselves with their
Treasures. As Alexander traveled into Syria, many petty Kings met him adorned
with their Diadems, Justin. lib. 11. Curtius lib. 4.
whereof some he received into friendship, and others he deprived of their
principalities, as they had deserved of him. When he came to the City
Marathon, he received Letters from Darius, wherein he desired the ransom of his
Wife, Mother, and Children, with some other conditions of peace; but such as
rather became a Conqueror, than one that had now been thrice shamefully
beaten, His offers scorned by Alexander.
not vouchsafing, in his direction, to Alexander the Title of King. He
disdained his offers, justified his War from the invasion of Greece by the
former Persian Kings, and the treachery of Darius himself, who hired one to
murder him, as Philip his father had formerly been by some set on by them. He
promised him his relations without Ransom, if he would come himself as a
Suppliant for them, and safe conduct, he both knowing, as he said, to overcome,
and show favor to the Conquered. And the next time he wrote he bad him
remember that he did it not only to a King, but to his own King also.

37. Alexander marched to Byblus, Arrianus lib. 2. Curtius lib. 4. Justin. lib.
11.
which yielded to him upon composition, and thence to Sidon, the inhabitants of
which being so hardly used formerly by Ochus, in hatred of the Persians sending
for him. The King of Sidon was one Strato, who being the son of Gerostratus the
King of Aradus the Island Governed it in his absence (he joining his ships, as
the rest of the Phoenician Kings, to the fleet of Darius) and meeting Alexander
as he came into Phoenicia, put a Golden Crown on his head, and gave up Aradus,
Diodorus ad Olymp. 111. an^. 4.
and Marathus, a great and wealthy Town, standing upon the Continent over
against it, with Mariamne, and all that belonged unto them, into his hands. But
now because he had done this rather for that the will of the people was such,
than out of his own inclination, Alexander deprived him of his Kingdom, and
permitted his beloved Hephaestion to bestow it upon any of his friends. He
chose to confer it upon a Sidonian by whom he was entertained; but he refused
it, for that it was unlawful for any but one of the Royal stock to possess
it. He wondering at the greatness of his spirit joined with so much honesty,
bid him choose any one of the Royal Race on whom to bestow it, who accordingly
made choice of Abdalmon (or Abdalomnius) a poor Gardener who wrought for his
living, but of unblameable life, and descended of the Royal family. Alexander
admitting of him, said, the habit of his body could not withstand the
nobleness of his stock, but desired to know with what patience he had endured
such poverty, to whom he answered, That he wished he could as well bear a
Kingdom, and that those his hands had satisfied his desire: whilst he had
nothing, nothing was wanting to him. The King being much taken with his
carriage, not only gave him the hous-hold stuff of Strato, but most of the
booty got from the Persians, subjected the Country adjacent unto his power,
and afterward also the City of Tire, according to Diodorus.

38. Now was all Syria in the hands of the Macedonians, Curtius lib. 4.
and whole Phoenicia also except Tire, which City was seated in an Island
about half a mile distant from the Continent. As he marched thitherwards, the
Tyrians sent him a Crown of Gold of great value, in a Congratulatory way,
Justin. lib. 11.
and a large quantity of provisions; which he received as from friends,
Diodorus ad Olymp. 112. ann. 1. Plutarch. in Alexandro.
and friendly signified to the Messengers his intention to go into their City,
to pay some vows he had made to Hercules. They told him there was a Temple of
Hercules without the City, in the place called Old Tire, wherein his devotion
would be most suitably performed, and so dissuaded him from entrance, that he
was enraged thereat, and threatened ruin to the City, telling them, Arrianus
lib. 2.
that though they were confident in the strength of the place, and despised his
Land-Army, yet in short time he would make them find they were in the
Continent. And in confidence that their Town, not only fenced with high and
strong Walls, but also with the Sea, was impregnable, they resolved to stand
out against him, being encouraged also by the Carthaginian Ambassadors, who
after their yearly custom (in token of observance to their Mother City) were
come to celebrate the sacred Anniversary, and promised them certain, and speedy
supply by Sea, which for the most part at that time was commanded by their
Fleets.

39. Alexander yet having not his Navy at hand, and foreseeing that a long
siege would be a great hindrance to his designs, sent to them about an
agreement; but contrary to the Law of Nations, they slew the Messengers, and
threw them into the Sea, with which affront being much moved, he resolved to
besiege them. Ere he could do this, such a quantity of earth or other matter
was to be cast into the Sea, as to join the Island to the main land, which for
the depth of the water, and the force of the Current, was a task almost
insuperable; but there being great store of stones and rubbish at hand in Old
Palaetyrus.
Tire, Alexander his great attempt for the Conquering of Tire.
he caused it to be utterly demolished, and by the hands of many thousands of
his own men, and the people of the neighboring places, set upon the work. The
Tyrians (whose King Azelmicus being absent with Darius his Admiral, had left
them to the Government of his son) hindered it all ways possible, and when it
was near concluded, a violent wind spoiled a great part of it, but to repair it
he caused great Trees to be cut down in the Mountains, which together with the
boughs being cast in, and earth being heaped upon them, resisted the violence
of the waves, and at length by the great number of hands, and incredible
industry, the Island became but a Peninsula. But for all this, the Tyrians
having the command of the Sea, their City seemed yet to be impregnable,
whereupon Alexander had thoughts of gathering together a Fleet; but in the mean
time came in the Kings of Aradus and Byblus, who had withdrawn themselves with
their Fleet from Autophradates the Persian Admiral, and with them the Sidonian
Galleys. Besides these Vessels belonging to Phoenicia (which were 80 in number)
at the same time came ten from Rhodes, from Solos and Mallos three, and from
Lycia ten, besides one great Gally from Macedonia. All these he pardoned, as
having been necessitated to join with the Persians. And Azelmicus the King of
Tire now left Autophradates and came home; Arrianus writing that he was taken
in the City.

40. From the Mountain Libanus was wood brought for the making of Engines,
Towers, and Ships, in which work whilst Alexander his men were employed, some
of the wild Arabians fell upon them, slew thirty, and took scarcely so many. He
upon notice hereof left the charge of the Siege to Perd^^cas, and Craterus, and
speedily with a ready Band of men went into Arabia, where when they came to the
mountainous parts of the Hill called Antilibanus, they left their Horses and
marched on foot. When it grew night, and the Enemy approached, though his men
were before, yet would he not leave his Schoolmaster Lysimachus being weary
and spent, but still drawing him on was parted from the Army, and forced with a
few about him to pass the night in a dark and cold place. But seeing many
fires to be kindled afar off by the Enemy, he being nimble of body ran to one
of them, and killing two Babarians that there sat, brought away a fire-stick
burning to his Companions, who therewith kindled a great fire, and thereby
struck such a terror into the Arabians, as all that night they passed in
quietness. Then partly by force and partly by agreement he reduced the Country
into obedience, and in eleven days time returned to Sidon, where he found
arrived out of Peloponnesus 4000 Greekish Mercenaries, under the conduct of
Alexander the Son of Polemocrates.

41. Having then got together a Navy of 190 or 200 ships, he set sail from
Sidon and came to Tire, the Inhabitants whereof refused to fight by Sea, but
yet let down none of their courage, though 30 Messenges were come from Carthage
to let them know, that that State being hindered by a domestic War, could not
afford them any succor. They sent their wives and children thither to be out
of the danger, being thereby the more willing to undergo any themselves, which
they little regarded, making stout resistance, but at length the City was
taken; one says by treachery, another by a stratageme, but more by plain
force; Alexander himself alone first going down from the wooden Tower he had
reared, by a bridge laid upon the wall. The Inhabitants, though the Enemy had
entered, called one upon another, and fortifying the narrow passages stood out
still, till the number of 7000 (the most of those that fought) were slain. Tire
taken.
The Conqueror condemned the women and children that were found unto bondage,
the young men to the number of ^000 he caused to be hanged all along the shore,
or crucified, as another tells us, (which was accounted a servile kind of
death) because the Tyrian slaves had formerly conspired against their Masters,
and slain them all with their whole families, leaving no free people alive,
except one Strato and his Son, to whom and his posterity they committed the
Kingdom. Fifteen thousand the Sidonians saved upon the account of kindred (they
reckoning both Tire and Sidon to have been built by Agenor) from whom the City
was again re-peopled, and to such as had fled to the Temple of Hercules,
Alexander granted indemnity, amongst which the King and his family were, with
some Carthaginians which were come for the honor of Hercules to the
Metropolis. A. M. 3673. Ol. 112. an. 1. V.C. 422. Darii 5. Alexand. 5.
This befell Tire in the month Hecatombaon, when Annicetus (otherwise called
Niceratus and Nicetas) was Archon at Athens, in the first year of the 112th
Olympiad, the fifth of Darius, and the fifth of Alexander, A. M. 3673.

42. During this Siege, the Officers of Darius whch escaped from the battle at
Issus, with all those that followed them, and the youth of the Cappadocians,
and Paphlagonians, attempted to recover Lydia; but Antigonus who there
commanded for Alexander overthrew them thrice in several places. At the same
time also Aristimenes, who was sent with some ships by Darius to recover the
Coast of Asia, lying upon the Hellespont, was wholly defeated by a Fleet of
Macedonians which Alexander had sent for out of Greece.

43. Whilst Alexander lay before Tire, another Embassage came to him from
Darius, who now offered him 10000 talents as a ransom for his relations, and
all Asia betwixt the Hellespont and the River Halys in Dower with his Daughter;
which conditions that he might incline him to receive, he sets before him the
difficulties of passing into the Eastern Countries, and laid the loss of the
last battle to the straightness of the place: Darius sends new proposals to
Alexander, which he refuses.
he sought to terrify him by threatening to incompasse him in the plain
Countries, and bad him consider how impossible it was to pass the Rivers of
Euphrates, Tigris, Araxes, and the rest, with things of the like nature. The
proposals being brought before a select Committee of Alexander's friends,
Parmenio who was now old, and full of riches and honor, said, that if he were
Alexander, he would accept of them, to which the King answered, that so would
he, if he were Parmenio. But he returned answer to Darius, that he offered him
nothing but his own, and what victory and his own valor had possessed him of;
that he was to give conditions and not to receive any, and that having passed
the Sea it self, he disdained to think of resistance in transporting his Army
over Rivers. As for his Daughter, he said he would marry her, though without
his consent, and if he would taste of his humanity, he should come and refer
himself to him. Darius having received this answer, prepared himself anew for
the War.

44. Tire being taken, Alexander invaded Judaea, resolving to bring all
Palestine into subjection. At this time Jaddus was the High Priest there,
Eusebius. in Chronico. Plin. lib. 12. cap. 25. Josephus Antiquit. lib. 11. cap. 8.
whose Brother Manasses married Nicaso the Daughter of Sanballat, who had been
sent from Darius to govern Samaria, being both Sons to John, called in
Nehemiah, Jonathan and Johanan, who was Son to Jehoiada. Manasses thus matching
himself, the people was displeased at it, and thereupon Jaddus desired him to
put away his wife; not only the People but the Law so requiring it. Hereupon he
repaired to his Father in Law, and told him, that his wife was dear unto him;
but he must either part with her or his Priesthood, who answered, that he
would so bring it about, that he should not only be Priest, but an High Priest
also, A Temple built by Sanballat on mount Gerizim.
being minded to build for him upon Mount Gerizim near to Samaria a Temple like
to that of Jerusalem, which thing he would obtain to be confirmed by Darius.
Many betook themselves to Manasses, being allured with the newness of the
thing, and the liberality of Sanballat; but Alexander at that time passing the
Hellespont, the consultation thereupon was disturbed. After Darius was beaten
and retired back into Persia, Sanballat revolted unto Alexander, and going over
to him with 8000 men, though now very old, desired of him leave to build his
new designed Temple, persuading him it would be for his interest, that thereby
the Jews being divided amongst themselves, might be the less able to resist
him. Alexander yielding to his request, he returned, and falling with great
industry upon the work, he died not long after.

45. This was at such time as Alexander lay before Tire, during which Siege,
Jaddus the High Priest of the Jews refusing to break his Faith, Alexander
invadeth Judaea.
he sent round about to demand an Oath of Allegiance, and assistance from the
several Cities, and amongst the rest the messengers came to Jerusalem. Jaddeus
or Jaddus the High Priest answered, That he had entered by Oath into society
with Darius, and whilst he lived he might not by any means break his Faith;
with which answer Alexander being moved, after the taking of Tire (not of Gaza
as Josephus thinks, for then he must have returned backwards) he invaded
Judaea. The High Priest and People then looked for nothing but ruin, but he
imploring the assistance of God, was warned in a dream to go out and meet him,
adorned with his Pontifical Vestments, with the Levites and People, as in a
solemn Procession. Alexander meeting this long train, But his wrath is appeased.
lighted from his Horse, and adored the Priest, at which thing all the rest
being amazed, Parmenio asked him the reason thereof, to whom he answered, that
he worshipped not the Priest, but the God whom he served, for that whilst he
was yet in Greece, and consulted about his Expedition into Asia, such an one
appeared to him, advised him to it, and promised him success. Then going up to
the City he ascended to the Temple, and sacrifized according to the directions
of the Priest, who showed him the Prophecy of Daniel, wherein was foretold,
that a Grecian should obtain the Empire of the Persians. He accounting himself
the man rejoiced thereat, and the next day offered to the People whatsoever
they would ask of him, who requested they might live after their own Laws and
Customs, that on every seventh year in which they sowed not, they might pay no
tribute, and that such of their Countrymen as inhabited Babylon and Media,
might also be left to their own Laws, all which he readily granted them. He
offered them also, if they would follow him, the freedom of the exercise of
their Religion, whereupon many gave their names to the Expedition; and then
leading his Forces to the neighboring Cities, he was friendly received by them.

46. The Samaritans met him in the way, desiring him to visit their City
Sicirna, (seated at the foot of the Hill Gerizim, and inhabited by the
Runagates of the Jewish Nation) to honor their Temple with his presence, and
to remit to them also the tribute of every seventh year, they sowing not
therein; for that they were Hebrews, though not Jews, as descended of Joseph
and his two Sons Ephraim and Manasseh, Curtius lib. 4.
all which he referred to his return. By this time his Officers had recovered
several places that had revolted, as Callus Paphlagonia, Antigonus Lycaonia,
and Balacrus Miletus, after he had overthrown Idarnes the Captain of Darius.
Cilicia he had committed to the care of Soscrates, the Country about Tire to
Philotas the son of Parmenio, who had delivered his charge of Cebestia to
Andromachus, that he might follow the Expedition. All the Towns of Palestine he
had got now into his hands, except Gaza, which Batis the Eunuch resolved to
hold out against him. He besieges Gaza.
This was a City distant from the Sea about two miles and an half, of difficult
access by reason of the depth of sand about it, the Sea near unto it being
very muddy, being large, seated upon an high Rock, and compassed with a strong
wall. Hither, having commanded Hephaestion to go before with the Fleet, he
came, and sat down before it with all his Forces.

47. Having viewed the situation of the City, Diodorus, Josephus, Curtius,
Arrianus, ut prius.
he resolved that light kind of earth to be fit for digging of mines, which he
commanded presently to be attempted, and seeing that no wooden turrets could be
erected by the walls because of the looseness of the sand, he made a great
heap of earth and stones to be laid, which equalled the height of the walls, on
which he planted his Engines for battery. By the advice of Aristander his
Prophet, he contained himself for a time without the reach of the Arrows, but
the Arabians whom Batis the Governor (called Baberneses by Josephus) had
hired, issuing forth set fire to the Engines, and beat away the Macedonians
from the Mount, he ran in with the Targetiers to the rescue, and kept his men
from running, but he himself received a wound on his shoulder. Afterward those
Engines being come by water with which he had taken Tire, he caused the whole
City to be surrounded with mounts two furlongs broad, and 250 foot high,
whereby conflicting both with Engines above ground and below, at length after
two months it was taken, the wall being broken by a Mine, at which breach the
Macedonians entered. Alexander himself led in his men, and when his former wound
was not yet quite cured, received a bruise on his thigh with a stone. The
defendants stirred not from their places, but fighting to the last, were all
slain to the number of 10000. The women and children the Conqueror made
Slaves, and furnishing the City with a new Colony gathered out of the places
adjacent, used it as a Garrison in the War. Diodorus ad Olymp. 112. ana. 2.
Curtius lib. 4.


48. From Gaza he sent Amyntas the Son of Andremo with ten Galleys into
Macedonia, to make a Leavie of the stoutest young men, and bring them over,
because the War though prosperous, wasted his old stock of Soldiers, and he
could not so well trust foreiners as his own subjects. Then marched he strait
for Egypt, He marches for Egypt.
and the seventh day after his removal from Gaza arrived at that place,
afterward called Alexanders-Camp, and came to Pelusium. Here met him great
multitudes of Egyptians, who being weary of the insolence and avarice of the
Persians, expected his coming, and gladly received him. Placing a Garrison in
Pelusium, and commanding that the ships should sail up the River to Memphis, he
having the Nile on his right hand, came, through the desert to Heliopolis, and
thence crossing the River, unto Memphis, which when he approached, Mazaces the
Persian Governor met him, and delivered into his hands 800 Talents, with all
the royal household stuff. Here he sacrifized to all the Egyptian Gods, and
celebrated Games, and then sailed down the River to the Sea; and when he came
to Canopus sailed about the Lake Mareotis, betwixt which and the Egyptian-Sea,
he chose out a place whereon to build a City, which he would have called after
himself Alexandria.

49. In this place toward the Sea and Haven stood there once a Village named
Rhacotis. When the figure of the new City was to be delineated, Strabo lib. 17.
for want of Chalk, they marked out the ground with Meal, which presently was
seized upon by an innumerable company of Fouls of all sorts, Plutarch. in
Alexandro.
that from the Sea and Lake came flocking thither, Foundeth Alexandria.
and devoured it all. Hereat the King was discouraged, but his Prophets told
him, that it signified the City should he exceeding populous and wealthy, and
nourish all sorts of men. He himself designed in what place the Forum should
be, and where the Temples that were to be Consecated to the Egyptian and
Grecian Gods, and herein used the skill of that noble Architect Dinocrates
(called also Stasicrates) who was employed by the Ephesians, in restoring of
their Temple formerly consumed with fire. This (afterward Famous) City was
founded by Alexander in the fifth year of his reign, and the first of 112th
Olympiad, the 417th of Nabonasar, from which year the month Thoth, as also the
fifth of Darius, the supputation of the years of Alexander is begun by Ptolomy
the Mathematician, and a Native of this City, A.M.3673. 329 years before the
Era of Christ.

50. Leaving the care of his new designed City to fit Overseers, he took a
journey toward the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, Iidem.
situate in the vast sandy deserts of Libya, because he had heard that Perseus
and Hercules had formerly gone thither; or to know his fortune, Arrianus lib. 3.
or that he might at least have occasion to boast of his knowledge of it. In
the midst of the way he encountered Ambassadors sent to him from the
Cyrenaeans, Diodorus ad Olymp. 112. ann. 2.
who brought a Crown with other great gifts, amongst which were 300 excellent
horses trained up and taught for the War; which receiving in good part, he
entered into confederacy with them. Two great dangers especially to be met with
in this journey, viz. want of water in so dry a place, Justin. lib. 2.
and of being overwhelmed by heaps of sand, which the South Wind threw upon
50000 of Cambyses his army, he escaped wonderfully by abundance of rain which
is said to have falln, whereby the way was made more firm and passable; Goes
to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon.
and two Crows are reported to have been his Guides, and in the nightime when
they could not be seen, by their croaking to have given notice which way they
tended. When he arrived at the Temple, the Priest, either hired to it, or
mistaking the Greek language as it is thought, saluted him by the name of
Jupiter's son. Hereupon he took the name upon him, and to his Mother Olympias
as well as others wrote with that Title. She facetiously checked him for
slandering, and bringing her in danger with Juno, by making her an Whore to
Jupiter. By the terror hereof he hoped to do wonders with the Barbarians,
Gellius lib. 13. cap. 4.
and because Hammon was painted with the upper parts like a Ram, and the nether
like to a man, he also would appear to be horned, for which reason amongst the
Arabians he obtained the name of Dulcarnaijn. When he received an answer
satisfactory, as he pretended, he returned into Egypt the same way he came, or,
as another wrote, by a more direct one toward Memphis.

51. Being come to Memphis, he received many Embassies from Greece, whence also
came a new supply of Forces, viz. 400 Greekish Mercenaries from Antipater, and
500 horse out of Thessaly. Arrianus. Curtius. Justin. Josephus de bello lib. 2.
Antiquit. lib. 11. cap. ^.
The neighboring Cities he exhausted for the peopling of his new one, which he
ordained should be the Metropolis of Egypt. Amongst other sorts of people the
Jews also, whose fidelity he approved, were enrolled inhabitants, having equal
privilege with Graecians, and obtaining the name not only of Alexandrians, but
of Macedonians also: and to the Soldiers of Sanballat the Cuthaean, who
followed him into Egypt, caused he Lands to be assigned Thebais, which Province
he committed to their defense. He greatly desired to see not only the remoter
parts of Egypt, but Aethiopia also: but the War depending yet with Darius,
hindered him, and therefore disposing of Egypt, he removed in the Spring thence
to Tire in Phoenicia. Curtius.
Over Egypt he left Aeschylus the Rhodian, and Peucestes the Macedonian, with
4000 Soldiers; and the care of the River Nile he committed to Polemon with 30
Galleys. As for the Civil Government, he left it to Dolaspes the Egyptian, to
rule according to the ancient Laws.

52. Ere his departure, he understood of the death of Andromachus the Governor
of Syria, whom the Samaritans burnt alive. With all expedition then he removed
to revenge his death, but being on his way, the murderers were delivered up to
him, whom he punished according to their deserts, and placed Memnon in his
room. Taking the City Samaria, he gave it to the Macedonians to inhabit, but
the Country about it to the Jews, Eusebius.
for their fidelity to him, with immunity from Tribute. Coming to Tire,
Josephus contra Apionem lib. 2.
he celebrated Games, as he had done at Memphis, and sacrifized again to
Hercules; and nominating several Governors over the places already Conquered,
took his journey toward Euphrates.

53. Darius having understood of his design, to find him out whithersoever he
should go, gave out orders for all his Forces to meet at Babylon, Arrianus,
Curtius, etc.
whereof some consisted of such Nations as rather seemed to fill up the names
of men than to make resistance. This Army being almost greater by the half than
that which perished at Issus, many wanted Arms, which were sought for with all
diligence. Some have reckoned 1000000 foot, and 400000 horse, bedes 200
Chariots, and 15 Indian Elephants; whereas Alexander his Forces amounted but to
40000 foot, and 7000 horse. In the month Hecatombaeon Alexander came to
Thapsacus, where he found two bridges on the River Euphrates; but such as
reached not quite over to the further side. Mazaeus was sent thither to hinder
his passage, with order also if he could not do this, to spoil, and destroy all
things in his way; but upon his approach he made haste away, Alexander passes
Euphrates,
and Alexander then making up the bridges, transported over all his Forces, and
so proceeding through Mesopotamia, having Euphrates and the Armenian Mountains
on his left hand, made for Babylon, not the nearest way, but that which was
more convenient for provision and moderation of heat. As he went forwards, he
was given to understand by some Scouts which he took, that the King had pitched
his Camp on the further side of the River Tigris, And Tigris.
with intentions to hinder his passage, but coming thither, he neither found
him, nor any opposition at all. This River was so swift (being upon that
account by the Persians called the Arrow) that by the violent force of its
stream it drove many weighty stones before it, and those that lay in the bottom
were made so round, and well pollished by continual rolling, that no man was
able to fight on so slippery a footing, so that the Macedonian footmen to wade
the River, were forced to enterlace their Arms, thereby making one weighty body
to resist the fury of the stream; so deep the Chanel was on the further side,
that to keep their Bows from being we^, as also their Arrows and Darts, they
were enforced to lift them above their heads, so that Darius might here have
easily resisted the Macedonians, and given a check to the fortune of the
Conqueror, had not the fate of the dying Persian Empire besotted his mind, and
deprived him of all common prudence.

54. Having (though with great danger) passed the River without any loss save
of a little of the Baggage, he led on through Assyria, having on the right hand
the River Tigris, and on the left the Gordian Mountains. On the fourth day
after his passage Mazaeus sent a party of 1000 horse upon him, which was easily
repelled by the Paeonian Captain Ariston, who slew their Captain, and bringing
his head to Alexander, demanded a Cup of Gold as his fee, according to the
custom of their Country, to whom he replied, smiling, That an empty one was
due, but he would give him one full of good liquor. Two days he here
continued, giving orders for a march the next morning; but it happened that in
the first watch the Moon was Eclypsed, and seemed of a bloody color, An
Eclypse of the Moon discourageth his men.
whereat (as all other common people long time after) the Macedonians, not
knowing the cause, were marvelously affrighted. They apprehended it as a
certain token or presage of their overthrow and destruction, and began to
murmur, that for the ambition of one man that disdained to own Philip as his
father, and would be called the son of Jupiter, they should all perish, being
forced to make War, not only against Worlds of Enemies, but against Rivers,
Mountains, and the Heavens themselves. He knowing it to be dangerous to lead
his Army to fight whilst it was possessed with matter of terror, called the
Egyptian Astrologers, to assure them that this Eclypse was rather a certain
presage of good success: and he made it out only by this reason, that the
Graecians were under the Aspect of the Sun, and the Persians of the Moon; and
therefore the Moon failing and being thus darkened, the Persian glory was to be
Eclypsed. Aristander the Soothsayer affirmed the same, promised Alexander good
success, and affirmed a battle was to be fought in that same month, for the
sacrifices portended victory. Hereby the Soldiers were settled, and their
courage redoubled, according to the great influence of superstition upon the
common sort of people.

55. Thinking it wisdom to make use of the present disposition of their minds
he marched thence, and proceeded, till he heard that Darius was not much above
twenty miles distant from him, upon notice whereof he rested there his Army for
four days. Here were interrupted Letters written by Darius to the Graecians,
to persuade them to kill, or betray him, which by the advice of Parmenio he
suppressed, Statira the wife of Darius dies.
and removing thence it happened chat Statira, the Wife and Sister of Darius,
through the tediousness of the journey, and grief, fell into untimely travel,
and died, at which disaster Alexander shed tears, and spared no cost in
solemnizing her Funerals, grieving that he was thus deprived of so fair an
occasion of showing mercy. One of her Chamberlanes, by name Tir^os, an Eunuch,
slipped away, and carried the news of her death unto Darius. He fell of beating
his head, and deplored the fortune of the Persians, which not only suffered
the Queen to be taken Captive, but dying in that condition to want the Ornament
of a Royal Funeral. Being satisfied that there was no want of any such
Ceremonies, or of tears from his Enemy to bedew her Hearse, he fell into a
jealous conceit that nothing but unchaste affections had drawn them from
Alexander, Vide Plut in vita Alexand.
and lamented his Wife's condition, who had been subjected to the lustful
power of the Conqueror. But being with much ado persuaded of his continency,
with hands lifted up to Heaven, he prayed that he might be able to restore the
fortune of the Persians to his posterity as he found it, that so he might be
able to requite Alexder for his noble carriage toward his relations: But if
the fatal time was come, and it so seemed good to Nemesis, and the vicissitude
of worldly things, that the Persian Empire should receive its period; that none
but Alexander alone might sit in Throne of Cyrus.

56. He dispatched away to him then a new Embassy of ten of his principal
friends, and offered him for his Mother, and two Daughters Ransom 30000
Talents, and in portion with his Daughter Statyra all Asia, Justin, Curtius,
Diodorus ut supra.
betwixt the Hellespont and the River Euphrates. He answered, that sometimes he
endeavored to corrupt his friends, and otherwhiles his Soldiers to destroy
him, and that therefore be was to be prosecuted not as a just and fair enemy,
but as a pernicious murderer: that what he had already gotten, though now
offered to him, was the reward of War, by which the bounds of both their
Kingdoms should be limited, and that they should both abide by what the fortune
of the next day should assign them. Darius had before this time come to Arbela
a City belonging to Babylon, where leaving the greatest part of his baggage, he
went to the River Lycus, over which laying a Bridge, he passed over his Army in
eight days, and proceeding ten miles pitched his Camp upon the River Bumelus,
near to a Village called Gaugamela, which in the Persian Language signified the
house of a Camel; Strabo lib. 16.
for that Darius the Son of Hystaspis gave this place to the maintenance of a
certain Camel which had been tired in carrying his provisions through the
Deserts of Scythia. This was a Champain Country round about, and such grounds
as were high he caused to be levelled, to be convenient for the fighting of his
Horse, and that he might have a free prospect round about him.

57. Understanding from his Ambassadors returning, that he must expect nothing
but a battle, he sent Mazaeus to defend a passage which he never yet dared so
much as to hazard, the rest of the Army he caused to march above a mile farther
in battel-aray, A Pannnick fear seizes on the Macedonians.
and there to expect the Enemy. Alexander fortifying his Camp which he left
with an ordinary guard, went forwards toward the Enemy, and in his march a
pannick fear seized on his Army, by reason of the Lightning of the Heavens in
the Summer season, which they took as proceeding from some attempt of Darius;
with some pains he undeceived them, and thought good to fortify himself in the
same place that night. Yet in the night he departed thence about the second
watch, as thinking to fall on the Enemy by break of the day. Upon his approach
Mazaeus with his Horse forsook an Hill which he had seized on, and returned to
Darius, which place Alexander by the advice of Parmenio chose himself, as safer
than the Plain, and from which one might take a full view of the Persian Army.
Before the Fight his friends came to him and complained of the Soldiers,
Plutarch in Apophthegm.
because in their conferences they had agreed to take all the profit of the
plunder to themselves, without bringing any thing to his treasury; whereat he
smiled, and said, they told him good news concerning the discourses of such as
were resolved to overcome, and not to fly. Many then of the Soldiers resorted
to him, and bad him be of good cheer, and not be afraid of the multitude of the
Enemies, which would not endure their very shouting for the battle.

58. The two Armies lying in the view of each other, Idem in Alexand. Curtius*
Arrianus. Diodorus.
in the eleventh night after the Eclyps of the Moon, Darius kept all his men in
arms, mustring his Forces by torch-light, which made all the Plain betwixt
Niphates and the Gordyaean mountains to be of a flame. Alexander in the mean
time whilst his Macedonians took their rest, was busy in his Sacrifice with
Aristander. Parmenio and others would have had him fallen upon the Persians in
the dead of the night, thereby to strike more terror into them; but he answered
them, that he would not steal Victory; which Darius was afraid of, and
therefore contained his men in Arms all the night, which not a little in^ured
his affairs the day following. All the night Alexander passed without sleep,
being careful for the main chance; but about the morning watch fell so fast
asleep, that it being full day he could hardly be awaked, and to his friends
demanding the cause thereof he replied, that now he was eased by Darius of all
his care, seeing he had gathered all his Forces into one place, and therefore
in one day he hoped to put an end to his daily labors and danger. His whole
force consisted of about 7000 Horse, and 40000 Foot, over which his chiefest
Captains were Parmenio, with Philotas and Nicanor his Sons, whereof this
commanded the Foot Regiment of the Argyraspides, or Silver-Shields; Coenus, who
commanded the Elimiots; Perdiccas Captain of the Orestae and Lyncestae;
Meleager; Polysperchon; Hephaestion Captain of his Lifeguard; Menidas; Philip
the Son of Balaccus; Craterus; Er^gyus the Mitylenaean; Philippus that had the
Thessalian Troops, and Clytus the black who lead the Kings Regiment. He himself
commanded the right wing, and in both caused the battle to be made something
bending-wise, lest they should be encompassed with the multitudes of the
Persians.

59. Darius having marshalled his men according to their several Nations, took
the command of the wing opposite to Alexander, and lead on against him. After a
sound to the charge on both sides, and a great shout, the Armies met, and in
the first place the scythed Chariots being driven with great fury upon the
Macedonians, The battle of Gaugamela.
struck them with great consternation, for that Mazaeus the General of the
Horse following the Chariots close, made the charge the more terrible. But the
Macedonian phalange, according to the King's order, beating their Targets with
their Spears, made such a noise, that the Horses skared therewith bore
backwards, and tetreated for the most part; and though some went still
forwards, yet the Macedonians parting asunder, made a lane and let them pass
through, yet with the loss of many whom the Scythes had caught. After the
Arrows and Darts were spent, the Armies came to handstrokes, wherein the Horse
was first engaged. Darius in the left wing was stoutly defended by his
followers, who fighting under his eye, labored all they could with their
multitudes to oppress the Macedonians. And Mazaeus in the left wing charging
with great valor, at the first onset did great execution. Then sent he a Party
of 2000 Caducians, and 1000 of the choicest Scythian Horse, to fall upon the
Enemies Camp, where a great tumult following, some of the captive women took
their opportunity, and betook themselves to their friends, but Sisygambis
Mother to Darius refused to stir, and kept her self quiet in the same place,
not thinking it fit to trust her self to the doubtful fortune of an escape, or
show any ungrateful disrespect to Alexander: the Scythians plundered most of the
baggage and departed.

60. In the mean while, part of the Horse that fought about Darius, with their
multitudes pressed sore upon the Macedonians, and forced them back, whereby the
second time the Victory seemed to incline toward the Persians. Alexander
seeing how he was concernd to relieve his men, broke out with his own Regiment
upon Darius himself, and with a Dart slew his Chariot-driver. The Courtiers
hereupon crying out, those that were further off supposed the King himself to
have been slain, and therewithal betook themselves to their heels, which the
next seeing fled also for company. The ranks also about Darius began to be
broken, Darius flies.
till at length all one side was bared, and then he accounted it also time to
fly, and therewithal such a dust was raised, Alexander with his Troops giving
the chase, that it could not be discovered which way he fled, using great
celerity therein, and for that purpose mounted a Mare that had lately foaled,
as he had done before at the battle at Issus. Whilst these things were thus
carried in the left wing, Mazaeus in the right sore pressed upon his
adversaries, which Parmenio with the Thessalian Horse and other for a time
sustained; but being put sore to it, he sent to Alexander for speedy relief.
But he could not be found; so that he was forced to use his utmost skill in
making the Thessalians endure the brunt; and at length put the Barbarians to
flight, after they were disheartened with the report of their Princes fortune.

61. Darius with a few in his company came to the River Lycus, which having
passed, when some advised him to break down the Bridge, lest the Enemy should
make use thereof in the pursuit, knowing that if he should do so, he must leave
many thousands of his men as a prey to him, he answered, that he had rather
afford way to the pursuers, than take it from those that fled. Here Alexander
immediately pursued him, but not being able to reach him, he returned, and
fought a more sharp encounter than ever with some Parthians, Indians, and many
of the valiantest of the Persians, wherein though he had the better, yet he
lost Sixty of his followers, and Hephaestion with Coenus and Mendas were
wounded. Of the Barbarians Diodorus.
one makes above 90000 to have been slain, of the Macedonians 500, and many
wounded. The number (...).
Another Arrianus.
counts of the former 300000 to have been slain, and a greater number taken,
with all the Elephants, and such Chariots as were not broken; Yet of
Alexander's men but 100 at most, with 1000 horses, partly killed outright, and
partly broken in the chase. A Curtius.
third reckons 40000 Persians, and less than 300 Macedonians to have been
lost. This battle was fought at Gaugamela a Village situate upon the River
Bum^lus, which being but an obscure place, the Macedonians to innoble their
Victory, gave out that it was at Arbela, a Town of good note, some fifteen
miles distant, beyond the River Lycus. A. M. 3674. Olymp. 112. an. 4. V.C. 423.
Darii 6. Alexand. 6.
Alexander obtained the Victory on the fifth day of the month Boedromion, in
the sixth year of his reign, as also the sixth of Darius; Aristophanes (not
Aristophontes his Successor, as some mistook) bein Archon at Athens, in the
second year of the 112th Olympiad. A. M. 3674.

62. Darius fled from the River Lycus to Arbela, where he arrived about
midnight, and then concluding that Alexander would ma^ch to Babylon and Susa,
resolved to fly into the utmost borders of his Kingdom, there to renew the
War; and accordingly withdrew himself into Media, beyond the Mountains of
Armenia. About midnight Alexander set forwards for Arbela, hoping to take him
there with all his treasure; but arriving there the next day, he found not him,
but met with much treasure, with his Bow and Target. Now seemed the Empire of
the Persians to all men to be dissolved, and thereupon Alexander was declared
King of Asia, Alexander declared King of Asia.
and for joy thereof sacrifized with great magnificence to his Gods, and
bestowed riches, houses, and Countries upon his friends. Foreseeing that the
air thereabouts, by reason of the corruption of the dead bodies might be
infectious, he removed with all speed from Arbela toward Babylon, being in his
way met with Mazaeus the Governor, who gave it up into his hands, and
Bagophanes the Keeper of the Castle and the King's treasures, lest he should be
exceeded by Mazaeus, caused the way to be strowed with flowers and garlands;
silver Altars heaped with Frankincense and other odours being placed on both
sides. Enters Babylon.
The Townsmen came also to meet him; whom he commanded to follow his rear, and
so entered the City and Palace in a Chariot, with his armed men about him.
Thirty days he spent in Justin lib. 11. Curtius. Diodorus.
looking over Darius his housholdstuff, all which time his Army glutted
themselves with the contentments of the Town. Here the Chaldaeans showed him
the motions of the Stars, and the appointed vicissitudes of times: and
Calisthenes the Philosopher sent into Greece unto Aristotle (whose cousin
german his Mother was) the Celestial observations of Porphy^ius apud
Simplicium de Coelo. l. 2.
1903 years. He consulted these men about his affairs, and at their desire
caused such Temples to be rebuilt, as Xerxes had out of anger destroyed, after
his overthrow in Greece. And especial care was taken for that of Belus in the
midst of the City, the ruins of which were so great, that the labor of Strabo
lib. 16. page 738.
10000 men for two months was required for the clearing of the ground. He
commanded all his Soldiers to lay their hands to the work, amongst which the
Jews only refused to do it, who thereupon received great incommodity, till
such time as they were discharged of this task by the King, as Apud Joseph.
contr. Apionem lib. 1.
Hecataeus the Abderite wrote in his Book concerning the Jews, who also at that
time lived with Alexander.

63. He committed the charge of the Castle of Babylon to Agathon of Pydna, with
a Garrison of 700 Macedonians, and 300 Mercenaries, appointing Mazaeus the
Satrapa of the Country. To Apollodorus of Amphipolis, and Menetes of Pella, he
assigned the Government of the Militia of the Satrapies of Babylon, and the
other Countries as far as Cilicia, leaving them 2000 Foot, and 1000 talents of
silver, to hire as many Solders as they could; and to Mithrinas who betrayed
the Castle of Sardis unto him, he granted Armenia. Of the money which he found
at Babylon, to every Macedonian Horseman he gave seven Minae (each Attick Mina
containing an 100 Drachmes, and about 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. Sterling) and to every
stranger five; to every Macedonian Footman two, and to every stranger two
months pay, for a reward. Then set he forwards from Babylon, and in his way
met with a supply of 500 Horse, and 6000 Foot, sent out of Macedonia, with 600
Horse out of Thrace, and 3500 Foot; and out of Peloponnesus 4000 Foot, and 380.
(or according to Diodorus little less than 1000) horse. These were also
accompanied with 50 of the Noblemen's sons of Macedonia, for the Guard to the
Kings person.

64. Drawing near to Susa, he met with the son of the Satrapa thereof, sent
unto him with a Messenger that brought Letters from Philoxenus, whom presently
after the battle at Gaugamela he had sent thither. The Letters imported that
the Susians had yielded their City to him, and that all the King's Treasure
was safe for him, which Abulites the Satrapa sent his son also to signify,
either for that he sought to obtain favor, or as some thought, being underhand
ordered by Darius to do so; that Alexander being busied with such booty, Comes
to Susa.
he might have time to consult the better for his own affairs. On the twentieth
day after his departure from Babylon he arrived at Susa, where he took
possession of betwixt forty and fifty thousand (as is to be gathered from all
Authors) Talents of Silver, besides Gold and Rich Furniture. Many things he
there found, which Xerxes had brought out of Greece, and amongst the rest the
brazen Statues of Harmodius and Aristogiton, which he sent back unto Athens. He
left the Mother and Children of Darius at Susa, with Masters to teach them the
Greek tongue, and then committing the City to the care of Archelaus, the
Castle to Xenophilus, the Treasury to Callicrates, and the Satrapy of the
Country of Susa to Abulites, in four encampings he came to the River
Pasitigris, being resolved to invade Persia.

65. Near to the Country of Susa lies that of the Uxians, Diodorus. Curtius.
Plutarch.
running out into the Borders of Persia, and leaving a straight passage betwixt
it self and the Susian Dominions. The inhabitants of the low-land Country
became without much ado subject to Alexander; but the other with some slaughter
of them he forced to submit; Arrianus. Polyaenus Stratagem. lib. 4.
and whereas they demanded money of him which they used to receive from the
Kings of Persia for their passage, he imposed a Tribute of 100 Horses, 500
Cattle, and 30000 Sheep yearly to be paid, they living like Shepherds, and
using no money. After this he committed the baggage, with the Thessalian Horse,
the Mercenaries and Associates, with the rest of the Army that used heavy
Armor, to Parmenio, to lead that way into Persia, that was passable with
Carriages, and he himself taking the Macedonian foot with the horse of the
associates, and others, with all speed marched a nearer one through the hilly
Country. Being arrived at the Pylae, He is opposed at the Straights of Persia
by Ar^obarzanes.
or Straights of Persia, he found Ariobarzanes, a Persian Satrapa, seized
thereof, by whom he was repelled also with some disgrace and loss, being
forced to retreat four miles from the Straights; but at length being led by a
Shepherd, another difficult way, he came upon his Enemies on a sudden, and put
them to flight. But Ariobarzanes in the midst of near forty horse, and 5000
foot, with great slaughters on both sides broke through the Army of the
Macedonians, which on both sides had beset him, and made for Persepolis the
chief City of that Country, but being shut out by those that kept it for the
Conqueror, he turned again upon his Enemies, and with great valor renewing
the battle, perished with all his followers.

66. Having private notice from Tiridates the Eunuch, Keeper of the Treasure at
Persepolis, that they there had an intention to rifle it upon hearing of his
coming, he took the horse, and all the night marched thitherwards. He comes to
Perseplis,
Being a quarter of a mile from the Town, about 800 Grecians met him in manner
of suppliants, whom the former Persian Kings had reduced into bondage, and as a
token of slavery cut off their Feet, Hands, Ears, or Noses, and having marked
them with some Barbarian Letters, kept them as laughing stocks for derision.
They besought Alexander, that as he had done by Greece, so he would also
deliver them from the cruelty of their Enemies. He offered them to send them
back, but they rather chose to receive some grounds to live on, than returning
home to carry greater disgrace than comfort to their relations. To each of them
then he gave 3000 Drachms, and 10 Garments, with Cattle, Sheep, and Corn, for
the stocking of their grounds. The next day he called a meeting of his
Officers, whom he told how there was no City more inveterate against the
Graecians than that, which had been the Seat of the Persian Kings, and that
therefore by the destruction of it they were to make a Parentation to their
Ancestors. The Town, all besides the Palace, he allowed the Soldiers to
plunder, who made a great slaughter of Captives, and got unestimable riches in
that place, which heretofore of all they had been most secure. Which he causes
to be plundered.
Entering the Castle, he received the Treasure which there had been heaped up
from the time of Cyrus the Great, containing a great quantity of Gold and
Silver. Diodorus says, he took thence 120 Talents, Gold being reckoned at the
reckoning of silver, part of which he employed in the present service of the
War, and the rest sent to Susa to be kept.

67. Leaving a Garrison in Persepolis, and a great part of the Army with the
baggage there, with 1000 horse, and a party of foot, he made an invasion into
Persia. Much rain fell, and grievous Tempests ensued, but he persevered in his
purpose, and also when they came to such places as were full of Snow and Ice,
and though the inhabitants fled from their Cottages to the Mountains, He
harrazeth the Country of Persia.
and killed his stragglers, yet he brought them to submit, and laying waste the
Territories of Persia, subdued also the Mardi, a warlike Nation, differing
much from the customs of the other Persians; and on the 30th day returned to
Persepolis. Then did he distribute gifts to his friends, making no spare of
Treasure, and there he wintred four months, rather enervating than refreshing
his Army with the delicacies of the place. For the celebration of his victories
he offered magnificent sacrifices, and feasted his friends Princely; and to the
feast admitted Courtisans. Amongst the rest was Thais the Athenian, the
Mistress of Ptolomy the son of Lagus. She gave out that the King would
atchieve a most gallant Enterprise, if in a frollick he would with them set on
fire the Palace, and thereby in one moment overthrow the glory of the Persians
by the hands of women. This finding acceptance amongst the younger sort, now in
the midst of their Cups, one amongst them desired that they might now revenge
the injuries offered to the Temples of the Greeks with burning firebrarnds,
which was seconded by others; but yet they said, that so great an affair did
only belong to Alexander. Burns in a frolic the Palace of Persepolis.
He being moved hereat, was led out by Thais in a dance with the Minstrels, and
she receiving a firebrand from him, first set it to the Palace, after which
all the rest followed, and so that structure was reduced into ashes. Thus was
the fury of Xerxes against Athens revenged by a Woman, and Native of that
City, in the same way, though accompanied with derision. But Alexander
afterward repented too late, alleging that he should more grievously have
punished the Persians, by forcing them to behold him seated in the Palace, and
Throne of Xerxes.

Comes to Pasargadae.
68. From Persepolis he removed to Pasargadae, a City founded by Cyrus the
Great, and the ancient Seat of the Persian Kings, which being delivered up to
him by Gobases the Governor, he therein found 6000 Talents. Here he saw the
Sepulcher of Cyrus in a Garden, into which he commanded Aristobulus (who wrote
the story) to enter, Strabo lib. 15. page 730.
who there found a golden Bed, a Table, and Cups, with a golden Basket, and
great store of Apparel, and Robes adorned with Pearl. On this place Cyrus
overthrew Astyages the Mede in his last battle, and thereby obtaining the
Soverainty of Asia, in memorial of it built this City, and a Palace, which
being by Curtius named Persagadae, or Pasagada, signifies the Army of the
Persians. Gad, turma. Stephanus.
Then Alexander either by force, or fair means, became Master of all the other
Cities of Persia, about the time of the rising of the seven Stars, from which
the ancients used to begin their Summer. He placed over this Country
Phrasaortes a Satrapa, and then, being minded to pursue Darius, set forwards
for Media, where he heard he was; Arrianus.
but being within three days journey of Echatane, there met him Bisthanes the
son of Ochus, who reigned before Darius. He comes to Ecbatane.
He assured him that the King was gone thence five days before, having taken
with him 7000. or 8000 Talents, and being accompanied with an Army of 6000
foot, and 3000 horse.

69. Dariu^ staid at Ecbatane some time to receive such of his Soldiers as had
escaped the battle; and for the furnishing of them with Arms. He raised forces
in the Neighboring Nations, What Darius did after the battle of Gaugamela.
and sent to the Satrapa of Bactria, and the higher Countries, to retain them
in obedience. And he determined, that if Alexander should stay about Babylon,
or Susae, to continue in Media in expectation of some better change of fortune;
but if he should pursue him, then to betake himself into Parthia, or as far as
Bactria, and lay all the Country waste as far as he passed, to cut off the
provisions of the pursuer. He sent therefore the women with all his Furniture
and Carriages to the Caspian Straights, and staid himself, with such forces as
he had raised, at Ecbatane, till such time as Alexander was within less then
two hundred miles of him. Then thought he of Bactria; Curtius lib. 5.
but fearing to be overtaken by Alexander (against whose celerity no distance
seemed to be sufficient) he changed his purpose, and though he fled, yet
prepared he himself rather for a fight than flight. His Army consisted now
(according to Curtius) of 30000 foot (whereof 4000 were Graecians, Commanded by
Patron, (a man for his constant fidelity to Darius, never enough to be
commended) and 3300 Bactrian horse, under the Command of Bessus the Satrapa of
the Country.

70. Alexander being come to Ecbatane, sent back toward the Sea the Thessalian
horse, and other associates, bestowing on them, besides their full pay, 2000
Talents. To Parmenio he gave in charge to bring all the Treasure out of Persia
into Ecbatane to be committed to the trust of Harpalus, whom he left with a
Garrison of 6000 Macedonians, besides some horse, and of the associates;
Alexander pursues him.
and then afterward he ordered him to march through the Country of the
Cadusians into Hyrcania. Clitus he commanded to go with his own Regiment into
Parthia whither he himself intended to come, but now with a select party with
incredible speed pursued Darius, and in eleven Encampings came to Rhagae. Here
seeing no hope ever to reach him, who before this had passed the Caspian
Straights) he staid five days, and then marched for Parthia, and on the first
day pitched his Camp by the Straights, and on the next having entered them, news
was brought to him concerning the Captivity of Darius.

71. For Bessus the Satrapa of Bactria, and Nabarzanes a Colonel of horse,
though his own servants, rebelled against him, and drawing their men to their
party, caused him to be bound, with an intention if Alexander should overtake
them, Bessus and others bind Darius.
to curry favor with him by the delivery of such a prisoner into his hands;
but if they should escape, then to kill him, seize upon his Kingdom, and renew
the War. They seized on his money and stuff, and taking into their society
Brazus, or Barzaentes, the Satrapa of the Arachoti and Drangi, lead him away
Captive in a Chariot, bound in Golden Fetters, as beseemed so great a King, but
yet, lest he should be known, they covered over the Chariot with base skins,
and unknown men drove it, his keepers following aloof off, lest he should be
discovered to any that asked of him. The Persians having none now to follow,
joined themselves to the Bactrians, and with the rest owned Bessus for their
General. But Artabazus with his Sons and Soldiers, as also the Greeks (whose
Captain was Patron) separated themselves from them, and taking another way
toward the Mountains out of the high road, departed, and went into Parthiene.

72. Upon notice of this conspiracy Alexander concluded that more haste was to
be used, and therefore taking along with him a party fit for such expedition,
he left the rest of the Army to Craterus to come after with more leisure, and
traveling all that night, and the next day till noon, gave his men a little
time to rest, and then again setting forward, came the next morning to that
place where Bagistenes the Babylonian (who brought him notice of the condition
of Darius) had departed. Then again marching fast that night, and the day
following, until noon, he came unto the place where Bessus laid hands on
Darius, as Curtius.
one tells us; but, as Arrianus.
another, where they that conducted him had rested the day before. Here he met
with Melon, Darius his interpreter, who being sick, and not able to follow, now
counterfeited himself a fugitive, and fully acquainted Alexander with the
King's condition. He hereby was further quickened up to use all expedition,
but his men spent with continual travel must needs have rest, and therefore he
made 500 Horsemen to dismount, and the Officers of Foot, and others most
valiant amongst them to take their Horses, being arrived as before, that so
they might be both Horse and Footmen as need should require.

73. Whilst he was thus busied, Orsillos and Mithracenes, two Persians who
detested the Paricide of B^ssus, came back from him, and acquainted Alexander
that he was 500 furlongs off, but that they could lead him a nearer way,
whereby he might soon overtake him. With this conduct he beg^n his journey that
night, and being come 300 furlongs encountered Brocubelus (or Antibelus) the
Governor once of Syria under Darius, who told him that Bess^s was but 200
furlongs off, that as he thought he made for Hyrcania, and marched out of order
as fearing no danger, And upon Alexander's approaching mortally wounded him.
and therefore might easily be surprised. He then continued his industry to
overtake him, but he and his accomplices had notice of his approaching, and
coming to Darius, bad him mount on Horseback, and withdraw himself by flight
from the Enemy. He refusing to do this, Salibarzanes and Barzaentes threw darts
upon him, and leaving him mortally wounded, wounded also the Horses that drew
him, lest they should follow far, and killed two Slaves which accompanied him,
having none now to follow him but a Dog which he had brought up. Aelian. Hist.
a^^. l. ^^. 25.
Having done this, the murderers with 600 fled with full speed, and that they
might not venture altogether, Narbarzanes went toward Hyrcania, and B^ssus
with a few Horsemen in his company kept on the way for Bactria. The rest of
their men stragled, as they were led, either by hope or fear: 500 Horsemen
imbodied themselves, not knowing, whether to fly, or to receive and fight the
pursuing Enemies.

But Alexander having notice of the fear and anxiety of the Enemy, sent Nicanor
with part of the Horse on before, to restrain their flight, he with the rest
following after, and when they were come up, so little courage appeared in the
Persians, that though they resisted, yet 3000 were presently slain, and the
rest stragled about like sheep, Alexander giving command then to his Soldiers
to abstain from slaughters. Now appeared an incredible thing, more prisoners
than they that took them, whilst the conquered were so stupefied that they
neither considered their own multitude, nor the small number of their Enemies.
In the mean while the beasts that drew Darius having none to drive them,
wandered out of the way for half a mile, and being wearied both by their wounds
and heat, stood still in a certain Valley. Not far off was a certain Spring,
Darius discovered by Polystratus.
to which Polystratus a Macedonian being directed, came almost spent with
thirst, and whilst he was drinking water in his helmet, he espied the Horses
fainting away, by reason of the darts sticking in their sides, and drawing near
to consider of the matter, found Darius in the Chariot sorely wounded, but yet
breathing. He desired some water of him to drink, which though none of the
best, yet he said was the best that ever he drunk^ He desired him to carry his
thanks to Alexander for his great humanity and courtesy toward his relations.
As for himself, he desired rather a seemly than noble burial, but bad him put
Alexander in mind how dangerous it would be to all Princes to suffer his death
to go unpunished. He wished him the Empire of the whole World, Dies.
and gave his ^and to Polystratus as though to be presented to Alexander; after
which wishing him a reward, for his kindness, from the gods, he expired.

This was the end of the Life, Reign, and Empire of Darius, a man who, if we
look at warlike matters, was fit for nothing less, but in other things did
nothing unbeseeming Royal Majesty. And neither could he; for as soon as he
began to reign, A view of his reign.
was he vexed by the Macedonians. Whilst he lived, one cross presently
succeeded after another: neither could he enjoy any rest from the beginning of
his reign. For within a while after, he received that overthrow at the River
Granicus; then lost he Aeolia, Ionia, and both the Phrygiaes: the Lydians also
and Carians (all but the Hallicarnassians) and not long after Halicarnassus it
self, and then all the Maritime Coast as far as Cilicia. After this he received
a great overthrow at Issus, in which his Mother, Wife, and Children were taken:
Phoenicia and Egypt fell off from him. At Arbela (or Gaugamela) losing a
mighty Army consisting of all sorts of people, he disgracefully was forced to
fly, then driven from his Kingdom, wandering up and down, and wanting due
accommodations, at last he was betrayed by his own servants, and at the same
time both a King and Captive, was ignomniously bound in fetters, and perished
by the treachery of those, from whom he should have expected safety, as
Arrianus writes. This happened in the year that Aristophontes was Archon at
Athens, in the month Hecatombaeon, when he had lived about fifty years, in the
seventh year of his reign, and the 203d of this Empire, in the third year of
the 112th Olympiad, A. M. 3675, 328 years before the ordinary Era of Christ.

Contemporaries with the Persian Empire.
CHAP. II. The affairs of the Graecians amongst themselves during this Empire.
SECT. I. Of such things as happened from the beginning thereof until the
Expedition of Xerxes.
Polycrates.
1. IN the time of Cyrus the Great, and afterward, lived Polycrates the famous
Tyrant of Samus, who from a small beginning arrived at such extraordinary
power, as no petty Prince of the Greekish Nation was ever accounted equal to
him for worldly felicity.

The word Tyrannus or Tyrant whence derived, and whom it signifies.
2. The word Tyrannus (which we English Tyrant) Suidas thinks to have been
derived from the Tyrrheni, a people of Italy, (...).
because they were cruel and given to robbery. Others thought it was derived of
the City Tire, by means of it is riches and glory. Most anciently the word was
of no ill signification, but was used in a good sense, there being no
discrimination betwixt King and it, as Aeneiad. l. 7.
Servius observes. For, though Homer (who never mentions Tire) either knew
it not, or would not use it, yet the Poets who follow him, call those Kings
that lived before the Trojan times by the appellation of Tyranni. Afterward
through the dissolute and cruel demeanor of some Princes, and the antipathie
of the Greeks toward Monarchy (after they had generally erected Oligarchical
or Democratical Governments) it came to be taken in a bad sense. Herein it is
especially given to those, who, being once private persons, enslaved their
Citizens by invading, without any just title, the supreme power; as to
Polycrates, Pisistratus, Dionysius, and Agathocles. It Is also applied to the
Children who succeeded their Fathers in the usurpation. And it is also given
sometimes to those who governed by the desire and consent of the People, as
Gelon of Syracuse, betokening, as to this particular, a petty Prince or
Regulus. For it is seldom or never in ancient Authors, when it is taken in an
ill sense, found applied to any but the usurping Lords of Cities (not any
notable Kingdom) and such Cities as had before been governed in the way of a
Commonwealth. And what is said of those Governors called Tyranni, must be
extended to their Government, in the Greek language called Tyrannis, which we
english Tyranny, SECT. 1.
though not in any ill sense, wherein the Athenians used it not when they would
have Solon to take the Tyrannis or Government upon him, though the word was
harsh. This is hinted to take off any thoughts of the ignorant, as if the word
reflected upon Monarchy, the best of Governments when all shall be considered.

3. Samus is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, lying over against Ionia, Vid.
Strabonem l. 14.
not far severed from it, containing in circuit scarce 100 miles, so called
from the height of it by the Ancients in their Language. On the West it looks
towars the Island Icaria, Samus called first Parthenia, and afterward Dryusa.
but on the East the continent of Asia, being near to Ephesus, and the
promontory of Mycale, from which it is distant but five miles. The most ancient
Inhabitants were Carians differing much from the Greeks both in language and
manners. But when the sons of Codrus led out Colonies from Attica, Androclus
one of them here settled one, Vid. Hera^li^.
by which the City of the same name with the Island was built; having a very
large and commodious Haven. It was presently much beautified with frequency of
Inhabitants, riches, and multitudes of buildings, and being very famous for the
Temple of Juno, which was especially worshipped in this place, it was reckoned
amongst the twelve Ionian Cities, being partaker of the great Council of
Panionium, and counted not inferior to Miletus, Ephesus, or Chius, the most
eminent amongst them. Lib. 3.
From Herodotus it should appear to have at first been governed by Kings, the
Inhabitants as he says, in the reign of Amphicrates, making War upon Aegina
which was hurtful to both sides: and this was the cause that in the Age
following the Aeginetans did as much by the Samian exiles which had retired
into Crete. But in what Age Amphicrates lived he does not mention; yet this is
apparent from his words, that the Samians because Islanders remained untouched
by the King of Lydia and Persia, when the other Ionian Cities in the continent
were forced by them into subjection.

4. But when Cyrus flourished in Asia, and Pisistrates at Athens, Herodotus
lib. 3. cap. 39.
Polycrates the Son of Aeaces one of their own Citizens offered violence to
their liberty. When first he seized on the Sovereignty, he made his two
Brothers Pantagnotus and Syloson partners with him, but afterward he slew the
one, and ejected the younger, and so having all the power in his own hands, he
contracted amity with Amasis, Polycrates his exploits.
who at that time reigned in Egypt. In a short time his affairs so prospered,
that he became famous through Ionia and all Greece, for wheresoever he made War
he prospered, with his 100 Biremes or Galleys with two ranks of Oars on a side,
and 1000 Archers, invading all his neighbors without any difference, for that
he held it for a rule, that he gratified his friend more by restoring what he
had taken from him, than if he had taken nothing away. He subdued many Islands
and many Towns in the continent. The Lesbians coming to help their friends of
Miletus with all their force, he overthrew, and took so many, as served him to
draw a ditch round about the walls of Samus. His affairs being thus prosperous,
were not unknown to Amasis, but being every day more prosperous than other, at
length Amasis suspected that his friend and allie for this prosperous Fortune
would have some disastrous end, and therefore he wrote to him, and desired him
that to make some certain change therein, he would pick out that which was most
dear to him, His felicity.
and in the loss whereof he would be most troubled, and make that away, so
that he should never more enjoy it. He accordingly took ship and cast into the
Sea his signet, which was an Emrald set in a gold ring; but it so happened, that
a Fisher taking a very large fish, presented it to him as only worthy of it,
and in the belly of it his Servants, when they cut it up, found the signet.
Amasis hearing this, took such assurance that an unfortunate end must follow
such prodigious success, that lest he should be troubled with the miscariage
of a friend and allie, he renounced his friendship.

5. When Cambyses was raising his forces for his Expedition into Egypt,
Polycrates sent to him underhand, to desire him to send for some supplies, who
doing so, he picked out such as he thought were most prone to rebellion, and
with them manned out two Triremes, desiring of him that he would not send them
back. Yet they after the War withdrew themselves from Cambyses, and went to
Lacedaemon to desire aid of that State against the Tyrant, which was granted
them, either for that the Lacedaemonians were engaged to the Samians (as these
pretended) because they had received supplies from them in the Messenian War,
or as the Spartans alleged, not out of any kindness, but malice to the
Samians, because they had in the Age foregoing intercepted certain presents
sent by them to Croesus, and to them from Amasis. The Corinthians were also
drawn in, having a particular quarrel of their own; the occasion was also
given at the same time, the Samians having taken from the Corinthians certain
Boys which they were carrying from Periander their Tyrant to Alyattes King
of Sardis to be made Eunuchs.

6. The Lacedaemonians coming with a great Fleet to Samus, besieged the City,
but endeavoring the storming of it were repulsed with some loss, and having
in vain spent forty days in the Siege (so valiantly was it defended by
Polycrates) they then returned home into Peloponnesus. A story went, that
Polycrates stamped some Lead, and covering it over with Gold, with it purchased
the departure of the Lacedaemonians; but this was the first Expedition which
the Doors made against Asia. Afterward at such time as Cambyses fell sick,
that fell upon Polycrates which Amasis had forewarned him of. At this time one
Oraetes a Persian was Governor of Sardis, Ionia, Lydia, and the Seacoasts, in
the place of Ha^pagus, who either for that he was upbraided that he got not
Samus, so near to his Province, into the King's hand, or for that Polycrates
slighted and gave no answer to a messenger which he sent to him (both which are
reported) sought earnestly to work his destruction. Knowing he had an ambition
to become Master of Ionia and the Islands, he sent to him to tell him that he
heard how excellent things he cast in his head, but that he wanted money to
accomplish them, wherefore he having now heard for certain that Cambyses
determined to kill him, offered to him, that if he would receive him he should
have half of the King's money which he had in his possession, whereby he might
get the Sovereignty of all Greece. And if he doubted of his faithfulness, he
desired him to send one of his most trusty servants to whom he would give
satisfaction.

7. Polycrates with great joy received the message, being greedy after money,
and to make the thing sure, sent Maeandrius his Secretary over to Oraetes, who
knowing him a cunning and circumspect man, filled several chests with stones,
and covering them at the top with gold, thereby deceived him. Polycrates was
yet dissuaded by all his friends from going over himself, for that the Oracles
were against it, and his Daughter dreamed that she saw him up aloft in the air,
where he was washed by Jupiter, and anointed by the Sun; but he was angry with
her for her importunity, and notwithstanding all disswasions went over to
Oraetes, taking with him amongst others, Democedes the Son of Calliphon of
Crotone in Italy, the most famous Physician then in his Country. He went over
into Magnesia as far as the River Maeander, and then Oraetes laying hold of
him, nailed him to a cross. Of those that accompanied him, Ends miserably.
the Samians he dismissed, telling them that they must account it for a great
favor so to be used by him, but all the Strangers and Slaves he took to
himself, and reduced them into the State of servitude. This end had Polycrates,
with whom none of the Syracusian Tyrants, or any other of Greece for
magnificence were to be compared. Maeandrius.
Him succeeded one Maeandrius his Vicegerent or Procurator, of whom Herodotus
tells many stories, and who by the help of Otanes the Persian Satrapa, being
removed, by the approbation of Darius the Son of Hystapes, Syloson the Brother
of Polycrates succeeded, Syloson.
Samus paying very dearly for it, what by the War and the ensuing severity of
Syloson. When Syloson died, Aeaces his Son succeeded him, Aeaces.
by the favor of the Persians; but was not long after thrust from his Tyranny,
when Aristagoras the Milesian drew all Ionia into rebellion against the
Persians; which happened about the eighteenth year of Darius.

8. In the second year of Darius, and the first of the 65th Olympiad, the
inhabitants of Platea in Boeotia, Eminius de rebus florentis Graeciae.
who never well accorded with their Neighbors the Thebans, being now irritated
with their continual injuries, that for the future they might free themselves
from such grievances, sent, and offered themselves to the Lacedaemonians (who
then were of greatest Authority in Greece) as Allies and Dependents. But they
perceiving themselves to be at too great a distance from them to give any
succors when need required, advised them to have recourse to the Athenians as
nearer to them, and of sufficient ability to relieve them. A League betwixt the
Plataeans and Athenians.
They accordingly did so, and contracted a straight league of Alliance with
Athens, which became a great eye-fore to the Thebans, and all their party a
long time after.

9. In the third year of the 66 Olympiad, and the 8th of the reign of Darius,
fell out great stirs at Athens, which never ceased till they produced a change
in the Government. Pisistratus the famous Tyrant at his death left three sons,
Hippias, Hipparchus, and Thessalus, and the principality (as it should seem
from De Politia Athen. Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 2.
Heraclides) to them all; though Hippias, as the eldest, had Supreme
Jurisdiction. He had hitherto for the space of thirty years enjoyed his fathers
Kingdom, being loving and affectionate toward his brethren, and moderate
toward his subjects: Hipparchus was accounted a wise man, and lover of
learning, being something given to be amorous, and Thessalus bold, and
headstrong. Thucydides lib. 6.
It happened that Hipparchus fell in love with one Harmodius, a young man of the
City, and sorely solicited him to unlawful dalliance, who therewith
acquainted one Aristogiton, a man of a middle rank amongst the Citizens, Stirs
at Athens.
and who most passionately loved him. He fearing he should be deprived of this
his dear one, consulted with himself how he might destroy, both Hipparchus and
the Tyranny. Hipparchus still going on to solicit Harmodius, but in vain, at
length resolved to be revenged on him, and executed it on his sister, which
being on a certain solemnity to carry up the basket that was to be dedicated to
Minerva, he put her by as unworthy of the office; though some of late have
thought that he ravished her.

10. Harmodius taking this in very evil part, and Aristogiton much worse,
prepared all things necessary for their conspiracy; but expected the great
feast called Panathenaea, on which day only the Citizens might be in Armor
without suspicion, for discharging the solemnity. They provided not many men
before hand, for the more close carrying of the business, and because they
hoped all the rest would without any hesitation be ready to come in to them.
When the day came, they and their party being ready with their Poniards, espied
a man talking with Hippias; Whereupon they thought they were discovered, and
therefore resolved to do that, wherein especially they were concerned,
Hipparchus slain by Harmodius and Aristogiton.
if they could, and so rushing in violently upon Hipparchus, they slew him in
the place. Aristogiton defended himself for some time from the Guard; but the
multitude flocking in, he was taken, after he had received many wounds, and his
friend Harmodius slain outright. Hippias having notice of what had passed, came
cunningly upon the Citizens that were Armed for the solemnity, and by his Guard
picking out such as had Daggers about them, or whom he suspected, thereby
prevented at this time all further trouble.

The behavior of the Pisistratidae, in the Government of Athens.
11. Hitherto he and his brethren had not been distrustful of their own safety,
and therefore had used no great Guards about them; not rendering their power
very burthensom to the people, but acting according to the rules of virtue and
prudence. They exacted only the 20th part of the public revenue, exceedingly
beautified the City, waged War, and left the Citizens to their former Laws;
only some one of them was always Magistrate, and other men held of them
yearly Offices, Pisistratus the son of Hippias, and Nephew to the founder of
this Kingdom, as it appears from Thucydides, having sometimes had the power
in his hands. But Hippias after this, fearing himself, exercised his power very
severely against the Athenians, putting many of them to death, and to establish
himself by foreign alliance he gave his daughter in marriage to Hippoc^us, the
son of Aeantides the Tyrant of Lampsacus, knowing them to be in great grace
with Darius King of Persia. To find out the accomplices of these two young men,
he tortured, amongst others, a woman named Leaena the Paramour of Aristogiton,
but she was so constant as to endure all, and biting off her tongue, spit it in
the face of the Tormentors, lest therewith she should discover any one; in
memory of which the Athenians afterward Consecrated in the Castle a Lioness
without a tongue, as also Erected Statues to the memory of Harmodius and
Aristogiton, as the liberators of their Country. These Statues were taken away
by Xerxes into Asia, and long after sent back by Alexander, or Antiochus, or
Seleucus, as is severally delivered by Historians. They also Decreed that their
names should never be given to any slaves.

12. Though these two did not actually procure the freedom of Athens, but
perished in the attempt, yet it was attributed to them, because that in the 4th
year after, some imitating their example expelled Hippias, and effectually
prored it. At this time the Alcmaeonidae (or those of the family of Alcmaeon,
Herodotus lib. 5. Capp. 62. etc.
who was great Grandson to Nestor, and being cast out of Messenia by the
Heraclidae, came and lived at Athens) being driven into exile by the
Pisistratidae (or Pisistratus his sons) having sometimes endeavored in vain
the recovery of their Countries liberty, still lay in wait for a more
convenient opportunity to accomplish it. Being full of money, they hired the
Amphyctiones to let them build a new Temple at Delphos, which was very
magnificent, and corrupted the Pythia (or the woman that received and delivered
the Oracles, standing in a Tripos, or three footed stool) as often as any of
Sparta came thither, still to propose to them to set Athens at liberty. This
being constantly done, the Lacedaemonians accounted it a piece of their
religion to do it, and sent Anchimolius, a man of prime Rank amongst them, with
an Army to expel the Pisistratidae, though their friends, and such as had
deserved no otherwise than well of them. They being aware of this, had
contracted friendship and alliance with the Thessalians, and now procured from
them a supply of 1000 horse, which by a common decree they sent under the
Command of Cixeas their King; which falling in upon the Camp of the Spartans,
slew amongst many others Anchimolius the General, and beat the other to their
ships, in which they returned home.

13. Afterward the Lacedaemonians sent another Army by Land, under the Conduct
of Cleomenes the son of Anaxandridas, Herodotus ut prius cap. 64. etc.
who invading the Athenian Territories was encountered by the Thessalian horse,
which he put to flight, and having killed above forty of them, the rest
shifted away, and betook themselves as they could into Thessaly. Cleomenes then
coming up to the City besieged the Tyrants, being shut up within the
Pelasgick-wall, but being unprovided for a siege, and they furnished
sufficiently with provisions, after a few days he was about to depart
homeward, had not one thing falln out. As the Children of the Pisistratidae
were privately to be conveyed out of the Country, The Pisistratidae banished.
they were intercepted, which overturned the affairs of their Parents, and
forced them to Covenant with the Athenians, for their Ransom, within five days
to depart out of Attica, which accordingly was done, Hippias going straight to
Sigaens, and thence to Lampsacus, from which place he went to Darius, and in
the 20th year after returned with his Army, Thucydides ut supra.
and died (as some say) in the battle at Marathon. Sigeus was a Town situate
upon the Hellespont, which Pisistratus took by force out of the hands of the
Mitylenaeans, and made Hegesistratus his base son, by a woman of Argos, Tyrant
there. Hippias was offered from Amyntas the King of Macedonia, either Anthemus,
or Iolcos, a City in Macedonia; but he refused both, and betook himself to
Darius, whose Army he afterward conducted into Attica.

14. The state of Athens great before, Herodotus cap. 66.
grew greater after this grand mutation, in which two men contended for the
chief Authority: Clisthenes one of the Alcmaeonidae (the Nephew by his Mother
of Clysthenes, the Tyrant of Sicyon) and Isagoras the son of Tisander.
Clysthenes being too weak for the other's faction, Clysthenes changes the
names of the Tribes.
that he might engratiate himself with the people, whereas they were before
divided but into four Tribes, increased them unto ten, and whereas formerly
they were named from the four sons of Ion, viz. Teleon, Aegicor, Argadaeus, and
Hopletes, now he changed these for other Heroes, which were, 1. Hippothoon the
son of Neptune, 2. Antiochus of Hercules, 3. Ajax of Telamon, 4. Leon the
Athenian, Pausan. i^ Atticis.
who according to the Oracle devoted his Daughters for the public safety, 5.
E^echtheus, who slew Immaradus the Son of Eumolpus, 6. Aegaeus, 7. Oeneus the
base Son of Pandion, 8. Acamas the Son of Theseus, 9. Cecrops, and 10 Pandion.

15. Isagoras envying Clysthenes that respect, which hereby he obtained,
procured Cleomenes the King of Spar^a (with whom he had contracted friendship
during the War with Hippias) to come once more against Athens. He sent a
Messenger first, Civil Wars betwixt Isagoras and Clysthenes.
and presently procured him to be banished, and yet came thither with an Army,
and besides many of the family of Alcmaeon formerly cast out with Clysthenes,
now also expelled 700 families proper for War, under pretense of their being
contaminated with them in the business of the death of Cylon. Then endeavored
he to dissolve the Senate, and commit their power to those of Isagoras his
faction; but both Senate and people resisting, Isagoras and he with their men
seized on the Castle wherein they were besieged two days: On the third the
Lacedaemonians with Isagoras had leave to depart, but the rest were cast into
prison, and put to death. Then was Clysthenes with the 700 families recalled,
who restored the Democratical Government to the City, Clysthenes restores
Solon's Laws.
as it was founded by the Laws of Solon.

16. To Clysthenes is also ascribed the introducing of the Ostracism into the
Athenian State, Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 13. cap. 24. Diodorus lib. 11. Plutarch
in vita Aristid. and Periclis.
being generally granted to have been brought in a little after the banishment
of the Pisistratidae. For, considering the calamities which had happened in their
time, the Athenians for the time to come would have all of equal power and
authority. By the Ostracism therefore they forced absence from the City for
ten years upon the most powerful amongst them for Glory, The Ostracism.
Nobility, or Eloquence, lest they should grow too great; without any ignominy,
or disgrace; they being neither deprived of Goods, Lands, or any thing, save
their presence at home for that time. The form of it was this. Each of the
Citizens wrote the name of that man in an Oyster shell (whence it had the name
of Ostracism) who seemed to him to be the most powerful for the overturning of
the Democracy, and then brought the shell in as a suffrage into the place
designed, and so he that was found to have most written with his name, was for
ten years ordered to leave the City. But two conditions were required that
this judgment should stand in force: That no fewer then 6000 should be at the
meeting, and the giving of suffrages; and that those that gave them should be
no younger than sixty years old. The first that was banished by this Law, was
(as Aelian tells us) Clysthenes the Author of it, though (according to another)
Hipparchus, Harpocration. in (...).
and Charmus Kinsman to Pisist^atus: In after time; Aristides, because of that
great Title Just given to him, and Themistocles for his Military glory.

17. But Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian King perceiving himself damnified both by
word and deed from the Athenians, Herodotus lib 5. cap. 4. etc.
raised forces throughout Peloponnesus, intending (though dissembling the
matter) to be revenged upon them, and set up Isagoras as Tyrant over them. He
invaded one part, and procured the Boeotians on one side, and the inhabitants
of Chalcis on the other, Cleomenes to no purpose invadeth the Athenians.
to fall in upon other places. The Athenians thus distressed on all sides, yet
first went against the Peloponnesians lying in Eleusine, and when the Armies
were about to join, the Corinthians, first bethinking themselves of the
injustice of their cause, withdrew themselves; and so did Demaratus the son of
Ariston King of Sparta, and the Colleague of Cleomenes, having never dissented
from him formerly. Then the rest of the associates seeing that the Kings agreed
not betwixt themselves, and the Corinthians were gone, drew off also in like
manner: The Athenians then to be revenged, fell upon the Boeotians, of whom
killing many, they took prisoners 700, and then passing over into Euboea the
same day, chastized the Inhabitants of Chalcis in like manner. Thus, four times
the Doors out of Peloponnesus came into Attica; twice in a hostile manner, and
twice to the help of the Athenians. First when they brought a Colony into
Megare, which was in the time of Codrus, the second and third times to expel
the Pisistratidae, and now the fourth, when Cleomenes with the Peloponnesians
invaded Eleusine.

The Island Aegina.
18. The Thebans and the rest of the Boeotians, seeing themselves too weak for
the Athenians, desired help of the Inhabitants of Aegina, an Island situated in
that part of the Sea, which severed Attica from Argolis, being five miles
distant from the former, some eight in circuit, and the Country of Aeacus,
(whence the Aeacidae) having a City of it is own name. The Aeginetans bearing an
old grudge to those of Athens, and puffed up with a conceit of tweir wealth,
easily embraced their society, and when the Athenians were busy with the
other, passed over in their long ships into Attica, and wasted the Coasts
thereof. The Lacedaemonians at this time understanding how they had been
deluded by the Alcmeonidae their corrupting the women that gave out the
Oracles, and thereby their loss both of their old friends, and all thanks also
as to the Athenians; hearing further by the Oracles which Cleomenes had brought
out of the Citadel of Athens, that that State should much distress them, and
especially seeing how weak it was under Tyrants, but now how it increased in
strength after the recovery of it is liberty, called back Hippias, resolving to
restore him. He was ready at their call, but then it happened that Sosicles the
Corinthian Ambassador and others of their confederates utterly disallowed of
this practice, and therefore seeing there was no hope of recovering his former
condition, he returned into Asia, and there labored with all his might to
possess Artaphernes the Satrapa of Lydia against the Athenians, that they
might be conquered by Darius his Brother. They sent to Artaphernes, to desire
him not to give credence to their exiles; but, as when two or three years
before, when they sent to enter into society with the Persians, he told them
they must give Earth and Water, as symbols of subjection (which the Ambassadors
doing, were much blamed at their return) so now he told them, if they would be
safe, they must receive Hippias. They refused the Condition, and chose rather
to be professed Enemies to the Persian, and thence presently after joined with
Aristagoras, who withdrew the Ionians from their obedience, A. M. 3501. V.C.
250. Olymp. 69. an. 1. Darii 18.
which provoked Darius afterward to invade them, procured the Expedition of
Xerxes, and the quarrel of that Empire with Greece. But these things concerning
Athens and Hippias, happened in the first year of the 69th Olympiad, the 18th of
the reign of Darius, A. M. 3501.

19. After the Ionian War was over, Herodotus Lib. 6. c. 48, etc.
and the Graecians in Asia were forced once more to undergo the yoke, Darius in
the 27th year of his reign, and the third after his victory, sent into Greece
to demand Earth and Water as tokens of subjection. The Athenians and
Lacedaemonians threw the Messengers into a well, and bad them thence fetch
Earth and Water to carry to their Master, The Aeginetans by giving Earth and
Water to Darius, incense the Graecians against them.
but the Inhabitants of Aegina and other Islanders, for fear of the Persians,
promised obedience. The Athenians presently took offense thereat, as judging
that the Aeginetans did it out of a grudge to them, that they might fight under
the conduct of the Persians against Athens, and therefore they sent to Sparta
to complain of them as Traitors to Greece. Cleomenes was sent from that State,
and came to Aegina, with an intention to apprehend the principal authors of the
revolt; but one Crius there openly opposed him, threatening him, in case he laid
violent hands on any, for that he knew he did it without any public decree of
the Lacedaemonians, who else would have sent the other King with him. Stirs at
Sparta betwixt Cleomenes and Demaratus the Kings.
This he said at the instance of Demaratus the other King of Sparta, who
disagreeing with Cleomenes ever since the invasion of Attica, now also
grievously accused him in his absence. Hereupon Cleomenes returned home, cast
out Demaratus, upon pretense of his illegitimation from his Office, and put
Leutychides his kinsman in his place.

20. The Father of Demaratus was Ariston, of the posterity of Procles, a man as
worthy as any of his Ancestors; Cap. 61, etc.
who having no children by two wives (for which cause he divorced them) to
satisfy the desires of the people (which greatly desired some issue male from
him) married a third, which already was the wife of his friend Agetus,
covenanting with him for her, (she being the most beautiful woman next after
Helena) which by the Laws of Lycurgus he might do. The birth of Demaratus.
Being married, it happened just after seven months, when he was according to
the custom sitting amongst the Ephori, his household servant came and signified
to him that he had a Son born, with the suddenness of which thing being
disturbed, he rashly swore that it was not his, coming so much within the Time.
The Ephori then neglected it, and he afterward repenting of his rashness,
brought up the Child as his own, and because he was so desired by the public
wishes of the People, gave him the name of Demaratus. After his death Demaratus
succeeded, a man of great worth, and who obtained a crown in the Olympic
Games, which never happened before to the Kings of Sparta. But that speech of his
Father was now objected against him, by his Colleague and Emulator Cleomenes
the Son of Anaxandridas, who accused now also for their retreating formerly out
of Attica, which occasioned all the difference betwixt them; and all this was
aggravated by Leutychides, who sought for his place, and had a private quarrel
with him about a wife, of which he had hindered him by taking her to himself.

21. Great contention hence arising the Spartans resolved to send to Delphos,
and enquire of the Oracle whether Demaratus was the Son of Ariston, which being
done, Cleomenes procured a friend he had at Delphos to corrupt Py^hia,
Demaratus deposed, and Leutychides put in his place.
so that being drawn by bribery she gave the answer against Demaratus. Hereby
Cleomenes procured him to be removed from the Kingdom, and Leutychides his
kinsman to succeed him; yet though thus handled, he ceased not to love his
Country, and continuing at home, disdained not to bear inferior Offices, till
further affronted by Leutychides, who to insult over and deride him, at such a
time as overseeing the exercises of the Boys, he sent and demanded of him how
he liked of that Office after the Kingdom. He answered, that he had tried both,
but the other not, and that that question should be the original either of
great mischief or happiness to the Lacedaemonians, and then getting him home
with his head covered he sacrifized to Jupiter, and sending for his Mother
conjured her to tell him the truth concerning his Father. Being assured from
her of his Legitimation, he went out of the City, under pretense of going to
Delphos; but took the way to Elis, and thence to the Island Zacynihus, and so
to Darius King of Persia, the Zacynthians having refused to give him up to his
Countrymen who pursued him. He was received with great honor by the Persians,
Pausan. in. Laconicis.
who bestowed Lands upon him, to maintain him in a Princely equipage; and there
his posterity is reported to have endured a long season.

22. Not long after Cleomenes received his just reward, his own hands being his
executioners; for his treachery against Demaratus being come to light, and
fearing to be called to an account for it, he first fled into Thessalie, and
thence returning into Arcadia stirred up the Inhabitants against the Spartans,
and attempted to swear them to be true to him whithersoever he should lead
them. The Lacedaemonians hearing of this, and fearing what he might do to them,
Cleomenes his ill end.
recalled and restored him to his former dignity; but when he was come home,
having not had before this time a very settled head, he now fell into a
Frenzy, as he met any one in the City, pushing their faces with his Scepter.
His friends then bound him with wooden fetters, in which condition, partly by
entreaties, and partly by threats, he got a Sword of his Keeper, wherewith
beginning at the calf of his leg, he cut up his flesh upwards to the thighs,
and, when he ripped up his belly, died, leaving no issue behind him, but a
pattern of Justice to all Greece, which being amused at his end, most
attributed it to the corruption of Pythia, and that injustice done to
Demaratus; the Athenians to his invasion of Eleusine, and his destroying the
Temple of their gods; but the Argives concluded this judgment to have fallen
upon him, because he had basely killed such of their Countrymen as escaped
from a battle fought with him, after he had got them out of the Temple of
Argus, and had burnt the grove which he had taken. This passage betwixt the
Lacedaemonians and Argives, is to be described though in the same order
Herodotus has done it, it having happened long before the death of Cleomenes, In
Laconicis.
and as Pausanias says, in the beginning of his reign.

23. Consulting the Oracle at Delphos, it was answered, that he should take
Argos, and hereupon he raised at Army and invaded the Territories of that
State. The Argives in their own defense made have to meet him, but he setting
upon them as they were at dinner, put many of them to the Sword, and besieged
the rest in the grove at Argus, whither they fled. Then learning their names
from such fugitives as were with him, he called them man by man out of the Wood
to redeem themselves (which at the Lacedaemonian rate was for two minae a man)
and so 50 of them coming out of the grove (in which place they could no see
beforehand what was done to their Companions) he put to the Sword. At length
one of them climbing up on a tree discovered the matter, after which no man
would come out; but then he set fire to the grove and burnt it and them
together. After this, asking to whom of their gods the grove belonged to, it
was answered to Argus, and so he found and acknowledged himself deceived by the
Oracle. Returning to Sparta, he was accused as having been corrupted, for that
he might have taken Argos if he would; but the major part were satisfied with
his excuse and acquitted him. As for Argos it was rendered by this overthrow so
desolate of men, that the Slaves governed all things, till such time as the
sons of the slain grew up and recovered their Patrimony; after which the Slaves
conquered Tyrinthes, and held it, till persuaded by Cleander a certain Wizard,
they returned, and made War upon their Masters, which continued long, till such
time as the Argives with difficulty remained Conquerours.

24. Cleomenes being dead, the Aeginetans sent and complained of Leutychides
for the injury he had done to them, in causing together with Cleomenes ten of
their principal men to be kept as Hostages at Athens. He was given up to them,
but fearing to carry a King of Sparta away prisoner, though for the present the
State had given him up, they took him only to Athens to procure them the
liberty of their Hostages. But the Athenians put them off, Leutychides punished
for the injury offered to Demaratus.
as refusing to deliver them without the authority of two Kings, seeing both of
them committed them to their custody, and the journey being to no purpose
Leutychides was dismissed and so returned; but yet he also paid for the injury
offered to Demaratus. Herodotus Lib. 6. cap. 72.
For, Menander leading an Army into Thessa^ie, of which as of the War he had
full and ample power, he was corrupted with money, and betrayed the interest of
his Country, after which being discovered, as he held the money in both his
hands fitting in his tent, he was apprehended and carried to Sparta, where
being called to account, he fled to Tegea, and there died in exile, his house
being razed as a traitor to his Country.

25. But the Aeginetans, of old, Enemies to those of Athens, Idem cap. 87.
were now much more incensed against them for detaining their Hostages, and set
themselves to study a revenge. At that time there was at Sunium (the utmost
promontory of Attica) a Gallie which (according to the custom observed every
year since the time of Theseus) was then going to Delphos, abord of which were
the principal men of Athens: on this they seized, and taking the men prisoners,
bound them all. The Athenians hereat enraged, labored with all might on the
other hand to revenge this, and agreed with one Nicomachus to have the City
betrayed to them; yet for that they could not get their Fleet together soon
enough, they came a day too late, and missed of that enterprise. But through
the counsel of Themistocles, having rigged a Fleet of 70 Galleys (20 of which
the Corinthians sold them at an inconsiderable rate, because by the Law they
could not give them) they set upon the Aeginetans, War betwixt the Athenians
and Aeginetans.
and overthrew them in a Sea Fight. They betook themselves for aid to the
Argives their old friends, but having offended them not long before, they
received a public denial, yet underhand a supply of 1000 Volunteers, most of
whom fell in Aegina by the hands of the Athenians, against whom yet the
Aeginetans afterward, reinforcing their power at Sea, in another battle became
Victors. But what the issue of this War farther was, is not declared by
Herodotus, who yet elsewhere affirms, that it give occasion to the safety of
all Greece, by putting the Athenians upon the care of Sea matters, whereby when
Xerxes came, they became the bulwark thereof. Probable it is, that this War
which was begun before the battle of Marathon, was not composed till the time
that Xerxes was about to invade Greece, when we read that all the Graecians
(and these two States amongst the rest) resolved to lay aside all private
quarrels amongst themselves, the Aeginetans being observed by Eusebius. in
Chronico.
another to have had the Dominion of the Sea 20 years, until the passage of
Xerxes, which thenceforth they were forced to yield to the Athenians.

26. Whilst the Athenians were busy in the War against Aegina, Darius sent
his Forces into Greece against them, and the Eretrians (inhabitants of the
Island Euboea) which though they took the City of the later, and made them
Captives, yet were they overthrown by the former in the battle at Marathon. The
battle of Marathon.
After the fight 2000 Spartans came to Athens (being hindered hitherto by their
superstition, which forbad them from a Law of Lycurgus not to stir out till the
full Moon) whence they proceeded to Marathon to see the number of the slain,
and then commending the valor of the Athenians returned home. Of these were
slain in this fight Callimachus one of the Polemarchs, Cynaegirus commended by
many Writers, Justin. lib. 2.
who when the Persians fled, and betook themselves to their ships, held one of
them with with his hands till they were cut off, and then with his teeth, till
at length he was slain; and Hippias the late Tyrant (who now hoping to recover,
after twenty years banishment, his old power, became the conducter of the
Persian Forces) though neither Herodotus nor Thucydides make mention of his
death, yet is reported by later Authors here to have been slain. Miltiades
Themistocles now a young man behaved himself gallantly in the battle; but the
success is ascribed to the valor, and conduct of Miltiades, to whom,
Plutarch. in Aristide.
when Aristides one of the Captains had assigned his day's Government, the rest
when it came on their turns did the same, after that by the same help he had
carried it in the Council for a battle. Yet did he not fight till his own day
came, and then engaging, overthrew the Enemy in that memorable battle.

27. His father was Cimon, Herod. lib. 6.
who in the Tyranny of Pisistratus departed from Athens, and thrice obtained
the Garland in the Olympic Games; yet being reconciled to Pisistratus
afterward returned, but after his death was slain by his faction. His eldest
son, who was called after his Grandfather Stesagoras, His Pedigree and Actions.
was brought up with their half Uncle Miltiades in the Chersonesus, over which
he was Prince. His other son was this Miltiades, so called after this his
Uncle, which dying without Children, Stesagoras succeeded him, but not long
after was killed by one that counterfeited himself a fugitive, and died also
without issue. Then did the Pisistratidae send Miltiades to succeed his brother
in the Principality of the Chersonesus, and there he ruled when Darius
undertook the expedition into Scythia, and he it was that gave the Ionians
counsel to break the bridge, and leave him there wandering with his Army. Being
settled, he married Hegesipyla the daughter of Olorus King of Thrace; but the
Scythians provoked by Darius, and making an excursion as far as the
Chersonesus, he daring not to withstand them fled, and after their retreat was
restored by the Thracians. After some years Darius being angry with him, sent a
Fleet of Phoenicians to subdue the Chersoneus; whereupon he fled with five
Galleys from Cardia, and came to Athens; but as he fled the Phoenicians
intercepted one of them, and therein his son Metiochus, who being presented to
Darius, received from him house, lands, and a Persian wife. Being returned
home, he was accused for possessing the Tyranny of the Chersonesus, but was
acquitted, and Pausan. lib. 8.
having persuaded the Athenians to throw Darius his Messengers into the pit,
was afterward declared by the people one of their Captains, and thence had
occasion to obtain this famous victory at Marathon.

28. Miltiades flourishing in great glory, and grace with the people, Herod.
lib. 6. cap. 132. etc.
obtained of them 70 Galleys well manned, not making known his intention, but
professing that he would much thereby benefit the State. He sailed to the
Island Paros (one of the Cyclades in the Aegean-Sea, and famous for the best
Marble) the inhabitants of which having assisted the Persians at Marathon, His
fruitless expedition to Paros.
he besieged, demanding 100 Talents of them. They would not hear of parting
with money, but made provision for resistance, whereupon he harrazed their
Territories, and more closely besieged them, and attempted the City for twenty
days, but leaping off from a Wall, he hurt his Thigh, and was forced to return
home. There, when he was arrived, he was accused by Xanthippus (the son of
Ariphron, and father to Pericles, his Emulator) of Treason, as having
voluntarily miscarried in the Enterprise about Parus. He could not be present
himself to answer, his Thigh now corrupting, which held him in his bed, but
Stesagorus, or Tisagoras, his brother (according to Cor. Nepos) or rather,
other of his friends did it for him, bidding the people remember the battle at
Marathon, and the taking of Lemnus, which he, having expelled the Pelasgiaus,
had subdued under the Athenian power. The people spared his life, but fined him
fifty Talents, which sum this expedition had cost them. One tells us it was not
out of any regard to his Crime so much, Corn. Nepos in vita Miltiadis.
as having lately been under the Tyranny of Pisistratus, they feared now the
power of their own Citizens, and him especially, who having been much practiced
in Magistracy and power, and inclined naturally to a love of it, could scarce
as they thought bear the condition of a private life; so that though being
called a Tyrant, he obtained that power not by his own seeking, but was ever
found to be just, moderate, and humble; yet having a great name for Military
matters, and thereby great interest, they chose rather to condemn him though
innocent, than continually be in fear, though they might have thought on the
Ostracism.

He dies in prison.
29. After this, Miltiades died in prison of the corruption of his Thigh, Valor.
Max. lib. 5. cap. 3. ext. exempl. ult. Corn. Nepos in vita Cimonis. Plutarch.
in Cimone.
as most have delivered, his fine being yet upon the score; upon which account
the Athenians would not suffer his body to be buried, till such time as his son
Cimon offered himself to bonds in the room thereof. As his father before him,
so he was unable to pay the fine, and by the Laws of Athens could not be
released until he had done it. He had then to wife his sister by the father's
side (as we are to take it) named Elpinice, Vide Janum Rutgersium Var. Lect.
lib. 1. cap. 9. and Boecleri notas ad Cora. Nepotem.
it being lawful for the Athenians to marry such. One Callias there was in the
City, a rich man, though of a vulgar cast, who had gained much by the Mines;
he being in love with her, offered Cimon, if he would part with her to him, to
discharge the fine. Cimon slighted the offer, but she avowed that she would
not suffer any of Miltiades his Children to die in prison, and that to prevent
such a thing, His son Cimon.
she would marry Callias, if he would perform his offer. Hereby Cimon was
persuaded, married her to him, and the fine being discharged, was set at
liberty, which he presently improved for his own advancement. These things fell
out not long after the battle at Marathon.

Xerxes invadeth Greece.
30. Three years the Graecians had rest, as from without, so within themselves,
till the coming of Xerxes; only the War betwixt the Athenians and Aeginetans
still depended, until common danger drew them to a composure. As the Athenians
had given most occasion to the invasion of Greece, Vide Plutarchum in vita
Aristidis.
so they bore the greatest burden thereof, and by the means of Themistocles,
one of their Citizens, procured the overthrow and flight of Xerxes, in that by
his Stratagems the Peloponnesians were brought to fight, and not suffered to
depart to their several homes, which would have brought certain destruction to
them all. Assistant to Themistocles was another of his Contrymen, named
Aristides, who though banished by the Ostracism through his procurement, for
that as they disagreed in temper, Themistocles and Aristides.
so in their way of policy, and Government ( Themistocles being quick, bold,
crafty, and easily changeable, according to the juncture of affairs; but
Aristides constant and grave, only intent upon Justice, and who neither in
jest nor earnest would give way to lying, scurrility, or deceit) yet now with
others was recalled by his means for the safety of the Country, and
voluntarily laid aside all private quarrels which came into competition with
the public safety. The surname of Just which first got this man love,
afterward procured him envy, Themistocles whispering this into the ears of the
multitude, that whilst he took upon him to censure all things, he had prepared
for himself a Throne, in the ruin of the Courts of Judicature, and defended
with a sufficient Guard. The multitude puffed up with their success at
Marathon, and designing great things in their heads, could ill bear any that
excelled them in fame and glory, and therefore flocking into the City they
banished him by the Ostracism, cloaking their envy at his glory with a
specious pretense of fear of Tyranny.

31. When they were come together to give their suffrages, Idem ibid.
a Countreyman ignorant of Letters, is reported to have given a shell to
Aristides (not knowing him, but to be of the common sort) and desired him to
write therein for him the name of Aristides, at which he wondering, and asking
him if ever he had received any injury at his hands, he said no, but that he
was troubled to hear him all over go by the name of Just. Aristides hearing
this, answered nothing, but wrote his own name, and gave it to the man, and
when he departed out of the City, with hands lifted up to heaven prayed
(contrary to what Achilles did when he found himself ill used by Agamemnon)
Iliad. ^.
that the estate of Athens might never happen to be such as to give them
occasion to think of Aristides. But in the third year after, when Xerxes now
marched through Thessaly and Boeotia toward Attica, the Athenians repealing
their Decrees, recalled all that were banished, especially for fear of
Aristides, lest joining with the Enemy, he might by his Authority draw many of
their Citizens to revolt. They were mistaken concerning the man's disposition,
for before the Decree for his return was made, he had not been wanting to
provoke the Graecians as much as he could to defend their liberty; then joined
with Themistocles, though one most averse to him, and for the public good
advanced him to the highest degree of Dignity. He joined in endeavors with him
for procuring the Graecians to fight, and understanding that Psyttalia a little
Island before Salamina was possessed of the Enemy, he passed over thither with
a party of such as voluntarily followed him, and put all of them to the sword,
except some of the chiefest, to whom he gave quarter. He disposed Soldiers so
throughout the Island, that on which quarter soever any of either party should
light, he might seize upon them, and so preserve his friends, and provide that
none of the Enemy should escape: upon which account a Trophy was erected in
Psyttalia. And when Themistocles to try him after the victory, said, that one
brave act was done, viz. the overthrow of Xerxes, but that another remained,
which was, by breaking the bridge to take Asia in Europe, he earnestly desired
him to reject all such advice, and rather to consider how soon they might
expel the Mede out of Greece, lest being shut in with such great Forces, and
all opportunity of flight being taken away, he might by necessity be^egged on
to revenge.

32. After the overthrow and flight of Xerxes, Herodotus lib. 8. cap. 111.
Themistocles having the greatest authority in the fleet, went therewith
against such Islanders as had taken part with the Persians, The acts of
Themistocles immediately after the flight of Xerxes.
demanding money of them. He urged them with two powerful divinities
Persuasion and Necessity, to which the Inhabitants of Andros (one of the
Cyclades) trusting in the strength of their Fortifications, opposed two others
as strong as the former, viz. Poverty and Impossibility, whereupon they were
close besieged, but it being to no purpose, the Fleet returned to Salamine,
Themistocles without the privity of the rest, going to other Islands, from whom
by his threats he exacted much money. After they had at Salamine divided the
spoil, and consecrated part thereof to their gods, they went to the Isthmus,
Idem cap. 122. etc. and Plutarch. in Themistocle.
there to reward him who should be thought to have best in the War deserved of
Greece. When the Captains severally came to deliver their minds in writing at
the Altar of Neptune, each one ascribed to himself the first place in merit,
but to Themistocles assigned the second, which amounted to as much, as if by a
silent confession they had acknowledged his merit to be principal. And though
by the envy of the Captains his glory was depressed, yet was he accounted the
most prudent man of all Greece, and being invited down to Lacedaemon, by the
judgment of that severe State, His glory.
as the praise of valor was given to their own Eurybiades, so that of prudence
and dexterity unto him. They gave him a crown of Olives, and the best Chariot
they had, as a reward, and what before was not done to any mortal man by them,
at his departure, to do him honor, they sent 300 Horse to conduct him to the
borders of their Dominions. After this, the Graecians overthrew Mardonius, whom
Xerxes had left behind him, at the battle of Plataea, and the same day the
Persian Fleet at Mycale a Promontory of Ionia, which they hereby restored to
liberty, Xanthippus being Archon at Athens; in the second year of the 7^th
Olympiad, and the seventh of the Reign of Xerxes. During which passages abroad,
little happened at home but in relation to them; the sum of which elsewhere
has been related.

33. As for learned men which flourished during this period; some of the seven
Wise Men of Greece lived in the time of Cyrus, Learned Men.
and about the beginning of the Persian Empire. These seven were, Pittacus of
Mitylene, Consule Diogenem Laertium.
who was born about the 32th Olympiad; Bas of Priene, Chilon of Lacedaemon, and
Cleobulus of Lindus, all who flourished about the 47th Olympiad, with Thales of
Miletus, who being born about the first year of the 35th Olympiad, foretold an
Eclypse of the Sun, which happened about the third year of the 48th, in the reign
of Alyattes, and Astyages, and about the beginning of the 58th having helped
Croesus over the River Hal^s, by drayning it with a ditch, then died. The sixth
was Solon of Athens, who died the same year with Thales, and the seventh
Periander of Corinth.

34. Besides these there was Xenophanes the Colophonian, who being born in the
40th Olympiad, came into Sicilie when Hieron and Epicharmus flourished, about
the 70th Olympiad, Epicharmus lived 97 years as Lucian writes, and invented
the Comedy eight years before the beginning of the Persian Empire. Phocylides
flourished at the same time, to whom a Poem yet extant concerning Laws is
ascribed, though Scaliger thinks it made by some Hellenistick Jew. Besides
these, Anacreon the Teian Poet, who as Lib. 7. cap. 7.
Pliny writes, was choked with the stone of a raisin. Simonides a Poet of the
Island Ceos, where he was born in the City Iulis. Having lived some time at
Athens with Hipparchus the Son of Pisistratus, he went into Sicilie unto Hiero,
by whom being asked what God was, he demanded a days time to consider of it,
and after that another; still professing that the more he studied the point,
the more he was to seek in it. Some say he found out the Art of Memory, and
that being very covetous, he first exposed the Muses to sale. In the second
year of the 58th Olympiad, and eight before the Persian Empire, died
Anaximander the natural Philosopher of Miletus. Anaximenes his Scholar
flourished about that time. Theagenes of Rhegium the most ancient
Chronographer. Democedes of Crotone a Physician, being taken Captive with
Polycrates by Oetes the Persian, was carried as a slave to Darius, with whom he
lived in great esteem, after he had cured his foot and the breast of his wife
Atossa.

35. There flourished also in Darius his time, Cadmus of Miletus an
Historiographer, there having been another of this name and place, according to
Suidas, who in four Books wrote the History of Miletus and all Ionia: and
Strabo names Cadmus, Phercydes and Hecataeus as those who first of all Greeks
wrote Prose. Hecataeus flourished at this time, and gave light to Herodotus.
Phrynichus the Athenian, a tragical Poet, who first caused a woman to be
personated, and invented the verse with four feet. Heraclitus the Ephesian, a
contemner of Heathenish Idols, SECT. 2.
who out of fear wrote his Book of Nature in such an obscure manner, that
thence he got the name of Scotivus or Dark. Zeno of E^ea, or Velia, in Italy,
Scholar to Parmeaides, who conspiring against Nearchus the Tyrant, endured
torments to death, rather than he would discover his accomplices. Pythagoras the
son of Mnesarchus the Samian, but born at Sidon in Phoenicia, about the 53
Olympiad. Diogenes. Jamblicus. Just a lib. 20. Plin. l. 2. c. 8.
Being twelve years old he learnt of Thales and Phocylides, from the later
taking the transmigration of Souls. Traveling into Egypt and to Babylon, he
drunk in the learning of both places. About the 68th O^ympiad he went into
Italy, where he lived first at Crotone, and then at Metapontus. Here he taught
and constituted the Italian School or Sect, as Thales had done the Ionick.
Whereas others suffered themselves to be called Sophoi, he would be called out
of modesty Philosophus. In the 67th Olympiad he found out the nature and course
of the Planet Venus. In the fourth year of the 70th he died at Metapontus,
where he was so admired, that his house was made a Temple, and that part of
Italy called Magna Graecia. Amongst his Scholars was Milo the famous Wrestler;
and women through him became famous for learning, their Epistles being yet
extant.

SECT. II. Of such things as fell out amongst the Graecians, from their
Victories at Plataea and Mycale, until the beginning of the Peloponnesian War,
containing the space of 48 years.
1. THe Persians being overthrown in Greece both at Sea and Land, Thucyd. l. 1.
and so driven utterly out of Europe; and those that fled into Asia in ships
being also defeated at Mycale, Leutychides the Spartan who there commanded in
chief, returned home with his associates of Peloponnesus. The Athenians with
the Ionians, and those that inhabited upon the Hellespont, besieged Sestus,
which the Persians had seized on, all Winter, and reduced it; after which they
also all departed home.

2. The Athenians having brought home their wives and children, Idem ibid.
Plutarch and Corn. Nepos in Themistocle.
after the overthrow of Mardonius, had the popular Government restored by
Ar^stides, and set themselves to rebuild the walls of their City in a greater
compass, and stronger than had been formerly, being thereto especially induced
through the persuasion of Themistocles. The Lacedaemonians above all others
were hereat exceedingly troubled, as considering that having obtained so great
glory by the two Victories at Marathon and Salamina, the Athenians would
contend with them for the Principality, and upon that account they wished them
as weak as might be. The Athenians rebuild their walls, which the
Lacedaemonians grudge.
They dissuaded them therefore from going on with their work, alleging that it
was dangerous for Greece to have any fortified place without the Peloponnesus,
which the Barbarians might seize on, and possess. They said they would send
answer by Ambassadors of their own, and Themistocles took the business upon
him. He first went alone, and ordered that the rest should follow, but not till
the wall was brought to a reasonable height; that in the mean time both bond
and free should ply the work; and sparing no place, whether holy or profane,
private or public, take all such stuff for building as they might soonest
light on. When he came at Sparta, he demanded no audience, but sought to
protract the time, pretending he expected his Colleagues. The Lacedaemonians
complaining that nevertheless the work went on, and that he went about to
deceive them, the other Ambassadors arrived, of whom after he knew that the
fortifications were almost finished, he labored to persuade the Ephori (who
now had the chief power in that State) that the things were false, which they
were made to believe, desired them to send persons considerable whom they might
trust to make inspection, and keep him as an Hostage till their return.

3. They sent accordingly three of their principal men to Athens, and with them
Themistocles his Colleagues, to whom he gave in charge that the Lacedaemonians
should not be dismissed till his return. After their departure, he demanded
audience of the Magistrates and Senate, and then freely and openly professed,
that the Athenians by his advice, and agreeable to the Common Law of Nations,
But are eluded by Themistocle.
had fenced their public and private gods with a wall, that they might more
easily defend them; and neither could that be to the damage of Greece, of
which Athens was the bulwark against the Barbarians, for here the King's Navy
had twice suffered Shipwreck. He told them, they did ill to regard more their
private ambition, than what was profitable for all Greece; and, to conclude, if
they expected the return of their Ambassadors, they must dismiss him, or else
never expect to see them return; which accordingly they were forced to do with
much private regret, though ashamed to own the cause. He advised his
Countrymen further to finish the work of the Piraeus or Port of Athens, which
they had begun a long time before, whilst he was Archon; for he persuaded them
first to apply themselves to Sea-matters, as the way to obtain Dominion, and
commended to them that place as most convenient for their design, having three
natural Havens. The wall he caused to be made so thick as two Carriages loaded
with stones might pass by each other; but brought the height of it but to half
of that which he had designed. And with so great a desire was he carried out for
the enlargement of the Dominion of that State, that observing the Lacedaemonian
Navy to be drawn up at Gytheum, and so, easy to be set on fire, Plutarch in
Themistocle. Val. Max. l. 6. c. 5. ext. exem. 2. Cic. Offic. l. 3.
he much desired to have it done, and told the people he had a thing of great
moment in his head, but such as was not to be divulged. The People appointed
Aristides to confer with him, and if he approved it, resolved he might
prosecute it; but he making a report that Themistocles advised a thing, than
which nothing was more profitable, and more unjust, he was commanded to desist.

4. A little after these things, Pausanias the Lacedaemonian, famous for the
Victory at Plataea, was sent with a Fleet of twenty Peloponnesian Galleys,
Thucyd. lib. 1.
and thirty of Attica, against Cyprus, where he took many Towns, and Byzantium
afterward, held by the Persians. Diodorus l. 11. ad Olymp. 75. ann. 4.
He was very imperious toward the associates, insomuch as he carried himself
more like a Tyrant than a General, and being sorely complained of to his
Superiors, he was by them recalled to give an account of it. He gaped after
the Kingdom of Greece, and to that end entered into conspiracy with Xerxes,
whose Daughter he asked to wife, and being accused of much favor showed
toward the Persians, yet for that nothing could be proved, he was dismissed,
having the government of the Fleet only taken from him. Pausanius holds
intelligence with Xerxes.
Yet returned he to the Hellespont, under pretense of the War to continue his
intelligence with Xerxes; but being expelled from Byzantium by the Athenian
Soldiers, he returned not to Sparta, but stayed at Troas, and for that was
again complained of, as holding clandestine consultations with the Persians,
and not having any just and warrantable cause there to remain. Hereupon he was
called home by the Ephori the second time, and cast into prison, but appearing
again to his trial, he was the second time dismissed.

5. The Lacedaemonians sent Dorcis with others to succeed Pausanias in the
Fleet; but the associates would take no notice of him; Thucydid. and Diodorus
ut prius. Plutarch and Corn. Nepos in Aristide.
for Aristides the Just, Captain of the Athenians, so moderately behaved
himself, and wrought cross to the actions of Pausanias, that all the Cities of
Asia hating the others pride, joined themselves to him, so that he became the
means of transferring the chief Command at Sea, which (together with that at
Land also) had hitherto been enjoyed by the Lacedaemonians, unto his own
Countrymen, the Spartans, The Athenians by the means of Aristid^s draw the
chief power to themselves.
at this time not being unwilling, or opposing it in the least, so ashamed were
they of the carriage of their own Citizens. The Athenians being thus advanced
by the associates for their moderation, under pretense of revenging the States
upon Xerxes, obtained also liberty to lay a Tax upon them all, how much money
one, and how many ships another should find. Officers they appointed to receive
the Tributes, the sum of all which amounted to 460 Talents: Delos was appointed
for the Treasury, and the place to meet in, to deliberate of the Affairs of all
the free States. This assesse (as Plutarch writes) was made by Aristides at
the desire of the Graecians, who relied upon his integrity; and his moderation
so much appeared herein, that afterward the Athenians inslaved the States, and
drawing the Tributes to their private use, first doubled, and then tribled the
sum. For now, whereas the whole Tax imposed by him amounted but to 460 Talents,
Pericles added almost a third part (as Plutarch reckons) and increased it to
600. and after his death it was brought to 1300 Talents.

6. The Athenians having settled the Tribute, Thucyd.
under the conduct of Cimon the son of Miltiades, took from the Persians Etone,
a Town of Thrace, situate upon the River Strymon, which they deprived of its
liberty. Then expelled they the Dolopians out of Scyrus (an Island in the
Aegean Sea) and therein planted a Colony of their own; then waged they War with
the Carystians in Euboea, for denying them obedience (which was composed) and
besieged the Naxians that had revolted from them, whom they forced to submit.
The Naxians inslaved.
This being the first of all Greek Cities, which, contrary to the League, was
subjected to bondage, after it others were as occasion served, which was taken
by the Athenians, either for that they sent not the full Tribute, or ships, or
would not serve in the War when affairs required it. The Athenians also
severely exacted what had been appointed, and compelled such as refused, having
forgotten their former mildness, now in power, and carrying it very
imperiously toward their associates whom they could order as they pleased. And
this was also effected by the Greeks themselves: for, to shun the labor of it,
most of them chose rather to send money than ships; whereby the Athenians, who
had Vessels enough, and always in readiness, increased their strength, and
upon occasion found them unfit for resistance.

7. In the mean time Pausanias, who had been called home to Sparta, Idem.
Plutarch. in Themistocl. and Aristide. Corn. Nepos in Pausania. Diodorus ut
supra. Plutarch. and Corn. Nepos. Thucyd. Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 3. extern,
exempl. 3.
gave not over his conspiracy against his Country, though he changed his
associates. For he now sought to draw the Helotes, or public slaves, into
rebellion with the allurement of liberty, and hereof being detected by one
Argilius (whom he had unchastly loved, and now being sent with Letters to
Artabanus, suspected he carried a Warrant for his own death, and so opening
them, discovered both his plot against himself and the State) he took sanctuary
in the Temple of Minerva, and there the door being made up (to which end his
own Mother is said to have brought the first stone) was starved to death. After
his death the Spartans sent to Athens to accuse Themistocles of the same Crime,
who being before this banished by the Ostracism, lived at Argos in great
esteem, and was much envied by the Lacedaemonians for having done many things
in his Countries behalf, which they looked upon as tending to their prejudice.
It Is said that certain Letters were found in Pausanias his Coffers, intimating
a correspondence betwixt them for promoting the affairs of the Persian King,
which though he assented not unto, yet discovered not the thing, hoping
Pausanias would either be deterred from his design, The ends of Pausanias and
Themistocles,
or the thing would come out some other way. But the Spartans laying it heavily
to his charge, and his own Citizens envying his glory, though he sought to
purge himself by Letters, yet was he condemned, and the people persuaded to
send some to lay hold of him, and bring him up. He perceiving this, fled to
Corcyra, and thence to Admetus King of the Molossians, with whom, not being
able to continue in safety, he went to Artaxerxes Longimanus, by whom he was
honorably received, and bountifully entertained (having three Cities given
him, one for bread, another for wine, and a third for victuals, to which others
add two more for Clothes and Linen) and died at length at Magnesia a natural
death, though some wrote, that seeing he was not able to perform his promise to
the King of Conquering Greece, which by this time had many expert Captains
(amongst whom of most especial note was Cimon) he poisoned himself.

And of Aristides.
8. Corn. Nepos and Plutarch. in Aristide.
Four years after the banishment of Themistocles died Aristides, whose
moderation and abstinency herein appeared, that having born such Offices, SECT.
1.
yet he died so poor, that he scarcely left wherewith to be buried; Thucyd.
lib. 1.
yet so grateful was the State toward his memory, that his Children were
provided for at the public charge. Eight years after the battle of Plataea,
Cimon being sent out by the Athenians, obtained in one day two notable
victories at Sea and Land, over the Persians at Eurymedon, a River in
Pamphylia, which brought him and the State no little credit. After this they
fell out with the Thasians, who by their Colonies had taken possession of the
rich Mines of Silver and Gold, The Thasians envied by the Athenians for the
Mines.
which were in that part of Thrace, lying upon Macedonia, betwixt the two
Rivers Strymon and Nyssus. For these Mines the Athenians envied them, and
raised such a contention, that they withdrew themselves from the association;
whereupon they presently commenced War against them, and overthrew them in a
Sea Fight, and afterward besieged them by Land. The Lacedaemonians distressed.
The Thasians besieged, sent to the Spartans, desiring them to invade Attica,
thereby to divert the Athenians from them; and, having promised, they were
ready to perform it; but that they were hindered by an Earthquake, which sorely
afflicted them, and whereupon the public slaves (called Helotes) of the
posterity of the Messenians, took their opportunity, Diodorus ad Olymp 77. ann.
4. Thucyd.
and rebelling, seized upon Ithome in the Territories of Messenia, being acted
by that impression, which Pausanias not long before had made upon them.

9. The Spartans much distressed by this rebellion, having lost 2000 men by the
Earthquake, besides a great loss in their buildings, after three years the
Thasians were no longer able to hold out, and yielded to such hard conditions
as the Athenians laid upon them. The Lacedaemonians proceeding but slowly in
their War, sent to the Athenians for aid, which was sent them, but through
sinister suspicions they sent it back again, and this was taken as an affront
by the Athenians, The beginning of malice betwixt the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians.
who were very much moved at it. This was the beginning of that mutual malice
and enmity which thenceforth passed betwixt these two States, and proved the
rise of abundance of mischief. For, the Athenians, presently after the return
of their men, forsook the League, which they had entered into with the Spartans
against the common Enemy, and made an Alliance with the Argives their
Adversaries, in which they also comprehended the Thessalians. And they that
were besieged in Ithame, at length in the tenth year, being forced to yield,
and banished Peloponnesus by the Spartans, the Athenians kindly received them
with their Wives and Children, and gave them Naupactus to inhabit, which they
had lately taken from the Locrians, called Vide Strah. lib. 9. page 427.
Ozolae. A little after this, another great accession was made to the strength
of the Athenians, and that with the detriment of the Spartans; for the
inhabitants of Megara, Neighbors to the former, being falln upon with War by
the Corinthians, betook themselves to them for aid, though heretofore they had
been the Allies of Sparta. This opportunity the Athenians embraced, The
beginning of the hatred betwixt Corinth and Athens.
and thereby got Megara into their hands, with Paga, a Mart-Town adjoining to
it; and fortifying Megara as far as Nisaea upon the Sea, therein placed a
Garrison of their own. And this was also the beginning of that inveterate
hatred betwixt Corinth and Athens.

10. During the War betwixt the Lacedaemonians and their slaves, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 78. ann. 1.
happened another in Peloponnesus, betwixt the Argives and the inhabitants of
Mycenae, upon this occasion. The Mycenaeans standing high upon the ancient
Eminency of their City, would not be subject to the Argives, as the other
Cities of Argolis were, but would live according to their own Laws and Customs,
The Mycenaeans and Argives fall out.
having nothing to do with the Commonwealth of Argos. Moreover, they contended
with them about the Temple and Rites of Juno, challenged to themselves the
Right of Administering the Nemaean Games, and whereas during the War with
Xerxes, the Argives had made an order not to help the Lacedaemonians at
Thermopylae, except they would yield them part of the Command, the Mycenaeans
alone joined themselves to them. These things made the Argives jealous that
their power increasing with the return of their ancient spirit, they would
contend with them for Empire it self, and therefore of a long time they desired
to destroy their City. SECT. 2.
Now seeing they had a good opportunity, whilst the Spartans being busied at
home could affoard them no relief, they raised a great Army out of their own,
and the Neighboring Cities, and therewith setting upon them, overthrew them,
Mycenae destroyed.
and laid close siege to Mycenae. They stoutly resisted for some time, but
being exhausted by the War, and the Lacedaemonians (being busied with the
Helotes, and lately distressed by the Earthquake) not being able to relieve
them, the Defendants being most spent, the City was taken and levelled with
the ground, the inhabitants being made slaves, and the tenth part of them
consecrated to the god of Argos. So, this City happy in more ancient times, a
Nurse of famous men, and renowned for worthy exploits, was brought to
destruction, and continued desolate to the time wherein our Author lived.

11. The difference raised betwixt the Athenians and Corinthians, Thucyd. lib.
1.
about Megara, proceeded so far, as the former invaded Peloponnesus, and
joining battle with the Corinthians and Epidaurians, were worsted; Diodorus ad
Olymp. 80. ann. 2. and 3.
but engaging the second time at the Island Cecryphalea, obtained a victory.
Not long after, the War betwixt the Athenians and the inhabitants of Aegina was
again renewed, wherein the former obtained a great victory at Sea, and took
seventy Vessels from the Islanders, and then besieged the City, to the relief
of which 300 men were sent out of Peloponnesus. Now the Corinthians judging it
a fit season to be doing something, The difference betwixt the Athenians and
Corinthians, about Megara renewed.
for that they were both occupied in the War of Aegina and Egypt also, (where
their Forces were assisting Inarus the son of Psammitichus against Artaxerxes)
invaded the Territories of Megara. But things happened otherwise than they
expected, for the Athenians left not the siege at Aegina, but sent out of the
City of Athens such as were both above and under age for the War, to the aid
of Megara, which at length carried away the victory, and forced the Corinthians
to return home with great loss. At this time the Athenians began to build
their long Walls from the City to the port.

12. After this arose a War betwixt the Phocians and the Doors. The
Lacedaemonians being Patrons to the later, sent to their aid 11500 men, which
Army forced the Phocians and brought them to terms, but being about to return
home, A War betwixt the Phocians and Doors.
it dared neither do it by the Crissaean Sea (or Gulf of Phocis) nor through
the Isthmus, for fear of the Athenians, and so staid in Boeotia for an
opportunity: especially being desired by some principal men of Athens, who
hating the popular Government, hoped by the help of this Army to dissolve it,
and hinder the building of the long Walls, which made much for the interest of
the people. But the Athenians hearing of this stop came out of the City to a
man against them, having with them 1000 Argives, and a great number of other
Allies, so that the whole amounted to 14000. who when the Thessalian horse
joined with them gave battle to the Lacedaemonians near Tanagra, a great and
famous City of Boeotia, not far from Thebes. The Thessalian horse revolting to
the Lacedaemonians, they obtained the victory, and then presently marching into
Megaris, wasted it, and so returned home through the Istshmus. Yet the
Athenians resolving not to give way to Fortune, 72 days after this defeat
marched again into Boeotia to revenge themselves, which by the overthrow of the
inhabitants they reduced together with Phocis; rased the Walls about Tanagra,
Idem ad ann. 4, and ad Olymp. 81. ann. 1.
and compelled the Opnutians of Locris to give them 100 Hostages of their
richest men. At this time they perfected their long Walls; Aegina was yielded
to them, the Walls of which they pulled down, took away their shipping, and
imposed Tribute upon them for the future. And Tolmides their Captain coasting
Peloponnesus with a Fleet, burnt the Lacedaemonian Arcenal at Gythium, took
Chalcis, a Town of the Corinthians, and landing his men, overthrew the
Sicyonians in fight.

13. But in Egypt the Athenians had bad success, Thucyd. lib. 1.
Inarus being taken and Crucified, and few of their men after six years
returning home: fifty Galleys also being sent to their relief were most of them
taken and sunk by the Phoenicians. Other Expeditions they made also with like
success, save that they overtherw the Sicyonians again in battle; which made
them after three years willing to make truce with the Peloponnesians for five
years, by the advice of Cimon, The Athenians forced by bad success to make a
Truce with the Peloponnesians.
whom being banished by the Ostracism they had recalled, during which time they
warred in Diodorus ad Olymp. 82. ann. 3.
Cyprus under conduct of Cimon, and in Egypt in the service of Amyrteus the
King, with good success. Thucyd. at prius
After this followed the Holy War, as they called it, the Spartans taking the
Temple at Delphos from the Phocians, and giving it up to the Delphians, from
whom the Athenians again took it and restored it to the Phocians. Afterward
the Idem. Diodorus ad Olymp. 83. ann. 2.
Boeotians revolte from the Athenians, who thereupon in great indignation under
conduct of Tolmides invaded them, took Chaeronea and other Towns, in which
putting a Garrison, and returning homewards light upon the Enemy, who killed
and took them all, and amongst others Tolmides was slain, They part with
Boeotia, and Euboea revolts.
who had made this bold attempt, contrary to the advice of Pericles the Son of
Xanthippus, who now had begun to grow eminent. Hereat the Athenians exceedingly
dashed, to redeem their prisoners parted with all Boeotia, and not long after
all Euboea revolted from them, their credit being now on the decaying hand. To
the recovery of this Island Pericles was sent, who scarce being landed, news
came that Megara had also revolted, and that the Peloponnesians were about to
invade Attica.

14. This constrained him to return, Thucyd. lib. 1. Diodorus ad Olymp. 83.
ann. 3, and ann. 4.
and the Peloponnesians accordingly invaded At^ica under the command of
Pl^stonax the son of Pausanias the Lacedaemonian King. They wasted all as far
as Fleusine; but Pericles there opposing them, corrupted Cl^andridas
Counselor to Plistonax with gold, whereby they were deterred, and returned
home, where Cleandridas was rewarded with death, and Plistonax with banishment.
Pericles having so easily dispatched his affairs here, returned into Euboea,
which he wholly reduced, Pericles reduces Euboea, and various fortune
inclines both sides to an accommodation.
pulled down the walls of Chalcis, and banished only the Inhabitants of
Hestiaea, which he peopled with a Colony of his own Citizens. This various
fortune inclined both sides to an accommodation, and procured a League to be
made for thirty years betwixt the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, with their
allies on both sides, whereby Nisaea, Achaia, Pagae, and T^aezene, were set
free by the Athenians, and it was made lawful for any City that had not been
associate with either part, to join it self to which it best liked; which
Article afterward was urged by them of Corcyra to Ath^ns, whereby they
demonstrated that they ought not to deny them the liberty of association.

15. Six years after, a War arose betwixt the Inhabitants of Miletus and those
of Samus, about Priene a Town in Ionia, under the Mountain Mycale. Thucyd.
Diodorus ad Olymp. 84. an. 4.
The M^lesian affairs going down the wind they sent to Athens, where they
grievously accused the other, with whom joined also many of the Samians
themselves, who not being employed in the Government, desired to have it
changed. The Ath^nians being persuaded by them, manned out forty ships against
Samus, by which power Pericles restored the Popular Government, exacted 80
Talents, and taking for Hostages 50 Boys, and as many Men, which they kept in
custody at Lemnus, put a Garrison of their own into Samus it self. Stirs in
Samus. Pericles victorious there.
But some of the Citizens who had withdrawn themselves into the continent,
entered into a conspiracy with the greatest in the Town, and associating to
them Pissuthnes the Governor of Sardis for the Persians, with 700 Au^i^i^ries
passed over by night into the Island, and setting upon the People on a sudden
(of which they overthrew the major part, and having their Hostages delivered to
them by stealth out of Lemnus, delivered up the Athenian Garrison with the
Officers into the hands of P^ssuthnes) and brake out into open rebellion, and
drawing in the Byzantians to their party, made War upon Miletus.

16. The Athenians, having notice of this, presenly dispatched away 60 Galleys
against Samus, with 44 of which Pericles and his nine Colleagues sailing for
Miletus, engaged with the Sam^an Fleet consisting of 70 Vessels (whereof twenty
were laden with Soldiers) at the Island Trag^ae, and obtained the victory, and
afterward with the other part of the Fleet, and a new supply of 40 ships,
sailing to Samus, overthrew the Inhabitants, and closely besieged them both by
Sea and Land. Pericles, whilst things were thus ordering, heard that the
Phoenicians were coming to the relief of the besieged, to meet whom he took
away with him 60 Galleys, and bent his course toward Caria, after whose
departure the Samians perceiving the Guards thinner than usual, broke out of
the Haven, put to flight the ships that lay nearest, overthrew the next, and so
recovering the mastery of the adjoining Sea, for 14 days exported and imported
what they pleased. But Pericles being returned with 60 other ships from Attica
(commanded by excellent Captains) besides 30 others from Chius and Lesbus, they
were besieged closer than ever, and being spent with the War, The City yielded
to him.
in the ninth month of the siege yielded up the City. The conditions were hard
enough, viz. To demolish their Walls, give Hostages, deliver up their ships,
and pay the charge of the War. Byzantium affrighted at this success, returned
also to it is former obedience.

17. Shortly after this, fell out those motions which occasioned the
Corinthian, and so by consequence laid the foundation of the Peloponnesian War,
A. M. 3566. Olymp. 85. an. 2. V.C. 314. Artax. Longim. 25. Thucyd. ut supra
Diodorus ad Olymp. 85. an. 2.
about the second year of the 85th Olympiad, and the 25th of the reign of
Artaxerxes Longimanus.

The Inhabitants of the Island Corcyra, who were a Colony of the
Corinrinthians, some 85 years after their plantation in that Island (formerly
called Phaeacus, situate on the Illyrian shore, and being very populous) sent
out a Colony which built a City called Epidamnus, and afterward Dyrrach^im,
but not without the leave of Corinth the Metropolis, which at their request had
assigned a Citizen of their own ( Phalius of the posterity of Hercules)
according to the Law and custom, to be Prince of the Colony; and out of the
number of their own Citizens and other Doors made up the number. This new
Colony seated in a very convenient place, in a short time flourished
exceedingly, and abounding with plenty of all things, as usually it happens,
fell out of luxury unto civil dissentions about the Government, and hereat
occasion being taken by their next neighbors the Taulantians (who made War
upon them) suffered no little damage. Stirs at Epidamnus, a Colony of the
Corcyraeans.
At length the People incensed against the great ones expelled them the City,
who thereupon betaking themselves to the Taulantians, procured them to
distress Epidamnus both by land and sea, by which the people being straightned
sent to the Corcyraeans their Founders, and Patrons, humbly to beseech them
that by their authority they would make an accommodation betwixt them and their
exiles, and bring the Taulantians to cease their Hostility. The Corcyraeans,
whether disapproving the cause, or minding something else, rejected their
petition, who then by direction from the Oracle at Delphos, betook themselves
to the Corinthians, Founders of them both, and gave up their Colony into their
hands. They were glad of this occasion, and presently promised them all
assistance, being angry with the Corcyraeans, who upon their good fortune were
grown insolent, and paid not the respect to them which was due from a Colonie
to the Metropolis; for they were so rich and strong, that giving way to no City
of Greece in the former respect, they had also 120 Galleys readily furnished,
which drew envy upon them from the Corinthians, insomuch that now by the help
of their Friends they resolved to chastise them, and sent a Party of Soldiers
to defend Epidamnus, together with new planters to be imbodied into the Colony.

Procure a falling out betwixt the Corcyraeans and the Corinthians their
founders.
18. The Corcyraeans took this heavily that they should intermedle with the
affairs of their Colony, and being solicited by such exiles as had fled to
them, sent a Fleet to Epidamnus, commanding it to receive the exiles without
delay, and cast out the new Planters with the Corinthian Garrison. But the
Epidamnians refusing to do it, and the Corinthians making great provisions for
the War, they sent their Ambassadors to Corinth with some Spartans and
Sicyonians to bear witness of the matter, and offered to put it to a reference
before equal Judges: But the Corinthians neglecting their message, as resolved
for War, they also made preparation for it. They still continuing the siege
before Epidamnus, the Corinthians sent a Fleet of 75 Galleys, armed with 2000
fighting men thither, but leaving 40 for the carrying on of the siege, Thucyd.
Dio^orus ad ^lymp. 85. ann. 3, and 4.
with 80 more they engaged with them in a Sea Fight near the Promontory of
Actium, The Corcyraeans victorious.
and got the Victory. The same day Epidamnus was yielded to that party they
had left at the siege, and so hereby getting the dominion of the Sea far and
vvide, and growing proud upon their good fortune, they invaded the Territories
of the allies of their Enemies, to succor whom the Corinthians manned out
another Fleet, and landed an Army at Actium. They pitched also there their
Tents against them, but Winter dravving on, they both departed without any act
of Hostility; the Corinthians all that year and the year follovving, out of
hatred to the other, using all their endeavors for rigging a new Fleet, and
procuring plenty of rovvers out of Peloponnesus and other parts of Greece.

19. The Corcyraeans before this time not joined in alliance with any other
State, Thucyd. Diodorus ad Olymp. 86. an. 1.
now began to look about them how they might strengthen themselves. They sent
to Athens, desiring to enter into society with that State, and to have
assistance from it; and the Corinthians having notice hereof, sent their
Ambassadors to oppose them. The Corcyraeans were first heard, making a large
discourse, They enter into society with Athens.
and then the Corinthians larger than they. The matter was brought twice
before the People, which at length resolved that a defensive League should be
made with them of Corcyra, that the one should assist the other in case they
were assaulted by an Enemy: but to make any inv^sion assistance was denied,
lest they should break the Leagues formerly made with other States. The
Athenians resolved on this course, for that they savv plainly they must have
War with the Peloponnesian, and therefore desired to have the Corcyraeans who
were very powerful at Sea, The design of the Athenians herein.
on their side; and they thought it would be for their interest to have the
Corinthians and their associates spend their stock upon those of Corcyra,
which Island they also looked upon as very commodious for passage either into
Sicilie or Italy. Ten Triremes therefore were decreed to assist the
Corcyraeans, in case they were in any danger, and three Captains sent, one of
which was Lacedaemonius the son of Cimon, whom Pericles envying for his
fathers sake, procured that no more assistance should be sent, that so the
business might miscarry under him; Plutarch in Pericle.
but afterward out of plain shame he sent another Squadron of ships which
came too late. These Generals had in charge by all means to decline the fight
with the Corinthians, except they set upon the Corcyraeans, whom then they
were to protect to the utmost.

20. This Squadron of ten ships joining with the Corcyraeans made up their
Fleet 120 sail, with which they gave battle to the Corinthians (who had 90
of their own, and 60 from their allies) betwixt the Island Corcyra and the
continent of Epirus. This fight (described most accurately by Thucydides) was
the most valiantly fought, and with the greatest number of ships, of any that
to those times had happened betwixt the Graecians themselves. The Athenians
mindful of the charge received from their Superiors, at the first rather
sought to deter, than to fight with the Enemy, succouring the Corcyraeans in
some places; but they being fully worsted and put to flight in that wing
wherein they stood, they then with all their might fell upon the Corinthians,
and spoiled their Victory in that part, and rendered it ambiguous as to both
sides. The Corinthians overthrown in a Sea Fight.
On the same day both parties rallied for a fresh engagement, and they were
sounding to the charge, when unexpectedly the Corinthians espied twenty
Athenian ships which Pericles had now sent to assist with the other ten, at
which sight being utterly discouraged (as fearing more might follow them) they
fell off again, to the admiration of the Corcyraeans, who knew nothing of the
coming of these ships. Great slaughter was made on both sides; the Corinthians
lost thirty ships, and Corcyraeans seventy, besides 1000 of their men taken
prisoners, whom as the Corcyraeans carried homewards, they took Anactorium (a
Town situate upon the Bay of Ambracia) in their way, and therein le^t some
Planters of their own. This battle was fought in the 39th year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, the tenth of the 86th Olympiad, and five years almost before the
beginning of the Peloponnesian War, Lysimachus being Archon at Athens.

21. Eight hundred of the Prisoners which had been formerly slaves they sold,
and the rest (many of them being of the chiefest Rank of the Corcyraeans) they
kindly entertained. This with other things exasperate them and the
Peloponnesians against the Athenians.
Thus was Corcyra as it were made victorious, and the Athenian ships dismissed,
which proved the first cause of the Corinthians making War upon the Athenians.
Others followed, which not only enraged them, but the other Peloponnesians
against the Athenians. Podaea, a Town situate in the Isthmus of Pallene
(formerly called Plegra, Sirabo lib. 7. page 330. ^. T^a^^d. Di^d. P^^^ (...)
ad Olymp. 86 an^. 2.
and afterward Cassandrea from Cassander King of Macedonia) was a Colony of
the Corinthians, but associated with the Athenians. The Inhabitants thereof
were now commanded by the later to demolish that part of their Wall, which was
next Pallene, to give hostages, and to cast out the Magistrate which every year
the Corinthians used to send them, and receive no more from them afterward.
This the Athenians did, for that they perceived the Corinthians to be much
exasperated against them, and feared that joining with Perdiccas King of
Macedonia, with whom they were at odds, and upon whose Kingdom Potidaea
bordered, they would solicit the place to revolt, and by its example would
entice the rest of the Towns thereabout from their alliance. But Perdiccas
being first aware hereof (against whom the Athenians had Armed his brother
Philip and Derdas) in great wrath sent to Lacedaemon to stir them up with the
other Peloponnesian States to make War upon them, and invited the Potidaeans to
revolt, with other Towns in Thrace.

22. The Athenians being not ignorant of all this, to prevent the revolt of the
Towns, sent order to the Captains of the thirty Galleys lately sent into those
parts, first to see the execution of their Commands laid upon Potidaea, and
take all possible care that the other places should not give ear to any
sinister advice. They of Potidaea sent to Athens, desiring earnestly that
nothing of extremity might be put upon them; but yet they dispatched also
Ambassadors (together with some from the Corinthians their founders) to Sparta,
to desire aid thence, that they might provide for the worst. Having no good
answer from Athens, but affrighted with the coming of the Fleet; and on the
other hand being promised by the Lacedaemonians, that in case the Athenians
fell upon them, they would straight invade Attica, they took the advice of
Perdiccas, and revolted with the Chalcidensians and Bottiaeans. The Athenian
Fleet having notice hereof departed from Thrace, where they had arrived, and
sailing to Macedonia, join their power with Philip and Derdas against
Perdiccas. The Corinthians to help their friends at Potidaea, sent 1600 men,
partly of their own, and partly hired out of Peloponnesus, of heavy Armor; and
400 besides light Armed, who forty days after the revolt of the Town came
into Thrace, under conduct of Aristaeus, the son of Adimantus.

23. The Athenians hearing of this aid, Thucyd. lib. 1. Diodorus ad Olymp. 87.
ann. 1.
to give greater strength to their affairs in Thrace, sent to their former
Forces 2000 Armed men, with a Fleet of forty Galleys, under the Command of
Callias, the son of Calliades, with whom were joined in Commission four others.
Being arrived in Macedonia, they found their friends who had joined with Philip
to have taken Therma, and now intent upon the siege of Pydna, and joined
themselves to them; but seeing how their affairs would be endangered by the
Conjunction of Perdiccas with the Corinthian Forces and Potidaea, they made up
a peace with the King, and attempting Berrhaea in their way, made haste toward
Potidaea, and pitched their Tents at Gigonum, whither another Athenian Fleet of
seventy Galleys also came. Perdiccas the Macedonian King again revolted to the
Potidaeans, and joined himself with the Corinthian Army, betwixt which, and
that of the Athenians ensued a fight, wherein the Athenians were worsted in
that Wing wherewith they fought with the Corinthians; The Athenians getting the
better
but got the better against Perdiccas, which Aristeus the Corinthian General
seeing, after he returned from the pursuit, broke through, and fled into
Potidaea. Of the Athenians were slain 150. amongst whom Callias the General,
but of the contrary part few less than 300. The A^henians after this victory
drew a line against the Town, and a supply of 1600 fresh men being sent from
Athens under the Command of Phormio, Closely besiege Potidaea.
closely besieged it both by Sea and Land. These were the mutual causes of the
heart-burnings of the Corinthians and Peloponnesians against the Athenians, and
of the Athenians against them, about Corcyra, and Potidaea, both of them
Colonies of the Corinthian, of which the Athenians defended the former against
its founders, whilst they endeavored to chastise it, and they again enticed
the later, with other Towns which were Tributaries to Athens, to renounce their
allegiance to that State.

24. Potidaea being thus blocked up, Thucyd.
the Corinthians were highly concerned, both for the Town it self, and such of
their own Citizens as were therein; and resolving that it was no time now to be
idle, sent to their associates of Peloponnesus to meet them at Lacedaemon,
where they grievously inveighed against the Athenians. The States of
Peloponaesus accuse the Athenians at Lacedaemon.
Liberty being given to every man to speak, several others also sharply accused
them, but especially the Deputies of Megara, for many injuries, and chiefly for
that, contrary to the agreement made with them, they had interdicted them the
Ports and Market of Athens. The Corinthians cunningly suffered the rest to
speak first, that by them the Lacedaemonians might be incensed against the
Athenians, but then, after all, more fully and earnestly laid open their
faults, aggravated the injuries received from them, pressed the great danger
which threatened Peloponnesus from their power, checked the Lacedaemonians for
their too much remissness in vindicating the cause of their distressed friends
and allies, and plainly declared, that if now they would not do it, they must
strengthen themselves with other confederates.

25. It happened at this time that there were at Lacedaemon some Ambassadors sent
from Athens upon other business, who understanding how things went, desired
also to be heard, and this being obtained, sought to allay the stomach of the
Peloponnesians by calm and prudent reasons. They desired not to be understood,
as though they came to plead the cause of their State which they neither could
acknowledge as guilty, nor own them as their Judges: but desired, and advised
them not rashly to resolve upon any violent course, nor give credit to all that
was objected, until such time as they could thoroughly understand the case; for
that things being once confounded could not easily again be composed. Their
Ambassadors answer in their behalf.
They mentioned the commodities of peace, and the evils that come by War;
charged these calumnies upon the envy of their accusers, who could not behold
the power of Athens without prejudice, though it was obtained no otherwise than
as the reward of virtue, as the associates themselves could not but witness,
who knew well enough how the Athenians merited at Marathon of all Greece, as
afterward at Saelamine; and they averred, that they had used their power so
moderatly, as none had any reason to complain. That they had increased their
strength they denied not, which to endeavor was agreeable to the Law of
nature, as also that the weaker should obey the more potent; so that it was
without injury, though not without force, which was absolutely necessary for
the maintenance of any command, and was practiced not only by themselves, but
the Lacedaemonians also, and would ever so be in the like cases. Again, they
laid before them the uncertainty of the event of War, and concluded with a
religious protestation, concerning their innocence, and desire of peace.

26. The Lacedaemonians having heard both parties, debated the business
amongst themselves. Archidamus, King of Lacedaemon his prudent discourse.
They were generally inclined to make War presently upon the Athenians as the
Authors of many in^uries, which Archidamus, one of their Kings, and a very
prudent, and moderate man observing, by a grave speech dehorted them, not from
undertaking a War for the safety of their Allies, but rushing into it; for that
the strength of Athens, and of their own State (as he said) being compared,
there was need of a sufficient time to make provision for it, in which not
only the assistance of the Graecians, but of the Barbarians also was
requisite. He showed that the Athenians could not be subdued by the wasting of
At^ica, having all provisions in a readiness, and that it was no policy for
them being unprovided to deal with such an Enemy: but that rather the thing was
to be deferred till things could be in a readiness, in which time the
Athenians might perhaps be in a better mind, and give satisfaction without
constraint; and this could not turn to the disgrace of the Lacedaemonians, in
that they followed the example of their Ancestors: Lastly, that by how much
they took Arms with more advice, they should by so much conclude with more
happiness and celerity. Which is c^^ded by Sthenelaides, and War is decreed.
But Sthenelaides one of the Ephor, and who spoke last, dissenting from the
judgment of Archidamus very sharply persuaded the people to take up Arms
against the Athenians, as violators of the former Leagues, and War was decreed
accordingly, not so much at the instance of their confederates, as out of fear
of the growing power of Athens. This was done in the 14th year after the ending
of the Eubaean War, and the Truce made for 30 years.

27. The Lacedaemonians acquainted the Deputies with what was resolved; but
withal told them they would signify it to all their associates, that if so be
the War should be decreed by the common consent, it might be carried on with
their joint force: then departed they to their several homes to know the minds
of their Superiors, and the Athenian Ambassadors returned. The Lacedaemonians
enquire at Delphos about it.
After their departure, the Lacedaemonians, before the matter should any
further proceed, sent to Delphos to enquire of the Oracle concerning the event
of the War, whence receiving such answer as they wished, they again sent for
their Allies, and propounded the business to them, who unanimously decreed the
War, which was exceedingly pressed by the Corinthians, who, before this
meeting, for fear of the loss of Potidaea had sent about it. It being not
expedient to begin the War unprovided, all were desired to repair home, and
make all provisions possible (in which was almost spent a year) and in the mean
time Ambassadors were sent to Athens to make demands, of which, if any were
denied, a more specious pretense might be obtained for the War.

28. In the first Embassy they demanded the expiation of a piacular offense,
in which P^ricles was involved by his Mothers kindred. For, knowing him to be a
man of great Counsel and courage, They send frivolous messages to Athens.
by all means they endeavored upon this account to have him banished; but the
other objected to the Lacedaemonians, that they had drawn out of the Temple of
Neptune some of their He^lots, and slain them, and starved Pausanias to death
in that of Pallas Chalciaeca, where he took sanctuary. After this the Spartans
sent to require them to abstain from Potidaea, to set at liberty Aegina, and
especially they pressed them to let the Inhabitants of Megara have the liberty
of their Port and Market, without which they must expect nothing but War: but
to none of these demands was there given any satisfying answer, the Megarians
being accused for appropriating to their own use the ground which belonged to
the goddess of Eleusine, and receiving such fugitive slaves as fled from
Athens. In the third message Ramphius and his Colleagues added but this to the
other demands, that the Lacedaemonians were desirous of peace, and would grant
it, in case the Athenians would suffer all the Graecians to be free, and live
according to their own Laws. These things thus often the Spartans demanded, to
amuse the other party till they themselves could be provided, and to catch at a
specious pretense for a quarrel.

29. The Athenians upon the last message called the Assembly of the people to
deliberate about the matter, Thucyd. lib. 1. Diodorus ex Ephoro ad Olymp. 87.
ann. 2.
that they might send a clear and positive answer once for all. Many speaking
pro and con, at length Pericles the most excellent of all the Athenians of that
age, both for doing and speaking, with his eloquence (wherewith he was said by
the Poets to Thunder and Lighten) easily drew the multitude to his mind. After
he had inveighed against the Lacedaemonians as swollen with envy, he excused
themselves, and encouraged the people from their ability to undertake the War.
He advised that this answer should be returned: That the decree against them of
Megara should be rescinded, in case the Lacedaemonians would give such freedom
of their City to the Athenians and other of the associates: that they would set
all Cities under their jurisdiction at liberty, which were free before, The
Athenians by the advice of Pericles, gave a positive answer once for all by way
of denial.
when the League should be entered into; provided the Spartans would do the
same, and suffer such as were under them to live according to their own
customs, and not to be tied to those of Laconia: and lastly, that they were
content to be judged concerning the things in controversy, according to the
leagues; neither would they first make War, but effectually defend themselves.
He added, that this was both just and honorable, and if they undertook the War
cheerfully, they should find their Enemies less conderable: that out of the
greatest extremities the greatest honor was wont to accrue both to their State
in general, and to each Citizen in particular, which he made good by instancing
in the Median War, at which time the City was far less considerable than at
the present, and whence it arrived to that pitch of greatness: he told them it
was fit they should imitate their Ancestors, and leave not the Empire received
from them diminished unto posterity.

30. Why Pericles should be so earnest for the War Vide Plutarch in Pericle.
several reasons have been alleged, and this Idem ibid. Val. Max. l. 3. c. 1.
ext. exempl. Diodorus ut supra.
amongst the rest, that he was not able to make account for the public money
he had received to build a Portal in the Castle to the honor of Minerva. He
consumed abundance of treasure in this work, and none looking after him,
diverted the public money taken up under that pretense to other uses. Whilst
he considered hereof, and sat sorrowful at home, Alcibiades a Boy and his
Sisters Son (whom after his Brother in Laws death he brought up in his own
house, and who afterward became very eminent) came and asked him why he was so
sad, to whom he answered, because he knew not how to give an account of his
Office, at which the Boy replied, Alcibiades when a child, his advice to his
Uncle Pericles.
Study therefore rather how thou may not need to give an account of is. This
most prudent man destitute of advice from himself, used this of a child, and
for this reason persuaded the people to the War, that being entangled therein
they might have no leisure to call him to account for the disbursment of the
money. What ever his motives were, the People Thucyd. in fine. lib. 1.
decreed what he proposed, and answered the Lacedaemonians particularly
according to what he said, and in general, that they would do nothing they had
enjoined them, but were ready to acquit themselves of those matters laid
against them, before equal and indifferent Judges; and with this answer the
Ambassadors returned to Lacedaemon, whence no more came. These were the
quarrels which foreran the War, being begun about the affairs of Epidamnus and
Corcyra. Notwithstanding this disagreement, yet they continued commerce with
each other, went to and fro without any public Officer, or Herald; but yet
not without jealousy of one another. For these things that happened made
confusion in the Leagues, and ministered matter for War.

31. Several Learned Men flourished in this space, as Anonymus ad Ol. 76. an. 4.
Aeschylus the Tragoedian, Steph. in (...).
Iccus a famous Physician of Tarentum in Italy, Plutarch in Pericle.
Anaxagoras the Clazomenian Philosopher, who was defended by his Scholar
Pericles, when accused of Atheism; Anonym ad Olymp. 78. an. 1.
Panyiasis a famous Poet; Pericles himself, the Son of Xanthippus, accounted by
In Bruto.
Cicero the first Athenian Orator. Besides these, Diodorus.
Charondas and Zaleucus both Scholars of Pythagoras, whereof the former gave
Laws to the Thurians, and the other to the Locrians; Melissus, Protagoras the
Atheist, and Empedocles, Diog. Laert. Anonymus.
all who flourished about the 84th Olympiad. Herodotus of Halicarnassus, who
being sent to Thurium in Italy with some new Planters to restore the Colony
there, lived to the beginning of the Peloponnesian War which he mentions, and
in the 42d year of his age, about the third of the 84th Olympiad, recited his
Book at Vossius de script. Graecis.
Athens in the Assembly of the Panathaenaea, by the emulation of which
Thucydides then young was much moved; so that afterward this stirred him up to
write. Eusebius.
Euripides the Tragoedian, the Scholar of Anaxagoras, Schol. in vitam Anonym.
Suidas.
Sophocles, who was chosen General of the Athenian Forces, and (l) Phrynicus
the Comoedian, and Idem.
Pindar a Theban the Prince of Lyrick Poets, who died aged 85 years, in the
second of the 86th Olympiad. SECT. 3.
Cappellus Censorius c. 18. Aelim. var. Hist. lib. 10. c. 7. and lib. 13. c. 12.
Men^on an Athenian in the year before the beginning of the Peloponnesian War
(according to the account of Thucydides) Apseudes entering into his Office of
Archon, began his Cycle of the Moon, containing nineteen years. In this space,
though not precisely, the Lunations do recur; so that if the Quadrature of the
Moon fall out as at this day this year; the same shall return the same day of
the nineteenth year succeeding. Either because it was written in letters of
Gold, or for the precious use of it, it obtained to be called, as still it is,
the Golden Number. It is found by adding an unit to the year of our Lord, and
dividing the whole by 19. The remainder shall be the Cycle of the Moon; or if
nothing remain, the Cycle is out; that is Nineteen.

SECT. III. From the beginning of the Peloponnesian War to the ending thereof,
containing the space of 27 years.
1. IN the fifteenth year after the recovery of Euboea by the Athenians,
Thucyd. lib. 2. ad ann. 1. Diodorus ad Olymp 87. an. 1. E^ X^noph. Hellenic.
lib. 2.
and the truce concluded for thirty years; the sixth month after the battle
fought at Potidaea; in the 48th year of the Priesthood of Chrysis the Priest of
Argos; Aenesias being the principal Ephorus at Sparta, Pythodorus Archon at
Athens; in the first year of the 87th Olympiad, the 33th of the Reign of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, of the World the 3574, began the Peloponnesian War,
henceforth there being no commerce with one another without an Officer at Arms,
and Hostility exercised without intermission.

2. In the second month of Pythodorus his Government, and the beginning of the
Spring, The Peloponnesian War begins with the surprising of Plataea by the
Thebans. Which the Townsmen presently recover.
300 Thebans seized upon Plataea, by the treachery of some in the Town, being
associate to the Athenians; for they perceiving a War to be drawing on, and
knowing that Town to be always in peace adverse to them, thought good to make
sure of it betimes. The Inhabitants thinking more to have got in, than indeed
did, at the first yielded it, but then again apprehending the truth, resolved
to rescue their liberty, and set by night upon the Thebans, whom they knew to
be weary, ignorant of the Town, and would be much troubled with the dirt, by
reason of abundance of rain which fell that night. The device prospered, and
the, slew almost half the number, taking the rest prisonres, which were 180,
and amongst them Eurymachus the Author of this Expedition. It happened that from
Thebes another Party came too late to the help of their fellows if need should
be, who seeing what was done, considered whether they should not set upon such
Plataeans as were abroad in the Country, and waste it round about, thereby to
redeem their friends. The Plataeans (as the Thebans said) sent to them, being
afraid of this, and offered them to release the prisoners if they would forbear
to spoil their grounds; but in case they did, threatened to put them to death;
whereupon the Thebans withdrew; and yet for all this the Plataeans put their
friends to death. The Plataeans on the other hand alleged, that they never made
any promise to dismiss them; but in case they should agree in treaty. But they
sent to Athens to give them notice there of this attempt made upon their Town.

3. The message being carried before the Thebans were put to death, the
Athenians sent word to Plataea, that they would do nothing against them till
they heard further from them; after they had first seized upon such Boeotians
as were in their Dominions. Then after the truth was known, they sent an Army
which victualled the place, and taking out the useless multitude of both
Sexes, put a Garrison therein. Thus the League being plainly broken on both
sides, both parties prepared themselves for the War, both sent away Ambassadors
to the Persian, and other Barbarians, and set themselves to obtain new
alliances. Now were old Prophecies and Sayings in all men's mouths, which they
interpreted according to their affection. Most were inclined toward the
Lacedaemonians, who professed themselves the vindicators of the liberty of
Greece, and hating the Athenians, either for that they desired to shake off
their yoke, The Lacedaemonians and Athenians heads of the two Parties.
or feared to undergo it. On the Lacedaemonian side were all the Peloponnesians
except the Argives and Achaeans, who were friends to both, all but the
Inhabitants of Pellene amongst the latter, who at the beginning sided with the
Lacedaemonians, and afterward the rest also joined themselves to them. Without
Peloponnesus the Megarians, Phocians, Locrians, What Greeks stood with the
Lacedaemonians,
Boeotians, Ambraciots, Leucadians, Anactorians. The Corinthians, Megarians,
Sicyonians, Pellenians, Eleans, Ambraciots, and Leucadians, furnished them with
ships; the Boeotians, Phocians, and Locrians, sent out Horsemen, and the rest
of the States supplied them with Foot.

And who with the Athenians.
4. With the Athenians stood the Chians, Lesbians, Plataeans, Messeniaens
inhabiting Naupactus, most of the Acarnanians, the Corcyraeans, Zacynthians,
and the rest of the tributary Cities all over, the Carians inhabiting the
Seacoasts, the Dorians their neighbors, Ionia upon the Hellespont, several
Towns of Thrace, and other places not few, the Islands lying betwixt
Peloponnesus and Crete toward the Sunrising, and all the Cyclades except
Melus and Thera. The Chians, Lesbians, and Corcyraeans, afforded shipping, the
rest, men and money, as Thucydides writes, who in this Catalogue passes by
Euboea and Samus, though they abounded with shipping, and sided with the
Athenians. Presently after the action about Plataea, the Lacedaemonians sent
abroad to their associates to meet at the Isthmus, which they did accordingly,
two third parts out of each of the Cities. Here Archidamus the Spartan King and
Captain General, having first gravely advised them not to trust too much to
their own strength, though they made up such an Army as the eldest of them had
never seen, Archidamus invadeth Attica.
sent to Athens to see if that City would now remit any of it is former rigor;
but the messenger being sent back without hearing, he marched for Attica, the
Boeotians at the same time having invaded the Territories of the Plataeans.

5. Ere Archidamus invaded Attica, Pericles his friend, who by the Athenians
with nine others was appointed General, foreseeing that if he should spare his
Villages, either upon the account of their particular friendship, or by order
from the Spartan State, to render him suspected, it would create him abundance
of envy and ill will, to avoid all suspicion, called the People together, and
gave the said Villages to the Commonwealth, and advised them to gather all
their things out of the Villages, and contain themselves within the City, to
take care of their shipping, and not to neglect their confederates, from whom
they might be supplied with money, which together with good counsel and advice
is the sinnews of War. The Provision of the Ath^nians for War.
He told them that they had 600 Talents of Tribute yearly coming in, besides
other revenues; that they had in the Castle left 6000 Talents of Silver ready
coined, besides in bullion and plate 500 Talents more, and money in the
Temples, besides forty pound of pure Gold about the statue of Pallas, which it
was lawful to use in extremity, making it up again afterward. They had ready
19000 Footmen, and 1200 Horse, besides others that used bows on Horseback, and
6000 Archers on foot: of Galleys fit for sail 300, and he added other things to
make them courageously begin the War. They obeyed him in fetching their goods
into the City, and shutting up themselves there, though much to their prejudice
and trouble; but such authority had he with the people, having first, to
ingratiate himself, enlarged the authority and liberty of the multitude,
whereby afterward in effect he ruled alone. They set themselves also with all
their might to the rigging of their Fleet, and gathering together the forces of
their Confederates.

6. The Peloponnesian Army entered Attica by Oenoe a Castle of the Athenians,
upon the frontiers of Boeotia, and there Archidamus staid, providing all things
for the storm. Being somewhat long in his preparations, his adversaries thence
found matter wherewith to accuse him, as one who affected the Athenians, and on
purpose before at the Isthmus, SECT. 2.
and now also protracted the time till they should have removed all their goods
out of Attica. He indeed thought they might be inclined to a composure for the
saving of their goods, and therefore did delay his march, but finding no
message sent, and not being able to take the Castle, he removed about 80 days
after the Thebans entered Plataea, in the height of Summer, Corn being now ripe,
and invaded Attica, which he wasted as far as Acharnae, the strongest Garrison
of all the Country, and but seven or eight miles distant from Athens. When
they in the City understood this, having not suspected he would have peirced
so far, and afflicted for the loss they sustained, they began to be much
moved, (especially they of Acharnae, who seemed to themselves a considerable
part in the State) and tumultuously gathering together, now began to rail at
Pericles, for that he being General did not lead them out against the Enemy. He
would not call the assembly nor any Company together, for fear they should
resolve rashly upon any thing; but was very careful of the defense of the
City, and sent out a party of horse, of which some were Thessalian
Auxiliaries, to restrain the excursions of the Enemy into the parts adjacent,
which was beaten back with some loss. At length the Peloponnesians seeing the
Athenians would not come out to fight, removed from Acharnae, and wasting other
places, departed through Boeotia into Peloponnesus, and went severally to their
own homes.

7. Whilst they were yet in Attica, the Athenians, to divert them, sent out a
Fleet of 100 Galleys, on which were aboard 1000 Soldiers of heavy Armor, and
400 Archers, with which the Corcyraeans joined 50 Vessels more, The Athenians
send a Fleet into Peloponnesus to divert their enemies.
and other associates contributed their numbers. Coasting the Peloponnesian
shore, besides other harm done, they landed in Laconia, and had taken Methone,
then unwalled, and meanly manned, but that Brasidas the Spartan with 100 men
brake through, and getting into the Town, defended it so, as they were glad to
retreat to their ships. Then went they to Elis, where they seized on Phia, and
staying there two days, harrased the Country, and overthrew such as were sent
to restrain them: but their ships being sorely tossed with a Tempest, and
hardly recovering the Haven of Phia, and understanding also that greater forces
were coming against them, they departed thence, and grievously distressed such
places as they came to. At the same time also another Fleet was sent from
Athens to infest the Locrians, and defend Eubaea, which did much harm upon the
Coasts of Locris, took Thron^um, took Hostages with them, and overthrew the
Locrians that came out to resist them. They eject the Inhabitants of Aegina,
and plant a Colony of their own in the Island.
In the same Summer the Athenians cast out the Inhabitants of Aegina, for that
they imputed to them the especial cause of the War, and judged that Island
convenient for them to place a Colony therein of their own. The Lacedaemonians
out of requital for the kindness received from them during the Earthquake,
and War with their slaves, and out of hatred to the Athenians, gave them Thyrea
and its Territories to inhabit (which separate Laconia from the Country of
Argos, reaching as far as the Sea;) but such of them as this place for its
straightness could not receive, were dispersed up and down Greece it self.

An Eclypse of the Sun on the third of August.
8. This same Summer, at the change of the Moon, happened such an Eclypse of the
Sun (at which time says Thucydides, it is judged that it can only happen)
that at Midday the Stars were seen, which according to the Julian account
happened on the third day of August, as the Astronomical Tables demonstrate.
About the same time the Athenian Fleet of 100 Galleys having in Acarnania taken
several Towns, came to Cephallenia, an Island lying over against Acarnania and
Leucas, which being inhabited in four Towns, they reduced without one stroke,
and so returned home. In the beginning of Autumn, the Athenians with a vast
Army invaded Megaris, which wasting in an Hostile manner they returned, and so
they did once a year, till they got Nisaea into their hands. At this time also
they placed a Garrison in Ataelante, an Island belonging to the Locrians of
Opus, which hitherto no body had peopled, lest it should prove an Harbor for
Robbers that from Locris might prey upon Eubaea. In Winter, according to their
custom, they solemnised the Funeral for those that first died in the War on
this manner. First, their bones for three days were laid out to be seen in a
Tent, The manner of burying those who died in the Wars.
where it was lawful for their friends to come, and do such duties as was
usual to the dead. Then when they were carried out, each Tribe came, and
putting the bones of their fellows into Cypress Coffins, carried them away on
Chariots, and one Chest was carried empty for such as had not been found; the
women of their kindred making lamentation as for them. Then were they buried in
a public Sepulcher, in the most famous Suburb of the City, called Ceramicus,
where all slain in War were constantly buried, except they that fell at
Marathon, who for their greater honor were buried in the place of the fight.
After they were buried, some one Eminent for prudence and eloquence made a
Funeral Oration in commendations of them, which at this time was most
excellently performed by Pericles. The scope of his speech was to show they
deserved immortal glory for shedding their blood in their Countries behalf, and
to excite the living to seek after such renown. With this Winter ended the
first year of the Peloponnesian War, whose History for its influence into the
whole is the more considerable.

9. In the Spring the Peloponnesians again under conduct of Archidamus their
former General invaded Attica, at which time fell also upon it, Thucyd. lib. 2.
ad ann. 2.
a most fearful plague, as it is described by Thucydides, who was sick of it,
as seldom happened; during the rage of which they plundered and wasted the
Country all over. Attica the second time invaded, when it was seized with a
fearful plague.
Pericles returning to his former Counsel, hindered the Citizens who were very
desirous to issue out and fight, and provided an hundred ships, with which and
fifty of the associates of Chius and Lesbus, armed with 4000 foot and 300
horse, he departed to Peloponnesus, the Coasts of which he sore wasted, and
forced the Army to return home to defend it, which they were willing to do also
because of the plague, after they had been in Attica forty days. After the
return of Pericles, his Army was sent under the Command of Agnon and
Cleopompus, against Chalcis and Potidaea, at the later of which it was seized
by the pestilence, and greatly dimished, and Agnon with 1500. which remained of
4000, returned home. But the people being sore afflicted by the plague and War
together, were angry now against Pericles, as him that moved them to take up
Arms, who calling them together sharply reproved them; and they confessed what
he said to be true, and that he had advised them upon good grounds, but being
enraged at their private discommodities, they fined him 80 Talents, and
banished him the City, Diodorus.
and yet presently after, according to the inconstant nature of the multitude,
recalled, and created him General with full power.

10. In the same Summer a Navy from Peloponnesus of an hundred Galleys fell
upon Z^zynthus, an Island addicted to the Athenians, which wasting, and being
not able to do any more, they returned home. The Peloponnesians also in the end
of Summer sent Ambassadors to the Persian King to desire aid, who were also
commanded to go to Sitalces King of Thrace, to desire a League of confederacy
with him; but they were taken near the Hellespont by some Athenians, through
the assistance of Sadocus the Kings son, and free of Athens, and being brought
thither, in revenge for some Athenians, Merchants, and others, slain in
Peloponnesus, they were put to death. In Winter twenty Galleys were sent from
Athens to Naupactus to secure the Straights lying betwixt Peloponnesus and
Aetolia, and other fix to Caria and Lycia, to gather money, under Command of
Melesander, who in a fight was there slain with part of his forces. Potidaea
delivered up to the Athenians.
Potidaea now also being in despair of any supply from Peloponnesus, and sore
afflicted with famine (which raged so far as they are man's flesh) yielded to
the Athenians. Of the besieged such as were Males had liberty to depart with
one Garment apiece, Females with two, and a little provision. The City being
thus emptied was replenished with a Colony from Athens, to which state this
siege stood in 2000 Talents. And so the second year of the War ended with this
Winter.

11. In the next Spring Archidamus the Lacedaemonian King marched against
Plataea, and besieged it. The Plataeans sent to him to desire he would forbear
to use any extremity against them; Idem lib. 2. ad ann. 3.
but he returned them very harsh conditions, Archidamus besieges Plataea,
which holds out.
requiring them to forsake the Athenians, to give up their City, and all they
had, for the time of War, and in the mean time to go and dwell somewhere else,
promising that as soon as the War should be over, they should have all entirely
restored to them. They desired a Truce, till such time as they could send to
the Athenians, their associates, and know their mind, who being utterly against
it, they then sent Archidamus word, that they were resolved to undergo
whatsoever the chance of War should lay upon them, for that they neither could,
nor would revolt from the Athenians. He then fell of wasting their grounds, and
with all his might attempted the City, which was as valiantly and powerfully
defended by the Inhabitants. No way taking, at length the Spartans attempted it
by fire, which consumed most part of the Town, leaving but a few houses for the
Plataeans to live in. Yet still the matter succeeded not, and at length
despairing to take the place by force, they raised a Wall round about it, which
they fenced with a double Ditch to shut them in, and leaving sufficient Guards,
departed home. Before this the Townsmen had sent out to Athens all their
useless Company. This same year the Athenians fought with various success in
Thrace and Acarnania.

12. In the later end of this Summer, Idem in Pericle.
and the 6th Month of the year died Pericles, of the Epidemical disease, or
the Plague, as Plutarch reports, though not by its sudden force as others,
but in a way of Consumption, which, if so, Pericles dies.
was extraordinary. As he drew on toward his end, some of the principal men of
Athens that were left alive of his ancient friends, as they sat by him, not
thinking that he understood any thing, discoursed much of his great and many
victories and Trophies which he had erected, placing therein the main of his
commendation. He understanding the discourse, interrupted them, saying, that he
wondered they should especially take notice of those things, which fortune made
common to him with others, and make no mention of that which was most worthy
and remarkable, for No man, says he, upon mine account has put on a black
Garment. His commendation.
A man he was to be had in constant admiration, not only for his equity and
mildness, which he showed in so many businesses of concernment, and such
enmities as were exercised against him; but also for his greatness of spirit,
that this he especially charged upon himself, not to indulge his anger in so
great power, or his malice; neither to be implacable toward his greatest
adversary: and this seems to be the reason that he enjoyed the surname of
Olympius without envy, because he was of so sweet a disposition, and in the
greatest power preserved his life unblemished. The great miss the Athenians
had of him made them soon perceive what man he was, whose power whilst alive
they ill bore, as dasling their eyes; when dead, and they had experience of
others, they confessed that no man could in that height of place have carried
himself more moderatly, or in that modesty more gravely, and that height of
power which used to be branded with the name of Tyranny, appeared in him to
have been the wholesome preservative of the Commonwealth; such depravednesse of
manners, and excess of wickedness falling upon all things after his death,
which he weakening and keeping under as long as he lived, procured that it
exceeded not the strength of the remedy.

13. The Summer following being the fourth year of the Peloponnesian
War-rising, Thucyd. lib. 3. initio.
the Peloponnesians and their confederates made the third invasion of Attica,
when Corn was now ripe, under the Conduct of the same Archidamus, which they
wasted up and down as long as their provisions lasted. Archidamus the third
time invadeth Attica.
In the mean time all the Island Lesbus (except Methymna) revolted from the
Athenians, having had a great desire to do it before the War, but that the
Lacedaemonians would not receive them. A Fleet of forty ships were then
presently dispatched from Athens, and War was denounced to the Inhabitants of
Mitylene, except they delivered up their ships, and pulled down the walls;
SECT. 3.
which being denied, War was made upon them, their Galleys put to flight, and
the Haven blocked up. Hereupon they desired a Treaty, The Athenians besiege
Mitylene.
and obtained truce to send an Embassage to Athens about a Peace; but in the
mean while they sent underhand Ambassadors to Lacedaemon, to desire a straight
League and alliance, with present aid. The Ambassadors being ordered by the
Spartans to stay at Olympia at the time of the solemnity of the 88th Olympiad
pleaded there their cause, and in the name of their City were received into the
League, and assistance out of hand was promised to them. Another Expedition was
then resolved on into Attica, but the Spartans being ready, at the Isthmus,
whereas their associates loitered, and the Athenians then with a Fleet of 30
ships preid upon Peloponnesus, they being advertized of the loss they
sustained in Laconia, returned home.

14. Yet the Peloponnesians in performance of their promise made to the
Mitylenaeans, dispatched away a Fleet of 40 Galleys, which found another from
Athens to oppose it, consisting of 100; for the Athenians now abounded in
shipping, having ready furnished 250 Galleys, on which they expended much, so
as to defray their expenses, they now first of all were assessed, exacting yet
from their confederates the usual Tributes, which they paid with much repining.
At the same time the Mitylenaeans and the rest of the Lesbians made War upon
the Methymnaeans, who persisted in their obedience to the Athenians. These
understanding of it, sent at the latter end of Summer a band of men into the
Island, which drew a line round about Mitylene, upon which Guards being set,
the Inhabitants were straightly besieged. In Winter the Inhabitants of Plataea
being greatly distressed for want of victuals, and despairing of any aid from
Athens, resolved to break through the Enemies Fortifications, though exceeding
difficult to be passed, and save themselves by flight. Many for the difficulty
of the thing changed their minds, but 300 stood firm in their resolution, and
taking advantage of an exceeding dark and tempestuous night, 212 with
remarkable courage and constancy brake through, and (the rest being repulsed
into the City) came safe unto Athens. Toward the end of Winter Salaethus was
sent from Lacedaemon to Mitylene, to encourage the besieged to hold out, by
promise of help; and another Expedition to be made by the confederates into
Attica. And so the fourth year of the Peloponnesian War ended.

Attica invaded the fifth time, and the Mitylenaeans yield.
15. In the beginning of the fifth year, the Peloponnesians sent 40 ships to
Lesbus to the relief of the Mitylenaeans, under the conduct of Alcidas, and
they themselves with an Army, over which Cleomenes (Uncle and Guardian to
Pausanias their young King yet under age) was Captain, invaded Attica the fifth
time, which they most grievously distressed; but hearing nothing from Lesbus
that they liked, and being in scarcity of victuals, they returned the sooner
into Peloponnesus. The Mitylenaeans being sorely distressed in the same nature,
whether the Magistrate would or not, yielded themselves to the mercy of the
Athenians, which the Peloponnesian Fleet understanding before they arrived at
Lesbus, went over to the Coast of Asia, and there having cast many things in
their heads, without any thing of note performed, returned, through the
persuasion of their General, into Peloponnesus, being from Lesbus in vain
pursued by Paches the Athenian Captain. He returning from the pursuit, settled
things in Lesbus according to his own mind, sent Salaethus the Lacedaemonian
messenger (whom he took in the Town) with the authors of the revolt, and some
whom the Townsmen sent to intercede for them, unto Athens, staying there
himself for further orders. Salaethus was presently put to death, and the
people being called together to consult about the Mitylenaeans, resolved, at
the instigation of Cleon, a man of bitter severity, that all those of ripe age
should be put to death, as well as they that were sent to Athens, and all the
women and children should be made bondslaves; and this decree was without
delay sent to Paches to be put into execution. A severe sentence against them.
But considering of this rash and cruel sentence, they repented of what they
had done, and the next day met to advise further of it, when again Cleon a man
in great grace with them, pressed vehemently the former decree. But Diodotus
one of a milder spirit opposed him, and having endeavored the day before to no
purpose to do it, now by very few voices carried it from him.

16. Then was there dispatched a swift Galley, with order if possible to get
before that which carried the former Decree, Reversed.
and command Paches to abstain from putting it in execution. Yet the former
arrived at Mitylene first, having set forth a whole day before it; but whilst
Paches was considering of the sharpness of the Decree, and how to perform it,
the latter arrived, and so the lives of the multitude were saved, being so near
to destruction, as scarce any thing nearer. But to punish the revolt, above
1000 of those whom Paches had sent to Athens as authors of it, the People
commanded to be put to death, Mitylene was deprived of it is walls and ships,
all Lesbus except the Methymnaeans had hard conditions imposed upon them. The
fields were taken from all the owners, of which the tenth part being dedicated
to the gods, the remainder was distributed to the Citizens of Athens, the
tillage thereof being left under a vast rent to the Lesbians: and all such
Towns as were now subject to the Mitylenaeans, the Athenians reduced under
their Dominions. The same Summer they seized upon Minoas, an Island lying
before the shore of Megaris, and the Port of Nisae, and fortifying it, made the
Coasts more safe and convenient to all intents. Plataea at length yielded and
destroyed.
In the mean time those that were left in Plataea were forced by mere famine to
yield themselves and City to the judgment of the Lac^daemonians, who sent five
men to hear their Orators, and the Thebans their Enemies. These men adjudged
them all to death, which accordingly was executed upon them to the number of
200, with whom were slain 25 Athenians found in the Town, and the women
adjudged to slavery. The City for some time was given to some exiles to
inhabit: then, scarce a year being past, was by the Thebans utterly destroyed,
an Inn only being built out of the ruins of the Temple of Juno, and the
Temple it self enlarged, all the grounds being seized on by the Thebans. This
was the fortune of the Plataeans (who thought they might have had some favor
showed them for the merits of their Ancestors in the Median War) after they had
continued 93 years in the society with Athens, and no more is to be heard of
them till Plataea was rebuilt by Alexander the Great.

A lamentable sedition at Corcyra.
17. During these things, a most lamentable sedition happened at Corcyra, part of
the Citizens being for Popular Government, and the rest for that of a few or
the most potent; the former trusting to the aid of the Athenians, as
conformable to their policy, and the other to the Peloponnesians. Twice within
the City did they fight, and both the Athenians and Peloponnesians sent their
Fleets to the assistance of their Friends; but the Athenians being stronger at
Sea, and sending 60 Galleys more to the help of the former Navy, the
Peloponnesian withdrew themselves, having only lightly skirmished with the
Enemy in the sight of Corcyra, before the latter Fleet arrived. Then those for
the Popular Government, strengthened by the assistance of the Athenians, cruelly
raged against their adversaries, no mercy being shown to such as took
Sanctuary, or hung upon the Altars, neither from Parents to their own Children,
insomuch that the City was almost shaken to pieces and made desolate, and a
grievous Sedition indeed came afterward proverbially to be termed a
Corcyraean. And it was not only fatal to Corcyra, but to all Greece besides,
being drawn into example by other States which afterward broke out into
factions.

Stirs in Sicilie of which the Athenians make advantage.
18. At the same time the Greek Cities in Sicilie fell into dissentions, some
being of the Dorick, and others of the Ionick faction, the head of the former
Syracuse, and of the latter Leontium, which two made War upon each other. The
Leontines craved aid of the Athenians, for that they were not only of the
Ionian stock, but conjoined with them in an ancient League of confederacy. The
Athenians willingly took the opportunity to get some footing in Sicilie, to
hinder thereby the exportation of Corn thence into Peloponnesus, and especially
to make way for their power and dominion there. At the end of Summer they sent
thither twenty Galleys. In Winter these ships assisted with ten more from
Rhegium in Italy, invaded the Aeolian Islands near to Sicilie, and wasted such
as refused to yield. At the same Season the Plague began again at Athens, which
took away a great number of Soldiers, but much greater of the common people:
Earthquakes also happened in several places. And with this Winter the fifth year
of the Peloponnesian War ended.

19. In the beginning of the next Summer, the Peloponnesians came the sixth
time to the Isthmus, The sixth Summer of the War.
with intent to invade Attica, under the conduct of Agis the Spartan King; but
being affrighted with the frequent Earthquakes, they returned. In the mean
while the War in Sicily variously proceeded. Laches the Athenian Captain taking
some Towns. The Athenians sent out one Fleet to infest Peloponnesus, and
another the Island Melus, which stubbornly withstood their commands, both which
did nothing of very great concernment. The Spartans planted the Colony of
Heraclea, in the platform of old Trachinia a City in Thessalie, being for the
convenience of it is situation upon the Sea, and the Haven, very fit for
carrying on the War against the Athenians. These received a great loss from
the Aetolians, but in Winter thrice overthrew the Ambraciots, who were forsaken
by their friends the Peloponnesians, which made them now embrace a Peace with
their adversaries the Acarnanians and Amphilochians (who called in the
Athenians against them) and entered into a league and society for ten years with
them. The war proceeding all this while in Sicily, a greater Fleet was sent
under conduct of Eurymedon and Sophocles, Aetna breaks out into flames.
to oppose the Syracusians, toward the end of Winter, at which time the Hill
Aetna belched out great store of fire into the Territories of Catana, 50 years
after it had the last time so done. Thus the sixth year of the Peloponnesian War
ended.

20. In the beginning of the next, Thucyd. lib. 4.
the Peloponnesians under the command of Agis the Son of Archidamus the Spartan
King, again invaded Attica. The Athenians having furnished 40 ships for
Sicilie, gave order to the Captains, in their way to have an eye to the
Corcyraeans, who were much infested by their own exiles, Attica the sixth time
invaded.
and were in fear of 60 Peloponnesian Galleys sent thither: and to Demosthenes
was given the command of some ships wherewith he should infest Peloponnesus. As
all the ships sailed by Laconia, Demosthenes a man of a prompt and earnest
disposition, advised the other Captains to fortify Pylus, which is a ragged
Promontory joined to the main by a little neck of Land. Before it lies a small
barren Island of less than two miles compass, and within that a Creek which
is a good harbor for ships, the force of weather being born off by the
head-land and Isle. The Promontory having anciently belonged to the Messenians,
and now desolate, he pressed sore that they might seize upon, and make their
own, being very convenient for the wasting of Laconia; but the other Captains
dissented from him, hasting for Corcyra, when in the mean time such a tempest
arose as forced them to take into the Harbor. Pylus fortified ^y Demosthenes
^he Athenian.
Then did he again urge his former advice, and though he nothing more profited
with the Captains, yet the Soldiers desirous to make some stay there, and
seeing the commodiousnesse of the Haven, fell upon fortifying the place, and
with wonderful diligence and pains perfected the wall in six days. Then was
Demosthenes left there to keep it with five ships, and the rest directed their
course for Corcyra.

21. The news of these doings at Pylus drew the Peloponnesians in all have
thither out of Attica, fifteen days after their arrival, and they brought
their whole Force both by Land and Sea to recover this piece of ground, which
they well foresaw how bad a neighbor it might prove in time. Draws the
Peloponnesians out of Attica, and being sorely laid at the Peloponnesians are
worsted.
In the Island named Sphacteria, they placed a number of men all Spartans,
which were to keep it by their turns, and stopped up the Haven on both sides,
that there might be no entrance in for the Athenian ships: then furiously did
they assault Pylus both by Land and Sea, but it was as valiantly defended by
Demosthenes; So that with several new onsets the storm was continued till the
next day, and then the Peloponnesians drew off to recruit themselves, and
provide for a new onset. In the mean time came in forty Athenian ships (to
which Demosthenes had beforehand sent to acquaint them with his condition) and
with them some belonging to their Allies, which first offered fight to the
Peloponnesians in the open Sea; but that being refused, set upon them in the
Haven, brake, and sunk many of their Vessels, took some, and forced the rest to
run themselves on ground, about which afterward ensued a great contention,
whilst the Athenians would become masters of them, and the Spartans out of
shame, and grief for their friends in the Island, labored with more
earnestness to get them off, which they effected by some, and the rest fell as
prize to the Enemy, who now closely besieged the Spartans that were left in the
Island.

22. Pylus being now secure, but the Spartans in the Island as good as lost,
the Magistrates were sent for from Lacedaemon into the Camp (as the custom was
in great dangers) who perceiving that there was no other way to rescue their
Citizens, The Lacedaemonians desire a Truce,
than by composition with the Enemies, took Truce for a time with the Captains,
till they might send to Athens about a peace. The conditions of the Truce were,
that the Peloponnesians should deliver up to the other all their ships, as well
such as were upon the Coast of Laconia as there, to be restored to them if the
peace should not succed, and that they should attempt nothing upon the Fort,
nor the Athenians against their Camp. That a certain quantity of victuals
should be daily carried into the Island, but no ships should pass into it
secretly; that the Truce should end at the return of the Ambassadors, and if in
the mean time it should be broken in any one point, it should be esteemed
utterly void in all. The Ambassadors coming to Athens put the people in mind of
that moderation all men ought to show in prosperity, And send to Athens about a
peace, which Cleon crosses.
and with what credit they might now, at their request, make a peace. But Cleon
a man very vehement, and much in request, with-stood it, so that in stead of a
peace on equal terms, and recompense for harm received, the Athenians demanded
certain Cities, which had been by the Spartans long before this War taken from
them, and refused to continue the Treaty, except the Spartans in the Isle were
delivered up to them as prisoners. The Ambassadors returned without success,
and the Truce being ended, both sides betook themselves to their Weapons again
about Pylus.

23. The Peloponnesians demanding their sixty ships which they had given up,
and now at the end of the Truce were to be restored to them in as good a
condition, were put off, under pretense that they had broken the Truce. The
Island was also afresh besieged, and the Spartans valiantly standing out,
things went on but slowly, so that Cleon himself, who much vaunted what he
could do, was by the people, who now began to relent of their not embracing a
peace, forced, whether he would or not, to command a new supply of men thither.
He, and Demosthenes (whom he chose for his Colleague) first offered conditions
to the Spartans, The Spartans in the Island Sphacteria yield to mercy.
and then upon their refusal forced them, after the loss of 128. to yield
themselves to mercy. The number of those that yielded were 292. (whereof 120 of
the Nobility of Sparta) which were carried to Athens, and being closely
imprisoned, it was resolved, that when the Peloponnesians next invaded Attica,
they should all be slain; and then was a Garrison of Messenians (the old
Inhabitants, and bitter Enemies to the Spartans) sent into Pylus. The
Lacedaemonians sorely discouraged by these Events, and fearing worse things,
sent to Athens again about the liberty of the prisoners, and delivery of Pylus,
but the Ambassadors were often rejected, and nothing done, the Athenians being
still more puffed up by their good success. This Summer they overthrew the
Corinthians in the Isthmus. A Fleet being also sent for Sicily, The Sedition of
Corcyra ends.
assisted the Corcyraeans in their way against their Exiles (who having got
footing in the Mountains, annoyed them) and by their help they now utterly
subdued them, and using them with unwonted cruelty, the sedition here had an
end. Anachorium a Town of Corinth, upon the Bay of Ambracta, they also took. In
Winter Artaphernes a Persian being sent from his Prince to Lacedaemon, was
intercepted in Thrace, and brought to Athens, where his Letters being opened
and read, they contained no secret, and he was sent back with Ambassadors to
Ephesus to the King of Persia, Artaexerxes Longimanus, concerning whom they
there had intelligence that he was dead, and so the Ambassadors returned home.
The Inhabitants of Chius being suspected by the Athenians, were commanded to
demolish their new Wall; with these things the seventh year of the War ended.

A partial E^^^se of the (...) the (...) of March.
24. In the beginning of the eighth year happened a partial Eclypse of the Sun,
which the Astronomical Tables show to have falln out on the 21st day of March
after the Julian account, before noon, half of the Diameter or above being
obscured, the fourth year of the 88 Olympiad now drawing to an end; and an
Earthquake happened on the first of the Month Munichion, which some make to
fall in with the same day. The Athenians this year fell upon the Island
Cythera, lying near to Laconia, and inhabited by a Spartan Colony, which they
took, and putting therein a Garrison for a time, thence made excursions into
Laconia. Afterward they took thence a great part of the Colony, and took, and
burnt Thyrea, standing upon the Confines of Laconia and Argolis, given by the
Spartans to the Aeginetans, whom now they took away, and plundring the Town set
it on fire. Carrying their prisoners to Athens, the Aeginetans were condemned
to death, and the Cytheraeans being dispersed throughout the Islands, such as
they left in Cythera were subjected to a great Tribute. An Universal peace in
Sicily.
But in Sicily, at this time, an Universal peace was made, and embraced by all
the Cities, through the earnest persuasion of Hermocrates a Syracusian; so that
the Athenian Forces were driven to quit the Island, for which at their return
two of the Generals were unjustly banished, and the third underwent a great
fine.

25. The Exiles of Mitylene with others of Lesbus, and some Mercenaries,
seizing upon Rhetium in Asia, took Antandrus; but selling the former again to
the Inhabitants, they were drawn out of the later to fight, by Aristides, and
Demodocus (or Symmachus, as Diodorus calls him) who overthrew them, and took
the Town from them. These two were Captains of the Fleet, which gathered
Tribute from the Islands; their Colleague Lamachus being gone into Pontus
against the Heracleans, who being in League with the Persian King denied
Tribute. His ships, by the vehemence of water which ran down the River, were
shattered, and he lost the greatest part both of them, and his Forces; so that
he could not move thence, either by Sea, or Land; whereupon the Heracleans
thinking it a more honorable part to do good than to take revenge, furnished
him with provisions, and sent him away with a Convoy, esteeming that the
wasting of their grounds would be well recompensed if they should make friends
of their Enemies. With this Convoy he passed through the Country of the
Thracians in Asia, and so came to Chalcedon.

25. At this time the Inhabitants of Megara were much distressed, what by the
several inrodes of the Athenians, and their own Exiles whom they had cast out,
and now preyed upon them from the Villages. Wearied with these continual
disturbances, they thought of recalling the Exiles; but the Magistrates
understanding that, Stirs about Megara.
and presently apprehending what danger might arise to themselves from those of
whose banishment they had been the cause, conspired with Hippocrates and
Demosthenes, the two Athenian Captains, to betray the Town to them. The Gates
were opened, and the Athenians had been Masters of the place, but that some of
the Conspirators changed their minds, and obstructed the business, which the
other seeing seized upon part of the long Walls, and casting up a cross work
against the Town, set themselves with all their might to compass about the
Nisaea, or Port, hoping, if they could get it, the more easily to obtain the
Town. And the Garrison in it being presently discouraged by the stopping of
victuals, which they were wont daily to receive out of the Town, yielded; the
Spartans to mercy, and the rest upon condition of liberty to Ransom themselves.
Then the Athenians provided for setting upon the Town: but were hindered by the
coming of Brasidas the Spartan, who hovering about Corinth, upon notice how
things passed here, hasted, thinking to prevent the taking of Nisaea, and after
he had heard of its surrender, yet used all expedition, hoping to save the
Town, and to recover it. But when he came the Megarians were divided in their
affections, yet both parties feared to let him in, for that they thought it
best to reserve themselves for that party that should have the better, and
Govern themselves according to Occurrences, and therefore he was forced to
depart at this time without having done one thing or other.

26. Not long after, the Boeotians came, and joined themselves to Brasidas, and
thereupon followed an Engagement with the Athenians, which ended with equal
success to both sides. That party of the Town which favored the Exiles, being
encouraged with the presence of their friends, sent for Brasidas, and other
Peloponnesian Officers into the Town, to consult with them, who confirming them
in their resolutions then departed home: The Athenians also following, The
Exiles readmitted rage against their Adversaries, contrary to their Oath.
such as sided with them for fear betook themselves to flight. Then were the
Exiles recalled, having first taken an Oath to forget all things past, and not
consult their own passion, but the good of their Country; but having got the
power into their hands, and having the Guards of the City at their disposal,
they caused 100 of those they suspected to be apprehended, and being condemned
by a forced judgment of the people, they put them to death. Then taking all
the Government to themselves, it continued in an Oligarchical way a long time.

27. At the same time, several amongst the Boeotians attempted to change the
frame of their Government, Several amongst the Boeotians attempting to bring in
Democracy are disappointed.
being much desirous of Democracy as it was established at Athens; and to this
purpose held correspondence with them there, plotting to betray several places
into their hands; but the matter being discovered succeeded not, but only to
the loss of the Athenians, who were overthrown in battle. In the mean while
the Lacedaemonians being invited by Perdiccas King of Macedonia, and some of
the Inhabitants of Chalcis (who promised them some pay for their men) resolved
to send some Forces into Macedonia and Thrace, to divert the power, and design
of the Athenians, Brasidas the Spartan sent into Thrace give trouble to the
Athenians.
who now began to be ill thought of by many in those parts, and feared by
reason of their growing strength. They made choice of Brasidas for their
General, a man of approved valor, and remarkable integrity. They did a thing
at this time, which is noted with cruelty and injustice. Being something down
the wind in their Fortune, they suspected the power and number of their slaves
the Helotes, lest in this their weakness they should attempt something against
them, and took occasion at this expedition, by offering all such of them
liberty as would cheerfully embrace the service, to observe who amongst them
were most active, and when they expected to be manumised, instead thereof they
made away (though how is not known) about 2000 of them, and sent 700 away with
Brasidas, together with 1000 Mercenaries hired out of Peloponnesus.

28. Brasidas after his arrival, by fair means reduced Acanthus and Stagirus
(both Colonies of the Andrians) from the Athenians, and then in Winter set upon
Amphipolis a famous Colony of theirs, situate upon the River Strymon, which
almost compassing it gave an occasion to the later name of it, being before
called Nine-wayes. In a dark night he seized on the bridge, and all but the
City it self, and it is thought had taken it also had he led his Soldiers on,
but such as had conspired with him to betray it being overmatched, and stirring
not, he only wasted the grounds about it, and attempted nothing further for
the present. The Inhabitants who affected the Athenians, being more in number,
Thycydides the Historian, the Athenian General.
sent to Thucydides the son of Olorus, and the Writer of the History of the
Peloponnesian War, then the Athenian General, lying in Thasus, an Island
inhabited by a Colony of the Parians, half a days sail distant from
Amphipolis, who with seven ships hasted thither to prevent the delivery of it,
or however to save Eione. But Brasidas being aware hereof, to obtain Amphipolis
before his coming offered them most large conditions; that all should there
remain, and live in the same State as formerly, as well Athenians as others; or
if they liked better to remove, it should be free for them so to do, which they
accepted of, hearing nothing from Thucydides, who yet came to Eione that very
night, and saved it, whereas Brasidas else had taken it the next morning. Yet
he took three other Towns near to Amphipolis, and left them to be Garrisoned by
Perdiccas.

29. The Athenians were much moved for the loss of Amphipolis, which had been
of great use to them in affoarding them Wood for shipping, as well as money,
and besides this, how a free passage seemed to be open to the Lacedaemonians to
invade their confederates, who thereupon might be induced to revolt by
Brasidas, who being a very moderate, and just man of himself, gave out, that
his design was to set Greece at liberty. And even so it fell out, for the
Cities hearing what had happened, and great commendations of Brasidas, sent to
him to hasten his march toward them, with promise to revolt, thinking they
might safely enough do it, for that they falsely persuaded themselves, that the
power of the Athenians was not so great as they found it afterward, when it
was too late to repent them of their rash and inconsiderate resolution, into
which they were hurried by an earnest desire of liberty. The Athenians having
intelligence of this, used all diligence to send Soldiers into all of them, as
the shortness of the time, and the Winter season would bear. Brasidas sent to
Lacedaemon for a new supply of men, but little heed was given to his message,
partly because the great ones there envied his glory, and especially because
the people being well wearied now with the War, desired to have their men that
were taken in the Island, Brasidas envied by his own Country men.
and to make peace. Yet he having made provision for the building of ships upon
the River Strymon, went on with the War, drew all the Towns on the Mountain
Athos, except two, to submit, and then by surprise taking Torone, a Town of
Chalcis, and tributary to the Athenians, he stormed the Castle the third day
after. The remainder of the Winter he spent in fortifying the places taken
already, and providing for taking of others which he designed. And thus the 8th
year of the War ended.

30. In the beginning of Spring the Lacedaemonians for the reasons above
mentioned were desirous to come to a composition, and they hoped that now the
Athenians, something discouraged by what Brasidas had done in Thrace, might not
be averse to it. And indeed they were inclining to a cessation of Arms, that
they might stop his proceedings till such time as they could recruit
themselves, intending to Govern themselves in reference to the length of the
Truce as their affairs should comport, and so a Truce was concluded for a year,
the Articles of which imported these things especially. That what both sides
possessed at this time they should enjoy; A Truce for a year.
that free access and regresse should be given to Ambassadors and Heralds, and
their Confederates, to treat about a peace: that Runagates should not be
received; that all controversies should be decided by Law, and not by force:
and something was added concerning the use of the Sea; In this Truce the
Confederates on both sides being comprised. During this Cessation several
Treaties were held about a League, but something happened which disturbed sorely
the minds of the Athenians. For Scione a Town of the Peninsula of Pellene of
its own accord revolted to Brasidas, and was followed by Menda. Brasidas
ignorant of the Truce, after the revolt of the former, labored sore with the
later, and Potidaea, to reduce them also; but then news came to him of the
Cessation, and much contention there was about the places; for that the
Athenians said that Scione revolted two days after the Truce was sworn to, and
concluded. Being not able to recover them by words, they sent an Army to effect
it by deeds, and Menda they recovered, whilst Brasidas was absent, assisting
Perdiccas the King of Macedonia in his War with Archibaeus, where such
dissatisfaction passed betwixt the King and him, that thenceforth Perdiccas
began to join himself to the Athenians. Who compassed Scione about with a Wall,
which having finished in the later end of Summer, a sufficient Guard being
left, the rest of the Army was brought home. The Winter following all was quiet
betwixt the two States by virtue of the Truce; but the Mantinaeans and
Tegeatans fought a battle with equal success, both parties erecting their
trophies. The Spring drawing on, Brasidas attempted by night to surprise
Po^idaea, but missed of his purpose. And with this Winter the ninth year of the
War ended, in which the Temple of Juno at Argos was burnt through the
negligence of Chrysis the Woman-Priest, The Temple of Juno at Athens burnt.
which flying for it, another was placed in her room, after she had during this
War continued eight years and and half therein.

31. The Truce being expired on the day of the Pythian Games, Thucyd. lib. 5.
the seventh of the month Thargelion, Cleon having himself persuaded the
Athenians to undertake the Expedition, was sent into Thrace with a Fleet of
thirty ships, abord of which were 1200 Foot, and 300 Horse, besides
Confederates. Cleon sent into Thrace, is quickly puffed up.
Hearing that Torone was but manned with a mean Garrison, he departed from the
siege of Scione, and set upon it with such earnestness, both by Land and Sea,
that in the same day he took it, and though he attempted Stagirus in vain, yet
he effectually did it upon Galopsus, a Colony of the Thasians, after which he
staid at Eione expecting some Auxiliaries out of Macedonia, and Thrace. Here he
grew very secure, being exceedingly puffed up with his late success, and that
at Pylus, which he arrogantly imputed to his own wisdom; but his men disdained
to lie idle, and pretended to be weary of his Government, as thinking him
unfit to command. Herewith he moved from Eione in a secure posture, thinking of
nothing less than fighting, which was taken notice of by Brasidas, who having
fewer men than he, and less experienced, thought it not wisdom to try a
battle with him, nor at once to let him have a sight with all his Forces; but
pouring them violently upon him by degrees, thereby to confound and overthrow
his Army. He had a discovery of Brasidas his intents, and began to retreat, but
then he fell upon him out of Amphipolis in the manner aforesaid, and without
much ado put his men to the rout. Cleon himself flying was slain outright, and
Brasidas before this was mortally wounded and carried to Amphipolis, Is slain
together with Brasidas his adversary.
where he died, after he had heard how his men had got the Victory, being
honored by the Touns-men, as an Hero, by Sacrifice, anniversarie Solemnities,
and naming a Colony after him, which they did to ingratiate themseves with
Sparta, because of the fear they stood in of the Athenians. Of the Athenians
were slain 600; but of the Conquerours but seven; such disadvantage was there
in the battle.

32. In the beginning of Winter Ramphias with others in commission with him,
was sent from Lacedaemon with new Forces, and came as far as Pieria an hill of
Thessalie; but there the Thessalians opposed his passage, and news of Brasidas
his death arriving, other causes also moving him (whereof this was not the
least, that the Spartans before his coming from home were inclined to a peace,)
he returned into Lacedaemon. And after the action at Amphipolis, and his
return, came to be known, both sides for weighty and urgent reasons were much
more inclined to it, Cleon and Brasidas being both slain, whereof the one was a
man of a turbulent spirit, and the other a great soldier, Both the Athenians
and Lacedaemonians desire peace,
who sought after glory in Military matters. The Athenians having received two
great blows, at Delium first (when the change of the Government was to be made
in Boeotia) and now at Amphipolis, had learnt not to trust too much to the
smiles of their fortune: therefore they who before would hear of no conditions,
as certain of Victory, now were much abated in their confidence, and repented
they had not embraced peace, when it was offered them upon such honorable
terms, after the action at Pylus, for that they feared their confederates would
be encouraged by this change of their fortune to change their affections. On
the other side the Lacedaemonians who thought they should have ended the War,
and brought the Athenians to terms by an invasion of Attica, now found they
were much mistaken; the defeat in the Island they had ever before their eyes,
and felt the excursions from Pylus and Cythera; they feared their slaves, lest
they should rise against them; and another danger pressed them sore; for the
State of Argos which had ancient enmity with them, was now after a truce of
thirty years well-nigh expired, and likely to take the benefit of their present
troubles, by joining, with those who alone found them work enough, being so
powerful at Sea. Above all, the liberty of the prisoners at Athens, whereof
most of them were of the greatest quality, provoked them to a pursuit after
peace.

33. The business was much helped on by Plistonax the Spartan King, and Nicias
the Athenian, the former being weary of those calumnies which were raised
against him upon any miscarriage in the War, and the other much enamoured of
Peace, by the obtaining of which he thought he should be famous to succeeding
Ages. Several treaties all the Winter were on foot about it, and toward the
Spring the Lacedaemonians to make the Athenians the more readily embrace it,
gave out, that they would with the whole force of all their confederates invade
Attica, Which is concluded.
and fortify a Castle therein. After much stickling about it, a peace was
concluded for fifty years, upon these terms especially: that a restitution of
places and prisoners should be made on both sides, except Nicaea, which the
Athenians might still keep from the Megarians, and Plataea, which the Thebans
refused to restore to it is Inhabitants. The two States swore to the performance
of it, and all their allies and confederates (except the Boeotians,
Corinthians, and Megarians, who liked it not) and it was concluded at Sparta,
upon the 26th day of Artemisius Pleistolas being Ephorus, at Athens, upon the
24th of Elaphebolion, Alcaeus being Archon, in the beginning of the Spring,
presently after the Bacchanalia, ten years and a few days being past since the
first invasion of Attica, and the beginning of the War.

34. The Lacedaemonians were by lot to make restitution first; which they
presently did of persons, but as to places, Amphipolis was the cause that they
could not perform it; for neither the Inhabitants, nor the rest of the
associates would suffer it, though the Spartans drew out their Garrison, and
did all that in them lay to restore it, they being unwilling to come again
under the dominion of their old Lords, and counting it unreasonable for the
Spartans to desire it. The deputies of the dissenting Cities were at
Lacedaemon, and being desired to sign the League, flatly refused, except some
things were changed in it. Several Cities dissent,
Which the Spartans hearing dismissed them, and very prudently applied
themselves to the Athenians, making an offensive and defensive League with
them, thereby to retain them from joining with the Argives and Peloponnesians,
which confederacy it behoved them above all things for to hinder. After this
straight League, the prisoners taken in the Island were set at liberty, the
eleventh year of the War now rising, and the peace was observed according to
agreement; but all the late confederates of Sparta took this exceedingly ill,
and let out all their hatred, formerly conceived against the Athenians their
professed Enemies, upon their unjust friends. The Corinthians especially took
it in great disdain, who had been the greatest incentives to the War, out of
envy to the State of Athens, and as their Deputies departed from Lacedaemon
they took Argos in their way, And the Deputies of the Corinthians application
to Argos.
where to the principal Citizens they inveighed grievously against this League,
saying, it was made with design to enslave Peloponnesus, whose vindicators they
the Argives must needs be, and that it was incumbent upon them to decree, that
all free Cities which would, might enter into an alliance with them for their
mutual safety, which if they would so do, they were sure that many, out of
hatred to the Spartans, would give their names to it.

35. After their departure the thing was first referred to the Magistrates, and
then to the People, who chose twelve men, to whom they gave power to make a
League with any City or State, except the Spartans, and Athenians, with whom
nothing was to be concluded, without the advice and consent of the whole body
of the People. This they did, because they foresaw a War to be made with Sparta
after the end of the Truce, and hoped by this means to become master of
Peloponnesus; Those of Peloponn^sus apply themselves to that City.
for as the Lacedaemonians were now contemned for their bad sucesse (and the
rather more for that all had such vast conceits of their courage, that they
thought they would have submitted to no conditions, but have cut out all by the
Sword) so they who had been of neither parry in this War, but allied to both,
had bettered their condition, and now flourished exceedingly. The Mantineans
first, who livnig in Arcadia, stood in fear of the Spartans whose confederacy
they had shaken off, entered into an alliance with them, and after them the rest
of the Peloponnesians, who thought they might understand more of the matter
than themselves did, and had high thoughts of this great and rich City,
conceiving it able to do much, because that of so long it had done nothing.
They were grievously incensed against the Spartans, and this offended them
especially, that in the straight League betwixt them and Athens it was
provided, that by mutual consent they might add new conditions, or alter the
old at their own pleasures. This proviso they looked upon as made to enslave
Peloponnesus, by the assistance of Athens, for that if any thing was to be
changed, it were but just that it should be done by consent of all the
Confederates who were concerned in it.

36. The Lacedaemonians knowing well how much they were concernd in these
courses, sent Ambassadors to stop the matter at Corinth, whence they well
perceived the mischief to have proceeded. They expostulated with them for what
had been done, and laid perjurie to their charge, in case they left their
society and betook themselves to Argos, The Lacedaemonians vindicate themselves
at Corinth.
and blamed them for not admitting the League with Athens, because it was
formerly agreed, that what the major part should conclude, it should oblige
all; except some divine impediment interposed. The Corinthians replied in the
Assembly of the Agents of those Cities which refused the League, that in
general the Lacedaemonians themselves had not fully performed the conditions of
the League, who had not taken order that the places forced from them should be
restored, and that for their part they could not desert their confederates in
Thrace, whom they persuaded to rebel against Athens, and taken into protection,
and to whom they were obliged by oath taken more than once, which to them
appeared to be a sufficient divine impediment why they could not enter into a
League with Athens. And as for their conjunction with Argos, after they had
advised with their friends, they should do what was right and fitting. After
their departure, in the next assembly they entered into a League with the
Argives, and so did the Eleans with the Corinthian Colonies, and those of
Chalcis in Thrace.

37. All the Summer of the eleventh year, the Athenians and Peloponnesians had
commerce with one another, though great consultations were on foot, and, the
associates bickered with one another, and both parties wanted not
dissatisfaction. For, the Lacedaemonians restored not Amphipolis, neither
procured the associates in Thrace, the Boeotians, nor Corinthians, to sign the
League, though they engaged jointly to cause them to do it, and that if within
a certain time they did it not, both were to hold them as Enemies. The
Athenians seeing that they performed not these things, suspected they dealt
deceitfully with them, Dissatisfacti- betwixt the parties.
and for this cause refused to surrender Pylus, repented they had dismissed the
prisoners, and withheld other places till the Spartans had first performed the
Covenants. They excused themselves, for that they had done as much as in them
lay, having set at liberty their prisoners, drawn out their Forces from Thrace,
and omitted nothing in their power, in which the restitution of Amphipolis was
not: and as for what concerned the Boeotians and Corinthians, they would do
what they required. They earnestly desired that Pylus might be restored, or, at
least, that the Helots and Messenians might be taken thence, which after much
ado was granted, and these men were conveied into the Island Cephalenia.

38. In Winter the Deputies of the Confederates came to Lacedaemon, and
labored in vain to dissolve the League betwixt that State and Athens. But now
other Ephori having entered into their Office, who had nothing to do in making
the straight alliance, and were also much averse unto it, they dealt secretly
with the Boeotians and Corinthians, to persuade the former to join themselves
to Argos, and then all to enter into a League with Sparta, which they were sure
would purchase this willingly, with a breach betwixt them and Athens, for that
then the War would be more easy out of Peloponnesus; only they desired much
that the Boeotians would deliver up Panactus into their hands, that
therewithal making exchange with the Athenians for Pylus, they might with
less difficulty make War against them. As the Ambassadors were in their way,
two of the principal men of Argos met them, and were very earnest with the
Boeotians to embrace their society, which, when they came home, The designs of
the Boeotarchae frustrated.
they laid open to the Boeotarchae, and Ambassors followed from Argos to
persuade them to it, who were kindly entertained and dismissed with hope that
some Ambassadors should follow them to conclude upon the business. In the mean
time the Agents from Corinth, Megara, and Thrace, agreed with the Boeotarchae,
that they should bind themselves by Oath to assist him who should want it, and
not to begin, or finish any War without the joint consent of all, and upon
these terms, that the Treaty should be signed. But ere this could be done, the
Boeotarchae were to refer the matter to the four Councils of Boeotia wherein
lay the supreme power, which not being made acquainted by them what advice the
Ephori and others of Sparta had given, for fear they should give that State
offense by joining with Corinth which had revolted, they judged the contrary,
and so by the means of the Boeotarchae, who took it for granted that the
Councils would act according to their advice, the matter proceeded no farther
now, and afterward was neglected by them.

39. This Winter also many Treaties were held betwixt the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, about the restitution of the places; and the Spartans hoped,
that if Panactus was but restored to the other, they should recover Pylus. But
such Towns as their old Allies had gotten by their means in the late War, could
not be restored without their consent, and therefore Ambassadors were sent
earnestly to request the Boeotians to deliver up Panactus with the Athenian
prisoners. They stoutly refused to do it, except they would enter into as
peculiar and straight a League with them, as they had done with the Athenians.
Now this could not be legally done, because in the League with Athens it was
provided, that neither should make either League, or War, without mutual
consent. Yet being possessed with an inflamed desire of recovering Pylus, and
the more, for that they something now were moved by the Ephori, and others that
desired a breach with Athens, they struck up a League with them. Then did the
Boeotians utterly demolish Panactus instead of giving it up, Panactus
dismantled.
and so the eleventh year of the War ended.

40. In the Spring the Argives hearing nothing of the Boeotian Ambassadors
promised to be sent but great talk of the demolishing of Panactus, and the
League betwixt them, and the Spartans, whom they thought to have drawn them in
with the consent of the Athenians, were much perplexed, thinking they now
should be run upon by all, though they formerly promised themselves the
Dominion of Peloponnesus by forsaking the alliance of Lacedaemon. They
therefore sent presently thither, and struck up another League with them for
fifty years. In the mean while three were sent from Sparta to receive from the
Boeotians the A^henian prisoners and Panactus, who yielded both persons and
place, but this utterly demolished, pretending for their excuse, that by an
ancient League it was to be held by neither of them in particular, but be
common to both. The Athenians thereat, and otherwise offended.
The Athenians received their men, but were much moved that Panactus was
demolished (though the Ambassadors put it off by telling them they needed not
now then to fear any thing from it) being sensible of a double injury received,
both as to the Town, and the League made without their knowledge, and then they
called to mind other breaches of the peace, and were jealous that they were
circumvented by the Spartans. An occasion was hence taken by such amongst them
as bare no good will to the peace, to seek all manner of ways to destroy it.
Amongst these was Alcibiades the son of Clinias by the sister of Pericles, who
though a young man, yet eminent for his Nobility, Riches, and Favor with the
people, bare a secret grudge against the Lacedaemonians, for that despising his
youth, and having no regard to the ancient friendship betwixt them and his
family (which his Grandfather having dissolved, he sought to restore by
kindness showed to the prisoners taken in the Island) made use of Nicias and
Laches in the conclusion of the League before him, which he thought was much to
the prejudice of his honor.

Are incensed by Alcibiades,
41. He cried out, that their design was first to suppress Argos, and then to
do as much for Athens, and at this time there being no good agreement betwixt
the Argives and Spartans, he sent to them privately, exhorting them, as they
tendered their own safety, to enter into a League with Athen. They who were now
not consulting how to become masters of others, but how to save themselves,
were well pleased with his message, and though they had Ambassadors now
resident at Lacedaemon about the League with that State, yet did they send away
others to Athens, together with the Eleans and Mantineans, to make one
offensive and defensive with them there. The Lacedaemonians hereat were at a
stand, seeing well, that such a Combination tended to their hurt. To keep in
with the Athenians the Ephori thought that more was done already than stood
with their honor or profit; others held it the wisest course, seeing they had
done so much, not to stick at a little more, but rather by giving full
satisfaction, to retain the friendship of that State, which was more to be
valued than all the rest of Greece. This resolution prevailing, such were sent
away to Athens as had most affection to peace, who said in the Senate, that
they came with full Commission to conclude all, excused the League entered into
with the Boeotians, as having been done only to pleasure them in the regaining
of Panactus, and assured them of the readiness of their State to give all
satisfaction, being much grieved that things went otherwise than according to
their pleasure. Alcibiades taking notice that they said in the Senate, that
they came with full Commission to conclude, feared that thereby the people
might be drawn to a peace, and interposed by a notable stratagem. Who hinders
the peace by a notable stratagem.
He persuaded the Ambassadors of his friendship toward their City, and
advised them to take heed that their absolute power to conclude might not be
known to the Commonalty, lest the multitude should thereupon grow peremptory,
and yield to nothing, except they could draw them to unreasonable conditions.

42. The Ambassadors believed him, and ordered their speech to the people
according to his directions. Hereupon he took the advantage which their double
dealing afforded, and openly inveighed against them as men of no sincerity,
come for no other purpose than to draw the people from strengthening themselves
with friends, intending to withdraw the Argives, and their adherents, to their
own alliance, as already they had done the Boeotians, though contrary to their
Oath. Then he commended the cause of the Argives, Eleans, and Mantineans, to
the people, which was much moved, having had before no good opinion of the
Lacedaemonians; but an Earthquake intervening before they came to the
question, Nicias labors for it.
nothing was done that day. At the next meeting Nicias persuaded them to let
him first go to Lacedaemon to know their minds concerning the League with the
Boeotians, whether or no they would renounce it, and their friendship with
Amphipolis, and restore Panactus in such a condition as it ought. But Xenares
the Ephorus, and his party, was so strong, that none of these things could be
procured; only the peace with Athens was again sworn to, to gratify Nicias,
who was sensible how he should be blamed at his return, being accounted also
the cause of the League. After his return the Athenians made a League with the
Argives, Eleans, and Mantineans for 100 years, at large described by
Thucydides, but tending to the mutual assistance of each other. Hereby nothing
in terms was done derogatory to the League with Sparta, and the Corinthians,
though the Allies of Argos, yet refused to be comprised in it (as in the former
betwixt the Argives, Eleans, and Mantineans) alleging that the former
Convention was sufficient, which did not oblige them jointly to make War upon
any one, though to defend one another. This they said, for that they seemed to
find reason to forsake these Confederates, and to apply their minds afresh to
the Lacedaemonians.

43. This Summer the 90th Olympiad was celebrated, from the solemnity of which
the Lacedaemonians were kept by the Eleans, being forbidden the Temple, The
Lacedaemonians kept from the Olympic exercises.
and offering sacrifice, for which a Guard was set, because they had not paid a
Fine of 2000 Minae imposed upon them by them, according to the Olympian Law,
for putting some men into the Castle Phorycus, and the Town of Leprea, during
the Olympian Truce. They sent their Ambassadors to excuse the matter, but
nothing was done, so that they sacrifized at home, which bred very ill blood
betwixt them. After this solemnity the Argives and their Confederates sent to
Corinth, to persuade them there to embrace their party; but the Ambassadors of
Sparta being there, and it being much debated, an Earthquake happened, and so
they returned without any success. In Winter happened a fight betwixt the
Heracleots of Trachine (placed there by the Spartans to their loss) and part
of the Thessalians with others, wherein they were worsted, and many of them
slain: amongst whom Xenares the Lacedaemonian General. With these things the
12th year of the War ended.

44. The next Summer Alcibiades with some forces out of Attica, and the
assistance of Argos, Alcibiades marches into Peloponnesus.
marched into Peloponnesus, which passing over he came to Patrae, where he
dealt with the Inhabitants about building a Wall thence unto the Sea, intending
also of himself to build another as far as Rhium in Achaia; but the matter was
hindered by the Corinthians, Sicyones, and others, who would have been endamaged
thereby. The Argives made War upon Epidaurus upon light occasion, thinking,
that if that Town was but subdued, they should be more safe from the
Corinthians on that side, and the Athenians would have a readier way to send
them aid from Aegina. Whilst they were busy about a peace, Ephamidas the
Corinthian threw this in their dish, that what they made words of, that they
contradicted by their deeds, and upon that account they drew back their Army.
But no conclusion coming of the Treaty, they invaded the Territories of
Epidaurus again, and wasted the third part thereof. The Lacedaemonians were
twice abroad with their Armies this Summer, but were recalled by their
superstitious Ceremonies. The Athenians also sent the Argives 1000 men under
Conduct of Alcibiades; but they having drawn away their forces, and having no
employment for them, they returned home. In Winter the Lacedaemonians conveyed
300 Garrison Soldiers into Epidaurus, which passing through the Borders of the
Athenians, the Argives expostulated with them for suffering it, contrary to the
League, and complained that they restored not the Helotes and Messenians unto
Pylus, whence they had taken them upon the desire of the Spartans. This
accordingly was done at the instance of Alcibiades. All others were quiet this
Winter, except the Argives and Epidaurians, who skirmished sometimes, and
toward Spring the former hearing Epidaurus to be naked, came suddenly with
their scaling Ladders, and endeavored the taking of it, but in vain. Together
with this Winter the 13th year of the War ended.

45. The Summer following, the Spartans seeing in how bad a case their friends
the Epidaurians were, and that the rest of Peloponnesus had either already
revolted, Agis the Spartan King invadeth the Argives.
or was ill affected to them, fearing that if they delayed, all things would go
worse, they armed themselves, and slaves, with their Confederates, under the
conduct of Agis their King. It happened that the Argives were compassed round
about by their Enemies; but when they were about to fall on, two of their
Captains stepped out, and persuaded Agis to abstain from fight, saying, that
the Argives were willing to do all just things, and make peace with the
Lacedaemonians. This they spoke of their own heads, without the consent or
knowledge of the multitude, and Agis, without acquainting any more of the
Captains or Confederates, consented to a Truce for four months, and therewith
drew off his Army. The Lacedaemonians and Confederates obeyed him for the
rigor of the Law, Is easily put off, and deservedly blamed.
but grievously blamed him for letting slip, or rather wilfully losing so great
an opportunity, having the Enemy at such an advantage, and having such a
numerous and well-furnished Army as had not been seen of the Graecians to that
day; there being met together besides the Spartans, the Arcadians, Boeotians,
Corinthians, Sicyonians, Pellenians, Phliasians, and M^garians, and the choice
of all these States, who seemed not only able to fight with the Argives, and
their associates, but with any other in combination with them. The Argives also
not considering what danger they had escaped, were sore enraged against their
Officers, who had as they thought let the other escape out of their hands,
insomuch that they had stoned one of them had he not taken Sanctuary, and they
sold his goods, Not long after a Party of 1000 Foot, and 300 Horse coming from
Athens to their aid, the People, by the persuasion of Alcibiades, renounced the
Truce made with Agis, and the Confederates gathering together went and besieged
Orchomenus, wherein the Spartans had put the Hostages received from the
Arcadians, and which was without much to do delivered up to them.

46. The Lacedaemonians being grievously enraged against Agis, especially after
the news came about Orchomenus, Severely sentenced.
beyond all precedent decreed his house should be demolished, and fined him
100000 Drachmes, which he deprecating, and promising to redeem his credit by
some notable exploit, they yet made a new Law, that there should be ten men
assisting to him, without whose consent he should not as much as lead the Army
from the City. News presently was brought that Tegea was besieged, whereupon he
took the field, and came to a set battle with the Argives and their
confederates, wherein though his right wing was over-borne through the
negligence of the Polemarchi (who did not soon enough communicate the orders
received from him) yet he put to flight the Enemy in the other, According to
his promise he redeemeth his credit.
and then coming to the help of it, obtained the Victory. This was that noble
fight, as Thucydides extolleth it, betwixt the most eminent and powerful States
of Greece, than which there was none more eminent that happened amongst the
Graecians themselves. Yet the number of the slain was not great. Of the Argives
and their allies about 1100, of the Confederates of Sparta not many, and of the
Lacedaemonians themselves 300 were reported to have fallen. The day after, the
Epidamnians, whilst Argos was naked, fell in upon their grounds, and killed
many of those that came out of the City against them. Whilst the Lacedaemonians
were busy in their Carnean Solemnities, the Eleans and Athenians assisting the
Mantineans, went and drew a line about Epidaurus, upon which they left a
sufficient Guard, and departed.

47. In the beginning of Winter the Lacedaemonians after their solemnity was
over, Yet the Lacedaemonians send to Argos about a peace.
again took the field, but thinking now the Argives might be humbled, sent to
feel their minds about a Peace. At this time such as desired a change of the
Government at Argos became powerful, and hoped if they could conclude with the
Spartans, to take it out of the hands of the multitude, Which is procured by
those who affected an Oligarchy.
and bring it to a temper agreeable to the constitutions of that State. By the
artifices of those men, the Argives were brought to forsake the Mantineans,
Eleans, and Athenians, and join themselves in a League with the Lacedaemonians
to continue for 50 years: It was agreed, that no intercourse should be held
with the Athenians, except they would draw out all their Forces from
Peloponnesus (The freedom of Epidaurus being especially looked at herein by the
Spartans as much concerning them) and that no Treaty or War was to be entered
upon without mutual consent. They then took care for several other things, and
sent to Perdiccas King of Macedonia, to enter into a League with him, but de
did not thoroughly assent to it, though he bore respect to Argos, whence he
accounted himself descended: but they renewed the League with them of Chalcis,
and obliged others unto them. The Argives sent also to the Athenians, to
require them to draw off their Guards from Epidaurus: but they hereupon sent
Demosthenes thither to get all the Fortification into their own hands, after
which they surrendered it to the Townsmen, and renewed their ancient League
with them. The Mantineans at first refused to join with the Argives in the
League with Athens; but after considering that they could not subsist without
them, subscribed, and gave up those places they had in their hands. After this,
1000 men from Lacedaemon, and as many from Argos, were sent to Sicyon, where by
the endeavors of the Lacedaemonians, On Oligarchy set up a Sicyon and Argos.
the Supreme Power was transferred out of the hands of the People to a few men,
which was after effected at Argos also, an Oligarchy being introduced,
agreeable to the Government of Sparta. With this Winter the fourteenth year of
the War ended.

The Argives recover the Democracy, and renounce the League with Sparta.
48. The Summer following, the People of Argos bearing heavily the change of the
Government, took their opportunity when the Lacedaemonians were busy in the
naked exercises of their youth, and killing some of their adversaries, and
expelling others, restored the Popular Government, renounced the League with
Sparta, and renewed that with Athens. Then they fell on building of their long
walls from the City to the Sea, thinking, that if they should be blocked up by
Land, to have intercourse with the Athenians by Sea. In Winter the
Lacedaemonians knowing that they were busied (men, women, slaves and all) in
this work, with their associates (all but the Corinthians, who stirred not)
came against Argos, The Lacedaemonians in vain attempt to take Argos.
hoping to take the City by means of those within that were of their Party; but
being frustrated of their expectations, they demolished the wall, and taking
Hysias a Castle of Argolis, put to the sword all the males of free condition,
and so returned. After this, the Argives wasted the Territories of the
Phliasians, for harboring their exiles. This same Winter the Athenians
renounced the League with Perdiccas, accusing him of conspiracy with the
Argives and Laconians, of nonperformance of the League betwixt them, and
laying the blame upon him that the Expedition miscarried which they had made,
under the conduct of Nicias against the Chalcidians and Amphipolis in Thrace.
With these things the Winter ended, and together with it the fifteenth year of
the War.

49. The year following, Alcibiades with twenty ships sailing to Argos, took
thence 300 men suspected of Laconism, who were carried into the Islands subject
to the Athenians, and there committed to custody. After this the Athenians with
a strong force invaded the Island Melus, the Inhabitants of which being a
Colony of the Lacedaemonians, denied them obedience. They first sent
Commissioners to the Town to treat with the Melians, where there was much
canvassing the case; but in conclusion they continuing in their resolution not
to yield, Fortifications were made against the City, and strong guards left
upon them. Almost at the same time, the Argives making excursions into the
Phliasian Territories, by the lying in wait of the Phliasians, and their own
exiles, lost 80 of their men. The Athenians that lay in Pylus now also wasted
Laconia, They will not take notice that the League is broken with Athens.
notwithstanding which, the Lacedaemonians would not take so much notice as to
account the League broken, and thereupon to take arms; but only caused it to
be proclaimed by a Crier, that whosoever of their Subjects would, might prey
upon the Athenians: the Corinthians only about some controversy made War upon
them, all Peloponnesus besides being quiet. The Melians made two sallies
against the besiegers, with good success; but a fresh Army being sent from
Athens set upon, Melus taken.
and by the help of some treachery took it this Winter, upon terms of yielding
to mercy. All the males of ripe age that could be taken were put to the Sword,
the women and children made slaves, and the Town was repeopled by a Colony of
500 Athenians.

50. This same Winter the Athenians, Thucyd. l. 6.
with greater preparations than ever, resolved seriously to look after Sicilie.
The Athenians look after Sicilie.
Their pretense was to give assistance to their friends and allies there, but
the true and only cause was the desire of propagating their Empire, by the
bringing under of all that whole Island. A good occasion was now given them by
the Egestans, who upon account of former alliance, came and sued to them for
aid against the Selinuntians their Enemies, upheld by them of Syracuse,
offering them money for carrying on the War; whereupon they thought fit first
to send Ambassadors to be informed concerning the money boasted of, and the
state of the War. The Lacedaemonians this Winter made excursions into Argolis,
and carried away much booty. The Argives caused Ornea to be demolished, where
their exiles harbored, by the help of the Athenians, who sent some Forces to
Methone a Town bordering upon Macedonia, thence to infest the Territories of
Perdiccas. The Chalcidians hereupon solicited the Lacedaemonians to send aid
to the King, but they thinking it not policy to break quite with Athens,
refused. Thus the Winter with the sixteenth year of the Peloponnesian War ended.

Decree aid to be sent to the Aegestans, under the command of Nicias,
Alcib^ades, and Lamachus.
51. In the beginning of Spring the Ambassadors sent from Athens returned out of
Sicilie, bringing from the Egestans 60 talents of Bullion, with a months pay
for 60 ships, as was required. They affirming (though falsely) as well as the
Egestans, that they had much money in their Temples and public Treasury; the
People thereupon much elevated decreed aid to be sent to them, under the
conduct of Nicias, Alcibiades, and Lamachus, to whom they gave in charge, that,
if it might be, they should restore the Leontines, and do those things which
they saw to be most advantageous to the Commonwealth, according to the
comportment of affairs. Nicias labored with all his might to divert the People
from such a sudden resolution, proposing all the difficulties and dangers of
the War, and thought to have excused himself by magnifying the power that was
required to such an undertaking; but his mouth was stopped by a Decre, which
gave him as much as he could exact. For 100 Galleys were ordered for the
Expedition, besides others of their Confederates, which amounted to above 30,
over and above Vessels of burden, and others necessary for the transportation
of 6100 men, whereof 5100 bore heavy Armor. All things were prepared, with the
greatest care and industry imaginable; the Soldiers were completely funished
with Arms, clothes, and all things necessary; and a drachme a day assigned for
their wages.

The Hermae broken at Athens.
52. Before the departure of the Fleet, all the Hermae throughout the City
(these were the images of Mercury set up at every man's gate) in one night were
mangled and abused, which was taken as an ill omen, and the People was jealous
that it was done by some that were Enemies to the Popular Government. Great
inquisition was made in vain to find out the Authors, but the suspicion light
upon Alcibiades one of the Generals, through the practice of his emulators, who
made use of his lofty deportment, which ill suited with their kind of policy.
Alcibiades suspected, and desirous to be tried, is yet by his Enemies sent away.
He offered himself to the trial, being fearful to be condemned absent; but his
Enemies put it off for the present, and got him to be sent away, intending to
make use of that which he feared, that being condemned unheard, he might be the
sooner oppressed, because now by his own authority and interest, he had drawn
many to give their names to the Expedition, and therefore they could not easily
carry any thing against him, because of his popularity. As the Fleet saild
toward Sicilie, the Generals sent some before to discover further in what
condition the Egestans were, who bringing tidings clean contrary to what both
they, the Egestans themselves, and the Ambassadors sent to them had asserted,
the Generals were all divided in their opinions what to do, but Alcibiades hot
and youthful, was for their proceeding, to which Lamachus at length assenting,
his desire was obtained. They then landed and seized upon Catana, attempted
Camarina in vain, when Alcibiades received orders to come and plead his cause
at Athens about the Hermae, Then again recalled.
his Enemies having obtained it should be so. In truth he was condemned
beforehand, but to color the matter, he was sent for to plead, and that must
be with bonds laid upon him. He was aware of the danger, and departed straight
to Lacedaemon, with intention to teach the Athenians what person they had
compelled by unjust Judgment to forsake his Country, and betake himself to
their Enemies. After this was known, sentence of death was published against
him of his Partners, many (whether justly or no Thucydides much questions)
being put to death without proof already in the City. The Syracusians stand on
their Guard.


53. The Syracusians, though not fully persuaded of the design of the Athenians
against them at first, (and thereupon not so well provided as they might have
been) yet made all possible provision for resistance. The two Generals, after
the departure of Alcibiades, by a stratagem drew them out of the City, and in
the mean time brought their Forces near unto it, and worsted them when they
sallied out, but without any great loss sustained on either part, and then
drew off to their Winter quarters at Catana and Naxus. The Syracusians
encouraged by Hermocrates one of their new Generals (a wise man, who had
forwarned them of the design of the Athenians) sent to Sparta and Corinth for
aid; strengthened their Fortifications, made excursions to Catana, where they
wasted the grounds, plundered, and burnt part of the Athenian Camp which was
empty. Both sides labored to draw the Camarinaeans to their side, but in vain;
yet many Cities, especially in the inland, embraced the society of the
Athenians, who sent also this Winter to the Carthaginians to procure their
amity; the Cities upon the Tyrrhenian shore they also drew in, and all Sicily
was now divided into these two factions. The Corinthians readily resolved to
send aid to the Syracusians, and sent some of their own with their Ambassadors
to Sparta to procure as much for them from that State. The Corinthi^^^ and
Spar^^^s send them (...).
The Spartans made difficulty at first to do it, for fear of giving the
Athenians offense; but hearing from Alcibiades what their designs were (who was
come thither upon the public faith) at his persuasions resolved also upon
sending Forces under the Command of Gylippus: they also embraced his Counsel
concerning renewing the War, and fortifying Decelea a Castle in Attica. At the
same time, the Athenian Generals sent to Athens for money and hors-men, which
was readily decreed to be sent. Herewith the 17th year of the War was ended.

54. The next year the Argives and Lacedaemonians preyed mutually upon one
another in Peloponnesus. In Sicily the Athenians with their whole force, and
new supply of horse, sailed to Syracuse, about which they seized upon many
places, and several skirmishes ensued about the fortifications, wherein the
Athenians had the better. Then was the Athenian Fleet conveyed into the Haven
of Syracuse, whence great contention ensued, and Lamachus one of the Generals
assisting his friends was slain. The Syracusians endeavoring the recovery of
Epipolae were repelled by Nicias, who thence drew a double work against the
Town, and strengthened himself by the access of Confederates, and store of
provision. The besieged receiving no assistance from Peloponnesus parlied with
Nicias; but the matter succeeding not, they made choice of new Captains,
whilst Gylippus was not now far off, but despised by Nicias for the small
number of his men. In Greece the Spartans distressed the Argives, who were
assisted by the Athenians with thirty ships. These made excursions into the
Territories of Epidaurus, so that the League which had so long continued
betwixt them and Sparta, though in a doubtful condition, was now openly
broken, and the War resumed; and that more by their fault than any blame of the
Lacedaemonians, if Thucydides be judge.

55. Gylippus arriving at Syracuse disturbed the work of Nicias about the Wall,
and changed the constancy of his good fortune, Thucyd. lib. 7.
who yet was not discouraged thereby, but proceeded in his utmost endeavors
for the service of those that sent him, making preparation for Sea-matters,
wherein the Athenians seemed to excel all others: hereupon ensued several
skirmishes with various fortune, and the remaining of Summer was spent on both
sides, in increasing their forces and procuring aid. Demosthenes and Eurymedon
joined in Commission with Nicias.
Nicias writing to Athens for supplies, new Levies were made, and Demosthenes,
and Eurymedon joined in Commission with him, whereof the later was sent in
mid-winter with ten Galleys, and a great sum of money into Sicily, and the
other staid till Spring to get ready what was remaining: twenty ships they also
ordered to attend the motions of the Peloponnesians. These things being known,
the Spartans and Corinthians calling upon their Confederates provided for the
invasion of Attica, accordingly as Alcibiades had advised. With these things
the 18th year of the War ended.

56. In the beginning of the Spring the Peloponnesians under the Command of
Agis the Spartan King, invaded Attica, where they fortified Oecalea, a place
some twelve miles distant from Athens, and as much from the Borders of Boeotia.
The Athenians sent thirty ships to waste Peloponnesus, and sixty (with five of
Chius) into Sicily under Demosthenes his command. Out of Peloponnesus were sent
to the aid of the Syracusians, from Sparta 600 men, from Corinth 500. Sycion
200. and out of Boeotia 300. to which the Corinthian Galleys lying at Naupactus
were ordered to be a Convoy. At Syracuse the affairs of the Athenians, through
the skill and valor of Gylippus and Hermocrates, went down the wind, who being
also much distressed at home by the excursions out of Decelea, yet kept up
their spirits to the admiration of all men. After Demosthenes had arrived in
Silicy, and heard of the miscarriages of their Fleet at Sea, he blamed Nicias,
that he had not as soon as he came applied all his endeavor to Syracuse the
head of the War, and caused him to agree to set upon Epipolae, a difficult and
craggy place, where falling on in the dark night, they could not discern
betwixt friend and foe, all speaking in the same dialect, The Athenians
defeated at Syracuse.
and thereby great slaughter being made of them, partly by themselves and the
Enemy, the Athenians received a great defeat. The Generals hereupon consulting
together, were not of the same opinion; Demosthenes now was for departing away
speedily out of the Island, seeing all things happened cross therein, though he
had been the cause of the fight: on the other side Nicias, who had labored
with all his might against the War, now pressed earnestly that it was for the
honor and interest of their Country to stay and carry on the siege, and
though Eurymedon was of the same opinion with Demosthenes, yet could not Nicias
be removed from his, so that their departure was deferred till they understood
that Gylippus was come with new supplies out of Peloponnesus and Silicy. This
resolution he stuck to so much, for that he knew the multitude rather to look
at success than the reason of things, and was unwilling to hazard his life and
reputation in the hands of those who would be ready to condemn before they
heard him, as they had done Sophocles and P^hiodorus the former Generals,
pretending they had taken money for making peace, when indeed there was not any
possibility of making War.

57. But upon the report of Gylippus his coming, Nicias was content, and order
was given for the Army to dislodge with the greatest secrecy; when in the mean
time fell out an Eclypse of the Moon. By this, which was accounted an ill Omen,
was Nicias again so terrified, that out of a superstitious conceit he would not
have the Camp break up till 27 days were past. The Syracusians much rejoiced
hereat, and resolved to hinder their flight, or force them to transfer
themselves to some other place. They first beat up their Camp, and the next day
provoked them to fight, both at Land and Sea, and in the mouth of the Haven
engaged in a great and bloody battle, wherein Eurymedon one of the Athenian
Generals was slain, and though the Squadron of Gylippus was worsted, which made
the Athenians Erect a Trophy, yet had they the worst of it, Again at Sea.
all considered. They made them too late repent that they had so ambitiously
and unjustly undertaken a War with a City as great as Athens it self, and one
of the same kind of Government, Enemy to Oligarchy. But the Syracusians were
more and more animated, conceiving now great hopes of obtaining much glory and
favor amongst the Graecians, of whom some they might free from slavery, and
others from the fear of it for the time to come, by chastising their Tyrants,
as they were accounted. As a way hereto they resolved to block up the mouth of
the Haven, that the Athenian Fleet should not pass out thence by stealth.

57. The Athenians seeing themselves in this straight, concluded it the best
for them to make a new, and a more narrow Camp near to their ships, and attempt
another battle at Sea, in which, if they had the better, then to remove to
Catana, but if not, to burn their Vessels and depart by Land to some convenient
place. Sorely straightned.
This was attempted with all care and expedition; but the Syracusians opposed
them, and in the straight of the Haven was such a dispute, as scarce ever
before had happened, which was beheld by the land armies with passion suitable to
the condition of their friends: Notwithstanding the Syracusians lost almost as
many Vessels, yet the other were so weakened, and the Seamen so discouraged,
that though the Generals would have attempted to break out another time, yet
they refused any more to go aboard; so that they concluded of going away by
Land the next night. If this had been done it might have falln out well for the
Army, but by the cunning device of Hermocrates they were circumvented, and
persuaded to stay till the third day after.

59. Their departure was most full of outcries, sorrow, and misery, set out to
the life by Thucydides, so that none can read it without compassion. Gylippus
seized upon their 130 ships left in the Haven, They fly.
then pursued them, and set upon them behind, before, and on all sides, so that
distressed for all necessaries, they took another way than that which lead to
Catana, otherwise than they had intended, and they were divided into two
bodies, whereof that with Demosthenes soon yielded upon promise of their lives.
Nicias required better terms, Are forced to yield to mercy.
and refused to submit; but at length was forced to it, craving favor for
himself and men, at the hands of Gylippus and the Spartans; 18000 in one day
were slain, 700 taken and condemned to Mines, were after sold. The two Generals
were (contrary to the utmost endeavor of Gylippus, who would fain have had the
honor of carrying them to Sparta) put to death, or as Diodorus says, killed
themselves in prison. This was the end of the Sicilian War, so indiscreetly
overtaken by the Athenians, who when they had those already that gave them
enough to do, would needs make to themselves more Enemies, and so by laboring
to grasp, lost, all. Meton Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 13. cap. 12.
the Astronomer (mentioned before) was so certainly persuaded of the danger of
this expedition, that when he was enrolled amongst those that were to undertake
it, to prevent his going, he counterfeited himself mad, to confirm the belief
of which he set fire on his own house. But Vide Simpson in Chron. ad ann. M.
3590.
Hippocrates the Coan (Prince of Physicians) is said to have set out his own
son at his own charge, as Physician to the Athenian Army.

60. Thucyd. lib. 8.
The Athenians were loath to give credit to the first report of the loss of
their Army and Fleet, because of the greatness of it, but then knowing it to
be so indeed, were much incensed against those that persuaded them to undertake
the War, and for that they feared the Sicilians would now come upon them
whilst they were destitute of all things, the City was filled with great
consternation. Yet within awhile, they took courage, and making all provision
for defense, gave Commission to some few of the most ancient and experienced
amongst them, to consult and provide fit matter for the multitude to decree.
Great joy in Greece.
In Winter following all Greece was elevated upon this their bad success. They
who were neuters before, now offered themselves to join in suppressing those of
whom formerly they stood in fear: the Confederates of Lacedaemon more
vigorously provided against them, and all those that had been subject to them
were earnest to shake off the yoke. The Lacedaemonians having such
encouragement, set themselves very seriously to the War. Agis their King went
into Thessaly to raise money, and a Fleet of 100 Galleys was prepared amongst
the Confederates. Pharnabazus one of the Satrapaes of Persia, and Lieutenant of
those parts of Asia about the Hellespont, and Tissaphernes another of the
Satrapaes, sent to Sparta, and offered them assistance. These designs were
carried as secretly as could be, that the Athenians might get no knowledge of
them, who labored also at the same time about the Rigging of a new Fleet. With
these preparations the 19th year of the War ended.

61. The next year the Athenians were at the beginning somewhat encouraged by
some success at Sea, and thereby the Lacedaemonians so far discouraged again,
that they thought seriously of concluding the War, till otherwise persuaded by
Alcibiades, who undertook an expedition into Ionia to withdraw it from the
obedience of Athens, and did very much effect it. The Athenians hereat abashed,
Alcibiades his actings against his own Country.
and fearing all their Associates would revolt, took out 1000 Talents, which as
yet had been untouched, as forbidden by the Law, and laid them out in this case
of extremity in provisions, and especially in preparing a new Fleet. Then by
Alcibiades his means was a League of alliance made betwixt Darius Nothus King
of Persia, and the State of Sparta, by virtue of which the King allowed money
for payment of their Soldiers. The Athenians recovered Lesbus, and Clazomenae,
the Milesians and Chians (principal in the revolt) were destroyed by them, but
again they had the worst of it in a Sea Fight near unto Rhodes, which the
Peloponnesians then by fair means drew to their society, exacting of the
Inhabitants 23 talents in the name of tribute, which success, because of the
strength of this City, made them confidently despise the money, and alliance of
Persia.

62. For, Tissaphernes and they were at some difference about the form of the
League, which they complained was not rightly drawn, for therein they were tied
to give up to the Persian the Islands, Thessalie, Locri, and Boeotia, which
heretofore had been under the power of that Empire: which seemed unworthy for
the Lacedaemonians to do, who pretended themselves the vindicators of the
liberty of Greece, against the encroachments of the Athenians; Herewith
Tissaphernes was grievously netled, and departed in discontent from Cnidus,
where eleven Spartans had met him to require that the instruments should be
corrected. At this time also it happened that Alcibiades was envied for his
glory, and suspected by the Peloponnesians, and hated by Agis the Spartan King,
He flies from the Spartans out of fear.
for that he had corrupted his wife, insomuch that order was reported to have
been sent to Astyochus the General, to kill him, but he withdrew himself to
Tissaphernes. He laid open to him the full State of the Peloponnesians,
persuaded him to diminish the pay that his Master allowed them, by changing a
Drachme into three Oboli a day, part of which also he should ever keep unpaid,
to keep the Seamen at his devotion. He further suggested crafty counsel to him:
especially that they should not suffer the Athenians to be suppressed by the
Lacedaemonians, but to keep those two States ever in an even balance, He
suggesteth crafty counsel to Tissaphernes.
and let them weaken one another by their mutual enmities; yet to favor a
little more the Athenians, because they would be content with part of the
sovereignty of the Seas, and would go no further, whereas the Spartans would
not rest here, but contend for the sole Dominion, and to bring all the
Graecians from under the Persian yoke. These things he pressed upon him as
great mysteries of State for his Master's service, and as such he embraced
them; wherefore the promise he had made of joining the Phoenician Fleet with
that gallant one of the Peloponnesians was not performed, and the power of this
weakened by the withholding of the Soldiers pay.

He desires to return to his Country.
63. Alcibiades had a great desire to return into his own Country, which would
not be to any purpose except it were preserved, and therefore he communicated
these things to Tissaphernes. He wrote to some of the chief of the Athenians
then lying at Samus concerning his desire, and told them wherein he was dealing
with him; and yet he signified that he had no mind to return, as long as the
Popular Government (under which he was banished) should continue. The Athenians
that lay at Samus liked the matter well, and generally inclined to change the
Government, for that they were made to believe that Tissaphernes by the
procurement of Alcibiades would be their friend, and they should have money
from him for the payment of their Army. Phrynicus stands in fear of him, and
labors to destroy him,
But Phrynicus the General standing in fear of Alcibiades, by reason he had
spoken too freely against him, opposed it with all his might, and when he could
do nothing by words, very boldly acquainted Astyochus the Lacedaemonian General
with the matter. He who now had not Alciliades in his power, was no whit eager
for his destruction, and being withal corrupted by Tissaphernes to betray his
trust, went and acquainted him and Alcibiades with what he had received.
Hereupon Alcibiades wrote to the Athenians in Samus, and acquainted them with
the treachery of Phrynicus, required them to put him to death as a Traitor to
his Country, who hereupon was exceedingly troubled, and boiled with anger
against Astyochus; yet in so desperate a case adding one rash act unto another,
To no purpose.
he wrote again to him, upbraided him with unthankfulness, and signified that
he would betray Samus with all the Athenian Army there unto the Lacedaemonians,
which he could do, because the Town was unwalled, and would do, forasmuch as it
was lawful in so eminent a danger, as he was in, to provide for his own
security.

64. Astyochus without taking this opportunity to serve his Country, made this
known also to Alcibiades, which Phrynicus understanding, and knowing that
Alcibiades would write hereof to the Army, that he might prevent him, he told
the Soldiers that the Enemy intended to set upon Samus by Sea and Land, now
that the City wanted walls, whereupon he commanded them, having absolute
authority, to raise a work about it, and keep diligent watch. This was done
accordingly, and then though Alcibiades his letters presently after arrived,
yet no credit was given to the accusation, as proceeding from his bitter Enemy,
but more confidence reposed in him. Alcibiades then applied himself to
Tissaphernes to reconcile him to the Athenians, but he being unwilling to lose
all his credit, was cool in the business. But whilst he dealt with him, the
Soldiers in Samus having sent to Athens to deal with the People about the
change of Government, Pisander chief of the messengers labored to convince
them of the absolute necessity thereof, for that otherwise they could not be
freed from imminent destruction. The People being circumvented yielded to it,
and gave him with ten other Commissioners power to treat, and conclude
whatsoever they found necessary for the State, with Tissaphernes and
Alcibiades: but the former of these standing in fear of utterly losing the
Peloponnesians, and having this always in his mind to keep the two States in
an equal balance, Commissioners sent to treat with Alcibiades, and
Tissaphernes, but in vain.
would not give any encouragement, or open his mind fully to Alcibiades, who
fearing to lose his credit and power with him, which he had so boasted of to
the Athenians; that he might put them by, demanded such hard Conditions as he
knew they could not grant, and so the Commissioners returned with great stomach
and disdain, to have been so ill used by him.

65. And Tissaphernes to prosecute that design of setting the Graecians upon
each other, and keeping them in equal power; fearing that if he detained any
longer the pay from the Peloponnesians, that they would be too much weakened by
the Athenians, who now of late had had the better of it in some engagements,
and thereby the Kings Provinces should be exposed to danger, he went this
Winter into Caria, where he renewed the League on better terms for the
Peloponnesians, Tissaphernes renews the War with the Peloponnesians.
paid the arrears due to the Army, and promised to dispatch away the Phoenician
Fleet. This new alliance was made in the thirteenth year of Darius, (Alexipidas
being Ephorus at Sparta) upon the River Maeander, attested by the names of
Tissaphernes, Hieramenes, and the Children of Pharnaces. Toward the end of
Winter Oropus a Town situate upon the confines of Attica and Boeotia, revolted
to the Boeotians, being formerly in the jurisdiction of Athens. Hereupon the
Boeotians conceived hopes to alienate all Euboea from the Athenians, especially
for that the Eroetrians who were principal in that Island, inclined to a
revolt, and sent away to the Peloponnesians to desire they would come into
Euboea. But their care for Chius which was distressed by the Athenians suffered
them not to comply with their desire; for they set out a Fleet to relieve that
Island, but the Athenians being masters of the Sea, it durst not venture
further than Miletus; and therefore the Athenian ships returned unto Samus.
Thus ended the 20th year of the War.

66. In the beginning of Spring Dercylidas was sent from Sparta by Land to the
Hellespont, with no great force, where with ease he brought off Abydus (a
Colony of the Milesians) from their obedience to Athens, and after that
Lampsacus, but attempted the same upon Sestus to no purpose. The Athenians and
Chians had a battle at Sea upon equal terms: but Strombichides the Athenian
hearing what was done in the Hellespont hasted thither, recovered Lampsacus,
was repelled by the Inhabitants of Abydus, and then went to Sestus in Europe,
where he placed a strong Garrison for the security of those parts. In the mean
time Pisander and his Colleagues being returned from Alcibiades to Samus, in
conjunction with those therein, resolved without him to change the Government.
They first did it in most of the Cities which were subject to Athens, and found
it almost effected there, after that Androcles, a man who was most earnest in
the defense of Democracy, with some others, The Government changed to Oligarchy
in Athens, and the Cities subject to it.
were secretly murdered by some Conspirators, who labored thereby to gain the
good will of Alcibiades and Tissaphernes. These designed to have the State
governed by 5000 men of the most able with bodies and estates to serve it, and
the People durst not contradict them, such factions and jealousies had risen,
that no man was secure of his neighbor. But Pisander and his Colleagues
arriving, obtained of the multitude, that ten men might be empowered, to
conclude and set down in writing such things as seemed to them requisite for a
setlement, which on a certain day were to be referred to the People.

67. When the day came, these ten men first required, that it might be lawful
for any one to speak his opinion without danger of incurring any penalty by the
Laws. Then they proposed, that no Magistracy should be undertaken and exercised
after the usual manner, The Model.
nor any receive salary for the exercising thereof: that five Presidents should
be chosen, who should pick out 100 men, and each of these choose three more,
that all might make up the number of 400. That these 400 men should be invested
with the Supreme power and authority; Four hundred men have the executive power.
should decree and ordain what seemed good unto them; and might call together
the five thousand when they thought it convenient. These propositions, though
of so great consequence for the change they were likely to produce, were yet
admitted of, not as much as one man gainsaying them, such a change there was
made in the minds of the People, which now since the banishing of the Tyrants
had only been governed by it is Laws and constitutions, and not only not
subject to the authority of others, but reigning over many, divested it self of
so great sovereignty and power. But these 400 men thus authorized, were
conducted in a solemn manner to the Senate House, with daggers under their
coats, and compassed about with armed men, where the old Senate having their
Salaries paid were dismissed. They chose the Prytanes or Presidents out of
their own body, and then began to exercise their authority; They send to Agis
about a peace, who slighteth them.
but not without blood, bonds, and bannishment. They sent to Agis the
Lacedaemonian King, then lying at Decelea, to treat of Peace, but he not having
any opinion of their power as long to continue, but thinking the People would
shortly resume it, rejected their Ambassie, and sending for more Forces out of
Peloponnesus, came to Athens, hoping that in these commotions he might affright
the City into a surrender. But he found the contrary; for all agreeing in this
to resist him as the common Enemy, they stood notably in their defense, and
sallied out upon him; so that having no hopes, he dismissed his new forces, and
with the other returned to Decelea.

Refers their second address to Sparta.
68. After his return, the 400 sent other Ambassadors to him about a peace, who
referred them to Sparta, whither they went, but what success they had, does
not appear from Thucydides. They knew the common Soldiers at Samus (though
Pisander and his Companions had stickled so for it) to be Enemies to Oligarchy,
and therefore to take them off, they sent to acquaint them that the power was
not in them only, but in the 5000 also, and labored to satisfy them in this
point, that this was equivalent to Democracie, seeing that during that
Government, when all things were done by the body of the People, The Army at
Samus enraged at them.
a greater number did not use to meet. But they at Samus beng impatient of any
but Popular Government, after the departure of Pisander and his Colleagues, had
restored it there, and sent to Athens to signify so much, not knowing what had
happened there, which was very unwelcome news to the 400, who cast some of the
messengers into prison. But Chareas, hiding himself for some time, escaped, and
carried back a report how things stood, amplifying much the oppression and
insolence of these Governors; whereat the Soldiers were grievously enraged,
and threatened death, not only to the authors of the Oligarchy, but to all
that had been partakers of it; and at such a season when the Enemy expected
such advantages, they had committed something, tending to the ruin of their
Country, had they not been restrained by the interposition of more stayed and
prudent men. Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus, who had been most earnest for
restoring the popular Government, that they might do it in a safe and honorable
way, caused all the Soldiers, especially such as they knew to favor Oligarchy,
to take an Oath unanimously to act for the restitution of the power of the
people; to fight resolutely against the Peloponnesians; Takes an Oath of
Combination against them,
to take for Enemies the 400 men at Athens, and to admit of no intercourse with
them by any Officer at Arms; which Oath also they caused to be taken by all the
Samians that were at age, whose conjunction they thought necessary for carrying
on the design.

69. Then did the Soldiers choose them new Officers, of whom were Thrasybulus
and Thrasyllus, and encouraged one another to the Enterprise, both from the
justness of their undertaking (for that the Army had not revolted from the
City, but the City from it) as also from their strength, far superior
(especially in respect of the Fleet) to that of the 400. adding also, that
Alcibiades upon promise of security, and restitution, would be assisting to
them, and that they might hope well concerning Tissaphernes, and the King of
Persia. In the mean while the Peloponnesians sore mutined against Tissaphernes
and Astyochus, that they had not their pay; and were not lead out to fight with
the Athenians, whilst they were so at odds amongst themselves, which forced
the later to draw both Sea and Landforces to Mycale for an engagement, but the
Athenians refusing to fight, for that they were inferior to them in number of
ships, when more came from the Hellespont presented themselves; but then the
Peloponnesians conceiving themselves too weak for the encounter, refused to
engage. Thrasybulus in the mean while persuaded the Army to recall Alcibiades.
Recalleth Alcibiades.
Audience being given him, after he had complained of the injustice of his
Enemies, he discoursed much of the state of Affairs as they then stood;
Magnified above measure his power with Tissaphernes (which he did, both to
discourage them at Athens, and to render the Satrapa the more odious to the
Peloponnesians) who he said would assist them to the selling of the bed he lay
on. Hereupon the Soldiers mightily elevated with hopes, presently created him
one of their Generals, with full power, thinking of nothing but the punishment
of the 400. and resolving without any regard of the Enemy at hand to sail
directly for the Piraeus.

70. Alcibiades withstood their resolution, saying, that nothing was rashly to
be committed, and seeing that they had put the power into his hands, he must go
to Tissaphernes. This he did, not only to transact what he pretended, but also
to boast of his new power, to let the Persian know he could either pleasure
him, or incommodate his affairs, and so this crafty man procured, that he both
made him fear the Athenians, and the Athenians stand in awe of him, whilst
hereby he made up his own interest. That also which he intended concerning
Tissaphernes, and the Peloponnesians, came to pass; for distrusting him
before, they were now very bitter against him, since he hindered the fight at
Miletus, and defrauded them of their pay, and Astyochus their own General they
had killed in a mutiny, had he not taken sanctuary. Presently upon this came
Mindarus, sent from Sparta to succeed him, who then departed home with an Agent
from Tissaphernes, whom he sent to excuse himself to that State, and answer
such objections as were made against him. Alcibiades returned from Tissaphernes
to Samus, The Ambassadors of the 400 come to Samus.
where met him the Ambassadors of the 400 men (who upon hearing how things went
here, had all this while out of fear staid at Delus.) The Soldiers would not
hear them, and voted they should be put to death; but he caused them to have
leave to deliver their message, which they did with all the advantage they
could, in excuse of those that sent them, accusing of falsehood what had been
reported by Chareas; but still the Army was dissatisfied, and cried out to sail
to the Piraeus. Alcibiades now timely interposed himself; for, had the Army
then departed for Athens, all Ionia, and the Hellespont had been presently
lost; but he put a stop to their heat, and checked those that were so fierce
against the Ambassadors. He himself bad them return this answer, Alcib^ades
gives them a cross answer.
that the 5000 might retain their power, but the 400 were commanded to desist,
and restore the Senate of 500 whom they outed; that they should do well at
Athens to take care of the Commonwealth, and not to give place to the Enemy:
for whilst the City was safe, he hoped to make up the breaches; but if either
it should be lost, or the Army at Samus miscarry, there would want those who
should be reconciled to each other.

71. With this answer he dismissed the Messengers in safety, as he did also
with much kindness Ambassadors sent from Argos to offer assistance against the
400. Tissaphernes now upon what design is uncertain, went to Aspendus where the
Phoenician Fleet lay, pretending he would purge himself to the Lacedaemonians,
and give order to Tamus his Officer to pay the Arrears due to the Army. But
neither did he remove the Fleet from Aspendus, according to agreement,
pretending frivolous things, nor did Tamus accordingly pay the moneys; which
raised many conjectures and much discourse. Thucydides thinks his design to
have been to hold the Graecians in suspense, and suffer them to weaken one
another, The Counsels of Tissaphernes in the dark.
for that if he had joined himself to either party, by the help of his Fleet he
might in a short time, and without difficulty have finished the War, and given
the victory to which side he pleased. Alcibiades went to him with 13 ships,
promising either to induce him to join his Fleet with the Athenians, or to
procure that he should not assist them of Peloponnesus; it being likely enough
that he knew his intention of not moving to the one part or the other; but this
he did, especially by his intercourse, and familiarity with him, to increase
the indignation and choler of the Peloponnesians, and thereby to constrain him
to join himself with the Athenians. But the return and report of the
Ambassadors sent from the 400 men raised great perturbations in the minds of
men at Athens, whilst those, who either out of some ambitious design (all men
being greedy of power over others) or for the public good, How men in Athens
stood affected to the 400.
desired the Supreme Authority might be in the 5000. had the advantage of the
other factions. The other were as busy as concerned, especially Phrynichus,
because so obnoxious to Alcibiades, Pisander, and others. They sent to
Lacedaemon to make peace, with that State upon any terms, and Fortified that
part of the Piraeus, which commands the mouth of the haven, which made the
other party, which affected Democracie, very jealous; Theramenes crying out
that they intended to betray the City to the Enemy, who now with 42 Galleys
hovered about the Coasts.

The Traitorous designs of the 400.
72. Neither were these mere Calumnies; for these 400 men for the most part
desired to retain the Dominion over both Citizens and Allies; but if not that,
yet to continue Masters of the Fleet and Fortifications, and if this could not
be obtained, then to call in the Enemy, to redeem their lives, and part of the
City, with the ships and works; being resolved never to give way to the
popular Government, from which they could expect nothing but sudden
destruction. To this purpose they made the Wall upon the Piraeus with several
Gates to let in the Enemy if need were. But Phrynichus returning from Sparta
whither he was sent Ambassador (though to no purpose) was stabbed in the Forum
by a conspiracy, after which Theramenes and his party grew more bold, and by
the help of the Soldiers seized upon some of the Chief of the 400. Tumults at
Athens.
whence ensued a very great tumult, all being ready to fall one upon another,
and certain mischief had followed, but that the ancient men somewhat repressed
the younger, and Thucydides the Pharsalian, then sojourning in the City,
labored earnestly to persuade them, crying out, that they should not
themselves destroy their Country, now that the Enemy was ready to assail it,
and with much ado he kept them from offering violence to one another.
Theramenes also checked the Soldiers in the Haven; but he giving way to it, the
new Fortifications there were demolished. The next day the 400 met, though in
great fear, and sent some of their number to appease the Soldiers, saying, that
they would choose 5000 men, who from amongst themselves should choose the number
of 400 by turns to rule the State, desiring they would not undo the City by
compelling it to yield to the Enemy. Herewith the minds of the Soldiers were
somewhat quieted, and with much ado they agreed that a general Assembly should
be had at a certain day for an agreement: but when the day came, and the
Assembly was scarce gathered together, news came that the 42 ships, under
Command of Hegesandrides the Spartan, held their course directly from the Coast
of Megara, to the Island Salamine.

73. The Soldiers now concluded of the certainty of what Theramenes had told
them, and that these ships intending for the Piraeus, it was good that the
Fortifications were demolished; and likely enough it was that Hegesandrides
hovering so long about Epidaurus, expected some good opportunity to fall on
Athens. Hereupon all the Assembly hasted to the Piraeus, but the Fleet making
toward Euboea at length came to Oropus, which making them very sollicitous for
Euboea wherein their hope only remained, they sent Thymochares with some ships
to Eretria, which he joining to those that were in the Island, made up 36 sail.
He was forced to fight sooner than he intended, by the fraud of the Eretrians,
who delayed to bring victuals to sell as they were wont, and thereby drew the
Soldiers further off from the Fleet, and made great disorder; so that the
Peloponnesians setting* upon them, The Athenians defeated are seized with great
consternation.
whilst out of good order, quickly put them to flight. They took 22 ships,
killing some, and taking the rest of the men: such as fled to Land, and betook
themselves to Eretria as to friends, were killed by the Inhabitants; then
presently all Euboea, except Oreus, revolted to the Peloponnesians. When
tidings hereof came to Athens, never did so great consternation seize upon them
there, no not after the overthrow in Sicily. For the Army at Samus dissented
from the City; they had neither ships left, nor men to serve in them, and were
broken into factions, of which they could not foresee the event; and the loss
of Euboea was exceeding great, because that Island furnished the City with
more Commodities than Attica it self. And their fear was increased by the
nearness of it, from which the Enemy might presently come and seize upon the
Piraeus now destitute of ships, which they did not only think would be, but
imagined to be already done.

74. And had the Enemy been a little bolder, he might easily have done this,
and more. Had he besieged the City, it would have been more grievously broken
by seditions, and constrained to call home the Army at Samus, and thereby he
might have reduced with ease Ionia, the Hellespont, all the Islands, and all as
far as Euboea; and so consequently all the Athenian Dominion into his power.
The contrary dispositions of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians.
But well was it for the Athenians that they had such an Enemy to deal with as
the Spartans, who were of so contrary dispositions: they being speedy and bold
in executing all their designs; but these slow, and something fearful,
especially in Sea matters, whereby they affoarded many opportunities to the
Athenians. These things are confirmed from instance in the Syracusians, who
being of the same nature as the Athenians, were good enough for them at all
assayes. The Athenians in the midst of all their fears took yet all care
possible for their Affairs, furnishing out twenty ships, and meeting together
in Pnice, the usual place for popular Assemblies, they abrogated the power of
the 400. and gave it to 5000. amongst whom some were to furnish the
Commonwealth with Arms, ordering that none should receive any wages for his
employment. The power of the 400 abrogated, and the Government most equally
poised.
Many other meetings then succeeded, in which certain Lawmakers were chosen,
and other things decreed for the good of the State, at which time Thucydides
thinks the Athenian Commonwealth to have been better than ever tempered and
qualified, a moderate, and equal way being brought in betwixt the power of a
few, and that of the whole people. A decree also passed for the restitution of
Alcibiades, and those with him. Upon this change Pisander and the rest that
adhered to Oligarchy fled to the Enemy.

75. In the mean while the Peloponnesian Fleet lying at Miletus, in vain
expected money from Tissaphernes, and the coming of the Phoenician Fleet: on
the other side Pharnabazus, Lieutenant to the King upon the Hellespont,
promised them all kindness, and in particular used his endeavor to draw all
the Greek Cities within his Government from the society of the Athenians, which
Tissaphernes also had promised, but performed like other things. Mindarus the
General of the Fleet moved herewith, went from Miletus toward the Hellespont,
with a Fleet of 73 ships, which Th^asyllus the Athenian understanding, made
after him with 55 Sail, laboring to get before him. Some stop was made by the
way, but nothing very considerable done till they came toward an engagement at
Gnosema. Sixteen Galleys of Athens were first met with by the Peloponnesians,
who took three of them, and burnt another; and at length both the Fleets joined
battle, being enlarged since they came into the Hellespont by the access of
other ships. At first the Peloponnesians put to flight the middle battle of the
Athenians, and driving the ships to Land had the better of it there; but being
too eager in the pursuit, The Athenians obtained a^ Victory at Sea.
they brake their ranks, which Thrasybulus and those with him observing in his
wing, wound about and sell upon them with such violence, as forced them to
fly. They took 21 ships, the rest by reason of the straightness of the Sea
getting into some Harbor or other, and though they lost fifteen of their own,
yet obtained they a seasonable Victory, which made them lift up their heads
(having been dejected by so many disasters) and cease to complain of their
Fortune.

76. The report of it at Athens, as of an unexpected thing, mightily encouraged
the people also, so that notwithstanding the revolt of Euboea, and intestine
Seditions, they had hopes still, if they prosecuted the War with diligence, to
have the better. Four days after the fight the Fleet removed from Sestus
toward Cyzicus, where in their way they took eight Galleys that came from
Byzantium, and taking the Town, which then for want of walls could make no
resistance, fined the Inhabitants; the Peloponnesians at the same time
endeavoring to recruit their Navy. In the mean while Alcibiades having been
with Tissaphernes returned to Samus with thirteen Galleys, bringing word, that
he had stopped the Phoenician Fleet from joining with the Peloponnesians, and
had rendered the Satrapa more friendly toward the Athenians. Then presently
adding nine ships to the former, he constrained the Halicarnasseans to pay a
great sum of money, and fortified Cos. Tissaphernes, when he heard that the
Peloponnesian Fleet was gone toward the Hellespont, hasted from Aspendus into
Ionia, where understanding that the Inhabitants of Antandrus had received a
Garrison from the Peloponnesians of Abydus, because they had been ill dealt
withal by Astacus, whom he had made his Lieutenant in those parts, as also
that the Peloponnesians had cast his Garrison out of Miletus, and Cuidus (which
they did to affront him, laying grievous matters to his charge) lest they
should proceed any further, and grieving that Pharnabazus in a less time, and
with less expense, should make more use of them against the Athenians, he
determined to follow them into the Hellespont, to expostulate with them about
Antandrus, and purge himself as well as he could of those things laid to his
charge about the Phoenician Fleet, and other matters. And when he came to
Ephesus he sacrifized to Diana. Here the history of Thucydides Diodorus ad
Olymp. 92. ann. 2.
ends (with the Summer of the 21st year of the War) which afterward was
continued by Theopompus for seventeen years; but by Xenophon for 28. The work
of the former is lost; and that of the latter extant, but without a beginning,
in the judgment of a learned man, who, besides the proeme, will have the
history of two years to be wanting; Usserius in Annal. Vet. Test. page 216.
from the end of that Summer at which Thucydides left, to the conclusion of the
Summer of the 23 year of the War. But Diodorus placing the last things of
Thucydides in the second year of the 92 Olympiad, in the very next relates
those which are mentioned in the beginning of the first Book of Xenophon, so
that if the whole was extant in his time, he either missed these two years, and
so inverted the Chronology of all his history succeeding; or else only the
proeme of the first Book of Xenophon is lost (if there was any) and the History
entire.

77. Not long after the Athenians and Lacedaemonians engaged thrice in fight at
Sea, Xenoph. Hellanic. l. 1.
wherein the Athenians had the better first and last, the second having been
fought to no great purpose on either side. Tissaphernes, Plutarch in Alcibiade.
after this coming to the Hellespont, Alcibiades went to visit him, whom he
secured, and committed to close custody, pretending he had orders from his
Master to make War against the Athenians; but rather for that he feared he
should be accused by the Peloponnesians to the King, and therefore thought by
this enterprise to redeem his credit. Tissaphernes secureth Alcibiades.
But after he had been secured thirty days, he made his escape to Clazomenae,
where pretending to have been sent by Tissaphernes, he sailed thence to the
Athenian Army lying at Cardia. Sailing thence to the Hellespont or Cyzicus,
Alcibiades overthrows Mindarus the Spartan.
he overthrew Mindarus both at Sea and Land, who died also in the fight, taking
all the Peloponnesian ships, after which he forced from the Town a great sum of
money, and prosecuted the Victory by fineing and securing other places. In the
mean while letters were intercepted, and sent to Athens, which were to Sparta,
written from Hippocrates Lieutenant to Mindarus, and found to contain the
distress of the Fleet in these few words, according to the Lacedaemonian
custom: A. M. 3594. Ol. 92. an. 2. V.C. 343. Darii Nothi 13. Belli Pelop. 21.
All is lost; Mindarus is slain, the Soldiers are famished: we know not what to
do. But Pharnabazus labored with all his might to encourage the Lacedaemonian
Army, telling them they had lost nothing but wooden ships, their men being
saved, and that new ones should be built at his Masters cost (who had wood
enough on the Mount Ida) in which work he was very diligent, and relieved the
Chalcedonians then distressed.

78. The news of the success with the letter of Hippocrates coming to Athens,
filled the People with excessive joy, Diodorus ad Olymp. 92. an. 3.
who offered sacrifice to their gods, and kept holy day. They chose then 1000
of the most valiant Foot, and 100 Horse for prosecuting the War, and sent
thirty Galleys more to Alcibiades, that he might with greater success set upon
the allies of Sparta now the Sea was in his power. The Lacedaemonians when they
understood how things went, dispatched away Ambassadors (the chief of which was
Endius, unto Athens) about a peace. They offered that both States might retain
such places as they had already in their power, that the Garrisons might be
dismissed on both sides, and the prisoners redeemed man for man; and much in a
little was said by Endius, The Lacedaemonians send to Athens about Peace.
to show that the Athenians were more concerned to be for peace, though he
denied not but that the War was hurful to Sparta. The most moderate men amongst
the Athenians were willing to hear of an accommodation; but such as made their
own markets out of the public loss, and gained by the War, withstood the
proposition. Amongst these as principal was Cleophon, the most eminent of the
Daemagogi (or leaders of the People) at this time, though formerly a maker of
Harps, whom many remembered to have been bound with fetters, but he was
surreptitiously registered amongst the Citizens. Cleophon hinders it.
He speaking many things fit for his purpose, especially made use of the late
success; which he so improved, as if Fortune now had forgot to be inconstant.
The People herewith puffed up, and conceiving great hopes that by the conduct
of Alcibiades they should re-obtain their ancient power, refused to entertain
the proposals made by Endius; of which ill advice they were afterward
sensible, when it was too late, falling so low from this height of presumption,
that they could never after recover themselves.

79. Ater this, Agis the Spartan King made excursions from Decelea, Xenoph.
Hellen. lib. 1.
as far as the walls of Athens, at which time it happened that Thrasybulus was in
the City about business, who leading out his Athenian Soldiers and others that
were present, offered him battle; at which he was troubled, and hasted away,
losing a few of his men in some light Skirmishes. This service got Thrasybulus
such credit, Agis repulsed from Athens.
that he easily obtained what he came for; 1000 Foot of heavy Armor which he
himself would pick out, 100 Horse, and 50 Galleys, being decreed to him; but
Agis seeing that it was to no purpose to besiege Athens by Land, as long as
they could bring in what provision they pleased at the Piraeus, sent away
Clearchus the Son of Ramphius to Byzantium and Chalcedon, to make provision for
Sea matters, who got through the Hellespont with much ado, and with the loss
of three ships out of his fifteen he had with him, came to Byzantium.

The acts of Thrasybulus the Athenian.
80. The next year in which the 93 Olympiad was solemnized, wherein Eubotas the
Cyrenaean got the prize in the course, Euarchippus being Ephorus at Sparta, and
Euclemon Archon at Athens, Thrasybulus having obtained the ships decreed to
him, with 5000 Seamen, sailed to Samus, whence after three days he departed,
and took Colophon, made excursions into Lydia, where obtaining much booty, he
also went against Ephesus. Tissaphernes coming in in good time, he was beaten
back from the City with double loss, whence he sailed to the Hellespont, and
in his way at Lesbus put to flight a Fleet of 25 Syracusian ships, four whereof
he took with the men in them. Then departed he to Sestus to the other Athenian
Forces, and thence removed to Lampsacus with the whole Army in the beginning of
Winter, which Town they fortified, and besieging Abydus overthrew Pharnabazus,
who came with a considerable body of Horse to relieve the Town; which Victory
reconciled the Soldiers, who before this were at odds, because those under
Alcibiades being hitherto victorious, would not be joined with the followers of
Thrasybulus who had been beaten. In the same Winter the Athenians made frequent
depredations in the territories of the Persian King. Then also the Helots which
had fled from Malea to Coriphasium, were upon agreement dismissed by the
Lacedaemonians; and the Plantation of Heraclea, and Trachinia, were by the
Acheans the ancient Inhabitants, betrayed into the hands of the Oeteans the
common Enemy, and 700 of them slain, together with Labotas the Lacedaemonian
Governor. Thus the 24th year of the War ended, wherein the Medes having
rebelled, were reduced to obedience by Darius No^hus, and the Temple of Pallas
at Phocaea was burnt with Thunder and Lightning.

81. In the beginning of the next Spring Pantacles being Ephorus at Sparta, and
Antigones Archon at Athens, Alcibiades besieges Chalcedon.
the Athenians with their whole Army and Fleet went into Proconnesus; thence to
Chalcedon and Byzantium, and sat down before Chalcedon. The Chalcedonians
aware of their coming, sent all their booty to the Bythinaeans their
neighbors, which being known to Alcibiades, he went with a sufficient force,
and by threats got it delivered up to him, after which returning he compassed
Chalcedon from Sea to Sea with a rampire, and to the River. Hippocrates the
Lacedaemonian, Governor of the Town, troubled hereat, sallied out, and fought
with that Party that was undet Thrasyllus, for a long time with ambiguous
Fortune, till Alcibiades coming in, Hippocrates was slain, and his men repulsed
into the Town. Pharnabazus during the fight came to relieve him, but could not
get to them by reason of the Athenian fortifications. He, whilst Alcibiades was
absent, gathering Money from the Cities, made an agreement with the other
Athenian Captains, that he should pay them 20 talents, that the Chalcedonians
should pay all their arrears, and afterward as much as they were wont: in the
mean time the Athenians should offer them no violence, till the Athenian
Ambassadors, which he took upon him to convey, should return from the King.
Alcibiades at this time was at Selymbria, which having taken, he returned to
Byzantium with a body of Horse and Foot newly raised in Cherronesus and Thrace,
where Pharnabazus expected him to have his oath to the agreement. He refused to
take his oath except Pharnabazus did the like, who condescended to him, and so
they both swore not to hurt each other. Together with the Athenians, others
went as Ambassadors to the King from the Lacedaemonians; as also Hermocrates
and his brother Proxenus now banished from Syracuse.

82. The Athenians then presently besieged Byzantium, which having no hopes to
obtain by strong hand, they atempted by treachery, and had it delivered up to
them, whilst Clearchus the Governor, a Lacedaemonian, was gone to Pharnabazus
to solicit him about money to pay the Soldiers, and to gather a Fleet
together wherewith if possible he might raise the siege. News hereof was
carried to Pharnabazus then wintering at Gordium in Phrygia with the
Ambassadors whom he was carrying to the King. In the beginning of Spring when
they were on their journey, they met with some Spartans, who already had been
with him, and said they had obtained from him for the Lacedaemonians what they
desired, and how he had appointed his younger son Cyrus his Lieutenant for the
Seacoasts, The Athenian Ambassadors and others sent to the Persian King never
come at him.
whom he had commanded also to assist the Spartans in the War, bringing a
Commission with him whereby he was constituted Governor over all that used to
meet upon the plains of Castolus. The Athenian Ambassadors hearing this,
desired first to see Cyrus, and then to go to the King; but if not, to return
home. But Cyrus required Pharnabazus, either to deliver them up into his hands,
or to send them back, because he would not have the Athenians privy to what was
done. But he neither sent them to the King, nor dismissed them, but kept them
off and on for three years, after which he obtained leave of Cyrus to dismiss
them, seeing he would not permit them to go to his father, and so procured them
by Ariobarzanes to be conveyed through Mysia to sea: and so they sailed to the
Athenian Army.

83. Alcibiades having a great desire to return to Athens with the Army,
Xenoph. ibid. Plutarch. in Alcibiade.
first betook himself to Samus, whence he went and gathered up 100 Talents
amongst the Carians, and returned thither. Thrasybulus with thirty ships going
into Thrace, reduced several places into his power, and Thasus amongst the
rest, sorely at this time distressed with Seditions, Famine, and Pestilence.
Thrasybulus with the rest of the Army sailed to Athens, before whose coming the
people had created anew three Generals, Alcibiades, and Thrasybulus, Alcibiades
returns to Athens.
who were absent, and Conon present in the City. Alcibiades encouraged hereby
sailed to the City, where at his landing multitudes of people came to meet
him, admiring his person, and the present posture of affairs, which they
ascribed to his good conduct, whom they now acquitted from what was laid
formerly to his charge, and excused him for siding with the Enemy, seeing he
was thereunto led by necessity. He spoke to the Senate and people in his own
defense, and gave such satisfaction, no body opposing, that he was created
General with full power, as able to restore the Commonwealth by his own
industry to its ancient power. He first on Land (which of late had not used to
be done for fear of the Enemy) celebrated the Eleusinia, and then in the third
month after his arrival, with a Fleet of 100 Galleys, aboard of which were
1100 foot of heavy Armor, and 150 Horse, he sailed to Andrus, the Inhabitants
of which he worsted in fight, and thence departed to Samus, Lysander made
Admiral by the Lacedaemonians, obtains pay of Cyrus for his Seamen.
intending to make use of that Island as the Seat of War. At this time Lysander
was sent from Sparta to succeed Cratisippidas in the Fleet, who went to Cyrus
to desire him in earnest to undertake the War, blaming the backwardness of
Tissaphernes. Cyrus promised him his utmost assistance; but he desired that the
sailors might have a dram a day assigned as their wages, thereby to entice
the Athenian Mariners to forsake their Masters. He answered, he could do
nothing against his fathers order, who had appointed for every ship 30 Minae a
month, it being in the power of the Lacedaemonians to furnish out as few, or
as many ships as they pleased; but afterward he condescended to increase their
pay to four Oboli a day: Moreover, he paid them all their Arrears, and gave
them a months pay beforehand, which made them very cheerful, and ready for
all duty. Who refuses to meddle with the Athenians.


84. The Athenians were much troubled hereat, and sent also to Cyrus to obtain
his favor, but could not be admitted, though Tissaphernes used all his
interest in their behalf, Alcibiades going to speak with Thrasybulus, leaves
his Fleet with his Pilot, who fightng with Lysander, contrary to his express
command, is defeated and slain.
relating, that his design had been according to the wise Counsel of
Alcibiades, not to promote the Affairs of either, but to suffer them to destroy
one another. Alcibiades understanding that Thrasybulus being gone from the
Hellespont fortified Phocaea, went thither to speak with him, leaving the Fleet
with Antiochus his Pilot, whom he commanded expressly not to fight, no, not
although he were provoked to it, until his return. But he being not at all
used to command any thing except the Helm of a ship, could not bear his new
power without making trial of it, and with two Galleys went, and provoked
Lysander in the Haven of Ephesus (where he was intent upon mending his Fleet
consisting of 90 sail) who first sent out some particular ships against him;
but the whole Athenian Fleet coming in to his aid, he was also forced to carry
out his, and so engaging with it, there ensued a sharp conflict upon uneven
terms. For, the Athenians came on without order, and so within a short time
were discomfited, Antiochus slain, and fifteen ships lost; the other returning
back to Samus. Alcibiades returning within awhile, in great chafe for what had
happened, went, and offered battle again to Lysander, but he contenting himself
with his former victory would not stir, and not long after the Lacedaemonians
took Delphinium and Eion, two Towns in Thrace. For which Alcibiades is
discarded.
This loss was at Athens by Thrasybulus imputed to the neglect, and luxury of
Alcibiades, who thereupon by the people was outed of his Command, and ten other
Captains chosen for the management of the War, amongst whom was Thrasybulus
himself, Conon, and Pericles the son of Pericles the Great. He then went and
made War upon the Thracians that were not under the command of that King, and
thereby enriched himself with great Treasure, having built a Castle for his
security, called Bisanthe, in those parts. Conon, who at this time was
Governor of Antandrus, Phanisthanes being assigned his Successor, according to
the decree of the people, went to Samus, took Thuria, and made excursions into
the Territories of the Enemy. So this year ended, in which the Carthaginians
with a Fleet of 120 Galleys, and 120000 men invading Sicily, overthrew the
Agrigentines, whom after a seven month's siege they also forced to a surrender.

An Eclypse of the Moon.
85. The year following wherein the Moon was Eclypsed in an evening ( April the
25. some three hours after Sunset, as the Astronomical Table demonstrates) and
the old Temple of Pallas was burnt at Athens, Pitaeus being Ephorus at Sparta,
and Callias Archon at Athens, the 26th year of the War commencing,
Callicratidas was sent from Lacedaemon as Successor to Lysander, whose time was
now expired. He having furnished himself with money subdued Methymna, and
charged Conon the Athenian General to depart out of those Coasts, and when he
perceived him putting out to Sea, made after him, Callicratidas succeeding
Lysander defeateth, and besieges Conon in Mitylene.
intending to stop his passage to Samus. He pursued him to the Haven of
Mitylene, where he worsted him, took thirty of his ships, and then besieged him
in the Town, from which he cut off all provisions. Conon sent out two Galleys
to carry word hereof at Athens; one of which escaping clear from the Enemy,
came thither with the news, whereupon relief was presently decreed to be sent.
Callicratidas in the mean time overthrew Diomedon, who came to relieve Conon
with twelve ships, ten whereof he took, but when he heard that the Athenian
Fleet was now come to Samus, consisting in all of 150 sail, he left Eteonicus
with fifty ships to continue the siege, and with the other 120 betook himself
to Malea, a Promontory of Lesbus over against Mitylene, The Athenian Generals
overthrew Callicratidas.
where he supped, and it happened that the Athenian Fleet coming to Arginusae (a
place also over against Lesbus) supped there the same night. Here they fought
the next morning a long, and earnest battle, wherein at length Callicratidas
his ship being sunk, and he in it, his men began to fly toward Chius and
Phocaea. The Peloponnesians lost 79 ships, and the Athenians 19. with most of
the men in them.

86. The Athenian Generals resolved that Theramenes, Thrasybulus, and others,
with 42 ships should hasten to such Vessels as were as good as lost, to
preserve them and the men, and the rest should sail to Mitylene against
Eteonicus; but a vehement Tempest arising they were all hindered, and forced to
continue in the same place, during which stay, Eteonicus having notice by a
Pinnace how things went, told his men the clear contrary, with which artitifice
encouraging them to take the Sea, he escaped. It might have been expected that
the ten Captains, who jointly had the command in Chief over the Athenian Fleet,
might have received great honor for such a victory: But they were instead
hereof, by the especial endeavor of Theramenes, brought to judgment, for
suffering many Citizens to perish in the broken, and sunken ships; whereas, as
it was pretended, they might have saved them. They alleged justly for their
excuse the Tempest which followed the fight; but after much canvasing, both in
the Senate and Assembly of the people, the malice of Theramenes (who set
persons on to make great lamentations for those that were dead) so far
prevailed, together with the forgery of a certain fellow (who saying that he
himself escaping in a Meal-Tub, had been entreated by those that were in peril
of drowning, And for that 8 are rewarded with a sentence of death executed upon
six of them there present, amongst whom Pericles, the son of Pericles.
to desire the people to revenge their death against the Captains) that against
the form of Law (contrary to which Socrates the Philosopher only resolutely
refused to act as one of the Prytanes) eight of them were condemned, and six
being present were put to death; amongst whom was Pericles the son of Pericles.
Those that were absent escaped, the heady multitude quickly repenting of their
rashness, and the accusers of them were bound over to answer what they had
done. Afterward a sedition being raised, wherein Cleophon was slain, they took
the opportunity and fled; but Callixenus one of the most faulty returning to
the City, and hated of all men, was famished to death.

87. The Soldiers of Eteonicus wintring in the Island Chius, Xenoph. lib. 2.
where they wanted both victuals and clothes, most of them conspired together
to seize upon the City Chius, to which whosoever agreed was to wear a Reed as
a distinction. He having notice of it, was sensible what ill will, disgrace,
and damage it would bring upon him if it proceeded, and fearing his own life,
he boldly killed one of the Soldiers, whom he met with the Reed upon him, and
being asked the reason of it, said as boldly, it was for wearing that mark of
Sedition, whereat the rest were so daunted that they for fear cast away their
Reeds, and so the plot was broken in pieces. Then received he money of the
Chians, and gave them a months pay, and taking no further notice of the plot,
encouraged them with fair words, and promises, and so sailed away. After this
the Allies met together at Ephesus to consult about their affairs, Lysander is
sent for by the Allies to resume the Government of the Fleet*
where it was agreed, that ten men should be sent to Lacedaemon to desire that
Lysander might be sent back to the Fleet, of whose abilities they had already
sufficient proof. By the Laws of Sparta he could not be twice General, and
therefore they found out a middle way, to appoint Aracus to that place, and
send him as his Lieutenant. Five and twenty ships were then delivered to
Lysander, at the end of the 26th year of the War, wherein Cyrus killed his two
Cousins Autobaesaces and Mitraeus, because they had not given him the honor
due to Kings of Persia, by holding their hands within their clothes when they
came to him. For this he was accused to his father, who upon pretense of
sickness sent for him to come to him.

88. The year following wherein Archytas was Ephorus at Sparta, Idem ibid.
Corn. Nepos and in Plutarch. in Lysand. and in Alcibiad.
and Alexias Archon at Athens, Lysander gathering his Navy together, went to
Cyrus for money, which being obtained with some difficulty he paid his Soldiers
and Seamen their Arrears. At Samus also the Athenians provided for fighting;
where in the mean time came a Message to Cyrus from his father, who now being
sick desired to see him, although at this time the King lay encamped against
the Thamneri of Media, Neighbors to the Cadusians, who had revolted. Cyrus
hereupon sent for Lysander, and consulting with him about the War, desired him
not to fight the Athenians, except he overmatched them in number of men, told
him his father and he were able enough to increase the Fleet upon occasion, and
to bind him and the state of Sparta to him, he gave him all the Revenues he had
in those parts, with all the ready money, and so took his journey. Lysander
neither daring to fight the Enemy with so few ships, nor to be idle with so
many, subdued some places, and having given Agis a visit in Attica, sailed unto
the Hellespont, which finding clear, he besieged Lampsacus, and took it. The
Athenian Fleet, which consisted of 180 Galleys, hearing of this, came from the
Cherronesus to Sestus, The Athenian Fleet quite defeated at Aegosp^tamos by
Lysander.
and thence sailed to Aegospotamos, a River over against Lampsacus, the
Hellespont at this place being not two miles broad. Lysander contained his men
in great order, and refused to fight without an advantage, which was at length
given him by the Athenians, who braved him, but were in continual disorder,
carelessly running up and down, insomuch that Alcibiades having notice of it,
came and advised the Captains to look better to themselves, but returned with
no other recompense than bad words. But Lysander keeping diligent vvatch upon
them, observed his time when they were most of them landed, some eating and
drinking, others looking for victuals, and others vvandring up and down, and
setting upon the Fleet easily became Master of it all without any opposition,
except eight, vvherevvith Conon fled into Cyprus unto Evagoras the King,
knovving how bad entertainment he should have at home.

89. Such Athenians as had confusedly got into their ships were slain or
taken, and those that were yet on Land by the Land Forces, which Lysander had
in a readiness for that purpose. He took 3000 men, with the Captains and all
the ships, except those eight of Conon, and a Packe-Boat, which tacking to his
own ships, with the found of Pipes and the paean sung, he returned in triumph
unto Lampsac^s. Then called he the allies together to consider what was to be
done with the prisoners. A consultation what is to be done with the prisoners.
Many crimes were objected against them, as that they had done many unjust
things, and now had determined, if they had got the Victory, to cut off the
right hands of the Peloponnesians (or the thumbs rather, as Plutarch has it,
of their right hands, that they might never be able more to handle spears, but
row with oars) and having taken the two Galleys of Andrus and Corinth to cast
headlong all the men into the Sea; the perswader to this being Philocles.
Hereupon it was resolved, that they should all be put to death, except
Adimantus who had withstood the Decree of cutting off the hands, All of them
put to death except Adimantus.
which sentence was accordingly executed. Lysander then sailing about to the
Cities under the Athenian power, dismissed the Garrison Soldiers and all others
he found, with charge to get them to Athens under pain of death, which crafty
policy he used to fill the City with men, that it might not be able long to
endure a Siege for want of Victuals. When they of the City heard the news, they
were affected accordingly, bewailing not only the fortune of the slain, but
their own also, expecting now that should be done to themselves, which
heretofore they had done to the Melians, a Colony of Sparta, and to the
Histiaeans, Scionaeans, Toronaeans, Aeginetans, and many other Greek Cities,
not in way of revenge for any injury, but out of indulgence to their own lust;
for that they rejoiced in other men's miseries. Yet as grief would give way to
prudence, they took care for fortifying the City against a Siege, in which they
could not look for any assistance from elsewhere, all their Confederates,
except the Samians, having forsaken them, and such as they had banished from
their dwellings being again restored to those places which they had filled with
Colonies of their own.

90. Lysander having taken away Democracy, brought in the power of a few into
all the Cities. Herein he dealt with much cruelty and ambition, (putting in
such men only as were his creatures, that he might obtain an unlimited power
or Tyranny over all Greece) and sending for Land forces from Sparta, Lysander
besieges Athens both by Sea and Land;
he besieged Athens both by Sea and Land. The Athenians continued so resolute
for a long time, that till many were already dead of famine, not a word was
heard of asking Peace. Then Ambassadors were sent to Agis the Spartan King
about it, who referred them to Sparta, having as he said no commission to
entertain their overtures. Thither then they went, offering, that they might
gain the friendship of Lacedaemon, to part with all places besides the City and
Piraeus, where they would retain the Fortifications; but they had for answer,
that if they seriously desired peace, they must repair home, and not return
till they had better advised of the matter. Hereat the Athenians were much
abashed, thinking now of nothing but servitude; none daring to propose the
demolishing of the walls; for the Lacedaemonians having offered them Peace upon
these terms, Archestratus for advising them to embrace it, was imprisoned, and
it was decreed that it should be unlawful to mention it for the time to come.
Theramenes then procured to be sent to Lysander to get out what his intention
was, whether to enslave them, or to have the walls demolished, and thence he
returned not till the fourth month, that in this time they might be
constrained to resolve of something. At his return, SECT. 4.
he said he could get no other answer, but that they must send again to Sparta,
and thereby he procured himself and others to be sent with full authority for
concluding a Peace.

91. The Ambassadors of the Confederates being assembled at Sparta, many of
them, especially the Corinthians and Thebans, urged that no composition was to
be made with them, but that Athens should be destroyed; but the Spartans would
not give way to it, saying, it was not their intention to destroy a City, which
in the greatest dangers of Greece had done the greatest things for it is
deliverance. They then without much delay made peace with them upon these
terms: That the long walls and the fortifications of the Piraeus should be
demolished; that they should deliver up all their ships except twelve, receive
their exiles, follow the Lacedaemonians both by Sea and Land in the Wars, Which
yields.
and have the same Friends and Enemies with them. Some at the return of the
Ambassadors would have refused these terms; but the far major part siding with
Theramenes accepted of them. Lysander then seized upon the ships, and the
walls, upon the sixteenth day of the month Munichion (on which they had
formerly overthrown the Persians at Salamine) and went about to alter the
Government, which the People strongly resisted, insomuch that he sent back to
Sparta to complain of them, saying, they had broken the League, in that their
walls were not demolished; and though no worse thing was yet decreed against
them though pressed by some, yet this made them willing to receive any thing.
The walls demolished, and the Galleys burnt.
Then sent he for all the Pipers out of the City, to whom joining those in his
own Camp, at the noise of their instruments he caused the walls to be
demolished, and the Galleys to be burnt, the Confederates making great
solemnity, as if that day gave beginning to the liberty of Greece. Herewith,
the 27th year, and the War it self ended, which being carried on for so long a
time with most various fortune, dubious and inconstant events, with infinite
charges, all sorts of contests, and the ruin of so many Captains, as had not
perished in all the Wars of Greece besides, was finished by the politic
industry of one man, A. M. 3600. Ol. 93. an. 4. V. C. 349. Darii Nothi 19.
Belli Pelop. 27.
whom some thought thereupon they could not sufficiently admire, in the 780th
year after the end of that of Troy, in the fourth of the 93d Olympiad, the
nineteenth of Darius Nothus (who died presently after, the conclusion of the
Peace) A. M. 3600.

SECT. IV. From the end of the Peloponnesian War to the beginning of the reign
of Philip King of Macedonia, containing the space of 44 years.
1. THe year following being that wherein the 94th Olympiad was celebrated, in
the course of which Crocinas the Thessalian got the prize, Xenoph. ut prius.
Endicus was Ephorus at Sparta, and Pythadorus Archon at Athens, whom yet the
Athenians did not so account, because that the Oligarchy being brought in this
year, they esteemed it as anarchical. As soon as the long walls and the Piraeus
were demolished by the command of Lysander, thirty men were chosen to make
Laws, by which the Commonwealth might be governed. After their creation and
investiture in the power, they deferred both to publish or write the Laws;
but constituted the Senate and other Magistrates at their pleasure. The 30
Tyrants at Athens.
Then, first, they laid hold of all such as had under the Democracy lived by
informing, and false accusing of others, which was not displeasing to honest
men. So that those being condemned by the Senate, they were put to death. But
afterward they began seriously to lay their heads together, how they might
make themselves Masters of all. They sent Aeschines and Aristotle two of their
company to Sparta to desire a Garrison for the better government of the City,
till they had taken out of the way all naughty persons, and had settled the
Commonwealth, promising themselves to pay the Soldiers. Lysander being made
use of procured what they desired, and Callibius was sent as Harmostes unto
Athens, whom they so flattered, that they brought him to consent to whatsoever
they should act. Now then they fell upon, not only naughty and dissolute
persons, but on the best, whosoever they thought ill affected, and would
endeavor to stop their proceedings. Theramenes one of them protested against
this cruelty, and added, that it was impossible their power should continue in
that State without a sufficient company to assist them. Hereupon they fearing
him, lest he should make himself Captain of the discontented, which was almost
the whole City, chose out of the Citizens 3000 which they thought meetest for
their purpose, and gave them some part of the power, with this privilege, that
none of them should be put to death without the consent of the Senate; all the
rest of the People being left to the discretion of the thirty, whom they also
disarmed at a general muster.

2. Now thinking themselves secure enough, they filled all places with murders,
Fill all places with murders and rapine.
not only of their private Enemies, but such whose wealth might enrich them,
of which they were excessive greedy; and to this purpose they agreed, that
every one should name one man whom he would put to death for to seize upon his
goods. Theramenes having disliked the election of the 3000, uttered now also
his detestation of this wickedness, refusing himself to commit it. For this
they were more jealous of him, fearing he might cross their abominable
practices, and resolved upon his destruction; so that having provided a Company
of young men with daggers to assist them, they called the Senate together, and
therein Critias (his once familiar friend, but now his deadly Enemy, because
the most cruel Tyrant of the thirty) bitterly accused him as a turbulent and
unsettled man; being now for the People, and another while against them; he
objected against him the death of the six Captains procured by him, and
concluded he was not a fit man to live in a Commonwealth, Theramenes one of
them, for detesting their wickedness, is put to death.
especially so constituted. Theramenes replied with undaunted courage, and
gave satisfaction to the Senate, as Critias perceived by their muttering, who
thereupon concluding, that if he escaped it would endanger his own life, he
consulted with his Companions, and then returning to the Senate, told them,
that having first expunged his name out of the Catalogue of the 3000, and
hereby he being subjected to their censure, they condemned him to death.
Theramenes replied again, that his name was no more easy to be blotted out than
any other man's, in consideration whereof, he advised them all to make his case
their own: but none daring to oppose, for that they knew the men that were
present to be privily armed, he was led away, and compelled to drink poison,
which he did with a resolute and gallant Spirit. After this the Tyrants, as
being at liberty to do what they pleased, forbad all that were not contained in
the Catalogue, to come into the City, from which they expelled them and the
borders, that they and their Associates might enjoy their Lands. The Citizens
betook themselves to the Piraeus, but being thence also expelled, they filled
Megara and Thebes with their multitudes.

3. This banishment of the Athenians procured their liberty. For, now they
entered into consultation, and resolved to hazard their lives for the freedom of
their Country; seeing that now what would have been treason at home, would have
no danger abroad, but such as might be found in the execution. First
Thrasybulus who was then at Thebes, with but Corn. Nepos in Thrasybulo.
thirty in his company, seized upon Phyla, a Castle in the Territories of
Athens; which the Tyrants understanding, endeavored to recover, but to no
purpose; for he having gotten to him within a while 700 men, put to flight the
Garrison Soldiers of Sparta, whom they had set to watch two miles off from the
Castle, killing of them about 120 men. Herewith the Tyrants were something
discouraged, Thrasybulus opposes the Tyrants.
but thinking it best to get Eleusine into their power, they went thither, and
perceiving the Inhabitants that were able to bear Arms to go out at the gates,
that they might only as they pretended take the number of their heads, most
wickedly murdered them. After this Thrasybulus with 1000 men seized upon the
Piraeus, against whom, though the Tyrants came out with their whole power, yet
he obtained the victory against them, killing 70, and what more, Critias the
Arch Tyrant, with Hippomachus one of his Colleagues, and Charmiaes one of the
ten Captains which had been placed over the Piraeus. When the slain were
delivered up to be buried, and thereupon both parties met, C^eocritus a Crier
belonging to the Priests, and a man famous for his loud and audible voice,
expostulated with those who sided with the Tyrants for expelling them their
fellow Citizens, educated together, partakers heretofore of the same things,
sacred and profane, prosperous and adverse, and all for to satisfy the lust
of those Monsters, who had kindled such a flame as had already consumed more
than the Peloponnesian War did in ten years. His speech produced such effect,
that the 3000 fell at difference amongst themselves; such as had been busied in
the destruction of other men, together with the Tyrants, vehemently contended
that nothing was to be granted to them in the Pi^aeus; but those that were
confident in their own innocence, crying out, there was no reason that they
should obey the will and pleasure of the thirty, and suffer the City to
perish, prevailed against them. Then was the power of the thirty abrogated, and
ten chosen into their room, one out of very Tribe, Their power is abrogated.
after which they quitted the City, and retired to Eleusine.

4. Notwithstanding the change of the Government, yet there was no accord
betwixt them in the Piraeus and those in the Town, They send for aid from
Sparta.
but several acts of Hostility they committed against one another. At length
the 3000 in the Town, and the Tyrants of Eleusine, sent to Sparta to desire aid
against the other, saying, that the people revolted from the Lacedaemonians;
and Lysander procured them 100 Talents to be sent out of hand, himself ordered
to go General to assist them, and his brother Libys General of the Fleet. Then
besieged he the Piraeus, Lysander is sent and besieges Thrasybulus, and his
fellows in the Piraeus,
both by Land and Sea, and sorely straightned them; but Pausanias the Spartan
King thinking much that he should get the glory of Conquering Athens the second
time, which he would make as his own, he persuaded the Ephori to give way, that
he should follow him with another Army, under pretense of assisting him; upon
which account the Corinthians and Boeotians amongst the Confederates refused to
follow him, alleging they should break their Oaths by fighting against them,
who had done nothing prejudicial to the peace. This they did, concluding that
the Lacedaemonians would lay the Territories of Athens to their own demains.
Pausanias, after his arrival, sent to them in the Piraeus to bid them depart,
and they refusing it, for a color to his designs, he lead his Forces against
them. But returning without any thing performed, he went to view the Walls the
next day, at which time they sallied out upon him, and still fresh supplies
coming in on both sides, wrought, and received considerable damage.

5. Yet for all this he underhand sent unto them about a composure, and
instructed them what they should offer. They obeyed him, and he persuaded also
those in the City to end the controversy, that both might become friends to
the Lacedaemonians. But Pausanias the Spartan King emulating Lysander takes up
the matter.
The two Ephori present with him (for two used always to accompany the Spartan
Kings in their expeditions) inclined to his opinion, rather than to the
severity of Lysander, and so accordingly they sent Ambassadors from both
parties to Lacedaemon about an agreement. The Lacedaemonians after audience
presently dispatched ten Commissioners with them back to Athens, who, together
with Pausanias, might make an agreement. They presently composed all on these
terms: That all should return home to their own habitations, except the 30. and
the 10. and 11 men which had commanded in the Piraeus: and if any feared the
people they might remove to Eleusine. These things being done, Pausanias drew
off the Spartan Army, and those that were in the Piraeus went up with their
Arms into the City, The popular Government restored.
and there sacrifized to Minerva. Then by the persuasion of Thrasybulus the
popular Government was restored, and all things ordered as in former times. A
little after it being heard that they in Eleusine hired Soldiers abroad,
attempting new matters, the whole City rose against them, took their Captains
as they came to parley, and slew them: the rest by their friends sent to them
were persuaded to agree. Then passed a general Act of Oblivion for all that was
past, confirmed by an Oath, to keep which they being very careful, even yet
says Xenophon, jointly manage the affairs of the Commonwealth. By which wise
order the City returned to its former quietness, upon this Sedition raised by
the 30 Tyrants, who being created by a Decree of the Senate, as * another
says, put to death 1400 Citizens unheard, Isocrates in Areopagit.
and forced more than 5000 to fly into the Piraeus.

6. But this Tyranny of the 30. not only produced the dest^uction of many in
the Town, but of Alcibiades also then living in Asia with Phanabazus, Plutarch
in Alcibiad. and Cora. Nepos.
whom he intended to make use of to bring him to the King, hoping he might
deserve no worse of that Prince than Themistocles had done of his Predecessor.
When the Athenians were deprived of their liberty by the means of Lysander, and
the Tyranny of the 30. they then began again to repent of what they had done to
him, judging that if he had been yet at the Helm, they should never have made
shipwreck of their liberty, and still their confidence was in him, and thought
their cause was not utterly desperate as long as he was safe. The thirty
Tyrants procured Alcibiades to be made away.
The Tyrants also were jealous of him, procuring all the intelligence they
could concerning all his actions, and at length Critias remonstrated to
Lysander, that things could not stand as they did long, if he lived, who yet
was nothing persuaded to procure his death, till he received a Scytala from the
Magistrates at Sparta, who either feared his great abilities, or did it to
gratify Agis, to remove him by some means out of the way. He sent to
Pharnabazus, requiring him to dispatch him, who enjoined his brother Magaeus,
and his Uncle Susami^hres to be his Executioners: They coming to the Village in
Phrygia where he lived, durst not enter his house, but compassing it about set
it on fire. He perceiving what was done, took some Clothes, and casting them
into the fire, which keeping down the flame for some space, he brake out,
whereupon the Barbarians fled, not daring to stand to him, but at a distance
killed him with Darts, after which his body was burnt (with that matter that
was prepared to consume him alive) by the care of his Paramour Timandra, the
Mother of Lais the famous Corinthian Courtisan. Thus he died in the flour of
his age, scarce exceeding forty years, a man very beautiful, of most
excellent parts, fit for any employment, able to accommodate himself to all,
both times and customs, though never so repugnant, and therein yet esteemed
also to excel. Socrates upon him exercised the true Platonic love, laboring
to infuse such virtue into him as might make him truly lovely; but such were
his temptations, and inclination, that counterpoising the instructions, nature
in this man seemed to try what she could do; it being agreed by all, says Com.
Nepos.
one who wrote of him, that none was ever more eminent, both for vice and
virtue.

7. After these things Cyrus made War upon his brother Artaxerxes, Xenoph. lib.
3.
as has been said elsewhere, at what time he sent to Lacedaemon, demanding a
return for his kindnesses showed to them, who thinking it most just, sent their
Admiral to keep in play Syeunesis the Satrapa of Cilicia, till he passed that
Country. After his overthrow, Tissaphernes his greatest Enemy, being a most
insolent man before, now grew more haughty (after the King had laid the
Province of Cyrus to his Satrapie) and began to be more troublesome to the
Greek Cities in Asia. Thimbro sent into Asia.
They sent to complain hereof at Sparta, which State sent to their relief
Thimbron with an Army of 1000 new raised Soldiers out of Laconia, 4000 Foot of
Peloponnesus, and 300 Horse from Athens, which the City willingly parted
withal, with no good prosperity wished to their persons, for that they had
been in the service of the thirty Tyrants. What he did in Asia, and how he
returned home after Dercyllidas was sent to succeed him, and was banished upon
complaint of the Confederates, is related in the Affairs of Asia. At the same
time as Dercyllidas managed the War beyond the Seas, the Lacedaemonians and
Eleans reviving their old grudges and complaints, broke out into another War,
which was begun by the Lacedaemonians at the instance of the Ephori. They sent
out Agis their King, who led an Army into the Territories of the Eleans; but an
Earthquake happening at his first entrance, which was counted ominous, he
returned without any thing at all performed. The year after, he undertook
another expedition, the Athenians, and all the other Confederates, except the
Corinthians and Boeotians, following him, wherein he sorely afflicted all the
Country, sparing the City Elis it self, and though he retreated, yet the
Garrison he left behind him, continuing these depredations all the next Summer,
and the Winter following, the next Summer the Eleans were constrained to
receive such conditions as their Enemies would give them. The Wall about Patrae
was demolished, Cyllene relinquished, five Towns delivered into the hands of
the Spartans, and three to the Arcadians; the management of the Affairs of the
Temple belonging to Jupiter Olympius being only left remaining to them.

8. Not long after these things Agis died, Idem. ibid. Corn. Nepos, and
Plutarch. in Agesilao, and Lysandro. Xenoph. in Orat. de laudibus Agesil.
having falln sick in his return from Delphos. He had born to him by his wife
Timaea, a son called Leutychides, but conceived at that time when Alcibiades
sojourned at Sparta, by whom there were great presumptions that he was
begotten. He had not been with his wife of ten months before the Child was
born; Timaea her self was wont when she would play with it to call it
Alcibiades more commonly than Leutychides, as was acknowledged by her maids;
and neither did Alcibiades himself forbear to acknowledge that he had to do
with her, saying, it was not out of any carnal affection, but out of a desire
that those who should proceed from him might reign at Lacedaemon; upon these
grounds Agis owned not Leutychides for his son, but told the Ephori he was none
of his, divorcing also his Mother; A contention betwixt Leutychides and
Agesilaus for the Spartan Kingdom.
but when he lay sick, having no Children, and moved by his prayers and tears,
he owned him for his son before many witnesses. After his death a great
contention insued about the succession betwixt Leutychides and Agesilaus
brother to Agis, a man lame of one foot, but of a most noble and valiant
disposition. Agesilaus was bred after the ordinary strict way, as not having
expected the Kingdom being a younger brother, and yet was in great favor with
the people, and pressing the illegitimation of his adversary had their ear; but
one thing they much stuck at, which was an old Prophecy much urged by
Diophites their Prophet, that it should go very hard with Sparta when it should
have a lame King. Yet Lysander, who had taken a great affection to him,
Ag^silaus carries it, by the means of Lysander.
answered, that by a lame King was not meant lame of a foot, which could be
no hinderance to virtue, but one of spurions extraction; and herewith, and by
his private interest, procured the sentence to pass for Agesilaus.

9. Agesilaus had not been a year in his Office, before that being to sacrifize
for his Country according to the custom, the entrails of the beast three times
did not permit it, which being viewed by the Prophet, he foretold that a
grievous conspiracy was hatched against him, and all Magistrates, both in Town
and Country. Five days after this a notable conspiracy indeed was disclosed
to the Ephori by one of the Accomplices, the head of which was Cinaedon. They
presently referring it to the Senate, it was thought fit that he should be sent
out of the City, under pretense of some employment, and that some should go
after him to make him reveal his fellows, which accordingly was done, and an
ignominious death was executed upon them. After the execution Herodus of
Syracuse came with news out of Phoenicia, that a Fleet of 300 Galleys was
prepared by Tissaphernes, and the King, but upon what design was not known. The
Lacedaemonians moved at this, called the Deputies of their Confederates to
Sparta to consult about it. Now Lysander had a great mind to return into Asia,
desirous to relieve those his friends, who being by him placed in the
Government of the Cities, ten in a place, were for their violence and great
misdemeanors, either killed, or driven into banishment. He therefore persuaded
Agesilaus to undertake so noble and pious an expedition, and wrote to his
friends in Asia, to desire of the State that he might be sent. Being persuaded,
he offered his service on condition they would grant him thirty Assistants, He
is sent into Asia by the same means.
by whose directions and advice he might manage the War; with 2000 choice men
newly to be raised, and 6000 of the Confederates: These were all decreed to him
by the dealing of Lysander, who procured himself to be sent as chief of the
thirty, to which place he might well pretend for the great glory of his
achievements, and his friendship to Agesilaus, whom as he judged he had more
obliged by procuring this employment, than by the former courtesy of
preferring him to the Kingdom.

10. Having his Army and Provisions in a readiness, he marched to Aulis, that
thence, after the example of Agamemnon, he might pass over into Asia; but
going about to sacrifize a Do to the Goddess, with which he thought she would
be better pleased than she was with Agamemnon for his daughter, he was hindered
by the Boeotians from doing that which was contrary to their custom, and was
constrained in a great chase to pass over without the Ceremony, the Omission
of which he accounted as a bad presage. When he came to Ephesus, it appeared
that he only bore the name, and Lysander had all the credit and authority, all
men making application to him, and observing him as a man of whom they had had
former experience to exceed all men in earnestness to gratisfie his friends,
and destroy his Enemies. This much moved Agesilaus, Is Eclypsed by Lysander.
though a man of a most mild spirit (who was famous for bearing with any thing)
and troubled also his own Colleagues, so that the King resolving to cut off his
authority, rejected all the suits he made for any, and plainly showed that his
design was to cross him in all he attempted. Lysander hereupon told his
friends how the case stood, that they must make no more addresses to himself,
and being sensible of the disgrace expostulated with him about it, who let him
understand that he could not endure to be overtopped by him; He then desired
some employment of him, wherein he might both save his own credit, and do him
service, wherein he promised to be faithful. He then sent him to the
Hellespont, where findding Spithridates the Persian to be offended by
Pharnabazus, he brought him over to him with a great Treasure, and 200 Horse,
although hereafter it was found that he took very hainously the diminishing of
his reputation.

11. Agesilaus in Asia prospered in the War to admiration, gaining great glory
for his wisdom, valor, and courtesy, both at home and abroad; insomuch that
the Spartans, in confidence of his abilities, and integrity, committed the
Fleet also to his command, judging it most convenient for expedition, and that
both the Armies might join the readilier upon occasion, that they should be in
the hands of one man whom they could trust. But in this one thing he is
accounted to have erred, in that not having respect to the public good, he
passed by many far more Eminent for prudence and gravity, and pitched upon
Pisander, his wives brother (a man very bold, but meanly practiced in
business) for his Admiral. Tithraustes by Gold sent into Greece, corrupts
the States to War against Lacedaemon.
As he was going toward the Fleet, and Agesilaus marching for Phrygia,
Tithraustes (who having cut off the head of Tissaphernes had succeeded in his
place) considering in how great danger his masters affairs stood, sent
Timocrates a Rhodian with much Persian Gold into Greece, wherewith to corrupt
the principal men in the Cities, and procure them to make War against the
Lacedaemonians. This was effected at Thebes and Argos; and the Athenians,
though they had no Gold, yet were very ready to embrace the War, believing that
therein they should have the Chief command. Those that were corrupted then
grievously inveighing against the Lacedaemonians, procured that the chief
Cities entered into a Combination against them. The Thebans knowing that they
would not begin the War except first provoked, took occasion to do it by the
Locrian Opuntians, whom they procured to quarrel with the Phocians, and their
other Neighbors, about some grounds in question amongst them, concluding, that
thereupon the Phocians would break into Locris. They did so, and did more hurt
than they had received; whereupon Audocides, who had received much Gold,
procured the Thebans to assist the Locrians. The Thebans then invaded Phocis,
which they wasted, and presently did the Phocians send to Lacedaemon to desire
aid, showing that they had not been the beginners of the War.

12. The Lacedaemonians not unwillingly embraced this occasion of falling out
with the Thebans, to whom they bore many grudges. Xenoph. ut supra.
They exacted the tenth part assigned to Apollo at Decelea, refused to make War
against the Piraeus, persuading also the Corinthians, as they judged, to do the
same; they remembered also how they had forbidden Agesilaus to sacrifize,
casting the sacrifice from off the Altar, and would not follow him into Asia.
They resolved now that they had no War in Greece, and that their affairs were
in so good a condition in Asia, to curb their insolence. Lysander was then
dispatched to Phocis, where he should gather the Forces of the Confederates
together, and stay for Pausanias the King, Corn. Nepos and Plutarch in Lysandro.
who was to bring the Forces of Sparta and the rest of the associates to
Haliartus. He marching into Boeotia drew Orchomenus from the league of Thebei,
and impatient of delay tarried not for Pausanias, who hovered about Tegaea, but
went with such Forces as he had already to Haliartus, which he summoned, but in
vain, the Thebans which already were in the City hindering the surrender. Upon
refusal he led his men to the walls, Lysander slain.
and they of Thebes upon notice hereof hasted out of their City to help their
friends, and falling upon Lysander (whether aware of their coming or not is
uncertain) slew him in the place, and routed his Forces, of which were slain
1000 men, and of the Thebans 300. This was the end of Lysander, which he partly
brought upon himself by his eagerness to make this Expedition, being in his
old age fallen into melancholy, which rendered him more pevish than usual. His
character.
He left a great name behind him, but purchased rather by his good success
than Virtue. He would neither spare for cruelty nor falsehood to compass his
designs, taking no estimate of any thing by any balance but that of profit. He
scoffed at such as said, that those who were descended of Hercules (amongst
which he was reckoned, though not of the royal families) ought to manage Wars
without deceit, saying, that where the Lyon's skin would not serve, the Foxes
was to be sowed to it. A design of his was discovered after his death, whereby
he intended to have taken the Regal power out of the two families, and have
made them common to all in general. To this purpose a writing was found
containing a speech he intended to offer to the People; which Agesilaus would
have published, that it might have been seen what kind of Commowealths-man he
was; but was dissuaded by Lacratidas chief of the Ephori, who said, that
Lysander was not to be dug up again, but rather that speech to be buried
with him. Notwithstanding his ambition, yet he died poor, which rendered him the
more famous, so that to do honor to his memory the Spartans imposed a mulct
upon certain Citizens, who being contracted with his Daughters before his
death, afterward when his poverty appeared, refused to marry them.

13. The Thebans having lost so many men in the late fight, thought they had
but small cause to triumph, counting their loss equal with that of the Enemy.
The day after, when they understood that the Phocians and others had retreated,
they took more courage; but again, when they perceived Pausanias to draw near,
they esteemed themselves in no small danger. Yet the day following the
Athenians joining themselves to them, and Pausanias not moving forwards, they
then had no small confidence in the goodness of their Fortune. Pausanias being
doubtful what to do, called a council of the confederates to consult, whether
he had best by main force or by truce recover the body of Lysander, who for
that it lay near the Town walls, and it was very dangerous to fetch it off by
strong hand, concluded a truce was to be desired; and the rather, for that the
Corinthians refused to join with them, and the Enemy had good store of Horse
which they wanted. The Thebans refused to give up the dead bodies, except the
Lacedaemonians would engage to depart out of Boeotia, and therefore to their
great grief they were constrained to do it, and in their retreat the Thebans
grown very insolent, killed such as staid behind never so little in the
Villages. The Expedition was unfortunate to the Spartans in general; Pausanias
sentenced to die.
but especially to Pausanias, who at his return was accused capitally for not
meeting Lysander in convenient time, according to agreement, for that he had
not by fight but truce recovered the slain, and dismissed such Athenians as had
been taken in the Piraeus; and lastly, had not appeared at his trial. Being
condemned he fled to Tegea, where afterward he fell sick and died.

14. The Lacedaemonians awakened by their loss, Xenoph. lib. 4. Plutarch in
Agesilao, and Apothegmat. Xenoph. in Orat. de laudibus Agesilai.
and now knowing for certain that money had been sent out of Asia to the
several Cities, which had moved them to take arms, they thought themselves in
some danger, and recalled Agesilaus to defend his Country. He having had
success in the War suitable to his Military skill and valor, was now
gathering of greater Forces, wherewith he intended to march into the higher
Countries against the King himself; but notwithstanding this, and that it
troubled him to leave Asia, yet he resolved to obey, acknowledging in his
letter to the Ephori, that then a General truly and justly commands, when he is
governed by the Laws and Magistrates, upon which account he said, he would
follovv the letter, if not prevent it (seeing they had set him a day, and that
he commanded not for himself but the City and Confederates) although he had
subdued a great part of Asia, Agesilaus recalled out of Asia.
overthrovvn the Barbarians, and had made great preparations for the War in
Ionia. He left Eux^nus the Harmos^es of Asia with a guard of 4000 Soldiers,
but making all provision for his Country, drevv over many out of the Cities to
the Service. Having passed the Hellespont into the Cherronesus, he held the
same way that Xerxes formerly had done, when in the mean time the Ephori and
Aristodemus guardian to Agesipolis the young King, with an Army of 15000
overthrevv that of the Leaguers, consisting of 20000 (whereof 13000 bore heavy
Armor) making great slaughter, though they lost no more than eight of their
number. Care was taken that Agesilaus should have notice of this success (with
the Confederates in Asia) who grieved only that Greece should destroy so many
of it is own Worthies. As he passed through Thrace, he would not ask any of the
Barbarians leave to go through their Countries; but only sent to know whether
he should pass as a Friend or an Enemy. All friendly received and conducted
him, except the Tralles, who having formerly sold the passage to Xerxes, now
also demanded of him 100 Talents, and as many women. He jeered at them, asking
why they came not to receive what was demanded? and going forwards made great
slaughter of them. The King of Macedonia, when he asked the question of him,
said he would consider of it; so let him, said he; but in the mean time we will
proceed in our journey, which boldness so awed the King, that he suffered him
to pass quietly.

15. Having passed through Thessalie notwithstanding all opposition, by order
of the Ephori he invaded Boeotia, The Sun Eclypsed August 24. and Agesilaus
invadeth Boeotia. Where he obtains a Victory against the Leaguers.
judging always obedience best, though he could have wished, and had intended
first to have been better provided. As he invaded Boeotia the Sun was eclypsed
( August 24 according to the Astronomical Table) and he received the news of
the overthrow of Pisander upon the Coasts of Asia by Pharnabazus, and Conon the
Athenian, who being for his skill in Sea-matters in great request with the
Persian, improved his interest for the restitution of the Fortune of his
Country. Upon this report he put on a good countenance, lest he should
discourage his men, telling them Pisander the Admiral was slain, but that his
Fleet had obtained the Victory. But now in Boeotia, when he was come near to
Coronea, the Leaguers opposed themselves against him, being the Boeotians,
Athenians, Argives, Corinthians, Euboeans, Aenianes, and both the Locrians,
with whom was fought such a battle as had not happened in that Age. At the first
onset Agesilaus had the better in one wing, but the Thebans in the other, and
being in the pursuit were forced to retire to help their friends, where he
charging upon the Front of the Thebans, and not on the Rear, as he might have
done, did great execution, and was wounded himself, notwithstanding the valor
of his Guard, consisting of Fifty stour young men, lately sent him from Sparta
to do him honor. At length he had the better of it, and dismissed un-hurt 80
of the Enemies, who had taken Sanctuary near hand, after which he went to
Delphos, and consecrated the tenth of his spoils, which amounted to no less
than 100 Talents. In the mean time Gylus the Polemarchus brake out into Locris,
where the Soldiers being greedy of plunder, were fallen upon by the
Inhabitants, whom though they repelled at first, yet night coming on they were
so entangled, that Gylus himself and very many others were slain, and all of
them had been lost, but that the Alarm being taken by the Camp, relief was
thence sent to them. After this, the Soldiers were dismissed to their several
homes, and Agesilaus went by ship to Sparta. Yet notwithstanding the War
continued, the Athenians, Boeotians, Argives, and their Confederates, making
excursions from Corinth, which they had made the seat of War; and the
Lacedaemonians with their allies from Sicyon.

16. The Corinthians considering that their grounds were wasted, and many of
them slain, because of their being so near to the Enemy, but their Confederates
free from these mischiefs, the most and best of them desired Peace, and began
to consider of it amongst themselves. This being understood by the Argives,
Boeotians, Athenians, and especially by such amongst themselves as had received
the Persian Gold, and caused the War, they fearing Corinth would return again
to the Lacedaem^nians, to prevent this, they resolved to massacre all such as
were for the Peace. This they performed on a Festival, when most were got
together, sparing none that took Sanctuary in religious places, so that most of
the elder sort were killed, and the younger fled out of the City. Many of them,
by the entreaty of their friends, and upon the Oath of the Magistrates, that
they should be safe, returned home within a short time; but seeing plainly the
City was in the way to ruin by the tyranny of those that governed, Stirs at
Corinth.
as that for Corinth it was to be called Argos, the Laws of which City they
must be forced to receive; moreover being sensible that they had no more power
at home than mere strangers, some of them resolved it was better, by attempting
the freedom of their Country, to die in the quarrel, if it should fall out,
than to live in that slavish condition. In prosecution hereof they let in
Praxitas Governor of Sicyon for the Lacedaemonians within the long walls, who
having no great force with him, fortified himself as well as he might, which
being understood at Argos, they flocked out thence to assist their friends, and
the Lacedaemonians opposing themselves they came to a fight, wherein after much
difficulty and various Fortune, the Lacedaemonians were conquerours, making
great slaughter of their Enemies, This Victory was the more eminent, for that
so small a number had vanquished such multitudes, after which, they put to the
Sword a Garrison of Boeotians, which held the Haven called Lochaeus.

17. Praxitas pursuing his Victory, brake down part of the walls to make a
passage for his men, and then going on in the way toward Megara, took two
Towns, wherein he left a Garrison and departed, after which followed only some
light bickerings, till at length the Lacedaemonians issuing out of Lochaeus,
with their friends besieged Corinth, at which time the Athenians fearing they
might pass the long walls and invade their territories, came out of the City
with Masons and Workmen, and repaired that part which was toward them. The
Lacedaemonians grudging that the Argives should flourish at home, and prosper
abroad, sent Agesilaus with an Army against them, who laying waste all their
Territories, brake through to Corinth, and took the walls which the Athenians
had repaired, Agesilaus sent against the Argives.
his Brother Teleutias Admiral, taking the ships and Arcenals upon the Gulf.
Returning home, he was not long after sent out again, who when he came to
Corinth, thought to have surprised it, but the Citizens aware of it, called in
a Garrison of the Athenians, under the command of Iphicrates, and thereby
prevented him. At this time Ambassadors came to him from several parts, and
amongst the rest from Boeotia, to know what terms of Peace he would propound;
but he carried himself so high, that he would take no notice of them; though
Pharax interceded out of an inveterate grudge he bare toward the Thebans. But
before their departure there came news that the party he had left in Lechaeus
was defeated by Iphic^ates, at which unusual message being much affected he
leaped out from his Throne, and in all haste went to relieve them, but in his
way met with three Hors-men, who acquainted him how late his assistance would
be. Hereupon he returned, and the next day sent for the Ambassadors to hear
what they had to say; but they something encouraged at what had happened, and
minding to requite him for his disrespect, made then no mention of peace, but
desired leave to go to Corinth.

18. He easily apprehending them, told them they should the next day see their
friends in the Town rejoicing, and the defeat of his men, which was the true
cause of their desire to go to Corinth, and accordingly wasting all about the
City, went to the Walls, and having in vain provoked the Inhabitants to fight,
marched to the Lechaeus the place of the defeat, after which he dismissed the
Ambassadors, not suffering them to go to Corinth. His Army now beholding with
their eyes the monument of the late mischance, were sorely affl^cted, having
not at all been accustomed to such a sight, only the Parents, Kindred, and
relations of the slain, according to the Laconian custom seemed to rejoice in
the Calamity of their Country. Having reinforced the Garrison of Lechaeus, he
returned home his men, shunning the light and sight of all men, out of shame
for what had happened in this expedition contrary to their former fortune. But
Iphicrates after his departure, in confidence of his good success proceeded,
and reduced such places as had been taken by Praxitas and Agesilaus. Agesilaus
sent to relieve the Achaeans.
After these things the Achaeans being put to it by the Acarnanians, who
endeavored to wrest from them Calydone, a Town formerly belonging to the
Aetolians, sent to Lacedaemon, and expostulated with them for not assisting
them, who always were ready to follow them into all places. The State upon
this complaint sent Agesilaus to aid them, who invading Acarnania, wasted the
Country, made prey of most of their Cattle, and being opposed by them, was
much pur to it on the mountainous and precipitous places, by Darts and Arrows;
but coming to hand-stroaks, they were presently put to flight, and 300 of them
slain. Then consumed he all things with fire and sword, and attempted some
Towns by the persuasion of the Achaeans; but in vain. Now Autumn growing on, he
could not be staid by their entreaties to prevent the Acarnanians from sowing
their Corn, telling them they were not well advised in their request; for his
intention being to return the next year, how much more Corn they should have
upon the ground, by so much would they be the more desirous of peace.

19. And according to his promise, the Winter being over, he returned, at the
report whereof the Athenians seated in a mid-land Country, and thereupon more
obnoxious to damage in their Corn, and in great danger of losing their Towns,
made an agreement with the Achaeans, and entered into a society of War with the
Spartans. This War being over, the Lacedaemonians not thinking it safe to
contend with the Athenians and Bo^otians, whilst the Argives were at their
back, they resolved to send their Forces against them. The conduct of them
falling to Agesipolis, Agesipolis the other King sent against the Argives.
the other King, he would not undertake it, till he had consulted both the
Oracle of Jupiter Olympius, and that of Apollo at Delphos, concerning the
lawfulness of the War, because the Argives desired a Truce, but being
satisfied therein, he invaded, and wasted their Territories; yet ere long
terrified with diverse prodigies, he retreated without any considerable thing
done. In the mean time Pharnabazus and Conon, having overthrown the
Lacedaemonians in a Sea Fight at Cnidus, freed the Greek Cities from the
Lacedaemonian Governors, Phar^abazus and Conon their acts against Lacedaemon.
which Conon suggested to the other as the only way to make them his own, and
not to attempt to deprive them of liberty, which would force them to combine
against him, and thereby give him work enough. He attempted Sestus and Abydus;
but Dercyllidas having secured them, he lost his labor, and gave order to
Conon to procure a Navy from the Cities upon the Hellespont against the Spring,
being much incensed against the Lacedaemonians, and resolving to invade their
Dominions. At Spring he did so, and having strengthened the Enemies of Sparta,
as much as possible, he furnished Conon with a Fleet, and money to rebuild the
long Walls of the Piraeus, than which Conon persuaded him he could not do any
thing more suitable to his own interest involved in the damage of the
Lacedaemonians, and gaining the good will of the Athenians. The Spartans
understanding that their own affairs must necessarily decline as much as those
of Athens were advanced, (notwithstanding Teleutias brother to Agesilaus had
recovered the Sovereignty of the Gulf of Corinth) yet thought it necessary as
much as in them lay to prevent it.

20. Lest Conon should again recover the Islands to the Athenian state, they
thought good to advertise Teribazus, another of the Persian Satrapaes, hereof,
hoping either to draw him to their party, or at least to procure that no more
furtherance should be afforded to the design of Conon. Antalcidas sent into
Asia by the proposals of a peace to counter-work them.
To this purpose they sent Antalcidas to him, to lay open these things, and to
try what could be done with him about a peace, who according to his
instructions, to gain it the more easily, fully left to his disposal the Greek
Cities in Asia, provided those without were but left to their own freedom.
Teribazus liked well of this, but the Athenians, Boeotians, Corinthians, and
Argives, having also dispatched away their Ambassadors upon report of his
employment, refused to assent upon their own private interests. The Athenians
feared, if the Islands should be left to their own liberty, lest they should
lose Lemnus, Imbrus, and Sciras. The Thebans, lest they should be compelled to
set at liberty the Cities of Boeotia, and the Argives concluded, that then they
must lay aside all thoughts of Corinth, which they had conceived great hopes to
make their own. Their dissension hindered Teribazus from concluding a peace with
the Lacedaemonians without the Kings special Warrant, but underhand he supplied
them with money to maintain their power at Sea, and committing Conon to
custody, went to the King to know his pleasure.

21. The King upon his giving account how affairs stood, sent Struthas to take
care of the maritime affairs, who being sensible what damage Agesilaus had done
his master, was inclinable toward the Athenians, which being understood at
Lacedaemon, they sent Thymbro into Asia to keep him in action, who at first
sorely afflicted the places subject to his command, but at length was slain,
and his Forces defeated. At this time certain Rhodians being banished by the
people who had the power in their own hands, came to Sparta, and complained
that the Athenians had brought the Island under their power by that kind of
Government. The Spartans understood their interest in so powerful an Island,
and sent Ecdicus with eight Galleys to revive, if possible, the Oligarchy which
was agreeable to their own model; and in this Fleet they ordered him to convey
Diphridas into Asia, who was to gather up the Relics of Thymbro's Army, and
renew the War against Siruthas. He ordered his affairs very well, being a man
fitter for the purpose than Thymbro was. But Ecdicus fearful of the power of
the people did nothing at Rhodes, into his room Teleutias was dispatched, and
with a Fleet of 27 Galleys did that for which he was sent. Thrasybulus sent
against the Lacedaemonians.
The Athenians hearing of these motions sent out Thrasybulus against the
Spartans, who despairing of Rhodes went into the Hellespont, where in Thrace he
reconciled two Princes, Odryses and Seuthes, and made them friends of the
Athenian State. Departing thence, he recovered several Cities, and amongst the
rest Byzantium and Chalcis, whence going to the Island Lesbus (all the Towns
whereof except Mitylene were joined to the Lacedaemonians) he had good
success, taking several places, and wasting the Territories of the other.

22. From Lesbus he sailed victoriously unto Rhodes, where he obtained money
from the Inhabitants of Aspendus; Is slain.
but his men after the receipt thereof dealing injuriously with them, they
issued out in great anger, and killed him in his Tent. This is he, who if
virtue be to be valued without fortune, Corn. Nepos.
one doubts whether he be not to be preferred before all others, seeing that
for faithfulness, constancy, greatness of mind, and love toward his
Country, no man is to be preferred before him; and whereas it happened rarely to
any to free his Country from the slavery of one man, he did it from the
Tyranny of thirty. But whereas no man excelled him in worth, many overtopped
him in nobility, and hereupon it fell ou^, that though in the Peloponnesian War
he doing many things of himself, Alcibiades did nothing without him, yet the
eminency of that man easily swallowed the glory and profit of all
achievements. The Lacedaemonians having notice of what he had done, and
fearful of what the friendship of Pharnabazus to the Athenians might produce,
though they had nothing to say against Dercyllidas, yet sent Anaxibius out to
restore their fortune, who had prevailed with the Ephori for this employment,
and promised great matters if he were but assisted with money and shipping.
They gave him three Galleys, and pay for 1000 men. He coming to Abydus
skirmished with Pharnabazus, and then getting three ships more, infested the
Athenians. But the Athenians being sollicitous for keeping what Thrasybulus had
recovered, though they had nominated Argyrius to his place, yet now sent
Iphicrates with eight Galleys and 1200 men, who was lately returned from the
Corinthian War. He setting upon Anaxibius whilst he carelessly went abroad,
slew him as he was going to Abydus, and with him twelve more Governors of
Towns, and thence betook himself into the Cherronesus.

23. At this time Aegina was withdrawn by Et^onicus from the Athenians, who
thereupon besieged it, but to no effect. Xenoph. lib. 5. Diod.
At Sea both sides as it were played the Pirates with each other for some time:
But Telentias being made General of the Lacedaemonian Fleet, fell in upon the
Haven at Athens, where he took some Vessels laden, with the men, and putting
the Citizens into a great fright, in his return preyed upon the Coasts, whence
he took many Fisher-boats with other booty, the places being not aware of any
such things. In the mean while Antalcidas the Spartan returned with Teribazus
from the Persian King, having concluded a League offensive and defensive with
him, in case the Athenians and others would not consent to their proposals for
a general peace. He coming to Sea took eight Athenian Galleys which came from
Thrace, under the Command of one Thrasybulus, and making up the Fleet to the
number of 80 sail, with 20 Syracusian Galleys, and others which he procured of
Teribazus, obtained the Sovereignty of the Seas. The Athenians were startled
hereat, fearing the issue of this War might be the same with that of the
Peloponnesian, especially the Persian being now Confederate with the
Lacedaemonians, and the Inhabitants of Aegina infesting their Borders; The
parties desire peace.
upon all which accounts they were very desirous of peace. The Lacedaemonians
also being much straightned in maintaining Garrisons in so many places, both
affected to them, and weary of them, began to have enough of War, having
moreover much trouble about Corinth. The Argives not ignorant that War was
decreed against them, and that their old shifts and pretenses would stand them
in no stead, were also ready to embrace peace. They all then sent their Agents
to Teribazus to know what was proposed by Artaxerxes Mnemon.

24. Teribazus showing them the Kings Seals, read the Contents of the writing,
which imported, that he thought it just that the Cities in Asia, the Islands
Clazomenae and Cyprus, should be under his Jurisdiction: and all the rest,
little and great, should be left to their own freedom, except Lemnus, Imbrus,
and Scirus, which having been time out of mind subject to the Athenians, he
thought it fitting they should so continue. And such as would not admit of
these conditions, he with the rest of the Confederates would prosecute with
War, both at Sea and Land, to the utmost ability. The Agents returning home,
all the States embraced the conditions, except the Thebans, who were unwilling
to set at liberty the Cities of Boeotia; but Agesilaus making preparations to
invade them, they were so far awed thereby as to receive them. He constrained
also the Argives to leave Corinth, from which the Authors of the late massacre
then flying, The peace of Antalcidas.
the Exiles returned home. These things being done, and the League sworn to by
all parties, this first peace was made betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Athenians
with their followers, A. M. 3618. Ol. 98. an. 2. V.C. 367. Artax. Maem. 18.
after the ending of the Peloponnesian War, and casting down of their Walls,
being called the peace of Antalcidas; for so it was termed, from the procurer,
being indeed the shameful betraying of those Cities into the hands of
Artaxerxes, for which Agesilaus had prosecuted the War in Asia.

25. The Lacedaemonians were they who had the benefit thereof, being the
Protectors and Patrons of it, and grew so high upon the success, that now they
resolved to chastize such of the Associates as had in the late War born greater
affection to their adversaries than themselves. The Spartans hereupon grew high.
First they fell upon the Mantineans as guilty of this Crime, whom by their
King Agesipolis (for Agesilaus, because of the friendship that passed betwixt
his father and them, desired to be excused) they forced first to break down
their Walls by turning the River upon them, which ran through the City, and
then to divide themselves into Villages. After this they forced the Phliasians
to receive their Exiles, and made War upon the Olynthians in Thrace, at the
request of the Acanthians and Apollonians, who accused them of clandestine
practices with the Athenians and Thebans. By these courses they hoped that all
the small Towns in Greece, upon occasion, would willingly follow them in their
Wars as Authors of their liberty; and the great Cities, having lost their
Dependents, would be unable to make opposition. And in particular they had
conceived an emulation against Olynthus, now grown so mighty, that not only
she commanded her neighbor Towns, but was become terrible to places far
remote, The practices of the Oly^thians.
and to Sparta her self. The Olynthians had taken a great part of Macedonia,
together with Pella the Metropolis of that Kingdom, and now imitating the old
pretense of the Lacedaemonians to set at liberty the places over which Amyntas
did Tyrannise, had almost driven him out of his Dominions, and taken all to
themselves. They of Acanthus and Apollonia further adding, that either they
must War upon Olynthus, or become subject to it, and fight shortly in its
defense, Eudamidas was sent before with 2000 men. He arriving in Thrace,
fortified the Cities, and recovered Potidaea, which had associated it self to
the Olynthians, and managed his affairs with success answerable to such force.
In the mean time his brother Phoebidas, according as he had requested of the
Ephori, was employed in raising the main body of the Army, and having
completed the leavy marched away for Thrace to join with him.

26. At this time the Thebans were much divided amongst themselves, Xenoph. ut
supra, Plutarch. in Agesilao.
being headed by two Polemarchi, Ismenias, and Leontidas. When Phoebidas was
come on his journey as far as Thebes, Ismenias out of his hatred to the
Lacedaemonians would not see him, but his Colleague betrayed Cadmaea the Citadel
of Thebes into his hands, seized on Ismenias, and got the command of the whole
City, whereat those of the contrary faction to the number of 400 fled to
Athens. Cadmea the Citadel of Thebes betrayed.
Then another being chosen into the place of Ismenias, Leontidas went to
Sparta, where he found the Ephori and people much displeased with what
Phoebidas had done, being both against the League, and without any Commission
from them; and such as were Enemies to Agesilaus, especially aggravated the
matter, laboring to draw him into suspicion about it. He otherwise as great
both a commender and practiser of Justice as any, yet took upon him to defend
the fact, saying, that Phoebidas was worthy to be punished if he had done any
thing that was hurtful to the Commonwealth; but if it was profitable, The fact
is unjustly excused by Agesilaus.
then according to the ancient custom he was not bound, in such cases where
haste is required, to stay for a Warrant. Following herein his ambition, or
giving way to his passion (which most showed it self against the Thebans) he
not only indemnified Phoebidas, but persuaded the City to own what he had
done, to keep the Castle, and prefer Archias and Leontidas, who had betrayed
it, to the chief command of Thebes. The rest of the Graecians were sore
aggrieved at what was done; but the Confederates durst not contradict it, and
each City joined one Commissioner to three sent from Sparta, who all together
should take Cognizance of, and judge the cause of Ismenias. He was accused
before them of having favored the Barbarians, and held intelligence with the
Persian; that he had received part of the money sent from him to corrupt the
Graecians, Ismenias put to death.
and together with Andocides, had been the great incendiary who kindled and
fomented their intestine broils. He answered severally and apart to all; but
being believed to have attempted great and pernicious things, was condemned and
put to death. Then was the power established in Leontides and his Accomplices,
who did more in favor of the Lacedaemonians than was desired of them.

27. Things thus prospering, the Lacedaemonians more cheerfully pursued the War
against Olynthus. They sent General thither Teleutias, who with the help of
Amyntas the Macedonian, Teleutias sent by the Spartans against the Olynthians.
and Derdas Prince of Elimea, overthrew the Olynthians under their walls, and
wasting their grounds, for that Summer was ended, withdrew to their Winter
quarters. But the next year when he returned, the Olynthians sallied out
against him, whom to repel, he sending a party which drove them back beyond a
River which ran by the Town, and followed them over, they then thinking they
had his men at an advantage, turned back upon them, and slew to the number of
100. He being in a great chafe hereat, went in to the rescue with all his
Forces, and following them within bow-shot from the walls, his men were sore
galled by those that stood on the Turrets, and forced to give back, and then
being hotly charged he lost his life, with many others, so that the rest
clearly put to the rout, Is slain.
and shifting for themselves to several places, the strength of this Army was
broken, which defeat Xenophon charge upon the passion of Teleutias, showing
how dangerous it is in the Leader of an Army. The Lacedaemonians having notice
of what had happened, Agesipolis sent after him, dies of a Fever.
dispatched away Agesipolis their King with all convenient speed into Thrace,
who upon better advantages invading the Olynthians, took Torone one of their
confederate Towns, and harrazed the Country, but at Midsummer by extremity of
heat got a Fever, of which he died the seventh day, being much lamented by
Agesilaus his Colleague, for their long familiarity, though emulated by him.
Being put into Honey and brought home, there he was interred with Royal rites,
and Polybiades was sent to command the Army, who besieging the Olynthians, at
length forced them by famine to yield on these terms: Olynthus taken by
Olybiades.
To have the same Friends and Enemies with the Lacedaemonians, and to follow
them as associates whithersoever they should lead them in their Wars.

28. In the mean time the Phliasians grown confident upon the absence of
Agesipolis, began to act very insolently and unjustly against the Exiles which
of late they were made to re-admit. The Exiles complained of them at
Lacedaemon, and they thereupon in their absence put a mulct upon them, which
understanding, they still continued and prayed justice from that State. At
length the Ephori resolved upon War, and Agesilaus was sent against the
Phliasians, who thereupon offering largely to do all things fitting, he refused
them, saying, he must have deeds and not words, to which now without further
confirmation he could give no credit. They asking what he would demand, he
required their Castle to be delivered up to him, which being utterly refused,
he besieged the City. They held out longer than he expected, because the
Magistrate suffered them not to eat above half of the ordinary proportion, and
by means of one Delphion, who with 300 assistants, imprisoned such as spoke of
a surrender. But at length consumed with famine, they desired a Truce, to send
Commissioners to Sparta to treat of Peace. Agesilaus stomached that they should
pass him by, The Phliasians subdued by Agesilaus.
and therefore sending his friends to the City, he obtained that the matter
should be referred back to him. He ordered that 50 should be chosen of the
Exiles, and as many others, who should determine which Citizens should be
suffered to live, and which put to death, and that then power should be given
them to make Laws for the Government of the City. Whilst these things should be
done he left a Garrison in the Town, and so departed, having spent Twenty
months in this business.

29. All things thus falling out to the Spartans according to their wish, they
judged their Empire sufficiently established; Xenoph. ut prius. Diodorus ad
Olymp. 100. an. 3. Plutarch and Corn. Nepos in Pelopide.
but another event (as Xenophon gravely discourses of divine vengeance) taught
the contrary, it being clear, both from the Histories of Greeks and Barbarians,
that God suffers not to escape unpunished wicked and ungodly actions. They
had sworn not long before to leave the Cities to their own liberty, and yet
they kept in their hands the Citadel at Thebes, and therefore being formerly
invincible, were now sufficiently plagued by those alone whom they had injured.
There was one Phillidas Secretary to the present Polemarchi of Thebes, who
being not at all suspected by his Masters, went to Athens where the Exiles lay,
and there entered into a conspiracy with Mello one of them, for the killing of
the Polemarchi, and recovery of their Countries liberty. Mello and six others
being let in by Phillidas, were in women's apparel brought in to the Polemarchi
as Courtezans, whilst they were drinking and celebrating the Feast of Venus at
the end of their Office, whom they stabbed with daggers hid under their
clothes; after which they did as much to Leontides the chief revolter, as he
lay in his bed, Thebes recovered by the Exiles.
Mello being easily admitted to him without suspicion. Then went they to the
common prison, and killing the Keeper set at liberty their friends, when now
they called the people together, and exhorted them to stand in defense of their
native liberty. They presently besieged the Castle, wherein the Lacedaemonian
Governor seeing the alacrity of the assailants, was forced to yield upon this
condition, to go out with his Army, and for that was put to death at his return
to Sparta. The Thebans then slew such as they could come by, who sided with
Leontides, and, too rigorously, extended the same punishment to their children.

30. The Ephori solicited by the Exiles that fled to Sparta, Xenoph. and
Plutarch.
and moved by the authority of Agesilaus (who pretended a sufficient quarrel,
for that Archias and Leontides were slain) sent Cleombrotus their King against
the Thebans now in the depth of Winter. He in his passage slew those whom
Phillidas had let out of prison, to the number of 150, who kept watch upon the
mountains, but did nothing farther considerable, only he left Sphodrias
Governor of Thespae to raise new Forces, and be a refuge to the discontented
party amongst the Thebans, and so returned. Yet herewith were the Athenians
exceedingly affrighted, insomuch that one they put to death, who had conspired
with the Theban Exiles, and condemned another who fled upon it. The Thebans
also despaired of being able to graple with the Lacedaemonians, and therefore
betook themselves to a politic device, which was invented by Pelopidas and
Gorsidas principal of the late Conspirators. A Merchant was sent to Sphodrias,
then lying at Thespis, a rash and ambitious man, to persuade him to fall upon
the Piraeus or Haven of Athens, as a work very grateful to his superiors, for
thereby he should cut off the Athenian power at Sea, and he might be sure the
Thebans would not assist them being already too much incensed. Sphodrias
invadeth Attica by the cunning of some Thebans.
He pricked forwards by these conceits, invaded Attica as far as Eleusine; but
there his design being known, and his Soldiers unwilling to proceed any
further, as not sufficiently prepared for such an enterprise, he was forced to
return.

31. The Athenians cast into prison the Spartan Ambassadors as conscious of
such an unlawful act; but they utterly renounced the least knowledge of it,
Xenoph. Plutarch.
and promising Sphodrias should answer it with his life, they were content to
expect the justice of the State upon him. The Ephori called him to account
indeed, and yet though he appeared not, was he acquitted, to the great
admiration of all men, especially because of the author of his acquitment,
which was Agesilaus. Agesilaus moved by his son Archidamus, ^ procures him
indemnity, whence the Athenians join with the Thebans.
For the King, though at first he refused several times to hear any thing in
his behalf; yet Cleonymus the son of Sphodrias beloved by Archidamus, made such
means to him, that at length being very indulgent to his children, he excused
the matter, and saying, he held Sphodrias to be an honest man, and that the
Commonwealth stood in need of such Soldiers, he got him acquitted, to his great
dishonor. The Athenians hereupon out of indignation joined themselves to the
Thebans, and the Boeotians and they sent to the Cities under the command of
Sparta, to draw them to their party, which they effected with most, they
groaning under the yoke of Lacedaemon. They appointed a Common Counsel to be
held at Athens, for carrying on the War, made up of one out of every
confederate City, by which course and other ways of self-denial, the Athenians
recovered much authority, having constituted their Captains, Timotheus the Son
of Conon, Chabrias, and Callistratus.

32. The Lacedaemonians to counterwork them, Diodorus ad Ol. 101. an. 1.
Xenopo. Plutarch.
took off their severity from their Subjectts which had not yet revoked,
whereby they kept them fast to them, and renewing Military discipline, sent
Agesilaus into Boeotia with a great Army; for Cleombrotus liked not the cause
so well as to engage in it; and thereupon he was forced to lay aside his excuse
of superannuation (being above 40 years older than one of ripe age) and
submitted to the employment. The Thebans opposing themselves against him with
the Athenians and others, took an hill, where by direction of Chabrias, they
received him carelessly, with their shields let down to their knees, and their
lances advanced, which courage of theirs as it seemed made him to retreat, and
so having done great damage to their Country, and lost many of his men, he
returned, leaving the Horse still to make excursions, under the command of
Phoebidas. Several skirmishes then happened after his departure, in one of which
Phoebidas himself was slain, with 300 of his followers. This made the Thebans
take more courage, and many then revolted to them. The Spartans sent a party to
reinforce the Garrison of Thespis, and in the beginning of Spring prevailed
with Agesilaus to undertake another Expedition, which was performed to little
purpose. Agesilaus undertaketh another fruitless Expedition against the
Boeotians.
He broke a vein in his sound thigh, and the blood caused such an inflammation,
that though opening a vein at his ancle gave him some ease, yet at his return
he was forced to keep his bed for a long time, the blood at the orifice having
ran night and day, till at length he swooned, which stopped the flux of it. The
year after Cleombrotus was again sent out; but the Thebans and Athenians
disputing the passage with him in his way, after he had lost 40 men he
returned. By these conflicts the Thebans were so exercised, that they became
excellent Soldiers, as Autalcidas said jeeringly to Agesilaus at his return,
that he was very well rewarded by them, whom without either will or knowledge
he had taught to fight.

33. The Confederates being met at Lacedaemon, accused themselves of idleness,
for that they had not stroven with the Athenians at Sea, and being now
confident they could starve them in the City, they rigged a Fleet of 70 ships
for that purrpose. And hereby they for some time as it were besieged Athens, so
that the Corn-ships durst not approach, till Chabrias overthrew them in fight,
and brought in plenty of provisions. The Lacedaemonians preparing to send new
Forces into Boeotia, the Thebans desired of their friends at Athens to invade
Peloponnesus by Sea, to divert them; which they readily did, under conduct of
Timotheus, the Thebans at the same time taking several Towns upon their
borders. The Spartans sent out one Nicolochus to Sea against Timotheus, who not
staying for six Galleys of Ambracia, which he expected, with 55 sail set upon
the Athenian Fleet consisting of 60, and was worsted. Hereupon Timotheus
erected a Trophy, but Nicolochus getting the six ships of Ambracia, went and
offered battle again, and Timotheus not stirring erected another Trophy as a
Conqueror. But Timotheus mending his ships, made up his Fleet above 70
Vessels, and prevailed at Sea. Xenoph. lib. 6.
The Thebans having got all the Boeotian Cities into their power invaded
Phocis, to the succor of which Cleombrotus was sent from Sparta, Diodorus.
and there the associates both of the one side and the other met; but the
Athenians thinking now that the Thebans became too potent by their assistance,
were desirous of a Peace. The Lacedaemonians beaten.
The Thebans with 500 men went against Orchomenus, held by a Garrison of the
Lacedaemonians, which sallying out against them, a hot dipute ensued, wherein,
although the Spartans were double the number, yet they were beaten, which thing
had not happened in former Ages. This added courage to the Thebans, and their
military glory daily increasing, it now became evident that they strove for the
Sovereignty of Greece. With this year Hermeas of Methymna concluded his History
of Sicily, which consisted of 10. or, according to some, of 12 books.

34. The next being the second of the 101 Olympiad, Diodorus ad Olymp. 101.
ann. 2.
the 30th of the reign of Artaxerxes Maemon, Hippodamus being Archon;
Artaxerxes having a design to make War upon Egypt, and to use the Graecians
therein, sent to persuade them to agreement. The Thebans left out of the
general peace.
They being weary of War consented to it, all the Cities being to be set at
liberty, and the Garrisons drawn out; only the Thebans refusing to quit the
Cities of Boeotia were not comprised in the League, being very confident in
their good fortune, and much encouraged by several excellent good Soldiers
amongst them, the principal of which were Pelopidas, and Epaminondas, who from
a poor Philosopher became the most renowned for martial affairs of all Greece.
This change produced great Commotions in the several Cities, but especially in
those of Peloponnesus, which by the Lacedaemonians had been subjected to
Oligarchy, and now having the popular Government restored, knew not how to use
it moderately, but by unjust decrees opposed many worthy men, driving some into
Exile, and selling their goods. Great stirs especially happened amongst the
Corinthians, Megarians, and Phliasians, whilst those that were unjustly
banished endeavored by force or policy to restore themselves. The peace
continues but a short time.
Those that were for Democracy were maintained by the Athenians, and the
Spartans assisting the O^igarchical faction, the peace was but for a small time
observed by these two States, whilst both favored such as bare most affection
to their form of Government, and so they renewed the War: Such is the fruit of
Antimonarchical Government, viz. nothing but sedition, confusion, and disorder.

35. They Xenophon. Diodorus ad Olymp. 101. ann 3.
contested first about the Zacynthians, and afterward in Corcyra, where the
Spartans besieging the City, the Inhabitants almost all famished, yet sallied
out, and killing Mnesippus their General, with many others, the rest hearing of
the coming of Iphicrates the Athenian with a great Fleet, with such plunder as
they had got, disgracefully raised their siege and departed. Plataea and
Thespis demolished.
At this time the Plataeans having a design to commit themselves to the
Protection and Alliance of Athens, the Thebans thereupon demolished the Town,
and not long after did the same by Thespis. The ruin of Plataea is by In
Boeoticis.
Pausanias referred to the next year when Asteus was Archon, in which also
(being the fourth of the 101 Olympiad) happened Diodorus ad Olymp. 101. ann. 4.
Strabo lib. 9. p. 385. Pausan. in Achaicis.
such Earthquakes, and Inundations of the Sea in Peloponnesus, that Helice and
Burae, two Towns of the Achaeans, were together with the Inhabitants swallowed
up. Hereof Diodorus assigns several causes, laying the stresse upon an injury
formerly offered by them to Neptune, in refusing to lend the Ionians their
Statues, to which they should have sacrifized. Five days before the ruin of
these Cities, all the Mice, Weasils, Serpents, and such like Creatures came out
of Helice in great numbers, and took the way which leads to Coria. The
Inhabitants admiring so strange a sight, Aelianus Hist. Anim. lib. 11. cap. 19.
had the next night their thoughts diverted by the Earthquake, which made way
for that Inundation wherein they perished, and with them ten ships of the
Lacedaemonians then lying in the Haven.

36. The next year being the first of the 102 Olympiad, Diodorus ad Olymp. 102.
ann 1.
wherein Damon the Thurian got the prize, Alcisthenes being Archon, Artaxerxes
sent his Ambassadors into Greece again to persuade the States to an agreement.
The Athenians were now grievously displeased with the Thebans for destroying
Plataea and Thespes, Xenoph. ut prius.
two Cities which had so well deserved of Greece in the Median War, and
thereupon would no more join with them. They sent Ambassadors to Lacedaemon
about a peace, who used such Rhetoric to that State, specially Callistratus,
that they brought the Spartans to assent upon these Terms: that the Cities
should be set at liberty, the Armies disbanded, and whosoever would not
acquiesce in these conditions, it should be lawful for any of the
Confederates, if they pleased (not being constrained to it) to help the
distressed. All others except the Thebans subscribed the League, for they were
unwilling as before to quit the Cities of Boeotia. Hereupon the Spartans
jealous of them, resolved to make War in the behalf of all Greece, and gave
order to Cleombrotus their King (who now lay in Phocis, Cleombrotus the Spartan
King invadeth Boeotia.
expecting what they would command him) to invade Boeotia. The Lacedaemonians
having great Forces of their own, besides their Allies, and none willing to
assist the Thebans, every one gave them for lost, who yet upon Cleombrotus his
Summons refused to set free the Cities of Boeotia, except the Spartans would
restore Messene, and permit the Laconians to enjoy their liberty. In sum,
they desired they would no more meddle with what they did in Boeotia, than they
were concerned in any thing done in Laconia.

37. They creaded Epaminondas General, Diodorus ad ann. 2.
of whose rare skill and valor they had had abundant proof, joining with him
the Baeotarchae. He levying 12000 men marched away, and possessed himself of
the Straights of Coronea, Xenoph. Plutarch. in Pelopida Pausan, in Boeoticis.
which Cleombrotus hearing, marched through Phocis another way, and came into
Boeotia by the Sea's-side; coming to Leuctra, he there rested himself, which
the Boeotians understanding, passed over the Mountains, and came near to him,
but seeing such multitudes to overspread the plain, were not a little
discouraged. The Boeotarchae then deliberating what to do, were divided in
their opinions, three being for fighting, amongst whom was Epaminondas, and as
many for departing; Ab (...) Patronymice fit (...) per Syncopen (...).
but whilst they were still in doubt came in the seventh, and through the
persuasion of Epaminondas cast the balance on his side. Plutarch says, that
Pelopidas first approved of his advice, being Captain of the Sacred Company,
which was made up (as is most probable amongst many opinions) of intimate
friends and lovers, who fighting earnestly for one another, when in danger, did
great harm thereby to the Enemy. Whilst Epaminondas was several ways
encouraging his men to the fight, came in Jason the Pheraean, the most Eminent
leading man of Thessaly, with 1000 horse and 1500 foot, in show to help the
Thebans, but with intention to take up the quarrel; and he persuaded both
parties to accept of a Truce.

38. Cleombrotus was then departing out of Boeotia, when a new Army met him
from Sparta, under the Command of Archidamus; for the Lacedaemonians seeing the
courage and resolution of the Thebans, whereas otherwise they could not do it,
resolved to oppress them by their numbers. The General then thinking it to be
disgraceful at all to fear the Thebans valor, marched back to Leuctra without
any regard of the Truce, where they found the Boeotians ready to receive them.
Cleombrotus and Archidaemus (both descended from Hercules) lead the Wings of
their battle. Epaminondas gave leave to all that would to depart, which was
done by the Thespians and others, who bore no good will to the Thebans. His
prime men he placed in one Wing, and the other by themselves, whom he ordered
to give back, as though they fled. Epaminondas overthrows him in the battle
of Leuctra, wherein he is slain.
Making then an oblique battalion, he with the stoutest men began the fight,
and whilst the other retired from the Enemy he followed him close, who now
brake his order to get into it. The success remained doubtful as long as
Cleombrotus lived; but he being slain whilst he most valiantly demeaned
himself, first a great and bloody contest happened about his body, which at
length his men recovered, and gave back in order, and by degrees. A.M. 3634.
Olymp. 102. ann. 2. Urbis cond. 383. Artar. Mnem. 34.

Xenoph. and Plutarch. ut supra.


But Epaminondas still pressing upon them, and doing great execution, at length
they fled, having no body to govern them. About 4000 of them were slain, and
300 of the other party. This battle happened in the 34th year after the end of
the Peloponnesian War, the second of the 102d Olympiad, the 34th of Artaxerxes
Mnemon, Phraesiclides being Archon. A. M. 3634.

39. The message of this overthrow came to Sparta the last day of their gymnick
solemnities, wherewith, though the Ephori were so affected, as those that saw
now a conclusion of that Principality they had almost enjoyed 500 years, yet
suffered not the exercises to be broken off; but sending the names of the slain
to their relations, finished the Festival. The day after, when it was known who
were slain, and who escaped, one might see the Parents and Kindred of the dead
to meet together in the Forum with cheerful looks and minds, shaking one
another by the hands; but on the other side the friends of such as were living,
as in some solemn time of mourning to keep themselves at home, or if they came
abroad, to signify their sadness in their habit, speech and countenance: The
behavior of the Spartans after the battle of Leuctra.
and this was especially remarkable amongst the women. But when their
associates had revolted, and Epaminondas was thought to be about to invade
Peloponnesus, they then called to mind the Oracles, concerning what should
happen to them under a Lame King; yet reverencing the valor, power, and glory
of Agesilaus, they not only tetained him in his several places of King and
General, but made use of him as a Physician in this sad distemper. Now whereas
by the Laws of Sparta, such as had fled from a battle were not only made
incapable of Magistracy, and of marriage with others, who thereupon were noted
with ignominy; but were to be stricken by every one that met them, walking in a
dejected posture, in Fools Coats, with their beards half shaved; there being
many and powerful who fled from Leuctra; lest any inconvenience might follow
upon their discontent, Agesilaus procured that the Law for his time should be
silent, and (without repealing) obtain its ancient vigor for the time to come.
Then to recreat the minds of the Soldiers he lead them out into Arcadia, where
industriously abstaining from fight, he took a little Town of the Mantineans,
and made excursions into their Territories, to give his Citizens a little hope,
and show them that the fortune of Sparta was not altogether desperate.

40. The Ephori made new Levies, listing those now that were above 60. The
Tegeatans, Mantineans, Corinthians, Phliasians, Achaeans, and other Cities sent
their numbers, the Conduct of all which was committed to Archidamus, Archidamus
invadeth Boeotia.
because his father was not yet recovered. The Thebans presently after the
victory sent a Messenger Crowned to Athens, to let them know their success,
and demanded aid; but the Athenians being not a little troubled at what had
happened gave him no audience. Then sent they to Jason the Pheraean Prince of
Thessaly, who though he was otherwise employed with the Phocians, yet came, and
when Archidamus had now invaded Boeotia, procured a Truce betwixt them, and
thereupon the Spartan Army returned home. This by Xenophon is related as done
after the battle at Leuctra, and because he makes no mention of any Truce made
by Jason betwixt them, before the fight, we may suspect a mistake in the time,
either of him, or Diodorus, A Truce is procured by Jason Prince of Thessaly,
who is presently after murdered by his brothers.
who relates the story as before. Jason returning home was murdered by seven
young men, having great designs in his head, after he had, partly by
persuasion, and partly by awe, caused all Thessaly to receive him as General,
the Lacedaemonians having refused to send them aid to defend themselves from
his power. After his death his two brothers Polydorus and Polyphron, Authors of
his death, were made Generals, of whom the former was slain within a while by
the later, who turning his Principality into Tyranny, held it but one year,
being then slain by his brother Alexander, under pretense of revenging the
death of Polydorus, and overthrowing the Tyranny. But he proved ten times more
Tyrannical, Plutarch. in Pelopida.
burying men alive, convering them in beasts skins, and so setting them before
the Dogs to be devoured, and killing others with Darts, to make himself sport.
At length having a plot against his Wives brothers, he was slain by them by her
means, and Tisiphonus the eldest of all the brothers succeeded, who continued
in the Government when Xenophon wrote his History.

41. The Athenians considering that the Lacedaemonians still expected they
should follow them in the Wars as formerly, Xenoph.
and would compel them thereto if they could, thought it best for saving their
credit to revive the peace formerly made with Artaxerxes. They sent therefore
fifty men about it, to the Cities, to take an Oath of them to this purpose:
That they would observe the Truce established by the King, and confirmed by the
Athenians and their Associates; and if any injury should be offered to any that
took the Oath, to assist them with their full power. All the States willingly
admitted of it, and received the Oath, except the Eleans, who after the example
of the Thebans, pretended that the Marganians, Scilluntians, and Triphyllians
ought not to be set at liberty, because they belonged unto them. All Cities
both little and great being by virtue of this peace to be set at liberty, the
Mantineans taking occasion thereat, made a Decree to build their City again,
and to fence it with walls, which formerly had been demolished by the
Lacedaemonians. They were agrieved that this should be done without their
consent, and sent Agesilaus to them to stop their proceedings; but the
Magistrates refused to call the People together to give him audience, though a
friend upon his fathers account, telling him what was once deceed by the people
could not be altered. Some of the Arcadians sent and promised them assistance,
and the Eleans helped them with thirty talents of Silver. At this time the
inhabitants of Tegea fell out amongst themselves, whilst some would have all
the Arcadians meet together and choose some one man to be their Prince, A
Sedition at Tegea.
but others were for living under their own Laws only, and the maintenance of
their liberty. These at the first had the better of it; Alias Diodorus. vide.
but by the help of the Mantineans, at length the other prevailed, and killing
some, drove the rest of their Enemies to Lacedaemon, to the number of 80.

42. The Lacedaemonians thought they were bound by Oath to revenge the cause of
the Exiles upon the Mantineans, who by falling on them had broken theirs, and
gave order to Agesilaus to invade them. They by the advice of their friends the
Arcadians contained themselves within their walls new built, and suffered him
to spoil their Country, which doing with great caution and wariness, yet
without any loss of honor, he returned home. At this time it must be,
according to In Arcadicis.
Pausanias (who places it in the same year with the battle at Leuctra) that by
the persuasion of Epaminondas the Arcadians built them one City to inhabit
(destroying there many small Towns) which thence had the name of Megalopolis.
Megalopolis built.
Aelian var. hist. lib. 2. cap. 42.
The fame of Ploto being now spread abroad, the Thebans and Arcadians sent to
him to desire his help, not only for the instruction of their youth, and to
teach Philosophy, but also to prescribe them Laws for their Commonwealth. At
first he intended to go, but asking the Ambassadors how their Superiors stood
affected to an equal distribution of goods and honors, and hearing they were
utterly averse to such a constitution, he thereupon refused to go to them. At
this same time also Epaminondas sent into Sicilie, Italy, as far as the Islands
Euesperites, and all over where the old Messenians dwelt, Pausanias in
Messenicis.
to invite them home into their ancient Country, which was restored to them,
and called after the old name Messene. The Messenians recalled and
re-establisht.
Which restoration happened 298 years (reckoned from the first of the 28th
Olympiad) after the taking of Ira, and their banishment; in the third year of
the 102 Olympiad, Dyscinetas being Archon. During all this time of their Exile
they preserved entirely their ancient Rites, and the Dorick dialect unchanged,
which in our Age (says Pausanias) by them, and only by them, is also
preserved incorrupt and natural.

43. The same year happened such a Sedition and Massacre at Argos, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 102. an. 3.
as could never be paralleld in Greece. That City was then governed in a
Democratical way; but the Orators so stirred up the People against the
Nobility, that some being accused, An unparelled Sedition at Argos, the fruit
of Antimonarchical Government.
for fear conspired against the Popular Government, to prevent their own ruin.
Being hereupon suspected and examined, some fearing to be tortured made away
themselves, and one in the midst of his pains accused thirty of the most
eminent in the City. The common sort giveing credit to this accusation, put all
those to death unheard, and confiscated their goods, and then many others being
accused who were wealthy, they put them all to death, and in this manner made
an end of 1600. The Orators themselves now were afraid, lest in this so general
a Massacre they themselves also might unexpectedly miscarry, and therefore
ceased from their calumniations; which being understood by the multitude, as
though they now forsook them, they put as many of them to death as they could
find in the City, the vengeance of God thus repaying them.

44. The next year, the Lacedaemonians sent 1000 of their Citizens, Idem ad
ann. 4. Xenoph.
and 500 Argives and Boeotian Exiles, under the command of Polytropus into
Arcadia, who there fortified Orchomenus, but meeting with Lycomedes the
Mantinean, General of the Arcadians, he was slain in battle with 200 men. The
Arcadians after this desiring help of the Athenians in vain, procured it of the
Boeotians, who dispatched into Peloponnesus Epaminondas and Pelopidas, to whom
the other Boeotarchae of their own accord left the command of the Army. When
they were come into Arcadia, all the Confederates made up the number of 50000
men; but yet the Thebans were very unwilling to invade Laconia. They considered
that the Country was well fortified, and that the Lacedaemonians terrible every
where would fight more desperately at their own doors. Epaminondas invadeth
Laconia.
But the other pressing them much to it, and some bringing word how the borders
were desolate of defense, and offering to conduct them into it, at length they
invaded it in four several bodies, and bearing down all opposition, met
together at Sallasia, whence they marched for Sparta it self, burning and
consuming all things in their passage. Plutarch and Corn. Nepos in Agesilao.
Six hundred years had the Doors now inhabited Laconia, and for all this time
not an Enemy had dared to appear in it, so that this unusual sight caused great
tumults in the City, the women having never before seen as much as the smoke of
War, nor the men able to endure a Siege. Agesilaus contained them within,
bestowing them as he found convenient in several places, for the defense of the
City, which had no other walls than the bodies of it is Inhabitants. He was much
moved at the arrogance of the Enemy, who challended him by name, as the cause
of these dissentions, to come out and fight; yet so contained himself, as
taking great pains for the preservation of his Country, he showed clearly, that
if he had not been, the City could not have continued.

45. The Boeotians labored to provoke the Spartans to fight, bidding them
either do it, or confess themselves to be inferior to their Enemies; to which
they answered, that when they saw occasion, they would not fear to try a battle
with them for all. They left then the City, and making great waste of all
Laconia, returned into Arcadia. The Spartans in the time of this their
extremity, had promised liberty to such of their Slaves as would fight for
them, and sent to Athens to procure assistance from that State, which the
Ambassadors procured to be decreed, especially by this motive, that the
Lacedaemonians had saved that City, at the end of the Peloponnesian War, when
the Thebans were earnest for it is utter destruction. Iphicrates sent to assist
the Spartans.
They made choice of Iphicrates for the General in this Expedition, who
otherwise a man of excellent conduct, yet is judged by Xenophon to have been
far overseen in the management of this employment. For having loitered at
Corinth, and the Thebans being about to return home, he ought to have fortified
Cenchrea, where they had the most convenient passage, and when he sent to spy
whether they had passed Oneus, His conduct is censured by Xenophon.
he sent both all his own and the Corinthian Horse, whereas few had been
sufficient to spy, and better for a speedy retreat, and hereby he lost no
fewer than twenty men, and the Thebans retuned without any great molestation.
The Lacedaemonians having got 4000 Auxiliaries, besides 1000 Slaves newly
manumitted, and many men out of the neighboring Towns, thought themselves then
fit to try a battle; yet convenient for them first to send to the Thebans about
a peace. They offered it to them on these terms; that Messene should be
restored by them, and the Laconians left to their liberty. Most inclined to
receive these terms, till Archidamus rising up, said, that peace was not to be
received upon such unequal conditions by them, who were wont to give and not to
receive it; that Messene was justly destroyed 300 years before, and could not
be restored, but to the great distress and damage of the Lacedaemonians.

46. But Epaminondas having to his great honor restored Messene fully (the
grounds being divided, Diodorus ad Olymp. 102. ann. 4.
and all things done) after 85 days spent in this Expedition, returned home,
and being in his way molested by Iphicrates, pursued him home to the walls of
Athens. Epaminondus retutning questioned for his life.
But there was a Law at Thebes, which made it capital for any one to retain the
chief command longer than was in that case provided by the constitutions of the
City, new Magistrates being to be chosen the beginning of the new month
Bacatius. This Epaminondas knowing to have been made for the good of the City,
would not keep it to the damage thereof, and continued his command four
months longer than his Commission warranted. After his return, he and his
Colleagues were accused, and he permitted them to lay all the blame upon
himself. They being hereby freed, no man expected any defense from him, as
having nothing to say for himself. He appearing, denied nothing that his
adversaries objected, confessed what his Colleagues said to be true, Plutarch
in Pelopida and Corn. Nepos in Epaminonda.
and refused not to undergo what the Law inflicted, only he made one request
to them: that this might be written upon his Tomb: Epaminondas was punished
with death by the Thebans, because he constrained them at Leuctra to vanquish
the Lacedaemonians, whom, before he was General, Aelian. var. hist. lib. 13.
cap. 42.
none of the Boeotians durst once look on; and for that in one battle he not
only saved the Thebans from ruin, but also restored liberty to all Greece; and
brought matters to that pass, that the Thebans fell upon Sparta, and the
Lacedaemonians had enough to do to preserve themselves; and left not off till
Messene being restored, Pausan. in Boeoticis.
he besieged their City. Having said this, the People affected with joy set up
a laughter, and none of the Judges dared to pass sentence.

47. In the same year, according to Diodorus, but the next, Xenoph. lib. 7.
Diodorus.
according to Xenophon, Epaminondas was sent again into Peloponnesus to the
assistance of Arcadians, Argives, and Eleans, who afresh had made War upon the
Lacedaemonians. The Lacedaemonians and Athenians had lately established a
League betwixt themselves on these terms: That each should command the Army
five days in their course, Epaminondas again invadeth Peloponnesus.
which before was solely left to the Spartans. The Athenians hearing of the
coming of Epaminondas, sent Chabrias with an Army to stop his passage. He
coming to Corinth, with the Lacedaemonians and other allies, made up an Army of
20000, and then all joining together fortified the passage into Peloponnesus,
making a ditch and a wall cross the Isthmus from Cenchrea to Lachaeus. But
Epaminondas observing at what place the guards were weakest, there with some
difficulty brake thorough, harazed the Country, had Sicyon and other places
delivered up to him, but comeing to Corinth was gallantly repulsed by Chabrias,
who sallying out of the City, and getting advantageous ground, not only
sustained his charge, but did good execution upon the assailants. At this time
2000 Gauls and Spaniards were sent by Dionysius Tyrant of Sicilie to the aid
of the Lacedaemonians, who arriving at Corinth, the Graecians to try their
valor led them out against the Enemy. They behaved themselves very well, did
good service against the Boeotians, many of whom and their allies they slew,
for which receiving great commendations and rewards besides, they returned in
the later end of Summer into Sicilie.

48. The Thebans being returned home, the Athenians conceived indignation
against them, through the complaints of Lycomedes the Mantinean, Xenoph.
Diodorus ad Olymp. 103. ann. 1.
who urged it was an unworthy thing for the Arcadians, being more noble (as the
only ancient Inhabitants of their Country) and more deserving, to be commanded
by the other, and follow them in the War. Being much puffed up with such
conceits, The Arcadians fall out with the Thebans.
the Thebans began to be alienated from them, and the Eleans bore them malice,
because they could not obtain of them the Towns which the Lacedaemonians had
taken from them. Things being at this pass, came Phyliscus of Abydus, sent
from Ariobarzanes the Persian Satrapa, with much money, to persuade the States
to Peace. The Thebans yet would not come to any conclusion, alleging that
Messene ought to be exempted from the jurisdiction of the Spartans, with which
he being offended, not enduring that old pretenses should be again revived, he
left 2000 men already paid to the aid of the Lacedaemonians, and returned into
Asia. The Arcadians having chosen Lycomedes their General, sent him into
Laconia with an Army, where he took by storm Pallene, and therein put to the
sword 300 of the Lacedaemonian Garrison Soldiers. To return the like unto them
the year following (the first of the 103 Olympiad, wherein Pythrostratus the
Athenian was Victor) Archidamus was sent into Arcadia with the Confederates,
and a new supply of men sent from Dionysius. He took Caryae, and put all
therein to the Sword, and going on in his attempts, Cissidas the General of the
Sicilian Forces, pretending he had staid his full time set him by Dionysius,
would needs be gone; but in his way was circumvented by the Messenians, and was
forced to crave aid of Archidamus.

49. He hastened to relieve him, and in his march the Arcadians and Argives
opposed themselves, whom charging with great resolution, he got a most famous
victory, killing 10000 of his Enemies without the loss of one man; so that as
the Priests of Dodona had sung (that it should be a fight without tears to the
Lacedaemonians) yet the message being come to Sparta, Agestiaus, the Senators,
and the Ephori, are all said to have wept for joy. As this success revived the
spirits of the Spartans, which had been almost extinct by the battle at
Leuctra, so, as Diodorus tells us, the Arcadians now fearing their in-roads,
for their better security built them one great City, twenty of the Menalian
and Parrhasian Villages being taken in for the site thereof, Megalopolis now
built accoring to Diodorus.
though Pausanias will have Megalopolis built two years before. The Thebans and
Eleans only rejoiced in the misfortune of their friends the Arcadians, as
tending to the humbling of them. The Thebans casting much in their heads how to
obtain the principality of all Greece, resolved upon sending an Embassage to
the Persian King to contract a straight League and Alliance with him, and
assembling the Confederates they pretended a necessity thereof, Pelopidas sent
by the Thebans to the Persian King.
because Euthycles the Lacedaemonian was now with the King in behalf of that
state. They sent Pelopidas, with others for the Arcadians, Eleans, and Argives:
the Athenians also understanding hereof sent Timagoras and Leon. Pelopidas
being very famous even in Asia for his valor, by his demeanor got all the
favor from the rest. He urged the King with the merits of the Thebans, who had
never of all Greece born Arms against him, or his Ancestors, either of old in
the Median War, or of late in assistance to Agesilaus, and he extolled their
valor, showing that the reason why the Arcadians were of late overthrown by
the Lacedaemonians, was because of their absence. For the truth hereof he
appealed to Timagoras the Athenian, whom being at odds with his Colleague, he
drew off to his party. He obtained of Artaxerxes what he demanded, viz. that
Messene should be held exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Lacedaemonians,
the Athenians should abstain from the Sea, and all the other Cities left to
their own Laws: Lastly, that the Thebans should be esteemed the near Friends
and Allies of the Empire.

50. This employment got Pelopidas abundance of credit (who not long after was
slain in a victorious battle, Gets much credit by his Ambassie.
fought in the behalf of the Thessalians against Alexander the Tyrant) but
Timagoras returning home received a great Present from the Persian, and being
accused by his Colleague of siding with Pelopidas was put to death. The Thebans,
though they had got what they desired of the King, yet their design came to
nothing, for the Commissioners of the Cities first refused to take the Oath of
this new League, and then most of the Cities themselves after the example of
Corinth, the answer of which was, that there was no need of this new
Engagement. This plot then of Pelopidas having not taken good effect,
Epaminondas thought of another to reduce the Arcadians and Allies to obedience;
and that was, Xenoph. ut supra, Diodorus ad Olymp. 103. ann. 2.
first by subducing the Achaeans, to which purpose he went again into
Peloponnesus. He easily effected this, and receiving an engagement from them to
continue faithful to the Thebans, returned, for which being much blamed by the
Arcadians, and the rest of that faction, Governors were sent from Thebes into
the several Cities, who bringing in the popular Government, thereupon drove
away many of the principal men, who uniting themselves, seized again upon their
several Cities, and then stood no more Neuters, but openly declared for the
Lacedaemonians. So this second device of the Thebans came to nothing, and the
Arcadians were pressed both by the Lacedaemonians and Achaeans. At this time
Euphron the Sioyonian, a man of great power in his Country, persuaded the
people to bring in the popular Government, which done, and he with others being
chosen Praetors, he murdered some of his Colleagues, expelled the rest, and
openly established a Tyranny. The associates he put off by doing them
pleasures, through which the Argives being encouraged, together with him fell
upon the Ph^iasians, and brought them to great straights, because of their
faithfulness to the Lacedaemonians, wherein they excellled beyond President,
no adversity nor any advantage being able to affright, or allure them from it,
as is largely discoursed by Xenophon. The Athenians sent Chares with relief to
them, who overcame the Argives in two fights, and restrained their violent
attempts against them.

51. But Aeneas the Symphalian, General of the Arcadians, judging things not to
be at Sicyon as they should, seized upon the Castle there, and forced Euphron
to leave the Town, and give up the Haven to the Lacedaemonians. Yet a Sedition
following in the Town he took occasion thereat, Stirs about Sicyon.
and repossessed himself, joining with the people against the Nobility, but the
Castle being held by a Garrison of Thebans, he thought there was no long
continuing without their leave, and so taking money with him, went to Thebes,
to procure the good will of the people there. Thither several of his
adversaries followed him, to withstand his design, and finding that he wan upon
the Magistrates and Senate, to hinder the progress of the business, killed
him in the Castle, at such time as the Senate was sitting there. One of them
taking all the fault upon himself, made such a discourse in his own defense, by
telling what the Thebans themselves had lately done in the like case, and by
other arguments, that Euphron was pronounced justly slain, and he was absolved.
Yet being carried to Sicyon he was honorably buried in the Forum, and
worshipped by the people as one of their greatest benefactors. The Phliasians
now had by the assistance of Chares taken Thymia, which was fortified against
them by the Sicyonians, but their Exiles had seized upon Oropus; the Sicyonians
and Arcadians recovered the Haven at Sicyon, and no body assisted the Athenians
at Oropus, but all forsook them, so that it was committed to the trust of the
Thebans, till the controversy about it should be decided. Lycomedes seeing
them dissatisfied with their Allies, drew the Athenians to enter into society
with the Arcadians. The Athenians enter into society with the Arcadians,
The conditions were, that the Athenians, in case Arcadia was invaded, should
send succors of horse, without being constrained to invade Laconia.

52. The Athenians, as soon as this was done, cast in their heads how they
might make Corinth their own, through the persuasion of Demetion; which being
known there, And consult how to become masters of Corinth.
their Soldiers were dismissed, and the society broken betwixt them. This made
the Corinthians, who now had gotten so new and potent Enemies, look about them
for their own security; and to this end levying all the force they could, they
made also their peace with Thebes, in which they would have the Lacedaemonians
concluded, saying, they were constrained to this accommodation; but the
Lacedaemonians giving them, and all other their Confederates leave to provide
for themselves (which was accepted by the Phliasians and others) said they
would persist in the War, and commit the issue to God, being resolved never to
consent that Messene, which they had received from their Ancestors, should be
taken from them. The condition of this peace was only that each City should
enjoy its own; for the Corinthians flatly refused to enter into a society of
Arms, because they would not offend those that had well deserved of them, but
presently a contention was revived betwixt the Phliasians and Argives about
Thymia, which was seized on, and held by the later, notwithstanding all that
could be objected. At the same time were twelve ships, under the Command of
Timocrates, sent to the aid of the Lacedaemonians by Dionysius the younger (who
now had succeeded his dead father) which they used in the storming of Sellasia,
Artaxerxes procures another peace.
and then the Fleet returned back into Sicily. At this time Artaxerxes sent
once more to mediate about a peace, which was submitted to by the Cities, and
so the Laconian, or (as it is also called) the Boeotian War ended, after it had
continued above five years.

53. But in the very next year such sparks were kindled, Xenophon, Diodorus ad
Olymp. 104. ann. 1.
(first betwixt the Aeleans and Arcadians) as brake out at length into another
mighty flame. Lasion a Castle of Triphylia first belonged to the Eleans, but
being in the possession now of them, and another while of the Arcadians,
continual controversies were moved about it. The later now having it in their
hands, the Eleans, The Eleans and Arcadians at odds.
by means of the Arcadian Exiles with them, seized upon it. This being taken in
great disdain by the Arcadians, they procured help from Athens, and recovered
it by force; after which they overthrew the Eleans, and wasted their
Territories to the City Gates. This put them upon craving aid of the
Lacedaemonians, and desiring them to invade Arcadia, who accordingly sent
Archidamus the year after the first action at Lasion. He took Cromnus, and
therein leaving a Garrison returned; but after his departure the Arcadians
recovered the place, and going into Elis, gave the management of the
solemnities of the 104th Olympiad now drawing on, to the Pisaeans, who by old
and fabulous arguments pretended it once to have belonged unto them. For this
purpose they seized on Olympia beforehand, The Pisaeans put in possession of
Olympia are falln upon by the Eleans at the time of the solemnities.
and going on when the time was come in the management of the exercises, the
Eleans with all their strength fell in upon them, and with incredible boldness
so laid about them, that they put the Arcadians to flight, and though they
could not keep the place, yet with great honor retreated to their City,
having never before been at all accounted of for valor. This Olympiad, because
the Pisaeans managed it by force, was not registered in the Annals of the
Eleans, neither is it certain who overcame in the course, Phocides the Athenian
being named by Diodorus, but Eubo^us the Cyrenaean by Pausanias, in the second
of his Eliacks.

54. At this time Epaminondas laboring all manner of ways to get the
Sovereignty of Greece for his Contrymen, Diodorus ibid.
persuaded them as a means hereto first to obtain the Dominion of the Seas.
Epaminondas persuades the Thebans to look after Sea matters.
He showed it was an easy thing for those who were strongest at land, to
obtain, by instancing in the Lacedaemonians, who though in the War with Xerxes
they furnished out but ten ships for 200 of the Athenians, yet for their power
on land were obeyed by them. By this, and other arguments, he got them to
ordain that 100 Galleys should be provided, and that the Rhodians, Chians, and
Byzantians should be invited to join with them in these preparations. He
himself going with a little Force to these Cities, induced them to side with
the Thebans, and so terrified Laches the Athenian, who endeavored to cross
his design, that though he commanded a strong Fleet, yet did he quit these
parts. During his absence, some of the Theban Exiles having a great desire to
change the Government into an Aristocracy, drew into their plot 300 hors-men of
the Orchomenians, who when they were about to execute their design, it was
revealed by some principal contrivers to the Boeotarchae. The Thebans had
conceived a grudge against the Orchomenians of a very long date, ever since
that City having paid Tribute to them formerly, was exempted from it by
Hercules. The Thebans destroy Orchomenus.
Having now then an opportunity to vent their malice, they first put to death
the 300 hors-men, then taking the Town, they put to the sword all the men, sold
the Women and Children, and so utterly destroyed Orchomenos. This cruelty was
utterly detested by Epaminondas, who said, Pausanias in Boeoticis.
if he had been present, he would have in no case suffered such wickedness to
be committed by the Thebans.

55. The Arcadians having the Olympian Temple in their power, the Magistrates
converted the money thereof to the paying of their Epariti, Xenoph. lib. 7.
being the strength of their Army. Diodorus ad Olymp. 104. ann. 2.
This the Mantineans first protested against as Sacrilege, and sent the money
which was due from them for the payment of the Soldiers, which being taken as
an affront from the other, they called the Mantinean Magistrates before the
Council of the 10000. who refusing to appear, Stirs betwixt the Arcadians and
Mantineans.
they sent to fetch them by force, but being repulsed, at length others in the
Council appeared for them, being of their opinion, that the money was not to be
touched, which would brand them for ever with a note of infamy. This was
decreed by the Council, which the great ones seeing, and apprehending in what
danger they were, sent to the Thebans to tell them, that except they would come
in time Arcadia would wholly revolt to the Lacedaemonians. The most sober men
amongst the Arcadians hereupon persuaded the Council to send to the Thebans, to
protest against the coming down of their Army unsent for; and by restoring to
the Eleans the Temple, to make peace with them. All took the oath of the
League, and amongst the rest the Governor of Tegea, who lay in Garrison with
300 Thebans; but the great ones who feared to be called to account for the
money, prevailed with him to lay hold upon the Mantineans and other Arcadians,
who at Tegea were making merry for the peace. But the Mantineans making demand
of their Citizens, promising if they had done amiss they should appear before
the Council, the Theban General was at a stand, knowing not what to do, and at
length dismissed the prisoners, purging himself by saying, he heard the
Lacedaemonians were about to invade Arcadia, and that some of the Arcadians had
designed to betray Tegea into their hands.

56. Though they believed him not, as knowing the contrary, Iidem and paulo
aliter Polybius lib. 9.
yet they dismissed him, but sent to Thebes to accuse him as worthy of death,
for attempting a matter so contrary to the good understanding betwixt the
States. But Epaminondas excused him, laying the blame upon the Arcadians, who
having drawn the Thebans into the War, would offer to make peace without their
consent, and thereby were guilty of treachery: and he plainly declared, that
the Thebans would march into Arcadia, and there assist their friends. The
Mantineans and others understanding this, sent to Athens and Sparta to desire
aid, laying open the design of the Thebans plainly to be this: To weaken
Peloponnesus, and bring it all into subjection to themselves. They jealous of
this, entered into League with them, wherein it was provided, that each State
should have the command over the Army in their own dominions. Whilst this was a
doing, Epaminondas marched from Thebes, leading with him, besides the
Boeotians, some Thessalian Horse, and Soldiers out of Euboea. When he came to
Nemea there he stayed a little, having a great desire to meet with the
Athenians; Epaminondas again invadeth Peloponnesus.
but understanding that they passed by Sea into Peloponnesus, he arose and
moved toward Tegea. Having notice in his way that Agesilaus with the whole
power of Lacedaemon were come into Arcadia, and that the City must needs
thereupon be desolate, he marched in all haste thither, and had become absolute
Master of it, but that by mere divine Providence (as Xenophon himself
acknowledges) a certain Grecian gave notice of his intention to Agesilaus,
who sent word in all haste to Sparta, willing them to stand upon their guard,
with promise to be with them as speedily as possible.

57. Archidamus his son being there left, set the old men and boys upon the
Houses to annoy the Thebans with stones, and disposed so of those that were fit
to fight, in the several places of the City, that though Epaminondas had
continued his march all night, yet found he that his design was betrayed, and
such was the opposition he found, Sets upon Sparta and retreateth to Mantinea.
that although he chose the steepest desent into the Town, to have the upper
ground, yet was he repelled, the Lacedaemonians losing the most in their too
long pursutes. Then understanding the Lacedaemonian and Arcadian Forces to be
all coming to relieve Sparta, he thought it not wisdom to hazard a battle with
them all; but judging that Mantinea would be left naked, and at this time of
the year the Inhabitaints would be much abroad in the fields about their Corn
and their Cattle at pasture, he thought it fit to try if he could surprise them
all, and sent before the Horse for that purpose. At this time it happened well
for the Mantineans, that 6000 Athenians under the command of Hagelochus were
come through the Isthmus into the City, His Horse put to flight.
who upon their desire, notwithstanding they should have to do with such Horse
as exceeded theirs in the number, and the best esteemed of in all Greece,
resolved to do their utmost in their behalf. In the engagement they had the
better of it, and thereby preserved all that the Mantineans had without their
walls. His case how it stood in reference to his return or stay.
Epaminondas after this thinking with himself that he must be gone within a few
days, the term of his commission being almost expired. was full of various
thoughts. If he should leave those, for the aid of whom he was sent, to be
besieged by the Enemy, he saw he should lose the honor he formerly had
obtained, especially seeing he had been repulsed at Sparta by so few a number,
and now also had miscarried at Mantinea: and he considered that by this
Expedition of which himself was author, he had given occasion to the
Lacedaemonians, Arcadians, Achaeans, Eleans, and Athenians, to enter into a
straight League of offense and defense. From these reasons he concluded he
could not in honor depart without a battle, in which if he overcame, he should
make amends for all, and if he should die, such a death could not but be
glorious, which should be undergone in an endeavor to make his Country
Mistress of all Peloponnesus.

58. Ere long the Armies of the Lacedaemonians and Mantineans appeared,
consisting, with their allies, of 20000 Foot, and about 2000 Horse. To the
Boeotians were assistants the Tegeatans, and such other Arcadians as were most
powerful and wealthy, the Argives, Euboeans, the Thessalian Horse which the
Thebans brought, the Messentans, Sicyonians, and other Peloponnesians; the
number of all which amounted to 30000 Foot, and little fewer than 3000 Horse.
This is much admired by Xenophon, that Epaminondas should so discipline his
Soldiers, that neither night nor day they should shun any labor, refuse to
undergo any danger, to be contented with any kind of provision, and very ready
to obey all orders. When he had ranged his men in order of battle, he led them
not straight on against the Enemy, but fetched a compass toward the Mountains
of Tegea, and made as though he would there pitch his Tents. This made the
Enemy secure, which he well understanding, formed his battalia like a wedge,
thereby to break them sooner, and led with speed against them, who now were all
to seek, and in a confusion, some hasting to bridle their Horses, others to
buckle on their harness, and all in a condition rather to suffer than act any
thing. And lest the Athenians should relieve their Companions from the left
wing, he placed a Party of Horse and Foot in the hills to keep them in awe, by
being continually ready to fall upon their rear.

59. His expectation was not crossed, for on what part he fell he carried all
before him, The battle at Mantinea wherein Epaminondas was mortally wounded.
the Enemy not daring to stand; but rushing more violently amongst them, the
Lacedaemonians taking notice of him, flocked to him, and laid at him amain with
darts, some of which declining, and fencing himself from others, those that
stuck in his body he took thence and rerorted. Whilst he heroickly thus
contended for the Victory, he received a mortal wound from one Anticiates a
Spartan, who gave him so mortal a stroke with a dart, that the wood of it
brake, leaving the iron and a piece of the tronchion in his breast. By the
vehemence of the wound he sank down, A. M. 3642. Ol. 104. an. 2. V.C. 390. Ante
Aeram Christi 362. Artax. Mnem. 41.
and then ensued a most bitter contest about him: but the Thebans inflamed with
wrathful indignation at this sad mischance, with great slaughter compelled
their Enemies to give back, but knew not how to improve the Victory. For
neither Foot nor Horse pursued them flying, but continued still in the same
place, and at length went off carelessly, insomuch that many of the Foot fell
into the hands of the Athenians. Which so falling out, another thing happened
than men generally had expected. For almost all Greece being here gathered
together, one State against another, in two factions, every one supposed, that
when they should once come to fight, they that overcame would obtain the
Dominion over the rest, who should be forced to submit to their yoke: But God
so poysed affairs, says Xenophon, that both sides, as if they had overcome,
erected a Trophy, not being hindered by each other. Both sides also as
Conquerours gave up the slain, and as Conquered received their dead by
composition. And whereas both sides said they had the better of it, neither
obtained thereby either Country, City, or Dominion, other than they before
enjoyed; but a greater disturbance thereupon followed in Greece. So much for
these matters says our Author; Xenophon with it ends his History. As also
Anaximenes and Philistus.
as for what is behind, perhaps some other will take care to commit them to
writing, and so he ends his History with this battle, though he lived almost
three years after it, as we have from Laertius. Anaximenes also of Lampsacus,
who began his History with the beginning of the gods and mankind (and therein
in twelve Books almost comprehended all the affairs of the Greeks and
Barbarians,) finisheth it with the Battle at Mantinea, and the death of
Epaminondas. So did Philistus his History which he wrote of Dionysius the
younger in two Books.

60. Epaminondas being carried alive into his Tent, Vide Diodorum ut supra.
Justin lib. 6.
the Physicians affirmed that as soon as the dart should be drawn out of his
body he would die. He then called for Diaphantus to declare him General of the
Army; but it being answered he was slain, he bade them send for Iolaidas, but
it being answered that he was dead also, he advised the Thebans to make peace,
Valerius Max. lib 3. cap 2. ext. exemp. 5.
whilst with advantage they might, for that they had none lest that was able to
discharge the Office of a General. Understanding of his approaching end, he
inquired of his Armor-bearer if his Shield was safe; (which to have lost was a
great dishonor) It being answered it was, Aelian var hist. l. 12. cap. 3.
he asked which side had the Victory; answer being made the Boeotians, then
said he, It Is time for me to die, and comforting his friends who mourned he
should die childlesse with this answer, that he left behind him two daughters,
Pausan. in Aridicis.
the battle of Leuctra and Mantinea, which should propagate his fame to all
posterity) he thereupon caused the dart to be drawn out, and so expired.
Ciceros. Epist. lib. 5. cap. 12.
This was the end of the worthiest Soldier that ever Greece brought forth, and
hardly to be paralleled in any other Country, all the Virtues which in others
were but singular having concen^red and united themselves in him. In strength
both of body and mind; Epaminondas his character.
in Eloquence, Justice, Temperance, Wisdom, Magnanimity, and Sincerity, he
excelled all men; and so far in Military skill, the art of a General, and in
valor, that he could not adequately be called a Valiant, Politic, Wary,
Bountiful, Industrious, or Prudent Captain; all these Titles and many others
being due unto him. His modesty was incredible, showing it self especially in
this, that after the Victory of Leuctra, and many other rare achievements, he
refused not to go in the Expedition into Thessalie, in quality of a private
Soldier. He was grave, yet affable and courteous, as a means to all those
virtues, having great insight into all parts of Philosophy and Learning, being
therein instructed by Lycis the Tarentine, a Pythagorean. But Corn. Nepos in
vita Epamin.
enough will be said in his commendation, if this be added, that the City
Thebes before the birth and after the death of Epaminondas was ever subject to
the command of others; but as long as he had to do in the management of the
affairs thereof, was the head of all Greece; from which may be gathered, that
this man was of more consequence than the whole City.

61. For with Epaminondas all the strength of the Theban Commonwealth was
extinct, as if he had not only died, Justin.
but all the rest of the Citizens with him, who as before him they did nothing
memorable, so now after were famous for nothing but their overthrows and
disasters. After this battle of Mantinea, all the Graecians being tired out
with War, Diodorus.
entered into a League offensive and defensive together, out of which Agesilaus
would have excluded the Messenians. But Artaxerxes stood for them, as having
Territories as large and fruitful as the Laconians, whereupon the
Lacedaemonians burning with an implacable grudge against them, refused to
subscribe, and alone by themselves refused to be comprehended in the League,
Corn. Nepos. Plutarch in Agesilao.
hoping still to recover Messenia. This reflected something upon Agesilaus, who
out of an insatiable thirst after War, had by his utmost endeavor hindered the
union of Greece, and the burying of public quarrels. And he seemed to increase
the infamy, by undertaking an Expedition shortly after into Egypt, though it
was by his service in his decrepit old age, to get some money for the supply of
the now very poor and exhausted State. For it appeared a thing unseemly, for
the best man in Greece, and one who had filled the world with his fame,
Agesilaus blamed.
to go serve a mean man, and a Traitor, and venture his life, credit and all,
for a little gain, when as because of his old age, he had refused the Office of
General at home, and in his own Country, though for the liberty of Greece. But
he thought nothing too much wherein he might serve the Commonwealth, and in
this respect undervalued his own honor, and having served in Egypt in a
condition far unworthy of him, after he had received 230 talents of Silver as a
reward from Nectanbis, died in his return, when he had lived 84 and reigned 41
years. A most excellent Captain, in whom Nature inwardly made amends for that
wherein outwardly she had been deficient, His death.
most ambitious of glory, and yet of exceeding great humility, which he showed
in his house, and in his constant conversation. Though his justice was
overruled by his passion in the business of the Theban War, yet generally he
held it most sacred, and as a punishment for his default therein, that great
glory whereby he even reigned over Greece till then, was afterward (together
with the splendour of the Lacedaemonian greatness) much eclypsed by the rising
Fortune of Epaminondas.

62. Artaxerxes King of Persia, and Agesilaus of Sparta, Diodorus ad Olymp.
104. an. 3.
died both in the same year, and the next after the death of Epaminondas. And
the same year the peace of Greece was again broken by some Arcadians, who
having been translated out of the neighboring places into Megalopolis, took
occasion at some words of the League (which gave leave to all to return home)
to quit the City and return to their old habitations. The other Megalopolitans
endeavored to reduce them by force, Stirs amongst the Megalopolitans.
and thence insued a great controversy, they calling in to their help the
Mantineans and the rest of the Arcadians and Eleans. The Megalopolitans sent to
the Athenians for aid, who sent them 3000 Foot, and 300 horse, under the
command of Pammenes. He with this Force took some of the Towns, and terrified
others into composition, and so reduced them all to Megalopolis. The year
following Alexander the Phaerean Tyrant subdued several of the Cyclades and
took thence abundance of Captives. The Athenian Garrison commanded by
Leosthenes opposed him in Peparethus, whereupon he set upon the Athenian
Galleys, and took them, together with one belonging to Peparethus, and 600
prisoners. The Athenians enraged hereat, condemned Leosthenes, and sent Chares
with a Fleet into those parts, who spending his time in scaring the Enemies,
but oppressing the Confederates, thereby contracted an ill name. For going to
Corcyra he there caused such a Sedition, as could not be ended but in the ruin
of many, and committed other things which much tended to the disgrace of those
that sent him. With this year Diodorus concludes his fifteenth Book, having.
according to his promise, related such things as happened before the reign of
Philip King of Macedonia, and such, as together with other affairs of the
Greeks related by others, show that peace, security, and order, are things
little akin to Antimonarchical Government.

Learned Men during this period.
63. Of Learned Men Contemporary with this period, in the first place is to be
remmebred Hippocrates native of the Island Cous, Prince of all Physicians. He
was the son of Heraclidas and Phaenarete, Sordanus.
the twentieth in descent from Hercules, and the nineteenth from Aesculapius.
Some have written that he was born in the first year of the 80th Olympiad. But
a certain passage mentioned in his life of his curing Perdiccas of an Erotick
Fever, Hippocrates.
argues him at this time to have been famous. This Perdiccas King of Macedonia
(who having reigned 28 years according to Eusebius, or according to others 53,
died about the third of the 93 Olympiad) fell in love with Phila his Father
Alexander's Concubine, but modesty forced him to conceal his grief, till he
fell into a Consumption and languished. Hippocrates by the motion of his eyes
found out the cause of the distemper, and told Phyla it was in her power to
save the King's life, whereupon she was willing though with the impairment of
her own credit to redeem it. The like story is told of Erasistratus the
Physician, who discovered that Antiochus the son of Seleucus was in love with
his Fathers Concubine, which Galen * mentions, adding, Lib. 7. (...).
that he had made the same discovery in a certain woman.

64. Hippocrates grew so famous in his Art, that Artaxerxes Longimanus hearing
of him, sent for him, with large offers to come and cure his Army, then seized
on by the plague. But he said it was not fit for him to touch any Persian Gold,
or cure the Barbarians who were Enemies to the Greeks. The letters of
intercourse betwixt the Persians and him, are amongst others yet extant. Having
lived as some said 85 years, but as others 90, or 104, or 109, he died amongst
the Larissaeans, in the first of the 94 Olympiad. He left two sons, Thessalus
and Draco; but the fruit of his brain has been far more effectual for the
propagating of his name to all posterity, wherein he has not only been a
benefactor to the mystery of Medicine by his writings, but also by his
religious care of the integrity of those who should profess it. For he framed
an Oath to be taken by all that entered into his School, which for his honor,
and the shame of those who have more reason to be convinced of their duty,
together with the information of the ignorant, it is convenient to exemplify.

65. I swear by Apollo the Physician, and Aesculapius, and Hygia; and call all
the gods and goddesses to witness, His oath.
that to the utmost of my strength and judgment I shall observe what now I
swear and covenant by writing. Namely, that I will esteem as my Parents my
Master who taught me this Art, and thankfully communicate to, and supply him
with all things necessary both for sustenance and convenience, as also account
of his issue as mine own brethren, and if they desire to learn the Art, teach
them without any wages or contract. That I will communicate the precepts, and
what I have heard, and the whole discipline to mine own children, to his who
taught me, and my Scholars who have given their names and faith in this Oath,
and none else whatsoever. That I shall also to my utmost power and judgment
prescribe an wholesome course to the sick, and defend them from all harm and
injury. Neither through the procurement of any will I give, or cause to be
given, any deadly medicament. Neither in like manner will I procure any Woman
to miscarry of her burden; but preserve my life and age always chaste and pure
from all wickedness. Neither will I cut any of the Stone, but leave this work
to be done by those Surgeons who are skilful in it. If I come into any house
I will do it for the health of the sick, shunning all suspicion of injury, or
corruption, especially as to the filthiness of Venery both toward women and
men, free persons and slaves. Whatsoever things I shall see or hear, either in
administering Physic or otherwise in common intercourse, which I think ought
not to be told abroad, I will conceal them. Now if I shall religiously observe
this Oath, and in no case break it, let me live in great esteem always an
happy life amongst all men, and reap ample fruit from mine Art. But if I break
it and forswear my self, may the contrary happen to me. Much skill in Physic
therefore corrupts not the conversation; for though a little Philosophy may
occasion Atheism, yet a great deal is an antidote against it, not suffering a
man to rest in second causes; but discovering a necessity of looking higher.
But more concerning this, as also to the praise of this excellent person, may
be said in a particular account of the original, cause, professors, succession,
progress and matter of the Art of Medicine.

66. Besides Hippocrates, there lived at this time Anonymus.
Democritus of Abdera the Philosopher, who died in the same year, and was well
known to him, having always laughed at the folly of men. Four years after,
Diodorus, Laertius.
Socrates the Athenian, the Father of Ethics, was made drink poison for
speaking against plurality of Gods and the superstition of his Countrymen;
Anycus having first procured Aristophanes the Poet, and then Melitus to accuse
him. But afterward the Athenians repenting of what they had done, in a way of
mourning forbade all public Exercises, and then animadverting upon his
accusers, condemned Melitus to death, and the rest to exile. Laertius.
Plato at this time being 28 years old, and having heard Socrates 8 years, went
to Megara to learn the Mathematics of Euclide, who now also flourished. The
year after, Suidas.
Sophocles died, six years after, Euripides the Prince of Tragic Poets. At
this time also flourished Diodorus.
Ctesias the Physician often mentioned before, who concluded his history in the
third year of the 96 Olympiad. Laertius.
Aristotle Father of Peripatetick Philosophy was born at Stagira a City of
Macedonia, in the first year of the 99 Olympiad. In the third year after,
Anonymus.
Demosthenes the famous Orator. Laertius.
Eudoxus of Cnidus, a famous Astrologer and Geometrician, flourished about the
103 Olympiad, who Seneca natural. quaest. l. 7. c. 3.
found out the supposed motion of the Stars from West to East, SECT. 5.
unknown to the Greeks in the time of Democr^tus. Z^no the C^tican, father of
the Stoics, was born in the third year of the 104th Olympiad. And we must not
forget Thucydides, nor Xenophon the Scholar of Socrates, and equal to Plato,
with whom he exercised some emulation. He was a great Philosopher; the greatest
master of eloquence in his time, insomuch that for the sweetness of his style
he got the name of Attick Muse; and so great a Soldier, that his retreat with
the Greeks out of Persia after the death of Cyrus, to one who duly weighs
all circumstances, will appear to have surpassed the exploits of Alexander the
Great.

SECT. V. From the beginning of the reign of Philip King of Macedonia, to the
Monarchy of Alexander his Son, containing the space of 31 years.
1. MAcedonia having been formerly called Emathonia from Emathon a certain
King, and afterward Macedonia from Macedon the Son of Osiris, or as others say
of Jupiter and Aethra was bounded on the North and Northwest by the Thracians
and Illyrians, on the South and Southwest by Thessaly and Epirius, and on the
East with the Aegean Sea.

2. The people were first called Pelasgi, says Justin, Eusebius. in Chronico.
Justin. l. 7. Velleius lib. 1. Solinus cap. 15.
and the Country Boeotia. In Paeonia, which afterward became part of
Macedonia, Telegonus reigned, the father of Astriopaeus an eminent Warrier and
friend to Priamus in the siege of Troy. On another side Europus reigned. But
Caranus an Argive, the sixteenth in descent from Hercules, some five years
after the fall of Sardanapalus, by the command of an Oracle led a Colony into
these parts, and having settled himself by force reigned 28 years. Caenus
succeeded him and reigned 12. then Tyrimas 28. Perdiccas a Prince much renowned
51. after him Argaeus 28. Philip the first as many, Euripus 26. in whose
infancy the Illyrians invading his Kingdom, Euripus.
his subjects carried him in his Cradle into the field, thinking he being
present could not but be victorious, or that his people durst not forsake him,
who was unable to defend himself. Alcetas. Amyntas. Alexander.
Alcetas after him reigned 29 years, Amyntas the first 50 years, to whom Darius
Hystaspis sent for earth and water as tokens of subjection. Alexander his son
who slew the Ambassadors sent to his father; reigned 43 years, and by marrying
his sister Gygaea to Dubares the Persian, grew into such grace with Xerxes,
that he obtained all the Region between Olympus and Hermus to be united to his
Kingdom, and yet during the War held secret intelligence with the Graecians,
discovering to them all his intents and purposes. He left three sons,
Perdiccas, Alcetas, and Philip, the eldest of which succeeded him, whose story
is sometimes by pieces related by Thucydides. Perdiccas left behind him
Perdiccas and Archelaus his base son. Perdiccas.
Perdiccas was drowned in a Well by Archelaus his Guardian at seven years of
age, the murderer to excuse himself alleging to his mother that he fell in by
chance as he hastily followed a Goose that way.

3. Archelaus having dispatched his brother out of the way, Aristotl. Politic.
lib. 5.
did the same by Alcetas his Uncle, and Alexander his Cousin, son to Alcetas;
and yet though he came in this way, is said to have done many things to the
advantage of the Nation, which is usual with Usurpers. Vide Raleium lib. 4.
cap. 1.
He sought by all means to draw Socrates to him, and greatly loved and honored
Euripides the Tragedian. He had two sons, Archelaus.
Archelaus and Orestes. Archelaus succeeded him, and reigned seven years, some
confounding father and son together, and making this, who reigned but seven
years, to have succeeded Perdiccas. Archelaus at the end of seven years was
slain in hunting, either by chance or on purpose by Craterus, called by Aelian
Cratenas, who relates the cause to have been for that having married his
daughter to him, he took her away and gave her to another. Var. Hist. lib. 8.
cap. 9.
Cratenas had enjoyed the Kingdom scarce two or three days when he was also
slain by others. Cratenas. Orestes.
Orestes then a Child succeeded, who was served by his Guardian as his father
had served his Pupil, being killed by Aecopus one of the blood Royal, who held
the Kingdom six years: the same who at first denied passage to Agesilaus when
he returned out of Asia. He left three sons, Pausanias, Argaeus, and Alexander.
Pausanias when he had reigned one year was slain by Perdiccas the son of
Tharcileus or of Philip, Diodorus ad Olymp. 96. ann. 3.
who being son of Perdiccas, and Grandson to Alexander the Rich, was preserved
when Archelaus the Bastard slew his brother Perdiccas, his Uncle Alcetas, and
Alexander his Cousin German.

4. Idem ad ann. 4.
Amyntas was by the Illyrians driven out of his Kingdom, but restored by the
Thessalians, held it (though very unquietly) 24 years. Some wrote how after his
expulsion Argaeus obtained the Kingdom for two years; Amyntas.
till again he recovered it. Ad Olymp. 99. ann. 2. Xenoph.
When he was overcome by the Illyrians, having little hope to recover his
Kingdom, he gave the Olynthians a great part of the grounds adjacent; but after
his restitution required it again. They refused to restore what was freely
given them. He hereupon gathered an Army, and sent to the Lacedaemonians for
aid, who sent Phaebidas to him with 10000 men at such time as he surprised
Cadmea, the Citadel of Thebes, having sent before his brother; but the
Olynthians had taken much of his Kingdom, and made themselves Masters of Pella
the Metropolis of Macedon. He had issue by his wife Eurydice, three sons;
Alexander, Perdiccas, and Philip; besides one daughter called Euryone or
Exione. He had also by his second wife Gygaea three sons; Archelaus, Argaeus,
and Menelaus, afterward slain by their brother Philip. Alexander.
Alexander reigned not much above one year, in which time he was invaded by
Pausanias the son of Aeropus, but defended by Iphicrates the Athenian, who
declared his fidelity in this as well as other things, toward the Children of
Amyntas, that Eurydice flying to him with her two Children, Perdiccas and
Philip, he defended, and sustained her. Against him Ptolomy Alorites made War,
Ptolomy Alorites.
and both called Pelopidas the Theban to judge betwixt them, who having decided
the controversy (as Plutarch says) took Philip the Kings brother, and 30
other of the sons of the chief Nobility, Philip educated at Thebes.
as Hostages to Thebes. But within a year after Ptolomy murdered him, not being
his base brother as some suppose, says Scaliger. Justin tells us he was
slain at the procurement of his mother Eurydice, which having agreed to marry
her son-in-law (which must be this Ptolomy Alorites, and thence comes he to be
called the brother of Alexander) Consulted in her husbands life time how she
might kill him, and transfer the Kingdom to the Adulterer, which being betrayed
by their daughter, Amyntas for his Childrens sake would not use any severity
toward her, little thinking she would really accomplish her wicked design upon
any of them at length.

5. Ptolomy Alorites held the Kingdom of Macedonia for three years, Diod. ad
Olymp. 103. ann. 4.
and then was slain by Perdiccas the brother of Alexander, who succeeded him
and reigned five. He was then slain in battle against the Illyrians according
to Diodorus; but Justin says he perished by the wicked practices of his
mother, as Alexander did. First Guardian of his Nephew,
Perdiccas left behind him a young son, of whom Philip his brother was
constituted Guardian in the second year of Ochus King of Persia, in the first
year of the 105th Olympiad, Callimedes being Archon. Plutarch makes him to
have been carried as an Hostage to Thebes by Pelopidas. Diodorus writes that
his father gave him as an Hostage to the Illyrians, and that they committed him
to the Thebans to be kept, who delivered him to the custody of Polymnis the
father of Epaminondas, with whom he was brought up, though Plutarch says he
lived with Pammenes, and thence became an emulator of Epaminondas. Justin says
he was twice given as an Hostage by his brother; once to the Illyrians, and
another time to the Thebans, which mightily conduced to his education; for
being three years at Thebes, he laid the foundation thereof in a City full of
ancient severity, and in the house of Epaminondas a great Scholar and General.
If he there continued but three years, he seems to have returned home at the
beginning of the reign of his brother Perdiccas, but Diodorus says, it was
after his death that he made an escape from Thebes. At first, as it seems
from Justin, he bore but the Office of Tutor, or Guardian to his Nephew; but
afterward great Wars happening, in which the expectation of the Child could
nothing avail, he was constrained to take upon him the Dignity of King by the
people. Then King.


6. For, the Macedonians having lately received an overthrow from the
Illyrians, were much dejected thereat. Diodorus ad Olymp. 105. ann. 1. A.M.
3645. Olymp. 105. ann. 1. V.C. 394. Ochi, 2.
Phe Paeones their neighbors made excursions, and the Illyrians prepared for
another terrible invasion. The King of Thrace was minded to set up Pausanias,
and the Athenians Argaeus (both sons of the late Usurper Aeropus) having sent
Mantias with 3000 men, and a Fleet readily furnished for that purpose. But
Philip seeming nothing to be discouraged at these things, by his good language
(wherein he was very able) and his courteous deportment, bare up the spirits of
his people. He amended military Discipline, He Conquereth all difficulties.
and instituted the Macedonian Phalange. Understanding the Athenians to have a
great desire to recover Amphipolis, and to have Argaeus established King, he
left that City to its own liberty. The Paeonians and the King of Thrace he
bought off with money, and overthrew Argaeus at Methone assisted by Mantias the
Athenian, by which victory he mightily encouraged his men.

7. The year after he made peace with the Athenians, Diodorus ad Olymp. 105.
ann. 2.
who readily accepted of it, because he was content to quit Amphipolis, giving
him great commendations also for his clemency, in that he had suffered the
Relics of their Army at Methone to depart with their lives and liberty into
Attica when he had them at his mercy. Being thus freed from the Athenian War,
hearing that Agis King of the Paeonians was dead, he invaded, and brought them
into subjection to himself. Then entered he the Country of the Illyrians with
about 10000 foot, and 600 horse, whose King Bardylis sent to treat with him,
offering that each should retain such places as they already held; but he
returned answer, that though he was also desirous of peace, yet would he admit
of no terms, except the Illyrians would quit all the Cities which belonged to
his Kingdom. Bardylis then met with him with a strong Army, and a great and
bloody battle was with great animosity on both sides fought, wherein at length
Philip had the victory, and the Illyrians having lost above 7000 men, were
forced to relinquish all places belonging to Macedonia.

8. After he had brought under all the Illyrians as far as the Lake Lychnitis,
and made an honorable peace with them, Idem ad ann. 3.
he returned into Macedonia with great fame. The year after, for that the
Inhabitants of Amphipolis had several ways provoked him, and ministered
occasion of quarrels* he went against them with a great force, and having cast
down the Wall with his battering Rams, entered the City, whence banishing all
his Enemies he granted indemnity to the rest. This place being very
conveniently sited for his occasions in Thrace, much conduced to the progress
of his affairs. For hereupon he presently took Pydna, and to ingratiate himself
with the Olynthians (the friendship of whom was very necessary for such as
would grow great) having taken Potidaea, he gave up Pydna with the grounds
belonging to it into their hands. Crenidae changed into Philippi.
Then going to Crenidae, he enlarged this Town with an accession of new
Inhabitants, and called it after himself Philippi. Here were rich Mines of
Gold, which having been formerly neglected he now so far advanced as to bring
him in yearly a Revenue of 1000 Talents, which mightily tended to the
advancement of his affairs, and the Majesty of his Kingdom, for now stamped he
that piece of Golden Coin, called the Philipick, raised great forces, and
afterward with bribes drew many Graecians to betray their Country. But he
proceeded in his affairs with more confidence and freedom, for that now the
Athenians were busied in the Social War began this year, and thereupon could
not take such care as was necessary, about the preservation of Amphipolis.

9. The Social War, which continued three years, had it is original from the
revolt of the Chians, The Social War.
Rhodians, Coans, and Byzantians, from the State of Athens. The Athenians sent
against them two Generals, Chares and Chabrias, who when they came to Chius,
found their the succors sent from other Cities, and from Mausolus the Prince
of Caria. They fell upon the City; Chares on the Land, and Chabrias by Sea, but
the later whilst too boldly he ventured by himself into the Haven, was slain,
and then the rest retreated without any thing done. One Corn. Nepos.
in his life tells us, that in this Expedition he was a private man, but
excelling the Commanders in Military skill and fame, was more regarded by the
Soldiers; which thing proved his destruction. For endeavoring first of all to
enter the Haven, when he had broken in none followed him, so that being
compassed with Enemies his Gally was sunck, out of which casting himself, he
might easily, as the rest did, have swom to his friends and escaped; but
preferring an honorable death before an ignominious life, fighting alone was
slain, in all fights having been daring, though otherwise he was accounted slow
and heavy.

10. The year following, for any thing we understand, was spent altogether,
Diodorus ad Olymp. 106. an. 1.
or for the most part, in preparations on both sides to decide the controversy
in a Sea fight. The Athenians having sent before under the command of Chares a
Fleet of 60 ships, sent other 60 after, which they committed to the trust of
Iphicrates and Timotheus, two of the most noble in the City, who were to join
with Chares, and in equal authority to manage the War. On the other part the
Confederates with 100 Galleys wasted the Islands Imbrus and Lembus, and coming
into Samus, after they had harased the Country, besieged the City both by Sea
and Land, and making depredations upon many other Islands under the
jurisdiction of Athens, got much money thereby. But the Athenian Generals
uniting their Forces resolved to besiege Byzantium, which the Confederates
understanding, raised the siege at Samus to come and relieve it. They were
about to join in battle, when suddenly arose a mighty Tempest, which made
Iphicrates and Timotheus decline the fight, but Chares would not acquiesce in
their opinion, but sent to Athens and accused them to the People, as wilfully
having neglected a good opportunity of doing their Country Service, which so
incensed the heady multitude, that they condemned them in many Talents. Corn.
Nepos relates, that Menestheus the son of Iphicrates, and son Law to
Timotheus, was sent as General, In vitis Timothei and Iphicratis.
and they two as his Advisers. That the action was about Samus wherein Chares
miscarried, and whereupon he accused them to the People. That Iphicrates being
quitted, Timotheus was fined ten Talents, which he being unable to pay departed
to Chelus, where dying, the multitude repented of their rash judgment, and
remitting nine parts of the fine, caused his son Conon to pay the other,
toward repairing of the Wall. So that the Walls which Conon the Grandfather
built with spoils Conon the Grandson was forced to repair at his own cost and
disgrace of his Family. This was the last Age of the famous Athenian Captains,
which concluded with the lives of Iphicrates, Chabrias and Timotheus, those
that followed being not at all worthy the reckoning.

11. Chares having got all the power into his own hands, Diodorus.
assisted Pharnabazus the Persian Satrapa, who had revolted from his Prince,
and was so rewarded for his service after the Victory, that he was enabled to
pay his Army. This was very acceptable to the Athenians at first; but when the
King had once sent to expostulate the matter with them, and a rumor was abroad
that he intended with 300 ships to assist the Enemies in the Social War, they
were far otherwise affected, insomuch as they resolved to make peace with the
revolters, which was easily done, they being no less desirous of it. Philip
having the year before married Olympias the daughter of Neoptolemus late King
of the Molossians, and Niece (not Sister as Plutarch has it) to Arymbas or
Aribbas the present, was much envied for his good success by the three Kings
of the Thracians, Illyrians, and Paeonians. Since they had been overthrown and
subdued by him, they had no strength severally to encourage them to a revolt;
Yet joining their Forces together they were confident of good success. But
before they had completed their Army, and whilst they were as yet incomposed,
he set upon them suddenly, and easily reduced them to obedience.

12. The same year being the first of the 106 Olympiad, the sixth of Artaxerxe^
Ochus, Alexander the Great is born.
Elpinices being Archon, Alexander the Son of Philip and Olympias was born at
Pella in Macedonia, in the Attick month Boedromion, if that be true which
Aristobulus relates in Arrianus, that being 32 years and eight months old at
his death, he died on the last day, but one, A. M 3649. Ol. 106. an. 1. V. C.
348. Ochi, 6. Philippi, 5.
of the month Thargelion. If this be true, (and Aristobulus, if any, might
have occasion to know it) then could it not be on the sixth day of the month
Hecatombaeon, as Plutarch relates, whose error (into which others also fell)
arose from thence, because anciently the Macedonian month Lous fell in with
the Attick Hecatombaeon. The same Author tells us in the life of Alexander,
that Philip received at the same time three several messages: One, that the
Illyrians had received a great overthrow from Parmenio his General. Vide
Usserum in Annal. Vet. Testam. p. 271.
Another, that he had got the prize at Olympia with his swift-footed Horse. And
the third concerning the birth of Alexander: and this was a little after he had
taken Potidaea. But Potidaea was taken two years before, as appears not only
from Diodorus, but also from Demosthenes; and strange it is, that Philip should
not know of his Sons birth a good while before he could have intelligence of
the Olympian Solemnities, concerning which judgment was given on the sixteenth
day of the month: So that the relation of Trogus is more true, that he
received two messages at the same time: viz. one of his Victory over the
Illyrians, and another of his prize at Olympia. Justin lib. 12. cap. 16.
The same day that Alexander was born, was the Plutarch in Alexandro.
Temple of Diana at Ephesus set on fire by Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14. ext. exemp.
5. Gell. l. 2. c. 6.
one who desired by such an act to be rendered famous to all posterity, as he
confessed upon the Rack. But the Council of Asia decreed that none should dare
to name him; and for any thing we certainly know, his name is buried in
oblivion, or at least, their is incertainty in it; for though Theopompus in his
History recorded it, and some Val. ibid. Strabo l. 14. p. 640. Solin. cap. 40.
tell us it was Herostratus, yet by another he is called Lygdamis. Strabo idem.
This being destroyed by this means a more excellent Structure was raised, the
women contributing their ornaments, and the men their goods; to this purpose
money being also made of the old pillars. Timaeus as Cicero. l. 1. de Divinat.
and 2 de natura Deorum.
one, or Hegesias the Magnesian as Plutarch.
another, said the reason of the burning to have been, because Diana that night
being busied in Midwives work at the travel of Olympias, had no leisure to look
to her Temple, which Jest Plutarch counts so frigid, as to have been able to
have quenched the flame. Perhaps both conceits put together might have done it.

13. The year after wherein Callistratus was Archon, began the Phocian or
Sacred War (as it was called) in Greece, which arose upon this occasion.
Diodorus ad Olymp. 106. an. 2.
The Lacedaemonians after their overthrow in the battle of Leuctra, had been
fined much money by the Council of the Amphyctiones, to the use of the Thebans,
The Phocian or Sacred war.
for seizing upon Cadmea their Citadel, which was exacted of them. The Phocians
also having plowed up a great piece of the ground belonging to the Temple at
Delphos and called Cyrrhaea, were also fined by the same Common Council of
Greece, many Talents. This Decree being confirmed by all the Graecians, and
about to be executed by seizing on their grounds, Philomelus a man of principal
note amongst them told them the Decree was unjust, A. M. 3650. Ol. 106. an. 2.
V. C. 399. Ochi, 7. Philippi, 6.
and persuaded them by force to rescind it, for that they had advantage enough
so to do, because the Oracle it self was once in their possession, and tuition,
citing to that purpose two Verses out of the second Book of the Iliads of
Homer. He persuaded them therefore to get it again into their hands, promising,
if they would give him power, to do it, and all other things for their profit
and honor. They made him General, with full power according to his desire, who
straight went to Sparta, where he pressed also the injustice of the
Amphyctiones toward that State about their fine, and showing how it also
concernd them to have the sentence of the Council nulled, he persuaded
Archidamus the King, to join with him. He supplied him with money, wherewith
raising Soldiers he invaded the Temple, and beating back the Locrians that came
to oppose him, with great slaughter, pulled the Decrees of the Council from the
pillars, and brake in pieces the tables wherein were registered the names of the
condemned. He caused it to be told abroad, that he neither intended to rob the
Temple, nor to have any other dishonest intention; but the Boeotians not
believing him, in their General Council decreed, that the Temple was to be
recovered, and gave order for levies for the same purpose. Philomelus in the
mean time fortified the place, and made all possible provision for defense. He
invaded the Locrians, who killing some of his men, refused to restore the
bodies, alleging the Law, that all sacrilegious persons ought to be cast out
unburied: but he on purpose engaged with them in another Skirmish, and with
some of theirs redeemed them formerly denied. Then forced he the Prophetess to
ascend the Tripos to give him advice concerning the War. She out of fear,
told him he might do whatsoever he pleased.

14. The Temple of Apollo Pythius, and the Oracle at Delphos, one of the two
chief Cities of Phocis (Elatea being reckoned with it) till made a Commonwealth
of it self by the Lacedaemonians, was of ancient Original, as appears by the
Odyss. ^. 75. vide Strabo. lib. 9. p. 417. D.
Poets making Agamemnon before his Expedition to Troy, to have received answer
from it. The place thereof was accounted the middle of all Greece, and also the
navil of the whole World, a Fable being invented (related by Pindar) that two
Eagles (some say Crows) being sent out, the one from the East, and the other
from the West by Jupiter, met here. The Diodorus ad Olymp. 106. an. 2.
Original of the Oracle is to be fetched from Goats, which feeding about that
cave or hole (where afterward the Temple was built) were seen to skip and
utter voices unusual to others and themselves at other times, The original of
the oracle at Delphos.
which the Herdsman perceiving, went thither himself, and was affected in like
manner, withal foretelling things to come. This being blazed abroad, and many
who flocked thither experiencing the same thing themselves, it came to be
judged an Oracle. For a time one gave answer to another indifferently; but many
were transported with the fury, and leaping down into the hole were utterly
lost, so that it was judged best, to set apart one woman, who should attend
constantly, and a certain Engine to be made, wherein standing safely over the
place, she might give out the Oracle. This Engine having three feet, came
thence to be called Tripos; the woman was named Pythia, from asking, says
Strabo, and the first of all others was called Phemonoe. Virgins at first were
only destinated to this work, till one of them being ravished by Echecrates
the Thessalian, women of about 50 years, but in the habit of Virgins were only
allowed of. The Temple in more ancient times was very famous for the Oracle;
for the sitting of the Amphyctiones, the Pythian Games, and the riches thereof;
but in the time of Strabo it was decayed in reputation, being nothing so much
accounted of, which we may gather from it is poverty, seeing by gifts it was not
able to recover the wealth taken out of it in after times, as it did that which
it enjoyed in the time of Homer, having been rifled before it was recruited
again by the present of Croesus, his Father Alyattes, the Italians, Sicilians,
and others.

15. Philomelus sent to Athens, Lacedaemon, and the other eminent Cities of
Greece, to excuse himself, professing he only intended the recovery of the
Temple into the possession of his Countrymen, and not with any desire or
design to pillage the treasures, adding, that he should be always ready to
account for the money or gifts belonging thereto. He desired that if any out of
ill will to the Phocians bare Arms against them, that they would enter into
League with them, or at least to forbear all Hostility. The messengers
effectually soliciting according to their instructions, brought the Athenians
and Lacedaemonians to enter into society, and to promise aid; but the
Boeotians, with the Locrians and some others, thought the contrary, and
resolved that the Temple was to be rescued. Idem ad an. 3.
Philomelus seeing what kind of a brunt he must undergo, labored all ways to
strengthen himself, for which purpose abstaining yet from the Treasures of the
Temple, he took a great sum of money from the Citizens of Delphi, wherewith
he hired Soldiers. Having got together a considerable force, he took the field,
and overthrew the Locrians who made head against him. They then sent to Thebes
requiring aid for Apollo and themselves, and the Boeotians thinking their
demand to be just, desirous to show their Devotion, and conceiving it to
concern them that the Decrees of the Amphyctiones should not be nulled, sent to
the Thessal^ans, The Council of Amphyctiones decrees War against the Phocians.
and the rest of the Amphyctiones to join with them in this War against the
Phocians. The Council meeting together, then Decreed, that War was to be made
upon them, which caused great motions and factions throughout all Greece.

16. Some thought Religion bound them to relieve the God, and punish the
Phocians as sacrilegious persons; but others inclined to defend them, according
to their particular interests. The Boeotians, Locrians, Perrhaebaeans, D^rians,
Dolopians, Athamanians, Achaeans, they of Pthiotis, the Magnetes, Aenianes, and
some others were for rescuing the Temple. With the Phocians stood the
Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and some others of Peloponnesus, whereof the
Lacedaemonians were now more than before concerned, for not having paid their
Fine imposed on them by the Amphyctiones within the time limited, at the last
sitting they were Fined 1000 Talents more. This made them desire that the
Decrees of the Council should be invalid, as well as the Phocians, and being
unwilling to contract the Odium of making War in their own name upon that
account, they were glad to do it as it were in the name of the other,
endeavoring withal to get the Temple into their own hands. Philomelus, when
there came certain intelligence that the Thebans would invade them with a
strong Army, to furnish himself with mercenaries, seized upon the Treasury of
the Temple: then offering half as much more wages as formerly, he had
multitudes offered themselves to the service. With 10000 he invaded the
Locrians, who being assisted with the Boeotians opposed him, and having the
worst of it, afterward taking some of his men as they were gathering forage,
put them to death as sacrilegious persons condemned by the Amphyctiones. This
the Phocians complaining of, procured of their General, that to stop such
proceedings for the time to come, he should punish such prisoners as he took in
the same kind. After this the Armies removed into other parts of the Country,
Philomelus slain.
where engaging in Woody and difficult places of passage, the Phocians were
overmatched with the number of their Enemies, and being put to flight,
Philomelus, after he had omitted nothing worthy of a Captain, for fear he
should come into the power of his Enemies, leaped down a Rock, and perished
with the fall. With Diodorus consents In Phocicis.
Pausanias as to the kind of his death, though Lib. 8.
Justin writes him to have been slain in the beginning of the fight.

Onomarchus succeeds him.
17. Onomarchus his Colleague taking upon him the Office of General after his
death, gathering up the relics of the Army, therewith retreated home, and the
Boeotians rejoicing they had wrought the destruction of so infamous a man,
returned into their own Country, hoping his hap would deter others from the
like Enterprise. But the Phocians (being persuaded by Onomarchus, who himself
had also been Fined by the Amphyctiones, Diodorus ad ann. 4.
and therefore for his own ends stirred them up to continue the War) resolved
to perfect if possible what was begun, and to that purpose created him General.
He as his Predecessor had done, with large pay allured many unto him, corrupted
the Thessalians to quit the society of the Boeotians, and invading the
Territories of the Enemy took Thronium, forced the Amphissians to submit, and
wasted the grounds of the Dorians; he took Orchomenus in Boeotia; but besieging
Chaeronea was worsted by the Thebans, and forced to retreat. At this time the
Thebans, though deserted by the Thessalians, sent over forces into Asia to
Artabazus, who had revolted from the King, and now began to decline after
Chares the Athenian had left him. The War was renewed betwixt the Argives and
the Lacedaemonians who had the better in a battle fought at O^neae. Chares
going into the Hellespont took Sestus, and Kers^blep^es the son of Cotys King
of the Thracians, bearing ill will to Philip of Macedonia, Philip besieges
Methymna, a Town situate in Magnesia.
drew all the Cities of the Cherronesus to the party of the Athenians, except
Cardia, into which the people were about to send Colonies. Philip considering
that the Methymnaeans suffered his Enemies to use their City seated in
Magnesia for a refuge, and as a place convenient for carrying on the War,
besieged it. They held out against him for some time, and in the siege he lost
one of his eyes with a stroke of an Arrow; but at length they desired to be
dismissed with one suit of Apparel apiece, and this being granted, he destroyed
the City, and divided the grounds amongst the Macedonians.

18. After this he was called into Thessaly by the Inhabitants against
Lycophron Tyrant of the Pheraeans, who in like manner desiring aid of the
Phocians, Phayllus the brother of Onomarchus was sent to assist him with 7000
men. Is twice defeated by Onomarchus.
Him Philip worsted, and expelled out of Thessaly. Onomarchus then, who had
already attained the Dominion of all that Country in his mind, with all his
strength marched to the aid of Lycophron, and overmatching Philip, and the
Thessalians, in number of men, overthrew them twice with great slaughter, and
sorely distressed Philip, insomuch that hardly containing his Soldiers in
obedience, he presently retreated into Macedonia. Onomarchus improving the
credit this victory had got him, overthrew the Boeotians, and got Chaeronea.
Philip recruited himself, and returned into Thessa^y against the Tyrant, Who
gets Chaeronea, but is again utterly defeated by Philip, and is hanged.
who being straightn'd sent again to Onomarchus, promising if his affairs
succeeded, to do his work in the Cities of Thessaly. Onomarchus with 20000
foot, and 500 horse was ready at his call, but engaging in battle with Philip,
and the Thessalians, was utterly defeated by the power and courage of the
Thessalian horse, and fled amain with such as could get away toward the Sea.
It happened that Chares the Athenian hovering then about the Coasts with a Fleet,
saved many that took the Sea, and swom to his ships. But of the Phocians and
their assistants 6000 were slain, and as many taken, amongst whom was
Onomarchus, whom Philip caused to be hanged, and the rest to be drowned in the
Sea as sacrilegious persons. This battle happened in the year wherein Mausolus
the famous Prince of Caria died, and Clearchus the Tyrant of Heraclea a City
in Pontus, was slain, to whom succeeded his son Timotheus, and reigned fifteen
years. Clearchus having obtained the Tyranny, and his designs prospering
imitated in all things Dionysius of Syracuse, Vide Justin. lib. 16.
and inslaved his fellow Citizens very magnificently twelve years.

19. The year after, being the first of the 107th Olympiad, Diodorus ad Olymp.
107. ann. 1.
wherein Smicrinus of Tarentum was Victor, and Aristodemus Archon, Phayllus was
made General in the room of Onomarchus his brother. He having plenty of money,
therewith allured not only obscure men, but the principal Cities of Greece to
join with him in the War. The Lacedaemonians sent him 1000 foot, Phayllus
succeeds Onomarchus,
the Achaeans 2000. and the Athenians 5000. besides 400 horse. Lycrophon and
Pitholaus the Phaerean Tyrants, after the death of Onomarchus being destitute
of succor, were forced to quit their power by Philip, and gathering together
2000 men, lead them to the service of Phayllus. With such forces and those of
his own he invaded Boeotia, but was worsted several times, first at Orchomenus
where he lost many men, then at the River Cephisus, and again at Chaeronea.
After this he invaded the Locrians, called Epicnemidii, several of whose Towns
he took, and received some loss from the Boeotians, who invading Phocis he
came suddenly upon them and revenged himself. And dies of a Consumption.
But having conflicted long with a Consumption, not long after in great pain,
as his impiety (says Diodorus) had deserved, he ended his life. He left for
his Successor Phalaecus the son of Onomarchus, who being but young, he joined
as Counselor to him, one Mnaseas his familiar friend. The Boeotians falling
by night upon them, slew 200 of the Phocians with their Captain Mnaseas, and
within awhile in a fight at Chaeronea, Phaloeus himself was also worsted, and
many of his followers were slain. Philip of Macedon having restored the
Thessalians to liberty by taking away the yoke of the Pheraean Tyrants (which
bound them ever after very fast to him and his son) went toward the Pylae, or
Streights, to make War upon the Phocians; but the Athenians hindering his
passage, thence he returned with great honor into his own Kingdom.

20. Whilst these things were adoing, the Lacedaemonians being at Enmity with
the Inhabitants of Megalopolis, sent Archidamus their King to invade them, who
being too weak for them of themselves, desired aid of their friends. Stirs
betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Megalopolitans.
The Argives, Sicyonians, and Messenians helped them with their whole strength,
and the Thebans sent them 4000 foot and 500 horse. The Lacedaemonians had 3000
foot from the Phocians, and 150 horse from Lycophron and Pitholaus, by the
assistance of which forces they took Orneae, a City of Argolis, before their
Enemies could come to relieve it. The Thebans afterward coming down, a battle
was fought with equal success, after which the Argives departed to their
several homes, and the Lacedaemonians invading Arcadia, took, and plundered
Elissus, and returned unto Sparta. After some time the Thebans had the better
of it at Telphussa, and after that in two battles more, wherein they killed
many of their Enemies; but then again the Lacedaemonians by a notable victory
recovered their credit, and the Armies returning home, a Truce was made betwixt
them and the Megalopolitans. This was done whilst Phalaecus in Boeotia took
Cheroieda, and presently lost it again to the Thebans, who then with a numerous
Army entered, and wasted Phocis, and then having taken some inconsiderable
places with much booty they returned into Boeotia.

21. The next year the Thebans being spent with the Phocian War, Idem ad ann. 2.
sent to Ochus the Persian King to desire a supply of money from him; who
without any difficulty, or delay, bestowed on them 300 Talents. No memorable
thing passed betwixt the Phocians and them this year, which was spent in
skirmishes and mutual depredations. Two years after Idem ad ann. 4.
Philip cast out again Pitholaus the Tyrant, who had seized upon Pherae, and
setting upon the Cities of Thrace which belonged to Chalcis, took by storm the
Castle Zeira, which he demolished, and forced other Towns to submit to his
yoke, Anagraphe Olympiadum.
though, upon desire of the Chalcidians, Charidemus had been sent from the
Athenians to help them, then lying in the Hellespont. The Diodorus ad Olymp.
108. ann. 1. Justin. lib. 8.
year following wherein was solemnized the 108th Olympiad, whereof Polycles the
Cyrenaean was Victor, having great designs in his mind, he hasted to get into
his hands the Cities of the Hellespont, and without any strokes got Micylerne
and Torone by treachery to be delivered up to him. Now he quarrelled with the
Olynthians (because his affairs were improved by success) whom before he
courted as fearing their power, which had been ever too much for his
predecessors. It Is said he pretended a quarrel because they received his two
half brothers, whom after he had taken in the Town he murdered; all things being
lawful to him now that might any way serve his turn, all his affections and
passions being swallowed up in his ambition, which made him not stick to break
faith himself, and by his Gold to tempt others to do it. He thought it to no
purpose to practice the winning of Olynthus, till he had first enclosed all
their power within the Walls, Philip gets Olynthus.
and therefore he first overthrew them in two battles, and then besieged the
City, which attempting with many assaults and great loss of men, at length it
was betrayed into his hands by Euthycrates and Lasthenes the chief Magistrates,
whom he had corrupted with money. He sacked it, and sold the Inhabitants with
the rest of the plunder, whereby he much enriched himself, and was enabled to
buy in Cities which he daily did, having been advised by the Oracle at the
beginning of his undertaking, to make his assaults with silver spears; insomuch
that he boasted that his Kingdom was more increased by Gold than Arms.

22. The Athenians being sensible of his encroachments, Diodorus ibid.
jealous of his growing power, and warily providing for the liberty of Greece,
supplied, as they might, such as he fell upon with war, and now sent up and
down to the Cities to desire them to value their liberty, and punish capitally
such as were treacherous amongst them, The Athenians began to look to
themselves.
promising them their alliance and utmost assistance, in this work. And now at
length by the special advice of Demosthenes (the greatest Wit and Orator of
Greece) they openly declared themselves his Enemies, and undertook the quarrel.
But so far were the spirits of the Greeks degenerated, that this endeavor of
theirs could not counterwork the efficacy of his Gold, so that having a mind to
take a Town that was strongly fortified, and one of the place telling him it
could not be done, he asked him if he thought it not possible for his Gold to
get over the walls. He had in all the Cities up and down his instruments and
secret workers, who sought for a little gain to undermine the fortune of their
own Country. After the taking of O^ynthus, he celebrated the Olympic Games,
and feasted all Comers; and entertaining them with great magnificence, by this
cunning engaged many to betray their Faith.

23. The following year the Boeotians and Phocians mutually preyed upon each
other, and several Skirmishes happened betwixt them, Idem ad an. 2.
which produced no great loss on either side. But Phalaecus the Phocian
General, being accused to have stolen the sacred money, was put out of his
place, and three Generals substituted in his room, Democrates, Callias, and
Sophanes, who were to make inquisition about the money which was stolen, and
call the Trustees who had the management thereof to account. The chief of the
Trustees was Philo, who being not able to give an account, was racked, and
confessed many of his fellow thieves. They had taken out of the Temple 4000
talents of gold after the rate of silver, and above 6000 talents of Silver of
such presents as Croesus and others had sent: and there wanted not some who
affirmed as much to have been rifled out of this Temple, as Alexander
afterward found in the treasures of the Persians. Phalaecus was about to
search in the pavement for treasure, hinted at by Homer; but when the Soldiers
came to dig near to the Tripos, such Earthquakes happened, as deterred them from
proceeding any further. The Phocians assisted with these riches carried on the
War, and by this time had got into their hand three strong places in Boeotia;
The Boeotians crave aid of Philip.
Orchomenus, Cheronea, and Corsias. The Boeotians being much pressed herewith,
having lost very many men, and wanting money, sent Ambassadors to the King of
Macedonia for aid. Philip was very glad to find them in so weak a condition,
desiring to abate that Spirit which they had got at the battle at Leuctra, yet
he sent them a considerable number of men, because he would not seem to be
wanting to so religious a cause, as vindicating the right of the Oracle. At
this time the Phocians building a Castle near Abae, were fallen upon by the
Boeotians, and shifting for themselves into the neighboring Towns, 500 of them
stepped by into a Chapel of Apollo near Abae. A remarkable accident.
Fire being left in their tents, seized upon some straw there, whence a great
flame arising, caught hold at length of the Chapel, and therein burnt alive
those that had fled thither, for an example (as Diodorus accounts it) to all
sacrilegious persons.

24. Philip being now employed in the War of Thrace, which was to the great
damage of the Athenians, to lull them asleep, promised he would enter into a
straight league and alliance with them, and pretending fair things, so
corrupted some of the chief Orators, Orat. contra Clesiphont.
( Aescines accuses Demosthenes, and Orat. (...).
Demosthenes lays the load upon Aeschines) that a peace was made up which
continued seven years. Idem ibid. Justin lib. 8.
Demosthenes advised them to send away their Ambassadors to Philip with all
speed, to ratify the League, lest he delaying the matter according to his
custom, should still proceed to incommodate their affairs. Accordingly five
Ambassadors were dispatched away, Philip lulleth the Athenians asleep.
whereof one was Aeschines; but coming into Macedonia, they were there forced
to stay till Philip had settled all things in Thrace, according to his own
pleasure, and passed through the Pylae or Straights into Phocis. The Athenians
hearing of his coming, notwithstanding the place, were in great fear, and
caused all their goods to be brought into the City. The Thessalians and
Boeotians earnestly now desired of him that he would undertake the conduct of
all Greece against the Phocians; and on the other side the Ambassadors of the
Phocians, Lacedaemonians, and Athenians, earnestly dehorted him from the War.
He hearing both sides, being accustomed to double dealing, promised them he
would do as all had desired, and so making them secure hereby, seized upon the
Straights of Therm^pylae.

25. The Phocians having sent to Lacedaemon for aid, procured 1000 Footmen of
heavy Armor, which were commanded by Archidamus. Diodorus ad Olymp. 108. an. 3.
Philip in conjunction with the Thessalians with a strong Army went down into
Locris, where finding Phalaecus restored to his Generalship, he hasted to
decide the controversy by action, but the other lying at Nice, and perceiving
himself too weak to fight, sent to treat with him, and they agreed that he
should have freedom to depart with his men whither he pleased. Faith being
given and received, he departed with his Mercenaries to the number of 8000 into
Peloponnesus, He ends the Phocian War.
and the Phocians being thus deserted, were forced to yield. So the War was
ended by Philip without a stroke, in the tenth year after the beginning
thereof, in the third year of the 108 Olympiad, according to Diodorus, when
Archias was Archon; but as In Phocicis*
Pausanias writes, in the first of this Olympiad, and in the government of
Theophilus.

26. Philip calling a Council of the Boeotians and Thessalians, Diodorus ibid.
it was resolved to remit the matter of the Phocians wholly to the judgment and
sentence of the Amphyctiones. Pausan. ut prius.
They decreed that Philip as a reward for his good service should be enrolled
in the number of themselv^, and have the double voice which the Phocians
formerly had. That the Phocians should be debarred from the Temple. That they
should neither have Horse nor Arms till such time as they had repayed the money
which they had stolen from Apollo. All their Exiles and as many as were guilty
of Sacrilege in their own persons should be accounted piacular, and it might be
lawful to take them out of any place. The Phocians how punished by the
Amphyctiones.
All their Cities were to be levelled with the ground, and they reduced into
Villages, not exceeding the number of Fifty little Families apiece, and distant
a furlong one from another. They were to pay to the Temple a yearly tribute of
Sixty talents, till the money stolen was made up. But from this punishment,
Pausanias tells us the Abaeans were excepted, who alone had not contaminated
themselves. The Council then took order for restoring of the Oracle, and for
the establishment of peace in Greece; and Philip having confirmed their
Decrees, embracing them all with singular kindness, returned into his own
Kingdom, flourishing with great glory both upon the account of Piety and
Martial matters. This Expedition made not a little for the enlargment of his
Empire, and the improvement of his design already laid, to procure himsef to be
chosen Captain General of Greece, and to make War upon the Persians.

27. Two years after, and in the 17 of his reign, he invaded the Illyrians his
old Enemies with a potent Army, took therein many Towns, Diodorus ad Olymp.
109. an. 1.
wasted the Country, and with rich booty returned into Macedonia. Then went he
into Thessalie, where casting out the Tyrants out of the Cities, he much won
upon the People, having a design hereby to make use of their favor, as a decoy
to bring in the affections of the rest. And it failed not; for their neighbors
led by their example, very readily entered into League with him. The year after
he prosecuted this design to a further advantage, for Kersobleptes the King of
the Thracians much distressing the Greek Cities in Thrace, Idem ad an. 2.
he exhorted them to join together, and with a strong force going against him
overthrew the Thracians in several battles, and forced them to pay the tenths
of their Lands to the Kingdom of Macedonia. Philip overthrows the Thracians.
He built Forts in such places as were convenient for the bridling of their
power, whereby the Cities being delivered now from their fear, most gladly
embraced his alliance and society. The year after this, Arymbas King of the
Molossians died, Idem ad an. 3.
who left a Son named Aeacides, the Father of Pyrrhus, but Philip deprived him
of the Kingdom, and gave it to Alexander the brother of his wife Olympias.
Justin l 7. and 8.
Another says, that he deprived Arymbas yet alive, and expelling him the
Kingdom settled Alexander therein.

28. The next Expedition Philip undertook, Diodorus ad an. 4.
was against Perinthus a strong City, situate upon the shore of the Propontis,
the Inhabitants whereof in favor of the Athenians crossed his designs. With
his utmost might, he fell upon it, continuing the storm without intermission,
by fresh men sent in the place of the dead or wounded: Besieges Perinthus.
he built Turrets higher than theirs, and with battering rams and mines brake
down a part of the wall. But the defendants being relieved from Byzantium,
manfully resisted, and built a stronger wall in the room of that which was
thrown down. By this means the Siege being drawn on in length, and great talk
being in Asia of the power of the Macedonian, Ochus the Persian King being now
jealous of his power, thought it wisdom to balance him, and for that purpse
gave order to his Satrapaes upon the Sea Coasts to assist the Perinthians. They
uniting their Forces together, gave them their utmost assistance, which with
the natural strength of the place enabled them to stand it out. For it was
seated upon the cliff of a Peninsula about a furlong in length, the houses were
thick and high, rising one rank above another, according to the ascent of the
hill, so that the whole Town represented the form of a Theater. Hereby, though
the wall was batterd down, yet stopping the ends of the streets, their defense
was little diminished, Marches thence to Byzantium.
which Philip perceiving, and how all things necessary for the War were
abundantly supplied from Byzantium, he left a strong party under expert
Captains to carry on the Siege, and with the rest of the Army hasted against
that City, the inhabitants whereof having sent their men and arms to the
Perinthians, were thereby much straightned.

29. By this time the grudges betwixt Philip and the Athenians were so
heightened, that now the peace was held as broken on both sides. Phocion the
Athenian was sent against Clitarchus the Tyrant of Eretria, who was made by
Philip, and cast him out, being by In Phocion.
Plutarch called Plutarch. Diodorus ad Olymp. 110. an. 1.
They sent aid also to the Byzantians, at the persuasion of Plutarch in
Demosthen.
Demosthenes, contained in the fourth Oration of his Philipicks. With them
joined the Chians, Coans, Rhodians, and other Greeks, which so terrified
Phi^ip, as he was glad for the present to yield to necessity, and made a peace
with them. For Demosthenes having persuaded his Citizens forgetting all
committed in the Social War, to send relief to the Byzantians and Perinthians,
and he himself being sent Ambassador to the Cities, wrought so effectually
with them, that besides their ordinary Militia, they raised 15000 Foot, and
2000 Horse, and liberally contributed money for their pay; at which time the
Associates desiring that the sum of the tax might be set, Crobylus the Orator
said, that War had no set rate of allowance. At this time Justin l. 9.
At^as King of Scythia being invaded by the Istrians, sent to Philip for aid,
promising him succession in his Kingdom; which being sent when as the Istrians
retreated, he also sent back the Macedonians, and recalled his promise
concerning the succession. Philip hereupon demanded money to pay the men, but
he also refusing it upon pretense of poverty, raised his Siege from Byzantium
to go against him, and sent messengers before to let the Scythians know he had
vowed to set up to Hercules a Statue upon the bank of Ister, and to desire
peaceable access and recesse for that purpose. He answered, that if he pleased
to send the Statue it should be erected, but refused to give leave for him to
enter his borders with an Army, He invadeth the Scythians.
saying, that if he set it up by force, he would pull it down after his
departure, and turn the Brass thereof into heads of Arrows. Philip entering
Scythia, a battle was fought, wherein he overcame them by craft, who in courage
exceeded, and took 20000 women and children, with multitudes of cattle, but
neither Gold nor Silver. Twenty thousand Mares of the choicest were sent into
Macedonia to breed. As Philip returned, the Triballi opposed themselves,
refusing to give him passage except he would part with some of his booty. He
disdaining the thing, forced his passage, but received such a wound in his
thigh, that through it his Horse was killed under him, and being taken up for
dead, so little care was had of the prey, At his return wounded and distressed
by the Triballi.
that it was left. Isocrates the Orator taking occasion at this disaster,
sought by his second Epistle to draw his mind to a peaceable inclination; but
to no purpose.

30. Two years after, Diodorus ad Olymp. 110. ann. 3. Plutarch. in Demosthen.
having drawn most of the Graecians into society with him, he longed after the
Empire of all Greece, in his way to which the Athenians only seemed the main
obstacle. He resolved now to daunt them, and obtain his purpose, and for that
end seized first upon Elatea a City of Phocis, and calling his forces thither
resolved speedily to make War upon them, hoping his work would be the less,
because he should take them altogether unprepared, and secure upon the account
of the peace. The Athenians exceedingly struck hereat for some time stood mute,
after they were met together, being come of their own accord, for that the
Magistrates caused an Allarm to be sounded all the night after they received
the news. At length all their eyes were turned upon Demosthenes, who persuaded
them to send to the Boeotians to desire their assistance in the vindication of
the liberty of Greece, and being sent himself by his Oratory persuaded them to
it, though they held themselves upon the account of the Phocian War obliged to
Philip. The Athenians were encouraged by this accession of the Boeotians, which
doubled their force, and dispatched their Army under the conduct of Chares and
Lysicles toward Chaeronea in Boeotia, all of flourishing age willingly giving
their names to the expedition, and the Boeotians admiring their readiness
hasted also themselves, and joining to them expected the coming of the Enemy.
He sent his Ambassadors to the Council, one whereof was Python an eloquent man,
to withdraw them from the Athenians, but prevailing not, he notwithstanding
resolved to fight them both, and with an Army of 30000 foot, and 2000 horse
invaded Boeotia. He overmatched his Enemies as well in skill as numbers, all
the Athenian Captains of note being now dead, and Chares Chief, who was nothing
better for conduct than an ordinary Soldier. A cruel and bloody fight was
fought with great animosity on both sides, He obtains a victory over the
Athenians, etc. at Chaeronea.
and with equal success, till Alexander, Philip's son, first made his Enemies
give ground in his Wing, and then his father had the same success in the
other, and obtained the victory. Of the Athenians above 1000 fell, 2000 were
taken, and of the Boeotians a great number. A.M. 3667. Ol. 110. ann. 3. V. C.
416. Arsis 1. Philippi 23.
Demosthenes being in the battle made his actions far disagreeable to his
words, and cowardly with the first casting away his Arms (though Good fortune
was engraven upon his shield) ran away.

31. Together with this battle was lost the liberty of Greece, and in effect
the ancient glory thereof here had its period, being never able to recover its
power, and first enslaved by one, and then another for ever after. Plutarch in
vitis Rhetorum and Dionysius in Isocrate.
Isocrates the Athenian Orator was so sensible of the advantage Philip had got,
that being ignorant how he would improve the opportunity, and resolved not to
see Athens besieged the fourth time, killed himself by abstaining from all
sustenance four days, aged 98 years. Diodorus.
Presently after the victory, Philip carouzed for joy, and walking amongst the
Captives upbraided the badnesse of their condition, when Demades the Athenian
Orator took him short, asking him, if he who had obtained the fortune of
Agamemnon shamed not to act the part of Thersites? with the wit of which
castigation he was so struck, that he cast off the former countenance, embraced
the author of it with singular kindness, with him gave liberty to all the
Athenian prisoners, and forgetting his pride, made a League and Alliance with
that Commonwealth. Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 15.
He is also reported to have appointed a Boy every morning to beat this into
his Ear, that He was a man. He was a great Master of his affections indeed. He
was never passionate to his disadvantage, and upon this account, to procure
that with more ease which he had long designed, he might thus gratify the
Athenians, whose interest in the other Estates being the same with the Common
of all Greece, he might be unwilling to force them to the utmost. But he placed
a Garrison of his own in Thebes; and Justin writes, how he sold for slaves all
the prisoners of that City, and the bodies of such as had been slain to their
friends for burial: that of the chiefest of the Citizens some he put to death,
and confiscated the goods of the rest, being sufficiently sensible of their
ingratitude. After the fight, when the Athenians fortified their City as
expecting a siege, Plutarch. in Demosthene.
Demosthenes at his own charge re-edified part of the Wall, for which service
Ctesiphon thought he was to be honored with a Garland at the public meeting
of Greece; but Aeschines contended it was against the Law: and so his Oration
against Ctesiphon concerning the Crown, or Garland, was written this year,
Charonides (or Charondas) being Archon, the third of the 110th Olympiad, and
the first of the reign of Arses the Persian King.

32. Diodorus ad ann. 4.
Philip by his success having utterly broken the courage of the principal
Cities of Greece, now gave out that he would undertake a War against the
Persian for the general commodity all the estates, and thereby, and with his
great courtesy, gained much upon some sorts of people. At length he called
them together at Corinth, and largely discoursing of the War, showed the
certain hope of success, and earnestly exhorted them to undertake it;
Obtains to be named General at Sea for all Greece against the Persian.
to which all either out of love or fear assented. He was chosen Captain
General for the expedition, allowance of men and money were appointed to the
several Cities, the Justin lib. 9.
Lacedaemonians alone scorning both him, and the conditions of his peace,
accounting that slavery, and not peace, which was imposed by the Conqueror.
The Auxiliaries of Greece amounted to 200000 foot, and 15000 horse, over and
above the forces of Macedonia, and the barbarous Nations thereto adjoining.
Whilst he thus prospered in his affairs abroad, Plutarch. in Alexandre.
great differences arose in his own house by his putting away Olympias upon
pretense of incontinency, and marrying Cleopatra the Niece of Attalus. Olympias
a woman of an high spirit, and melancholic nature, took it exceedingly to
heart, Differences in his house by a new marriage.
and incensed all she could her son Alexander, who at the Wedding hearing
Attalus in his Cups to exhort the Macedonians to pray for a lawful Heir of the
Kingdom from Philip and Cleopatra, calling him naughty fellow, asked him if he
counted him a Bastard, and therewith threw a Cup at him. Philip hereupon with
his drawn Sword made at Alexander, but to the good of both, being light headed
with Wine, and mad with anger, stumbled and fell. After this Alexander carried
his mother into Epirus, and went himself into Illyricum, whence his father
shortly recalled him by the procurement of Demaratus the Corinthian. Not long
after Pexodarus the Governor of Caria sent to offer his eldest daughter in
marriage to Aridaeus the base son of Philip, whence great talk being raised
that Philip did it on purpose to devolve the Crown upon Aridaeus, Alexander
sent one Thessalus a player to Pexodarus, to persuade him to neglect a Bastard
and a Fool, and transfer his affinity upon himself, which was very well liked
by Pexodarus. Philip smelling out the matter, checked Alexander grievously, as
degenerate, and unworthy of the hope of a Kingdom, being ambitious to become
son-in-law to a Carian, who was no better than a slave to a barbarian King.

33. The next Spring having enquired of the Oracle concerning the success of
the Persian War (which gave him answer as ambiguous, Diodorus ad Olymp. 111.
ann. 1. Pausan. in Arcadicis. Justin.
and to the same purpose as formerly to Craesus) he sent three Captains over
into Asia under pretense of setting the Greek Cities at liberty; Attalus,
Parmenio, and Amyntas. He himself, whilst the forces were gathering together,
made a magnificent sacrifize to the gods, and celebrated the marriage of his
daughter Cleopatra with her Uncle Alexander of Epirus, to which he invited all
that would, and gave large entertainment, being willing to show to the
Graecians how thankfully he took their making him General of all Greece.
Feasting and Music there was in abundance, and the Feast being done for that
day (but all the solemnity to be renewed on the next) whilst it was yet night
all the people ran together into the Theater. Thither were carried twelve
Images of his gods in solemn procession, and his own next after in a Divine
habit, as arrogating to himself a place in the Council of the gods. Then
followed he himself apparelled in a white Roab in the midst of the two
Alexanders, his son, and son-in-law. As he thus proceeded in the ruff of his
pride, He is stabbed.
the people sending up loud acclamations to the skies, and Ecchoing his
felicity, one Pausanias met him in the straightest place of his passage, and
stabbed him into the side, the wound being so mortal that he fell down dead.
This Pausanias having been invited to a Feast by Attalus, had been carnally
abused by him after he was drunk, and then prostituted to the filthy lust of
base fellows, A.M. 3668. Ol. 110. ann. 4. V.C. 417. Arsis 2. Phllippi 24.
for which having complained to the King, partly because of their affinity, and
because Philip intended to use him in the War, he could have no satisfaction,
and for this cause took this revenge upon his unjust judge; yet Alexander
objected to Darius that his father was made away by his procurement.

34. The murderer having mounted on hors-back had got away whilst the tumult
was about the body, but that his shoe catching hold on a Vine he was thereby
pulled down, and then slain by Perdiccas and others. This end had Philip after
he had reigned 24 years, and lived 46. to which Olympias is reported by some to
have contributed, by encouraging Pausanias to commit the fact, and neither knew
they how to clear Alexander of the matter. She put a Golden Crown upon
Pausanias his head as he hung on the Cross, and a few days after burnt his
body upon the Relics of her husband, and built him a Monument in the same
place, and caused a yearly parentation to be made to him. After this having
killed Cleopatra's young son in her bosom, she then hanged her, or as one
says, fried them both to death in a brazen Vessel, and consecrated the sword
wherewith Philip was slain to Apollo, under the name of Myrtalis, by which she
was called when young. The foundation of a great Empire was laid by Philip, and
a great pattern left unto his son, which to make, was far more hard than what
with greater glory was achieved by Alexander. His great achievements.
The recovery of Macedon when there were two Competitors that had such
assistants, was a work of much prudence and dexterity. The regaining of such
places as were lost to the Illyrians and Olynthians, with the overthrow of the
neighboring Kings, and the State of Olynthus, were such things as would have
seemed too difficult for many ages to his predecessors. The matters achieved
by him required both Mars and Mercury for assistants, and therein he bred so
many choice Commanders, as for their skill and valor being worthy to wear
Crowns; He seems most to deserve that glory which his son by the influence of
his abilities afterward attained.

35. Alexander his son succeeded him, aged about twenty years, Diodorus ibid.
in the first of the 111th Olympiad, wherein Cleomantes was Victor, Pithodorus
being Archon, in the first of the reign of Darius Codomannus, and the year of
the World 3669. being by the father's side descended of Hercules, Plutarch. in
Atexandro.
Alexander succeeds him.
and the mother's from Achilles, neither of which lines he disgraced by the
course of his fortunes. Of a great and lofty spirit he was from a Child, easy
to be persuaded, but hard to be compelled. His father apprehending his wit,
procured Aristotle to be his Schoolmaster, offering him very large rewards,
whose Native City Stageira being before by him demolished, he re-edified for
his sake. By such a Master he was not only instructed in morality, but had
some insight into the more abstruse Sciences, and seemed to have some skill in
Physic, being wont to give directions to his friends about their health. Being
sixteen years old, Philip undertaking an expedition against the Byzantians,
left him his Deputy in Macedonia, where improving his time, he subdued the
Medaeans who had revolted, and taking that City, planted it with new
Inhabitants, and called it after himself Alexandropolis. At the battle of
Chaeronea he behaved himself very stoutly, which with other his good parts drew
great love upon him from his father (insomuch as he willingly suffered the
Macedonians to call him King, and himself General) but Philips mind toward his
later end being withdrawn from his mother and fastened upon Cleopatra, thereupon
ensued great dissatisfaction on both sides, whilst his mother stirred him to
great indignation, insomuch as he escaped not suspicion of being privy to her
designs against his father's life.

36. Yet began he his reign with justice against such as had an hand in the
murder, killing them upon his Grave, Idem ibid. Diodorus ad Olymp. 111. ann. 2.
and blamed his mother that in his absence she had dealt so cruelly with
Cleopatra. Then celebrating the funeral of his father with royal Rites and
Ceremonies, he began to take care of his public affairs, He begins his
reign well.
and being contemned for his youth and little experience, above all expectation
explicated himself out of all difficulties, by imitating his Fathers courtesy,
and overcoming many by the invinciblenesse of his spirit, which through the
course of his life bore down all opposition. He renewed the discipline of War,
and gained the affections of the Army; knowing also that Attalus upon the
account of his Niece Cleopatra, lay at all advantages to do him mischief, he
sent Hecataeus with a band of men with order to attack him and send him over
alive if possible, or else to kill him one way or other, which was at length
effected. In the mean time Demosthenes having had secret intelligence of
Philip's death, went to the people, and pretending to have dreamt it, stirred
up the Athenians all ways possible to contemn the youth of Alexander, and not
to suffer him to obtain the Principality of Greece, and to this purpose they
sent unto Attalus, and entered into conspiracy with him, how they might best
effect it. The Aetolians intended to restore the Exiles of the Acarnanians
banished by Philip. The Ambraciots expelled the Garrison there, His
difficulties in Greece,
and the Thebans decreed to do the same by that in Cadmea. As the Arcadians had
refused to consent that the Father should be General of Greece, so were they
now nothing better inclined toward the Son, and the rest of the
Peloponnesians, as the Argives, Eleans, and Lacedaemonians were ready to do any
thing for the asserting of their own liberty and power. The Nations about
Macedonia began to stir, being altogether inclining to renounce their obedience.

37. Alexander as an earnest of his future success easily removed those
obstacles, reducing some by entreaty and good words, others by awe, and some by
force of Arms. He first obtained of the Thessalians by a public Decree to be
owned as his Fathers Successor in the Generalship, and then easily bringing the
neighboring People to do the same, Which he overcomes.
passing the Pylae, called the Council of the Amphyctiones, and procured by
their suffrages to be elected the Captain General of all Greece. Having done
this, to bring over the rest by fear, he led down his Army into Boeotia, where
pitching his tents by Cadmea he affrighted the Thebans and the Athenians also
so much, that these getting in all their goods to the City, and fortifying it
as well as they might, they sent to beg his pardon, that they had owned him no
sooner. One of the Ambassadors was Demosthenes, who came not with the rest to
Alexander, but returned back when he was come on his way, either fot that he
stood in fear of him for the Orations made against his Father, or because he
would not crack his credit with the Persian King, from whom Aeschines accused
him to have received much money. He answered the Ambassadors to their
satisfaction, and then sent for the Deputies of the Estates to meet him at
Corinth, where speaking very courteously to them, he was again declared
General against the Persian, and aid decreed to him for carrying on the War;
after which he returned into Macedonia. Whilst he here was in the Isthmus,
many Philosophers came to salute him; Diogenes Laertius and Plutarch, alii.
only Diogenes the Sinopian made no reckoning of him. The King understanding
this, went to visit him then at Athens, and finding him sunning himself in his
tub, saluted him kindly, and desired him, to ask any thing of him whatsoever
he pleased. He only desired him to stand out of the Sun, which greatness of
mind Alexander so much admired, that when his followers laughed and jeered at
the man, he ansvvered, that If he were not Alexander, he would be Diogenes.

38. In the beginning of the Spring he made an Expedition into Thrace, Diodorus
and Plutarch.
where he subdued several People, and afterward prospered in the same manner
in Poeonia and Illyria. In the mean time came intelligence, that many of the
Greeks had a design to revolt, and not a few Cities, amongst which Thebes was
most eminent, and had renounced his authority. Hereupon he returned into
Macedonia; But the Thebans fall upon his Garrison in Cadmea.
the Thebans in the mean while besieging his Garrison in Cadmea, which, being
supplied with Arms by Demosthenes, they fell upon and slew many. They implored
the assistance of the Argives, Eleans, Arcadians, and Athenians. The Athenians
were persuaded by Demosthenes to send them aid, who reigning in the Assemblies
by the power of his tongue, wrote also to the Kings Captains in Asia, thence to
oppose Alexander, whom he called a boy and a fool. But Alexander marching with
speed into Boeotia, the valor of the Athenians well abtaed, and Desthenes
himself grew very cool. The Thebans uncertain what their allies would do, and
surprised with the Kings coming, called a Council of Officers to consult what
should be done, where it was resolved to fight for their liberty, and this was
confirmed by the People, which with great alacrity prepared for resistance,
though they might have had good terms of Alexander. Who delayed also to do any
thing, that they might have time to advise; for his mind being fully intent
upon the Persian War, he would gladly have been rid of all trouble on this side
of the Seas. But when he saw their wilfulness, Whereupon he besieges Thebes.
he fully resolved to make this City a terror to the rest. Yet he first offered
indemnity to all such as would come over to him, which they to cross, out of
emulation, caused to be proclaimed from an high Tower, that if there were any
who had a desire to join with the great King and the Thebans in vindicating the
liberty of Greece, and suppressing the Tyrant thereof, they should repair unto
them.

39. Then fell he with all his might and skill upon the City, which they as
stoutly defended, knowing else what would follow, and encouraging themselves
with their former success at Leuctra and Mantinea, they made resistance to the
wonder and discouragement of their Enemies; till at length Alexander perceiving
a little door to be left unguarded, sent Perdiccas thither with a party, who
breaking into the City made way for the rest of the Macedonians. He takes
Now were the Thebans on one side by them, and the other by the Garrison in
Cadmea (which like a tempest fell upon them) cut in pieces, the Law of War not
being allowed them, because of that Proclamation they had made from the Tower.
The Graecians also that served under Alexander, as the Phocians, Thespians,
Plataeans, Orchomeni^^s, and others, bearing them malice, spared them no more,
so that great sl^^ghter was made, they fighting it out to the last, having no
other regard to their lives than this, to sell them at as dear a rate as
possible. There were slain 6000 ( Aelian Var. hist. lib. 13. cap. 7.
by some mistake has 90000) and 30000 were taken captives. Alexander having
buried all his slain (to the number of 500) assembled a Council of the
Graecians, to which he referred what should be done with the Thebans. There
their Enemies urged against them, that they had conspired with the Barbarians
against the Graecians, in the time of Xerxes, had fought among^^ other allies
of Persia against Greece, and since that been acknowledged and ^^warded by his
Successors as well deserving of them. By these things they so incenced the
Council, as to decree the City to be levelled with the ground, the Captives to
be killed, and such as had fled to be sought for and brought to punishment. The
King acquiescing in this severe sentence, executed it accordingly, And
demolisheth it.
selling all he had taken, except the Priests and those that had entertained
his Father when he was young, and their kindred, with the posterity of Pindar
the Poet, whose house alone he left s^^nding. This famous City then was
demolished the last day of the Fleu^^^^ Solemnities then celebrated by the
Athenians, the twentieth day of the month B^^dromion, after it had continued
in a settled condition almost 800 years.

40. Alexander publishing an Edict, whereby all Graecians were forbidden to
receive the Theban Exiles, the Athenians alone refused to obey it, setting open
their gates to them, being then celebrating the mysteries of Ceres. Hereat he
was enraged, and when they had sent to deprecate his indignation the second
time, The Athenians receive the Theban exiles which makes a quarrel betwixt
him and them.
forgave them only on this condition: to give up to him the ten ( Plutarch
names but eight) Orators who had stirred them up against him, and the
principal whereof were Demosthenes and Lycurg^^^ (...) People hereupon not
knowing how to demean themselves, Phoci^^ the Good, who went ever cross to
Demosthenes in managing State affairs, made a Speech, wherein he would have
persuaded the Orators to kill themselves like good Citizens, rather than to
bring their Country into danger; but the People ill resenting this, expelled
him in a tumult. At length Demades the Orator being hired by Demosthenes with
five talents, persuaded the People to mercy, and so framed an answer to the
King, that it should signify their readiness to punish them if they should
find them worthy thereof. They sent him then to Alexander, with order, not
only to take up this matter, but also to entercede for the Theban Exiles, and
obtain leave for them to receive them. This he did by the power o^ his
persuasions, says Diodorus, In Phocione.
although Plutarch says it was done by Phocion, who after Alexander had cast
away from him the former Decree, and rejected the messengers, was kindly
received by him, after the King had understood that his Father respected him.
He not only admitted of his request but his counsel also: that if he loved an
idle life he should lay aside all thoughts of War, but if he thirsted after
glory he should transfer his Armies from the Greeks to the Barbarians. Justin
writes, that he gave them leave to keep their Orators, but forced them to
banish their Captains, who going over to Darius much incommodated his affairs
beyond the Seas. Arrianus only mentions Charidemus to have fled to the
Persians.

41. Alexander returned into Macedonia with his Army, where consulting about
the Persian War, Antipater and Parmenio his choicest Warriors advised him
first to marry, and beget children, and then to undertake the Expedition after
he was provided of Heirs. But he being of a most quick and active spirit, and
impatient of delay, would not hear of any such thing, seeing as he said, he was
now created General of Greece, and had such Forces left him by his Father.
After then he had by proposing the commodities of such an undertaking, inflamed
the minds of his Soldiers with a desire thereof, he sacrifized to his gods, and
solemnized the plays to Jupiter, formerly instituted by Archelaus his
Predecessor. The solemnity continued nine days, one being allotted to each of
the Muses, during which in his Royal Pavilion which had twenty beds to eat on,
he feasted the officers of his Army, and the Ambassadors of the Cities. He
passes over into Asia.
In the Spring, all things being now ready, he marched with his Forces toward
the Hellespont. They who account the least, says Plutarch, reckon 30000 Foot,
and 5000 Horse, and who the most 34000 of them and 4000 of these. For the
maintenance of such an Army Aristobulus wrote that he had no more than 70
talents. A. M. 3671. Ol. 111. an. 3. V. C. 420. Darii Codomani. 3. Alexand. 3.
Daris said he had provision but for thirty days, and Onesicritus delivered,
that he ought besides this 200 talents. And though he was thus slenderly
furnished, yet before his journey making inspection into the estates of his
friends, to one he assigned a Village, to another a piece of ground, to this a
certain rent, and to that the Customs of such a port. When he had almost
distributed all he had, Perdiccas asked him what he left for himself, and he
answered Hope; then replied the other. That shall be common to us with thee,
and refused to receive any thing, which was followed by many; but such as would
he willingly gratified, and thereby passed away most of the revenues of
Macedonia. He passed over his men in 60 ships to Troas, and first of all cast
his Spear upon the shore, and skipping out, as it were, took possession of
Asia, in the second year of his reign, and the second of Darius Codomannus, the
third of the 111 Olympiad, Evaenetus being Archon, and in the third month
before his leaving of the Office, and the succession of Ctesicles, under whose
Government Diodorus places this Expedition, A. M. 3670.

42. To Antipater he committed the Government of his affairs in Europe, with
whom he left 12000 Foot, and 11500 Horse, as Diodorus has it, if (...) being
crept in. Diodorus ad Olymp. 112. an. 3.
1500 be not rather to be read. The Lacedaemonians after his departure grudged
his success, and lay watching for an advantage how to begin a War, and if
possible divert the course of his good fortune, which after the battle of
Arbela they supposed to be fitly presented. For the issue of that battle being
reported in Greece, many of the Cities who where jealous of his power resolved
to contend for their ancient liberty, before the strength of the Persians
should be utterly spent, which they might have to their assistance. They were
encouraged to revolt from tumults now raised in Thrace, For Memnon being sent
General thither, having Soldiers at his devotion, stirred up the Barbarians to
rebel, and got together a great Army. Antipater hereupon was forced to march
against him and leave Macedonia; the absence of whom the Lacedaemonians
thinking a sufficient occasion of working some notable feat, The Lacedaemonians
make stirs in his absence,
excited the Graecians to agree together with united force to recover their
liberty. The Athenians conceiving themselves engaged to Alexander, who had
respected them above all others, refused to stir, but most of the
Peloponnesians, and some others, gave their names willingly, and raised amongst
them 20000 foot and 2000 horse, which were commanded by Agis the Spartan King.
Antipater hearing this composed the matters of Thrace as he might, and with an
Army of 40000 men raised out of the Confederates of Greece marched against
them, and joining battle, after much opposition slew 5300 with the loss of
3500 of his own men. Agis himself fighting most valiantly, after he had
received many wounds was to be carried out of the fight and so to be conveyed
home. But are vanquished by Antipater his Lieutenant,
But being encompassed with Enemies, and seeing there was no hope to escape, he
bade his men shift for themselves, and reserve their lives for the further
service of their Country: he on his knees received his Enemies as well as he
could, till having first killed some of them, at length he was slain after he
had been King nine years.

43. Antipater having obtained this victory, was willing to put an end to the
War out of fear of envy, by seeming to proceed further than the modesty of a
subject should require. For he knew the high spirit of Alexander, who rejoiced
in the victory, but not in him being Victor, which he not obscurely grudged at,
thinking so much to be detracted from his own glory as was added to that of
another. And send to him into Asia to beg pardon.
The Lacedaemonians therefore being constrained to send to him, he remitted
them for answer to the Council of Greece, which having heard what could be said
on both sides, referred the whole matter to the Cognizance of Alexander. They
then gave up to Antipater fifty Hostages, and sent into Asia to Alexander to
beg pardon. Most of such learned men as were Eminent during this period have
already, upon occasion, been spoken of.

CHAP. III. The affairs of Sicilie during this Empire.
SECT. I. The first Names and Inhabitants of this Island, with a relation of
such things as preceded the Persian Empire.
1. SICILIE is an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, lying over against Italy at
five miles distance; from which it is thought to have been severed by some
Earthquake, or the violence of the Sea, being joined formerly by an Isthmus,
or neck of Land, to the Continent.

The old Inhabitants of Sicilie.
2. It was first, from the Triangular Figure, called Trinacria, then Sicania,
and afterward obtained the name of Sicilie. The most ancient Inhabitants were
Cyclopes, or Giants with one only eye in their foreheads (as the Poets
fancied) and the Laestrygones of the same Original. After them succeeded the
Sicani, by some said to be indigenae, or naturals of the place; but by others a
people of Iberia, or Spain, and so named from Sicanus, a River in that
Country, whence they were expelled by the Ligyes, and coming into the Island
Trinacria changed its name into Sicania. After these, SECT. 1.
the Siculi a people of Italy (so named says Thucydides from Italus a King of
Arcadia) being expelled by the Opici, passed into this Island, and overthrowing
the Sicani seized upon the best parts of it, and gave it the name of Sicilie,
almost 300 years before the Greeks found it out. When Ilium was taken, A.M.
2821.
some Trojans fled by ship from the Achaeans into this Country, and fixing
themselves near to the Sicani, were all called Elymi, whose principal seats
were Eryx and Egesta. To these were added some of the Phocensians, of those who
in their return from Troy being driven by Tempest into Libya, or Africa, thence
passed into Sicilie. The Phoenicians also inhabited all over the Island in the
Maritime parts, and the little Islands near adjoining, for the benefit of
Traffic with the Siculi; But after that many Greeks arrived, they removed, and
joined themselves to the Elymi, and inhabited Motya, Soluns, and Panormus,
because thence was but a little passage unto Carthage. So many Barbarians, and
after this manner, inhabited Sicilie says Thucydides, Lib. 6. ad initium.
with whom in the main of their relations, consent Diodorus, Strabo, Dionysius
of Halycarnassus, Pausanias, Constantinus Porphyrogenneta and others.

3. The first Greeks that came into Sicilie (as Thucydides proceeds) were
some from Chalcis in Euboea, who under conduct of Theocles planted Naxus. A.M.
3271. V. C. 20. Achazi 10.
The year following Archias the Corinthian, Greek Colonies.
descended from Hercules, drove the Siculi from that place where stood the
City afterward called Syracuse. About the same time Lamis brought a Colony
from Megara, which he first placed upon the River Pantacius, in a place called
Trotilus. In the 45 year after Syracuse began to be inhabited, Antiphernus from
Rhodes, and Eutimus out of Crete, with their several Colonies planted Gela, so
named from the River by which it stood, the Inhabitants whereof 108 years after
erected the great and Magnificent City Agrigentum, or Agragas, so called also
from a River of the same name. Zancla was first inhabited by some Pirates of
Cuma, a City belonging to Chalcis; but afterward by a multitude that came
promiscuously from Chalcis and other parts of Euboea, under the the conduct of
Perieres of Cuma, and Cratamenes of Chalcis, and were hence cast out again by
the Samians and other Ionians, who fled from the Medes into Sicilie. Zancle was
so named by the Siculi, from a Sicle, in their language Zancla, which it
resembled. Not long after Anaxilas Tyrant of Rhegium banishing the Samians
filled it with a mixed multitude, and called it Messana, after the name of his
own Country. Himera was planted by the Zanclaeans, and many Chalcidians
amongst them, with whom also joined certain Syracusians being expelled by the
contrary faction, and called Myletidae. Their language was mixed betwixt the
Chalcidian and Dorick tongues. These were the Colonies which from several parts
of Greece planted Sicilie. As for other Towns that were Colonies of these
Colonies, they shall be told whose they were upon occasion.

4. That Giants inhabited Sicilie (although to some it has seemed no other
than the invention of Poets, who usually speak monstrously of ancient things)
the discovery of the last age has made most manifest; Giants in Sicilie.
at what time were in several places of the Island found the bones of such kind
of men, and the perfect proportion of one or more within the earth, which upon
touch mouldred all into dust. Cluverius in his Description of Sicilie, and
Fazellus, herein give abundant satisfaction, which might be further strengthened
from what the discoverers of America relate concerning men of such stature; but
that the Testimony of Scripture alone suffices to make evident the being of
Giants. That they were indigenae, or first Inhabitants of Sicilie, is probable,
and the very same with the Laestrygones. As for the Sicani, no credit is to be
given to the Testimony of Thucydides in this point that they came out of Spain,
for that Diodorus being this Countryman, and certainly rather more concerned
in the delivery of the Antiquities of it, than other Nations, averreth the most
accurate Historians to have affirmed them indigenae, which Timaus, who lived
under Agathocles the Tyrant, did fully demonstrate. Thucydides, who first
obtruded this fable upon the Greeks, confesses that they themselves were of a
contrary opinion, and though they in a matter concerning their honor might not
be heard, The Sicani came not out of Spain.
yet this may satisfy, that in Spain there is no such River to be found as
ever had the name of Sicanus, which some of those who follow the opinion of
Thucydides change into Sicoris (at this day Segre) and others speak of a City
called Sicania, and one Sicanus Captain of the Colony, all which are as true as
any. Neither could these Sicani be driven from their seats by the Ligures,
whose habitation was not in Spain beyond the Pyrenaean Hills, but in Gaul near
the River Rhodanus and the Alps. Lastly, that difficult journey which those
obscure people must have taken by Land (for the use of shipping was much later
in Spain) through the Countries of the Tyrrhenians, Umbri, Ligures, Ausonae,
Opici, Oenotrians, and other fierce and warlike Nations, after the passage of
the Pyrenaeans, Alps, and Gaul, may justly induce as to give credit rather to
the opinion of Diodorus, and of Demetrius Calatianus a most ancient Writer;
who, as the Scholiast of Theocritus tells us, derived the Sicani from the
Cyclopes or Giants.

Neither the Siculi out of Italy.
5. That the Siculi came out of Italy several grave Authors relate, as amongst
others Diodorus and Dionysius of Halicarnassus from the credit of Hellanicus
the Lesbian, Philistus, and Antiochus, both of Syracuse; but they so diversely
relate the story, that it appears to be no other than dubious, and so
intricate as nothing certainly can be pitched on. In Thucydides the Opici, in
Antiochus the Oenotrians and Opici drove out the Siculi: But in Hellanicus
instead of Siculi the Elymi and Ausonae were expelled, with Siculus their King,
by the Oenotrians and Japyges. Again, according to the mind of Philistus,
neither any Siculi, Ausonae, nor Elymi transported themselves out of Italy; but
the Ligures under conduct of Siculus. Solinus and Martianus make this Siculus
the son of Neptune, Isiodorus the brother of Italus, Servius Captain of the
Sicani, and Antiochus will have him a Roman Exile, whom Morges the Successor of
Italus entertained. Further, Dionysius writes, that the Siculi were Native
Inhabitants of Latium, and thence beaten by the Aborigines, which is plainly
out of the road of history, the Siculi never having been masters of Rome. It
would be too tedious to recite the several opinions concerning the time when
these Siculi should make their passage out of Italy into this Island. And what
Thucydides brings for a confirmation of his opinion, viz. that in his time
some of the Siculi remained in Italy, cannot but be false, no footsteps of
them being to be found out in that Country by the discovery of any Geography;
so that others, on the contrary, grant that the whole Nation passed over. These
arguments drawn from the uncertainty of reports constrain us rather to
acquiesce in the opinion of Bochartus, who concludes that no other stranger
came from other parts to inhabit Sicily, but all were Indigenae, except the
Greeks and Phoenicians, the Siculi and Sicani not being distinguished in Nation
but only in place. From the Phoenicians (who especially lived about the
Promontory of Lilybaeum, though they were dispersed throughout the Maritime
Coasts) he shows the Island it self, and every notable Town and River to have
been named, in the first book of that admirable work entitled Canaan.

6. Sicily, says Justin out of Trogus, Lib. 4.
was from the beginning the Country of the Cyclopes, Cocalus.
which being extinct Cocalus made himself King of the Island. To him fled
Daedalus for protection, A.M. 2773.
from the presence of Minos King of Crete. Daedalus.
This Daedalus was an Athenian, of the family of the Erechthidae, and a famous
Artist in all manner of Graven and Carved works. It happened that he had a
Scholar, his own Nephew by his sister, named Talos, who going beyond him in
skill, he privately murdered him, and the matter coming out, was forced to fly
for his life, and went into Crete. There being courteously entertained by
Minos, he wrought many rare pieces of Architecture, but at length so displeased
the King in some thing which concerned Pasiphae his wife, that he also fled
thence into Sicily, where he was entertained by Cocalus King of the Sicani,
then reigning at Inycus, called also Camicus. Some thought that by the means of
Pasiphae he escaped by boat, his Son Icarus accompanying him in another, and
that having invented sails, (whereas before oars only were in use) Icarus not
managing his with skill enough, his Vessel sunk, and thereupon arose the Fable
that they escaped with wings made of feathers waxed together, and of the young
man's soaring so high, till the Sun melting the wax, he thereupon fell headlong
into that part of the Sea which afterward bare his name. Others thought Icarus
was drowned as he took water. But Minos getting notice whither Daedalus was
fled, pursued him with an Army, and required Cocalus to give him up. Cocalus
returned him a satisfactory answer, and invited him unto his house, where he
stifled him in a bath, or else his daughters, for the love they bore to
Daedalus, when they came to wash him (which was the custom for women and maids
to do unto guests, according to Athenaeus) instead of warm water, poured on him
scalding pitch. He gave up his body to his men, pretending he had slipped by
chance into hot water, and persuaded them to stay and plant in the Island,
where they built Minoa and Engyum, now Gange, the two first Greek Cities
founded in Sicily, as some note. The Cretans afterward in revenge for their
King's death, came and besieged Camicus five years to no purpose, and were
shipwrackt in their return upon the Coast of Italy, where then resolving to
stay and hide their disgrace, they built Hyria, betwixt Tarentum and
Brundusium, and from them descended the Iapyges and Messapii. This passage
concerning Minos the younger, happened in the days of Hercules the Grecian,
an Age before the Trojan War.

7. After Cocalus the several Cities (because they wanted rightful and
successive Kings, as it seems, and lived under loose Democracy) became the
prey of Tyranni, whereof no Country was ever more fertile than this Island,
says Justin. Of these, Ut supra.
Anaxilaus his Justice vied with the Cruelty of the rest, and was not
unrewarded. For at his death leaving his children young, whom he committed to
the trust of Micythus his faithful slave, his Subjects so prized his memory, as
they chose rather to obey him, and suffer the Majesty of a Kingdom to be
managed by a slave, than desert his sons. But if by these Tyranni be to be
meant, such as after the setlement of the Greek Colonies, made themselves
Masters of the Cities (as we have no other ground than to believe; the name of
Anaxilaus sufficiently declaring it is original) then Cocalus living an Age
before the Trojan War, and the first Greek Colony mentioned by Thucydides being
planted in the A. M. 2723.
11 Olympiad, this after Cocalus is with great liberty used by Trogus or
Justin; several hundreds of years, ( viz. five or six) intervening betwixt
Cocalus and those Tyrants. For the Cities were many years after their founding
governed by the People, according to the custom of Greece, till Phalaris
usurped in the State of Agrigentum, which Suidas writes to have happened in
the 52 Olympiad, and Eusebius in the 54. This difference betwixt them may well
be reconciled, if, with Cappellus, we believe that Phalaris coming to
Agrigentum, there was kindly entertained for eight years, A. M. 3441. Olymp.
54. an. 1. V. C. 190. Evilmerodachi, 2.
at the end whereof took occasion from a guest, and perhaps a Judge of
Controversies, to make himself Tyrant, and the People slaves.

8. Phalaris was born at Astypalea a City in Crete; his Fathers name was
Laodamus, Phalaris the Tyrant.
who died whilst this his son was an infant. He married Erythia, and on her
begat Paurolas, a little before whose btrth being banished, and deprived of the
greated part of his estate, he continued long in a desolate condition, not
knowing what to do, till at length a Sedition being raised in the State of
Agrigentum, he was sent for by the weaker faction, and in conclusion got all
the power into his hands. He kept the Tyranny by the same arts he first
obtained it, viz. fraud and cruelty, for which cause he was grievously hated by
many, and his life laid at by those of whom he had well deserved. Erythia
continued all her life with her son Paurolas at Astypalea, where though she was
much importuned by many Suitors, yet she remained steadfast in fidelity to her
husband. The Citizens of Astypalea when they saw Phalaris had so advanced
himself, either for that now their hatred was allaied, or out of fear of
revenge, sent to him to intimate that they had revoked what had been formerly
done against him, as unjust. He despised not this late repentance, but sent
them his hearty thanks, and rewarded them. Having obtained a victory over the
Leontines, his son Paurolas sent him a Crown of Gold, which he returned back
unto his wife Erythia. She was at length poisoned by Python one of her Suitors,
enraged at a repulse; which thing Phalaris took most impatiently.

9. It happened that one Perillus an Athenian, and an excellent Statuary, came to
Agrigentum, where showing his rare skill, he was kindly entertained by
Phalaris. He taking notice of Phalaris his cruelty, framed a brazen Bull, which
being heated and a man put in his belly, would by the roaring of him that was
thus tormented, Perillus and his brazen Bull.
imitate the voice of a natural one. Presenting him with this exquisite piece,
as incomparable for the torturing of men, he admired his skill, but detesting
his wickedness, caused him first to make a trial of it, and excused himself to
the Athenians, who took it ill, as having done nothing but what was just and
meet. If Perillus had only made experiments, Phalaris had satisfied all
reasonable men; but threatening his Enemies with this Engine, and making good
his word upom them as often as he could have occasion, he thereby incurred, and
slighted the hatred of mankind. At the same time flourished one Stesichorus a
Poet of Himera, who died eight years before Phalaris. He wrote verses against
the Tyrant, and raised an Army, animating the Inhabitants of Himera against
him, with whom joined Conon a most lewd and naughty man, and diverse others, all
which, together with the Poet, at length fell into his hands. Conon was
presently condemned to the Bull. He doubted at first what to do with
Stesichorus, but at length beholding his worth, he not only dismissed him
unpunished, but with large gifts; and ever after mightily reverenced him both
alive and dead; insomuch as he desired the Himerians to build him a Temple, and
Altars (offering for that purpose men, money, and all necessaries) and most
lovingly comforted his daughters.

10. He was so great a contemner of Popularity, and so conscious of his
wickedness and public infamy, that he refused the honors offered him by
them of Melita, not for any pride, but with a friendly admonition, that it
would be to them infamous, and to him not at all advantageous. So when
Stesichorus, Cleaeneta, Theano, and others, thought of writing in his praise,
he seriously desired they would forbear, wishing rather that his name might be
buried in oblivion, than celebrated in the Writings of Learned men, and, to no
purpose, adorned with false commendations. Being grievously provoked by the
affronts of the Messenians, Catanians, Leontines, Zanclaeans, and Tauromenites,
he prosecuted them to the utmost, often saying, that he most certainly knew
they would fall into his hands, which accordingly came to pass. He confesses
that he had tortured in the brazen Engine 37 men, seriously wishing they might
be the last; but he foresaw that Lamachus and Epiterses, though absent, would
increase the number. These things are related in the Epistles that go under his
name, which some Learned Men think written by Lucian. But whoever so drew to
the life another's disposition as he there does his own, insomuch as Suidas
accounts them (...).
very admirable. If one consider their style, accutenesse, and invention, there
are no Epistles of any Tyrant, no not of any Orator or Philosopher to be
compared with them. But if one look at the disposition of the man, he was a
portentous thing, Phalaris his disposition.
born for the chastisement of the naughtiness of men, of cruel hatred and
unparalleld cruelty; yet of a most propense and munificent mind toward his
Friends, and withal reverencing Virtue so much in his very Enemies, that for
it is sake he would pardon injuries, and relinquish hatred.

11. That is scarce credible which Clearchus relates in Lib. 9.
Athenaeus, that he was transported with so great cruelty, as to have served up
to his table sucking and new born Infants. Lib. 2. c. 4.
Aelian has a more likely story concerning Chariton and Melanippus. Chariton
loved Melanippus with an extravagant and immodest Love, as appears from the
historian. SECT. 2.
Melanippus having a contest with one of Phalaris his friends, was commanded,
and at length forced to desist, which taking very ill, he complained of it to
his Lover, and desiring his assistance for killing the Tyrant, thought of
taking in other young men into the conspiracy. Chariton and Melanippus.
Chariton desired of him to trust him alone with the matter to take an
opportunity to revenge him, unwilling that both of them should miscarry in it
if it were discovered; and on a time made at Phalaris with his dagger, but was
prevented by his Guard, which he had continually about him. Being examined
concerning his Accomplices, he endured great tortures, so long, that Melanippus
more sensible of them than he himself, went to the Tyrant, and revealed the
whole matter. He admiring the courage and love of both, dismissed them, with
this condition, that they should depart the same day out of Sicilie. This love
which appears to have been no better than an unnatural lust, was afterward
by Apollo called divine, whence, as in other respects, these impure Spirits,
the gods of Heathens, betrayed themselves what they were. And hence it is no
wonder that the Philosophers of old, such as Socrates, Plato, Xenophon,
Aeschines, Cebes, and the rest, might approve of this affection toward Males,
which the Val. Max. l. 6. c. 1. Plut. in Marcello.
Romans yet abhorred in some Ages, the Aelian l. 3. c. 12.
Lacedaemonians held as Capital, and the Lake wherein Sodom and Gommorah were
swallowed up, evinceth to have been contrary to the Law of God and Nature. But
as for Phalaris, after he had tyrannized sixteen years, he perished by the fury
of all the multitude of Agrigentum, which, as Offic. l. 2.
Cicero writes, fell upon him. Some thought that his subjects conspired
against him, being principled thereto by the doctrine of Pythagoras, of which
opinion is also Cap. 32.
Jamblich^s in the life of this Philosopher. But the whole relation concerning
Pythagoras his intercourse with Phalaris is therefore deservedly suspected,
because the Philosopher being yet young had scarce passed into Italy. The death
of Phalaris happened about the first year of the 58 Olympiad, and the twelfth
year of Cyrus his Reign, reckoned from his first obtaining the Kingdom of Media.

SECT. II. Of such thing as were Contemporary with the Persian Empire.
1. AFter the death of Phalaris, A. M. 3525. Ol. 75. an. 1. V.C. 274. Xerxis 6.
the Citizens of Agrigentum recovered their liberty, and enjoyed it till Thero
again brought them under. He was the son of Aenesidamus, and boasted that he
was descended from Oedipus. Thero Tyrannus of Agrigentum.
He got the prize at the race with the Chariot in the Olympic games, and is
celebrated by Olymp. Herod. l. 7. c. 153, etc. Pausan. l. 6. Sive Eliac. l.
posteriore.
Pindar the Poet, whose Scholiast teaches us, that he was Father in Law to
Gelon Tyrant of Syracuse, by his daughter Demareta, and married also his
brother's daughter: At this time Panatius made himself Lord of Leontium, and
Cleander of Gela. Cleander, after seven years, was succeeded by his brother
Hippocrates, who sore afflicted the people of Naxus, of Zancle, or Messana, and
Leontium, whom he forced to acknowledge him for their Lord. After seven years,
he was also slain in a battle against the Siculi, having before this made war
with the Syracusians, and by composition got from them the City of Camerina.
Gelon of Syracuse.
After his death Gelon the son of Dinomenes (descended of the race of the
Rhodians, who with the Cretans and other Greeks had seated themselves in
Sicilie) that had commanded his Forces with great success, and to whom he
committed the trust of his Children, breaking all obligations made himself Lord
of Gela. After he was in possession of this Town, a Sedition happening in
Syracuse, betwixt the Magistrates and People, he being called in to the
assistance of the Governors that were driven out by the multitude, made
himself Prince. Such being the danger and infirmity of all Governments, except
rightfully successive Monarchy. This fell out in the second year of the 72
Olympiad, when Hybrilides was Archon at Athens, the 31th of Darius Hystaspis,
and the same, as some reckon, wherein the battle at Marathon was fought. Now
the comportment of Sicilian affairs constraining us to speak most concerning
Syracuse, so considerable a place, both as to its self, as a City, and as the
scene of so great transactions, requires a more accurate description.

The Original of Syracuse.
2. Syracuse was first inhabited by some Greeks of Aetolia, and had the name of
Ortygia. These were expelled by the Siculi, who possessed themselves of the
place, and at length were outed also by a Colony led hither out of Peloponnesus
by Archias the Corinthian, in the eleventh Olympiad, Romulus then reigning at
Rome, and the Mess^nian War being very hot in Peloponnesus. This new Colony,
because of Archias, and for that many followed him from Corinth, owned that
City for its Metropolis, which at that time was most powerful at Sea. But
many afterward flocked out of other parts of Peloponnesus, and by little and
little the City of Syracuse so increased, as it became not only the greatest,
and most beautiful of all in Sicily, but of Greek Cities whatsoever, as Cicero
affirms. It contained, as he writes, four great Cities; the Island,
Acradina, Tycha, and Neapolis. Its compass was 180 furlongs, having, besides
Suburbs, two Ports very commodious for shipping, being separated by the Island,
and grounds about it very fertile, in some places rising into little Hills, but
compassed about with Fennes. The first Inhabitants dwelt in the Island
anciently called Ortygia; then as the City increased the other parts were
added, whereof the latest was Neapolis. As for the state of the City, after it
received a new beginning from Archias, the form of the Commonwealth was without
doubt the same that then was in the Metropolis under the Government of the
B^chiadae, viz. Oligarchical, bordering upon Aristocracie. Afterward the
common people waxing heady outed the better sort of the possession of the
grounds, and seizing on the Government, made bad to be worse, as the sad
changes and desolations will show. The Exiles (by Herodotus called Gamori)
betook themselves to Gelon the Tyrannus of Gela, who coming to restore them
with an Army, the people resisted not, but received him into the City, whereby
obtaining the whole power, he restored it not to the Nobility, but made himself
master of Syracuse. This happened at the time aforesaid, and about 244 years
after the Plantation of Archias.

3. Gelon so used his power as he was loved by all, and feared by none. He
every way much enlarged, The acts and power of Gelon.
adorned, and enriched the City: out of all Conquered Towns he took the
Noblest, and worst disposed Citizens, and brought them to Syracuse. He procured
the affections of almost all that dwelt in Sicily, and so greatly strengthened
himself, that he was able with a Navy of 200 Triremes, and as great an Army as
all Greece could set forth against Xerxes, to help the Graecians in the Median
War; and had gone to their assistance, if they would either have granted him
the Command of the Land Army or the Fleet. When he could obtain neither of
those, he employed his forces against the Carthaginians, who had been called
into Sicily by the Egestans, and on the same day wherein the Greeks obtained
their victory at Salamine, got so great an one over them at Himera a Maritime
Town, that his glory is thought to have equalled, His success against the
Carthaginians.
if not exceeded, the other of Themistocles. At this time the Carthaginians
were very powerful, and become Eminent; whose affairs being by necessity to be
joined with such matters as relate to this Island of Sicily, a more convenient
place cannot be had, to speak something (as this work requires) of the
Original, and progress of their Commonwealth.

The Original of Carthage.
4. Carthage was a Colony of Tire, and Tire of Sidon the most ancient Metropolis
of Phoenicia, mentioned by Homer with commendation for ingenious industry (who
has not one word concerning Tire) and built by Sidon the eldest son of Canaan.
Tire was built about the 2747 year of the World, and 240 years before Solomon's
Temple, as Antiquit. l. 8. c. 2.
Josephus has observed. The Greeks thought it received its name from Tyrus the
Founder: and Stephanus Byzantius. Pollux. lib. 1.
some invented a fable of a Nymph, called Tyros, beloved by Hercules. But Tsor
in the Phoenician language signifying a Rock, the situation it self
sufficiently declares the Original of the name, which upon this account was
communicated to three other places, besides this eminent City, viz. Scylax in
descriptione Phoenices vide Bocharti Canaan lib. 2. cap. 17.
two in the Continent, and another in the same Island. Near the Island of this
famous City stood Palaetyrus, or Old Tire, mentioned by Joshua, and called a
strong City even at the division of the Land of Canaan, which happened about 200
years before the building of that whereof we speak. Now Antiquit. lib. 8. cap.
2. and Contra Apionem lib. 1.
Josephus makes the Temple of Jerusalem to have been founded in the eleventh
year of the reign of Hiram King of Tire, who was son to Abebaal, by Josephus
called Abibalus, and by Eusebius, Abelbalus. Hiram, or Huram according to the
Hebrews, (by the Greeks called Irom and Syron (for Horom) by Eupolemus) was a
great friend to David, and supplied Solomon his son with materials, and
workmen for building the Temple. He also proposed hard questions to Solomon to
be unfolded, as Menander testified, who translated the Tyrian Annals into the
Greek language: He strengthened, and enlarged the City of Tire, as Dius also
wrote, and reigned 34 years. After him his son Beleastartus reigned 7. and
Abdastartus 9. who being slain by the four sons of his Nurse, the eldest of
them reigned twelve years. Then Astartus the son of Baleastartus 12. his
brother Astarimus 9. who was slain by his brother Phelles. Phelles reigned but
eight months, being killed by Ithobalus the Priest of Astarta, who reigned 32
years; after him Badezorus his son 6. then Mettinus his son 9. and lastly,
Pygmalion 40. in the seventh of whose reign his sister Dido built the City of
Carthage in Africa. Therefore from the beginning of Hirams reign to the
building of Carthage intervened 155 years and eight months; and whereas the
Temple was founded at Jerusalem in the twelfth of his reign, from the building
of the Temple to that of Carthage passed 143 years and eight months, as
Josephus collecteth from the Testimony of Menander the Ephesian, in his first
book against Apion.

The several opinions concerning the building of Carthage.
5. But Appian in his History of the Punick Wars, writes that Carthage was
built by the Tyrians, 50 years before the destruction of Troy, which precedeth
the former date 360 years. He names as founders Zorus and Carchedon, according
to the opinion of the Greeks, who thought them the Captains of the Colony;
whereas Tsor, or Zor, was the name of the Metropolis, and Carchedon of the new
City, Carthada signifying a New City in the Phoenician language, as Solinus
witnesses. Lib. 1. p. 48.
Strabo again will have the Phoenicians to have led out Colonies as far as the
Pillars of Hercules, and planted some, a little after the Trojan War, upon the
Maritime Coasts of Africa, with which Virgil closing, feigneth Dido to have
reigned at Carthage at that time; whereas she was 300 years later, according to
the Testimony of the Phoenician Annals; so as Servius upon the Poet affirms
the whole story of Aeneas and Dido to be a fiction, and utterly against the
course of History. Further, Eusebius notes that some accounted Carthage built
143 years after the destruction of Troy, about the 2966 year of the World, and
the 23 of the reign of David, 164 years or more before the time assigned to
Dido by Menander. It consisted of three parts.
For the reconcilement of these several assertions it must be considered that
Carthage consisted of three parts, viz. Cothon, Megara, and Byrsa, whereof the
first was the Port, and the last the Citadel compassed about by the second,
called Magalia and Magaria, but more truly Megara, signifying properly in the
Punick language, dwellings in a strange Country. It Is conceived that these
might be built at several times; as that part about the Haven before the War of
Troy; the other some time within 144 years after the destruction of it, which
might rightly, in respect of the other, be called Carthada, or New Town; and
lastly, the Byrsa by Dido 166 years after. For the Phoenicians being masters at
Sea, might according to their pleasure, as they had occasion, send out
Colonies, which they began to do from the time that Joshua expelled them out of
the Land of Canaan. The Greeks themselves believed that Cadmus made an
expedition into Africa, and there built many Cities, as appears out of
Nonius; and he built the Citadel at Thebes about the time of Joshua. In
Procopius his age, who lived under Justinian the Emperor, about the 540 year
of Christ, the two Pillars were yet standing, which those Canaanites erected
that fled from the face of Joshua, in that part of Africa, called Tingitana, as
the inscription testified, which we formerly mentioned, and Eusebius writes
that these same Canaanites led Colonies into Tripolis in Africa. Lastly,
amongst several other Cities built by the Phoenicians, the most considerable,
after Carthage, was Utica, Utica.
some ten miles distant from it, which Aristotle, from the Phoenician Histories
reports to be 287 years antienter than Carthage, and Velletus Paterculus to
have been built by the Tyrians a few years after Gades, about the time of
Codrus, who being Contemporary with Saul, this City obtained the name of Utica
or Ityca, that is (says Bochartus) in the Phoenician language, Old or Ancient.

The story of Dido.
6. Dido was sister to Pygmalion King of Tire, and wife to Sichaeus, Menander
Ephesius apud Josephum ut prius. Justin lib. 18. Appian. lib. de bellis
Punicis. Servius in Aeneiad. lib. 1.
or Sicharbas their Uncle the Priest of Hercules. Sichaeus being murdered by
Pygmalion for his Wealth, she out of hatred to, or for fear of her brother fled
into Africa, with all she could take, and thereby disappointed the murderer of
his prey. The story goes, that coming into Africa, she and her Companions were
repelled by Hiarbas the King of that place, till they craftily desired to buy
of him so much ground as an Ox's hide would compass. The Africans laughed at
their folly, and out of desire to see what use they could make of so little
ground, swore to make good the bargain. The Phoenicians then cut the Hide all
into one small thong, with which they encompassed twenty furlong, and thereon
built a Castle, thence, (said the Greeks) called Byrsa. But learned men explode
this story of the Hide as a mere invention, and a fable raised from a false
explication of the word, which in the Hebrew tongue is Bosra, and signifying a
fortified place, or Castle, is changed into Byrsa for the better sound, because
the Genius of the Greek language suffers not S and R to be joined together.
Justin out of Trogus relates that Hiarbas King of Mauritania sent for ten of
the principal Carthaginians, and required Dido in marriage, threatening else to
make War upon them. At their return they told her he desired some one who might
teach his people breeding and manners, but none could be found that was content
to leave his Country, and join himself with the Barbarians, whose lives were
like to those of wild beasts. She blaming them all exceedingly, that they
preferred their private commodity before the good of their Country, to which
if need required they ought their very lives, they opened to her the whole
matter, saying, that what she would impose upon others, she ought not her self
to refuse. Being caught with this wile, she long called on the name of
Sichaeus, her husband, with many tears and great lamentation, then taking three
months time for the doing of what there was necessity for, she made a pile of
wood, as though to make a Parentation to Sichaeus, and appease his Ghost before
her second marriage. Having killed many beasts, she ascended the Pile with a
Sword in her hand, and turning to the people said, that now she was going to
her husband, and therewithal killed her self. Before the name of Dido (which
some make to signify Loved or Amiable, Vide Bocharti Canaan. lib. 1. c. 14.
and Simson. ad A.M. 3132.
and others more probably Wandering or Erratick) she had that of Elissa,
betokening a Divine Woman, or Virago. The Latin word Virago, in Greek written
Ouirago, is in Eusebius corrupted into Origo, and being applied as a name to
the City, and not to the woman, by a misunderstanding has much perplexed
Joseph Scaliger and others.

7. Carthage then being re-edified, or enlarged by Dido, and the Colony she
brought thither, about the 3132 year of the World, in the days of Johas King
of Judah, and Jehu of Israel, 310 years after the destruction of Troy, The form
of Government at Carthage.
97 before the first Olympiad, and 120 before the building of Rome, was at
first under Monarchical Government; but afterward rejecting it, endured many
hazards and hardships, which followed loose liberty, whereof most are briefly
recited by Justin in his eighteenth book, and those that follow. The Polit.
lib. 2. cap. 9.
Philosopher compares this Commonwealth with those of the Cretans and
Lacedaemonians, saying that it was mixed of Aristocracy and Policy, as he
calls it. Lib. 16.
Polybius says it was composed of Kingly, Aristocratical, and Democratical
Governments, and In Nycocle page 61. tolius operis editi Genevae 1636.
Isocrates makes it Oligarchical at home, and in War Monarchical. As two Kings
at Lacedaemon had the first rank of Magistracy with equal power, so at
Carthage two persons, by them called Suffetes, and by Aristotle, and Polybius,
and Corn. Nepos, termed Kings, yet only nominal; As the former were for life,
so these were but Annual (in which respect Lib. 10.
Livie compares them with the Consuls of Rome) and their dignity being
hereditary, those were yearly elected out of any noble Families. Such were
especially preferred as were accounted most eminent for Virtue, and able to
defray the charges of their place. Aristotle commends this above the
Lacedaemonian custom, all but that concerning their wealth, imputing it as an
error to the Legislator; who ought another way to have provided for
Magistrates, that they might attend public business without any detriment to
themselves, and so be preferred merely for their Virtue.

The Suffetes.
8. These Suffetes were more rightly in their own Language called Sophetim, the
Hebrew name of those chief Judges amongst the Israelites, who from Joshua to
Saul governed their Commonwealth, and the History of whose actions by us called
Judges, has the same title of Sophetim, for that interpretation which renders
it Sophim (i. e. Overseers) at the first sight appears less probable. Their
Office was to Livius ibid. Lege Ubbonem Emmium in Descr. Re^p. Carthaginiensium.
assemble the Senate, in which doubtless they presided and proposed. They
decided causes Criminal, but their power was confined to home, nothing
appearing of their meddling with warlike matters, or having command of the
Armies. To these Suffetes was added a Senate, which because Aristotle compares
it with that of Lacedaemon, Senate.
may be supposed elective out of the best sort and most ancient men, and the
Senators it is likely, enjoyed the dignity all their lives. How many they were
in number does not appear; but that herein this Senate exceeded the other of
Lacedaemon, is to be gathered from Lib. 19.
Justin, who speaks of 100 persons that out of it were chosen for Judges, to
take account of the actions of all Generals at their return from the Wars. This
Senate, as that at Rome, was the chief member, and as the Soul of the State,
wherein the Suffetes propounding, as the Consuls there, all thines of moment
were brought to it; especially what concerned those great things of Empire:
viz. Peace, War, and Leagues. The Suffetes deliberating with the Senate, if it
was unanimous, and they resolved the same thing, their Decree was Law to the
whole State; but if the Senate and Suffetes disagreed, then was the matter
referred to the People.

Concio or Assembly.
9. In the Concio or Assembly of the People, any one of the rabble might speak
his mind freely, and without danger contradict the Magistrates. The People's
Decree concerning any thing referred, was taken for the ultimate determination
of the whole and State, and being once passed was so binding, that it was not
lawful to offer any thing against it, which Aristotle reprehendeth (and well
may he) as too Popular, and too much declining from the best form of a
Commonwealth, affirming this Constitution to have no place in the best modelled
States. But quo supra.
Polybius dissenting from the Philosopher, where he compares the Carthaginian
with the Laconick and Roman Commonwealths, shows that it was poised of the
three kinds of Government, that the Suffetes were as Kings, the Senate held the
place of Optimates or Nobility, and the People a convenient power. Yet he
adds, that when Hannibal made War upon the Romans, (which happened ten years
after the death of Aristotle,) the State of Carthage declined from it is ancient
and best condition, the People having assumed more than formerly, when the
Roman Senate's authority was yet whole. This he thinks to have much
incommodated their affairs, and brought great advantage to the Romans. Consule
Polybium.
But what authority the People had during the best and most ancient State, he
no where in those Books and fragments that are remaining, declares. Emmius
thinks that it consisted in electing Magistrates, making Laws, Leagues,
Peace, and War; in appointing and ordering Negotiations, Customs, Tributes, and
such like things, which concerned the generality, and respected the profit of
the multitude. But some of these things seem rather to have fallen under the
consideration of the Kings and Senate; however the disorders that followed, as
in all other such Governments, will satisfy the Reader in his opinion of the
excellency of Monarchy.

Council of 104.
10. Besides the Senate there was a Council of 104 men, whereof Aristotle only
informs us, and which, according to the round number, from him we may call
the Centumvirate. They had power to choose five men out of their body, who had
very large and great authority; Both these sorts of Magistrates retained their
power longer than any other, enjoying it both before and after they came to be
of the five, which thing was plainly Oligarchical. But in that they were not
chosen by lot, but by the Suffrages of the People, and served without wages; in
that they alone took cognizance of, and judged controversies, and public
actions, none being remitted to others, as the custom was at Lacedaemon, this
he takes notice to be Aristocratical. He compares the power of the
Centumvirate with that of the Ephori at Sparta, whereby he teaches us, that
the power of judging lay in it. And as the Ephori were (acording to him)
Conservators of Popular liberty at Sparta, protecting the Plebeians against the
power of the great ones, so it is likely, from these words of Aristotle, that
those 100 men at Carthage were the Keepers of the Popularity. Herein he
prefereth them before the Ephori, that they were not chosen out of the rabble,
but the better sort of Citizens, wherein lay also a piece of Aristocracy; for
mean persons being preferred to greatest places, do much hurt a Commonwealth,
says he, and have already endamaged that of the Lacedaemonians. Censors.
Amonst civil Officers there were some that made inspection into the manners of
the Citizens, as Corn. Nepos tells us in the life of Amilcar, Pretorship.
the Father of famous Hannibal, from whom they removed a beautiful young man
called Asdrubal, because he was reported to be more familiar with him, than
modesty required. There was also a Praetorship which had authority to look to
the Customs and Tributes, and also to prefer Laws, as appears by Hannibal,
who being chosen into this office, not only reformed the Customers, but also
taking notice of the corruption of Judges, procured a Law for them to be chosen
every year. But whether there were more than one of these Officers, is not to
be discovered from ancient Writers.

11. Besides the faults before mentioned, Aristotle reprehendeth the Custom of
choosing the Suffetes for their riches, which opens a door to avarice and
indirect practices thence arising. Faults in the Commonwealth.
He also notes it as a fault, that one and the same man had several Offices,
which yet they esteemed as a great honor. One detestable practice they used of
old, to sacrifize to their gods humane Sacrifices, when any affliction or
disaster fell upon them, and even their own Sons, as Plato witnesses, which
custom they seem to have brought with them out of Palaestine, every year
sending thither such kind of presents unto Hercules, as we find in Pliny.
Another absurd Law they had, Lib. 30. cap. 5.
which forbad any Citizens to learn the Greek Langage, lest they should hold
intelligence with the Enemy, because one Suniator had so done with Dionysius
the elder, Good Laws.
as Justin writes. This indeed was laudable, that this City abhominated
Drunkenness, and severely prohibited Wine as much as to be tasted in in the
Camp, as Plato records in his Laws. This also Aristotle commends, that, for
an encouragement to warfare, they had a Law which gave liberty to a Soldier to
wear so many Rings as he had served times in the field. The People were by
their natural constitution, morose and surly, obedient to their Magistrates,
The disposition of the people agreeable with their government.
tyrannical toward their Subjects, most dejected in time of fear, and cruel in
anger, resolute in their designs, notwithstanding all force of flattery, and so
infamous for their breach of faith, that the Punick faith or trust became a
Proverb. As for their greatness and Dominion, the description thereof is to be
left to it is proper place. Now must their affairs abroad in Sicily and other
parts, be defined with the matters of that Island.

12. At what time, or upon what occasion the Carthaginians first came into
Sicilie is uncertain, Decad. 1. lib. 4.
Livie will have them first called in by the Sedition of the Islanders. in the
year that T. Quintius (Surnamed Cincinnatus, as also Penno) and Cn. Julius
Mento were Consuls, which was in the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, the
323 year of the City, 50 years after the passage of Xerxes into Greece, and
consequently as many from the Victory which Gelon got over them; a gross
mistake. Lib. 18.
Justin out of Trogus, having first related their impious custom of pleasing
their gods by humane Sacrifices, adds, that the divine powers being therewith
displeased or averse to them, when they had long unhappily made War in Sicilie,
they translated it into Sardinia, and there losing the greatest part of their
Army, received a grievous overthrow, whereupon they banished Mazaeus their
General, (by whom they had conquered a great part of Sicilie, Mazaeus.
and done great matters against the Africans) with that part of the Army which
remained. The Army taking this in great disdain, sent to the City to desire a
repealing of the Act of banishment, and threatened by force to rescind it, in
case they were thereto constrained by a denial of their suit. Their message
being despised, they besieged the City, and after a few days took it. Mazaeus
calling the People together, complained of the injury, excused the necessity of
the War, and inveighed against the contempt of his Victories. He said he would
pardon all, but such as had been authors of the injurious Exile of their fellow
Citizens; and accordingly putting ten of the Senators to death, he restored the
City to it is Laws. Not long after being accused of an intention to make himself
absolute, he was punished both for his paricide committed against his Country,
and his own Son (as Justin terms it) whom being a Priest, he had crucified,
for refusing to come to him before he had finished his superstitious rites, and
when he came appeared in his purple and other ornaments, which Mazaeus thought
unsuitable with the condition of him his Father. Him succeeded Mago, by whose
industy the wealth, dominion, and reputation of the Carthaginians, for matters
of War, increased.

Mago.
13. Mago being the first, who by ordaining military discipline, Justin lib. 19
had laid the foundation of Empire, and added to the strength of the City, as
well by introducing Virtue as the Art of War, left two Sons behind him,
Asdrubal and Amilcar, who by treading in his paths, succeeded as well to the
greatness as the Patrimony of their Father. Under their conduct the State made
War in Sardinia, and fought against the Africans, who demanded Tribute for the
ground on which Carthage stood, which also at length they constrained the
Carthaginians to pay. Asdrubal died of his wounds in Sardinia, whose death was
ennobled by public mourning, eleven Dictatorships, as Justin calls them (by
which seems to be understood no other than so many times sending out, or
commissionating as General, with full power in the field, yet so as to be under
the commands of the State) and four Triumphs: and the Enemies of Carthage took
heart, as if with the Captain it is force and power was also dead. The
Inhabitants of Sicilie then vexed with the continual injuries of the
Carthaginians, betook themselves to Leonidas the brother of the King of Sparta,
and a great War insued, wherein both parties long strugled with various
Fortune. At this time came Ambassadors from Darius (the Son of Hystaspes) King
of Persia, commanding the Carthaginians to forbear offering humane Sacrifices,
and eating man's flesh, requiring them to burn their dead rather than bury them,
Darius his message to the Carthaginians.
and demanding assistance against the Greeks, with whom he was about to engage
in War. They denied to afford any succors because of their continual Wars with
their neighbors; but obeyed him in the rest, lest they should seem too
stubborn, says Justin; yet that they stood not to their word, the testimonies
of Plato, Diodorus, and Pliny, do certify. Whilst these things passed, Amilcar
was slain in the War of Sicilie, leaving three Sons: Amilco, Hanno, and Gisgo.
Asdrubal also left so many: viz. Annibal, Asdrubal, and Sappho. Of these,
Annibal is mistaken for Annibal the great, by one who has made some short
Notes upon Margin ad l. 19. excus. Londini, pro Felice, Kingstonio. 1651.
Justin, and Amilcar his Uncle, for Amilcar Barchas Father to the famous
Annibal, and Mago also for another of this name, that lived Vide infra paragr.
53.
many years after in the days of Dionysius the younger, and Timoleon. The
Annotator wondreth what came into Justin's mind to make Annibal (the great) the
son of Asdrubal, and well he might, if any such thing had been intended: he
also refers the Reader to the life of Timoleon, to find that Mago killed
himself, and was after his death nailed to a cross, because he fought
unprosperously in Sicilie, which Plutarch intends of another person. Of this
gross mistake of one (whosoever he was) that took upon him to inform
beginners, Students in History are to take notice and beware.

14. For this Amilcar seems no other than the very same that was slain in the
battle fought with Gelon of Syracuse, in the sixth year of Xerxes, Son to
Darius King of Persia, from which was made a digression into the affairs of
Carthage. The great defeat of Amilcar.
With Amilcar perished 150000 Carthaginians; the Captives that remained of his
Army, filled all the Cities of the Island, and the State of Carthage was
constrained to beg peace, having, as some say, made this War at the instance of
Xerxes, that thereby the Greeks in Sicilie might be diverted from helping their
Friends. After this, Herold. l. 7. c. 153. Aelian var. hist. lib. 13. c. 37. A.
M. 3527. Ol. 75. an. 3. V. C. 276. Xerxis 8.
Gelon was offered the Kingdom of Sicilie; but he generously refused it,
whereby he obtained the greater glory and love. At length, having settled all
things well, he died full of honor at Syracuse, after he had held the
Principality about thirteen years. In the third year of the 75 Olympiad his
elder brother Hieron succeeded him. Hieron of Syracuse.
He rebuilded Catana, and changed it is name into Aetna, the Mountain of which
name about this time brake out into flames, as fifty years after it did also.
In the beginning of his reign he was much unlike to his brother Gelon, being
suspicious, cruel, covetous, and turbulent: then caught with a lingering
disease, he was much amended by the conversation of most Learned men. After
this he fought prosperously against the Carthaginians, who now again returned
into Sicilie, overthrew Thrasydaeus of Agrigentum in a great battle, and drove
him to desperation: at length he incurred the hatred of the Syracusians,
uncertain for what cause, and shortly after withdrawing himself to Catana,
there died in the second year of the 78 Olympiad, when he had held the
Principality from the death of Gelon eleven years and eight months.

Thrasybulus.
15. After him his brother Thrasybulus seized upon the power, A. M. 3538. Ol.
78. an. 2. V. C. 287.
whose practices stirred up the Citizens to recover their liberty with the
hastening of his ruin. For being set upon by them, he was overthrown, and
reduced to such a straight, that he fled into Locri on the Coast of Italy, and
there killed himself, having held the Sovereignty ten months from the death of
Hieron. The Syracusians recover their liberty.
The Syracusians now gladly resumed their liberty; yet not therewith content,
that they might the more secure it, they freed also many other Cities of
Sicilie, from Tyranni and foreign Garrisons. But not long after they fell into a
most pernicious Sedition. Arist. Polit. l. 5. c. 3.
For excluding those from honors whom Gelon had brought into Syracuse for the
establishment of his own interest, they themselves bearing all Offices of
Magistracy, and governing the Commonwealth, though they took not away from the
other the freedom of the City, the lately made Denizons not enduring it,
conspired together, being in number 7000 of 10000 which Gelon had brought in.
Three years after liberty recovered, they suddenly fell upon two parts of the
City: the Island and Acradina. The natural Inhabitants overpowering them in
numbers, besieged them close, and overthrowing them in a Sea fight, at length
constrained them to acquiesce in the present state of things, or else quit the
City, after the Sedition and tumult had endured two years. In the mean time by
the conduct of Ducetius a Sicilian, those planters that Hiero had placed in
Catana, were thence ejected, and the old Inhabitants restored to the place,
whom he had cast out: now also the whole Island was restored to it is ancient
condition, the Exiles being repossessed, and new comers driven out, who setl^d
themselves at Messana, the utmost part of the Island.

The form of the Syracusian Commonwealth.
16. That form of a Commonwealth was now established at Syracuse, which
Aristotle properly calls Policy, mixed of Oligarchie and Democracie; which,
how dangerous it was, appeared shortly. For, after some years, the State
continuing in this form, and the number of Citizens increasing, one Tyndarides,
an Eminent man, and very rich, egged on by his ambition, brought it into great
danger. For binding to him the indigent rabble by his gifts, and using them as
a Guard, he manifestly pressed toward the soverainty, but by the Union of
those who were in greatest grace with the people, he was repressed, and when
the beggarly sort would needs undertake his protection, killed in a tumult.
When others not at all deterred by this example aspired after such power as
threatened liberty, the people for to humble those that carried their heads
highest, in imitation of the Athenians brought in the use of the Petalism. The
Petalism.
As they by their Ostracism removed such Citizens for ten years, who for their
reputation and interest were dangerous to the freedom of the City, so the
Syracusians by the Petalism removed such like for five years. This kind of
banishment, without loss of honor, or fortune, was called in Greek
Pesalismos, because his name whom any one would have banished was written in a
leaf of an Olive, according to Quom lege ad Olymp. 81. ann. 2.
Diodorus, both which in the same language were signified by the word Petalos.
But this constitution, as the other at Athens, could not long continue. For
those Eminent persons who were most fit for State Affairs, for fear thereof bv
little and little withdrew themselves from public business to a private life.
Hereby the Commonwealth fell into the hands of bold, Quickly abrogated for
weighty reasons.
rash, unskilful, and the naughtiest sort of men, whence grievous
incommodities and dangers followed. By these things the people were moved to
abrogate the Law of Petalism, and the better sort returned to the care of the
Commonwealth, after which it remained in quietness for some time, but again
relapsed, as necessarily it must, from the informity of Antimonarchical
Government.

The Wars of the Syracusians.
17. Abroad the Syracusians had War with the Tuscans in Italy; with Ducetius
Captain of the Siculi, as also the Agrigentines, Trinacrians, Leontines, and
Egestans in Sicily, wherein most commonly they had the better, and either fully
brought under, or bound to them by Leagues, most of the Cities in the Island.
Leontium a most flourishing Town was utterly destroyed when it now gaped after
the Empire of Sicily, the principal Citizens being removed to Syracuse, and the
multitude driven into Exile. Out of these motions they fell into the Athenian
War in the first year of the 91th Olympiad, concerning which we have already
sufficiently spoken. Syracuse was so exhausted therein with expenses and
slaughters, that upon the brink of ruin it was merely preserved by the wisdom
and valor of Gylippus, a stranger of Sparta; and not only preserved, but made
victorious to admiration, and enabled to return to the Athenians so great
overthrows by Land and Sea. This War which begun in the 50th year after the
recovery of their liberty (by means of the Egestans, who craved aid of Athens
against them and the Selinuntians) lasted not fully three years, leaving a
sufficient warning to all, of the vicissitude of humane affairs, and showing,
that they who gape after Dominion, and are busy to enlarge their bounds, being
carried out by the force of ambition rather than reason, often fall into a
necessity of defending their own Estate, and sometimes lose all.

18. The multitude grown exceeding high upon this success, would not rest
satisfied with its former privileges, but so ordered the matter, that the
temper of this Commonwealth more and more degenerated. Lib. 2. cap. 4. Diod.
Diocles a man of principal note, who had persuaded them to put to death Nicias
and Demosthenes the Athenian Generals, being of a most severe and rigid
disposition, A.M. 359^. Olymp. 92. ann. 1. V.C. 342. Darii Noth^ 12.
eloquent tongue, and great reputation for wisdom, persuaded the people to
change the Commonwealth, and elect Magistrates by lot, whereas formerly they
were left to the suffrages of the people. The former way inclined to Oligarchy;
The State new modelled by Diocles.
but, by this, admission was given to the meanest and unfittest person to
Govern, which ill agrees with the fame of Diocles his wisdom. Some think that
the multitude having got a promise from the great ones in the late danger, in
case they would well demean themselves, now wrested this Law from them, that
Diocles persuaded the Nobility, and the better sort to give way to the time for
avoiding some greater mischief, and then he with his Colleagues having power
from the whole State, as Diodorus adds, formed this new Commonwealth with
convenient Laws, whereby this liberty was bounded, and other things defined as
they thought, but falsely, made for public good. This Diocles was in punishment
of vice rigid, and inexorable, and yet most just in what was deserved by any
man. His Laws were so well thought of by the vulgar, that many Cities of Sicily
received them on their own accord, the whole praise of the invention being
given to him, though he had others joined with him in the work, that were
excellent for wisdom and prudence. In aftertimes one Cephalus under Timoleon,
and Polydorus under Hieron, were deputed to the making of Laws, but neither of
them were accounted Legislators, but both Commentators upon him, who in the
form of his speech was something short and obscure.

19. Diocles amongst other Laws ordained, Diod. ad Olymp. 91. ann. 4.
that it should be Capital for any man to come into the Forum, or place where
the people was wont to meet, with his Arms, and that neither the plea of
ignorance nor any other excuse should stand him in stead that so offended.
Afterward it happened that he himself having issued out against the Enemy who
made incursions, as he returned with his sword, heard of a tumult in the Forum,
and so went direrectly thither, not thinking what he had about him. Being for
this reprehended by a private man as breaking his own Laws, he cried out he
would do no such matter, but establish them with his blood, and therewithal
killed himself. In the Commonwealth thus new modelled by him, it is uncertain
what order there was, or what method was observed in acting. There was a Senate
consisting of 600 men, as we understand from Diodorus; but the fame of it was
very obscure, and the power, as may be gathered, exceeding small, which makes
it be so seldom mentioned. The multitude was sole Lord of all, and daily
meeting together created the chief Magistrates, disposed of the Militia,
placing, and displacing Officers therein, decreed War, made peace, contracted
Leagues and Alliances, exercised power as to life or death, granted Indemnity,
banished, and recalled at their pleasure. Other things of lesser moment were
left to Magistrates, which were various, as in other popular Commonwealths.
They were annual, as the Generals abroad, 2. 3. 4. or more, as the people
pleased, the General at home who was over the Militia of the City in time of
peace, and had great authority. Others were chosen by lot, as Judges,
Treasurers, Censors, and such like, amongst which were also those that oversaw
the matters at Sea, the City having an excellent site for trading. But things
could not thus long stand, the Government being such, and wherein the wisest
sort could do least, and the foolish unexperienced rabble was most powerful,
though having no skill in State affairs they little minded what they did, and
only aimed at their private advantage. Hereby they were easily led aside by
one, who cunningly, though underhand, Dionysius inslaveth Syracuse.
wrought his own designs. For scarce were 8 years passed over from the
overthrow of the Athenians, when Dionysius the son of Hermocrates, a man of a
subtle head, and deep dissimulation, so fooled the multitude, as obtaining
from it a Guard for his person, he invaded the Tyranny in the fourth year of
the 93th Olympiad, the very same that the City of Athens was yielded up to
Lysander. How this was effected must more particularly be related, to let the
reader behold the danger of Antimonarchical Government, and the happiness of a
people under that of hereditary Kings.

How this was effected by degrees.
20. The Citizens of Aegesta (who had entered into League with Athens against the
Syracusians, and been cause of the Athenian War, by reason of the controversy
betwixt the Selinuntians and them about some grounds) were in great fear after
the overthrow of their friends to be called to account, quitted those grounds
for which they had contested. But their adversaries not resting satisfied with
the restitution of these Territories, but seizing also upon part of the
adjoining Region, they sent to Carthage for help, giving up themselves into
their protection. The Carthaginians were very desirous to be masters of this
City, so fit for their purpose of Conquering Sicily, but on the other hand
they stood in fear of the Syracusians, who had so lately grapled with, and
worsted the power of Athens. Yet their ambition prevailing, they promised them
aid, which they committed to the care of Hannibal, then one of their principal
Magistrates, giving him Commission to make War if the case should so require.
After the death of Amilcar the affairs of Carthage had been managed by his, and
his brothers sons, being six in number, Justin. lib. 19.
under whose conduct War was made upon the Moors and Numidians, and the
Africans were also constrained to remit the Tribute which had been formerly
paid them for the site of the City. Now it was, that this great and numerous
family being dangerous to the liberty of the City, by doing, and judging all
things, 100 Judges were chosen from amongst the Senators, who received an
account from the Generals at their return from the War, that by this awe they
might so manage affairs abroad, as having an eye upon Justice, and the Laws at
home. To Amilcar in Sicily succeeded his son Amilco, who having good success
in the War, both by Land and Sea, on a sudden lost his Army by the force of
Pestilence, for which disaster there was a sad mourning at Carthage (as it is
largely described by Justin) and he at his return killed himself. Hannibal was
his brothers son, being the Grandson of Amilcar by his son Gesco, or Gisgo, as
Ad Olymp. 92. ann. 3.
Diodorus informs us.

21. Hannibal having an inbred hatred against all Greeks, A.M. 3595. Olymp. 92.
ann. 3. V.C. 344. Darii Nothi 14.
and an earnest desire by his own acts to redeem the credit of his family, was
glad of an opportunity to gratify his Country, and near upon seventy years
after the overthrow, and death of his Grandfather, undertook the employment.
He first sent to the Syracusians, referring the matter betwixt the two Cities
unto them, that the Selinuntians refusing to stand to any award, as he knew
they would, a more specious pretense might be obtained for the War. They
accordingly opposing it, the Syracusians decreed to hold them as Allies and
Confederates, and also to be at peace with the Carthaginians; but the two
concerned Cities falling upon each other, both Syracuse and Carthage was
thereby drawn into the quarrel. Hannibal then having both in Spain and Africa
made great preparations, Ad ann. 4.
the next year landed at Lilybaeum the most Southern Cape of Sicily toward
Africa, and setting upon the Selinuntians at unawares with a vast Army, took
their City in the 10th day of the siege, wherein he made Captive 7000 persons,
16000 being slain, and 2600 escaped to Agrigentum. He permitted Empedion and
his kindred to people it anew, Selinuns taken by the Carthaginians.
under condition of paying Tribute to Carthage. This was the condition of
Selinuns, after it had stood 242 years from its first founding by the
Megarians, who being descended from Megara in Greece first came into Sicily
under conduct of Lamis, and built a Town upon the River Pantacius, called
Trotilus. Thence Lamis departing with some of his Colony went to the Leontines
and Chalcidians, with whom having lived some time he was driven out by them,
and planting some Inhabitants in Thapsus, after his death they left the place,
and under conduct of Hyblon the Sicilian King, who betrayed the Country,
inhabited Megara, and were called Hyblaeans. After 245 years they were driven
hence by Gelon of Syracuse, but 145 years before this, they sent out a Colony
with Pammilus, which built Selinuns.

22. Hannibal from Selinus marched to Himera, having a particular grudge
against that place for his Grand-father's death. And Himera.
Falling on it with all his might, he was repulsed for a little time by the
resolute valor of the Inhabitants, but the Wall being beaten down with his
Engines, he shortly took it. Many Women and Children had withdrawn themselves
out of the City; of those men which he took he carried up 3000 to the Hill
where his Grandfather had been slain, and there killed them, being before used
with all kinds of indignities; then rased he the City which had been inhabited
240 years, and dismissing his Mercenaries and Subjects of Sicily departed home,
where he was received with greatest expressions of honor and affection for
having done in three months what other Captains would have required far larger
time to effect. After his departure, Hermocrates the Syracusian (who having
been sent as General to the assistance of the Lacedaemonians, was condemned to
banishment in his absence, through the malice of his Enemies) returned with a
considerable Force into Sicilie, and to ingratiate himself with his
Countrymen, repeopled Selinus, and fell upon the tributaries of Carthage. The
more still to indear himself, he took up the bones of those Syracusians that
fell at Himera, and in a carriage sent them to the City, Diodorus ad Olymp. 93.
an. 1.
well knowing, that this would procure as love to him, so envy and hatred to
Diocles his main adversary, who having been the Captain of the slain, had taken
no care for their burial. Diocles much opposed their public Sepulture, but the
People resolutely decreed it, then banished him, and yet they recalled not
Hermocrates, being lealous lest he should improve his power and abilities to
the making of himself absolute. He then being in despair of returning by fair
means, attempted to do it by force, and getting in to the City, was amongst his
accomplices killed by the multitude.

23. In the second year of the 93 Olympiad, A. M. 3598. Ol. 93. an. 3. V.C.
347. Idem ad an. 2.
the Syracusians sent to Carthage to complain of the late War, and to desire
that for the time to come they would forbear all hostility, to which they
returned an ambiguous answer, and made all possible provision for an Army,
wherewith to subdue the whole Island. Before they transported any Forces they
sent a Colony thither, which at the hot waters built a City, and called it
Thermae. The year following they ordered Hannibal to go over as General, who
excusing himself by reason of his Age, they joined with him Imilco the son of
Hanno, one of the same Family. These two Generals then made Levies throughout
Africa, Ad an. 3.
hired Soldiers out of Spain, the Islands Baleares, and Italy; and got together
an Army of 120000 men according to Timaeus, but after Ephorus his reckoning
300000. As they were passing over, the Syracusians met them, and sunk fifteen
of their Vessels, but with the rest Hannibal passed safe over, and fell upon
the rich and stately City of Agrigentum, which contained 200000 persons. The
Agrigentines wanted not assistance from their friends, all the Greek Cities
being deeply concerned in their welfare, and the Syracusians gave the besiegers
a considerable defeat, who demolishing the Tombs and Monuments the better to
get to the walls, had thereby pulled down a Pestilence upon themselves, says
Diodorus, wherein Hannibal died. But Imilco (or Imilcar) thereby not
discouraged, continued the Siege, expiating the offense, as he thought, by
sacrifizing a Boy to Saturn, and drowning a company of Priests in the Sea as an
offering to Neptune. His Soldiers mutinying for provisions, he supplied, by
taking of the ships which loaded with necessaries were sent from Syracuse to
the besieged. Hereby he starved them within, And Agrigentum.
and constrained them to quit the City, being guarded to Gela by armed men.
Imilcar found extrordinary rich plunder in it, whereof some rarities he sent to
Carthage, amongst which was Phalaris his Bull, though Timaeus the Historian
carping at all others, by denying that there was ever any such thing, is justly
censured by Diodorus. For Scipio Africanus the younger, 260 years after, having
destroyed Carthage, restored this Engine to the Agrigentines, with whom it was
yet remaining when Diodorus wrote his History.

24. Imilcar having, after a Siege of eight months, thus mastered Agrigentum,
a little before the Winter solstice, destroyed it not presently, that therein
he might quarter his Soldiers that Winter. All the Island was struck with great
fear upon report of what had happened; some of the Sicilians departed to
Syracuse, and others transported their wives and children with their wealth
into Italy. The Agrigentines being got safe to Syracuse, accused their
Captains, as having betrayed their Country, and the Syracusians were also
blamed by the rest for having chosen such Generals, as by their dishonesty had
brought Sicilie into extreme danger. A meeting being had at Syracuse, and great
fear of a War possessing all men's minds, none dared to speak one word, or give
any advice. All sticking at the matter, at length stood up Dionysius the Son of
Hermocrates, and accusing the Captains of having betrayed Agrigentum, Dionysius
his tricks for making himself absolute.
earnestly moved the People to punish them forthwith, and not stay the time
prefixed by Law. For this unlawful and seditious motion, the Magistrates fined
him; but one Philistus a wealthy man, who afterward wrote his History, bade
him proceed, promising to pay his fine, though it were a whole day together.
Animated hereby he proceeded, urging that the Captains had been corrupted to
betray the interest of Sicilie, and accusing others of the better sort of
Citizens as affecting Oligarchy. He therefore moved that new Officers might be
created, such as were not eminent for power, but good will toward the People,
for that the other usurping dominion despised the common sort, and made their
own markets out of the public; whereas those being of lower fortunes, by a
consciousnesse of their own weakness could not attempt such a matter.

25. Having discoursed these things fitly to the humor of the multitude, and
his own design, he made no small impression in the minds of the Vulgar, who
having had the fidelity of the Captains in question before, gave credence to
these slanders, and deposing them, made new, amongst which was Dionysius,
having got much credit for his valor against the Carthaginians. The foundation
thus laid, he beat his head all manner of ways how to accomplish his device,
and resolved if possible to get his Colleagues removed. For this purpose he
never would meet in council with them, giving out they hatched clandestine
designs against the State, and seeing the Citizens much affrighted at an
approaching War, procured the Exiles to be called home, hoping that they being
obnoxious to him, and desirous of innovation, would be fit for his purpose,
taking great delight in seeing their Enemies killed, and their goods sold,
their own Estates being restored to them. At this time it happened that a
Sedition falling out in Gela, he had an opportunity to lead thither 2000 Foot,
and 400 Horse, where procuring their principal men to be put to death, and
their Estates confiscated, he thereby much ingratiated himself with the
multitude and Soldiers. At his return he found the People just departing from
the shows of the Theater, which asking him news, he said he knew none, but that
their Governors were greater Enemies to the State than the Carthaginians, by
whose flatteries they now kept holy day, and who fleecing the Commonwealth,
cheated the Soldiers of their wages. Now was an innumerable Army hovering upon
the borders, and ready to invade, which they not at all regarded. This he
understood a little before, but now fully, having received a message from
Imilco that desired his connivance. Wherefore for his part he would lay down
his Office, not enduring that others making merchandise of the Commonwealth, he
alone should, together with the Citizens, bear the burden, and undergo the
danger; and yet also be accounted as treacherous as the rest. For this night
every man in great fear went home to his house. The next day he called them
together, and loading his Colleagues with great invectives, The misery of
People destitute of rightful and hereditary Princes.
so stirred the multitude, that some beginning to cry out he was to be made
Dictator, for that they had formerly had experience how convenient the conduct
of a single Person was, by the example of Gelon his Victory over Amilcar; the
multitude out of hand created him General with full power. Then to bind fast
the Soldiers to him, he procured a Decree for double pay, alleging it would
make them more valiant in that time of danger, and bidding the People take no
thought about raising money.

26. The wiser sort had all along sufficiently understood whither these actions
tended, but the multitude stopped their ears against all accusations, as
proceeding from the malice of the great ones. But now upon further
consideration they began to suspect him, and repent they had put the power out
of their own hands, which he being aware of, lest the discontent should so
seize upon the generality as thereby to procure him any let or hindrance in the
full completing his design, he drew out the Army to Leontium, which now was
used as a Fortress or Garrison, and there shutting himself close up, pretended
a great conspiracy against his life. The day followng he called the multitude
together, and alleging many probable reasons to persuade them of the danger,
obtained to have 600 men as a guard for his person, which he should choose out
where he pleased. This number he increased to 1000, picked out, and consisting
of such as were desperate in fortune, and thereupon backed with stomach and
resolution. He called the Mercenaries, and engaged them to him with good words,
then new modelling the Army, gave such commands therein as he knew would best
serve his own turn: he gave free admission to all Exiles and malefactors,
knowing such would be effectual to all his purposes. Having thus in imitation
of Pisistratus got him a guard, and made himself Tyrant, at his return to
Syracuse he openly showed himself such, placing his Tent in the Arcenal. The
People murmured in vain, being beset with strangers and mercenaries at home,
and in continual fear of a War hanging over them from abroad. To establish
himself he took to wise the daughter of Hermocrates, who did such service
against the Athenians, and was slain in attempting to seize on the City: he
also gave his own Sister in marriage to his wives Brother, thinking it his
interest to be allied to so great a Family. Then assembling the People, by his
devices he procured Daphneus and Demarchus the most potent of his Adversaries
to be put to death; A. M. 3599. Ol. 93. an. 3. V.C. 348. Darii Nothi 18.
and so from a Scribe and a man of mean condition, he became Master of the
greatest Greek City, continuing such for 38 years, unto his end.

27. Imilcar having wintred in Agrigentum, at Springtime razed the City, and
then fell upon Gela. The Inhabitants betook themselves to Dionysius for help;
but his endeavors not well succeeding, they were forced to quit the Town, and
leave it also to the disposal of the Enemy. Idem ad an. 4.
Dionysius made the Citizens of Camarina to do the same, possessing them with a
fear of the Carthaginians; so that departing thence in haste, some with their
Gold and Silver, others with their wives and children only, and the ways
being full of both sexes and ages, who miserably shunned servitude by exile,
the Syracusian Horsemen pitied them exceedingly, and accounting this but a
fetch of their Tyrant, A conspiracy against him
to make himself Master of the place, conspired how they might kill him in the
way, and the rather, because they had observed how remiss, or rather
industriously treacherous, he had been in the relief of Gela. He keeping the
Mercenaries close to him, they could not execute this design, but rode fast to
Syracuse, where being easily admitted, they rifled his Palace, and used his
wife very harshly that she died. Being secure of him as at a great distance
from them, he conjectured the same, and in post-haste comeing to Syracuse, set
fire on one of gates, and so got in. Then slaughtered he such of them as he
could light on, Disappointed.
as also of those Citizens whom he knew to be most averse to him, some he slew,
and others he expelled the Town. Scarce were things settled, when a message came
from Imilcar, inviting the Syracusians, though conquered, unto Peace. Dionysius
most gladly embraced the offer, He makes peace with the Carthaginians.
so that it was made upon these terms: The Carthaginians were to have subject
to them, besides their old Tributaries and Colonies, the Sicani, Selinuntians,
Agrigentines, and Himerians, and also the Gelaeans, and Camarinaeans, who might
inhabit their Towns unwalled, but be tributary to Carthage. The Leontines,
Messenians, and all Sicilians, were to be free, and the Syracusians subject to
Dionysius. All ships taken on both sides were to be restored. These things
confirmed, Imilcar passed over into Africa, having lost half of his Army by the
Plague, which so raged also in Africa, as great multitudes both of the
Carthaginians and their Associates fell thereby.

28. Dionysius knowing that the Syracusians now eased of the War, would busy
their heads how to recover their liberty, to prevent such a design, fortified
that part of the City called the Island, which he caused to be inhabited with
his own confidents: he also divided the public grounds to such as he thought
fit, and admitted strangers to equal privileges with the Citizens. Having thus
as he thought secured his estate, he resolved to march against such Sicilians
as he thought most assisted the Carthaginians, and was about to besiege Erbesa,
when the Citizens of Syracuse now armed, considering what an opportunity was
put into their hands, and repenting they had not assisted the Horsemen in their
revoult, resolved to declare for their liberty. The attempt generally took, the
Citizens stood upon their defense, and the Tyrant was besieged, Another design
against him
for whose head a great sum of money was offered. He was much cast down, and
thought to resign his power, according as some advised him; but Philistus
turned his mind, and made him resolve to venture all rather than do it.
Bethinking himself how he might circumvent the Citizens, he sent to them,
pretending a willingness to quit all, if they would but permit him to carry
away his goods; and at the same time he dispatched a message to the Campanians
(mercenary Soldiers of Campania in Italy) offering them large rewards if they
would stand by him. The Syracusians consented he should depart with five ships,
and then, as if their liberty was fully recovered, grew secure, remiss, and
idle, disbanding some of their men, neglecting their guards, and taking their
pleasure in the fields: The Campanians allured by his prowises broke in to him,
some Troops of Mercenaries also came to his assistance, Frustrated.
with which he set upon the Townsmen, and easily putting them to flight
recovered his power. He hindered his men from killing, and a great number flying
to Aetna, he sent to them, offering them pardon, which some embraced, and
others refused to venture themselves upon it.

29. When he had well re-setled himself, he made War upon several Towns in
Sicilie, some of which he took, and having an eye upon the Carthaginians, His
Wars.
strongly fortified his City of Syracuse. He resolved with himself to make War
upon them, hoping that all those Towns which in time of Peace willingly
submitted to their yoke, would then revolt to him. Understanding that in the
Athenian War a line had been drawn before Syracuse, from Sea to Sea, and
thereby access into the Country cut off, with admirable celerity he raised a
wall to prevent this for the time to come, laboring himself amongst the
workmen, to cause them the more cheerfully to undergo the toil: Then did he
make extraordinary provisions of all sorts of Arms, completely furnished
himself with shipping, and hired Soldiers from all parts. Thus provided, he
caused all the goods of the Carthaginian Merchants, and others dwelling there,
to beseized by the multitude of the Syracusians, Diod. ad Olymp. 95. an. 3, 4.
to whom now he carried himself more mildly, being very ready to begin the War;
especially upon so profitable terms. Other Sicilian Towns followed his example,
out of hatred to the Cathaginians for their cruelty, of whom such as were
amongst them they unmercifully handled in way of requital, which taught that
State to deal more favorably afterward with such as they took, in remembrance
of the vicissitude of humane affairs. Then dispatched he a messenger to
Carthage, to denounce war from the people of Syracuse, except they would set at
liberty all the Greek Cities of Sicilie. They were much struck therewith, being
exceedingly spent by Pestilence, but rejected the terms, and as they might,
made provision for resistance. Dionysius besieged Motya one of their Colonies,
and chief Fortress for War; upon whose ships Imilco, as yet not sufficiently
provided, made an attempt, and beating up the Camp presently retired again; so
that Dionysius became Master of the Town.

30. Ere he had taken Motya he besieged Aegesta, Idem ad Olymp. 96. ann. 1.
the Inhabitants whereof would not betray their trust, and made excursions into
the Territories of their Friends. But the Spring following the Carthaginians
having created Imilco King, sent him over with a vast Army, wherewith he first
wrosted Leptines, whom Dionysius had commanded to attend his motions; then took
Eryx, and presently recovered Motya. He had Panormus betrayed to him: A. M.
3609. Olymp. 96. an. 1. V.C. 358. Artax. Mnemonis, 9.
he took Lipara, and after that Messana with his ships, the Inhabitants having
sent their Forces out of the Town to meet his Land-Army. When he took Motya,
Dionysius brake up his Siege and retreated to Syracuse; now hearing that he
intended to set upon Catana both by Sea and Land, he sent Leptines with the
Fleet after Mago the Carthaginian Admiral, and he himself marched by Land to
meet with Imilco. Leptines according to order made after as fast as he could,
and attaching the Enemie's Fleet, at first sunk diverse Vessels; but when he
was now almost encompassed with Mago's ships which were in number 500. not able
to fight at such disadvantage, he was forced to fly out into the main, and in
his flight lost 100 Vessels. Dionysius kept on his march, intending to fight
Imilco; but was stopped by the intercession of his friends, who feared lest in
his absence Mago might with his whole Fleet set upon Syracuse, and take it. He
therefore returned to the City, and dispatched away Messengers into Greece and
Italy for aid.

Syracuse besieged.
31. Mago by Sea with nigh 200 ships, and Imilco by Land with 300000 foot, and
3000 horse, besieged Syracuse, who for that the Citizens refused to give
battle, wasted their grounds for 30 days, and after that took the Suburbs of
that part of the City called Acradina. His Army was taken with a sudden
Pannick fear, and seized by a sore disease; yet notwithstanding he drew a line
for the Fortification of his Camp, and built three Forts upon the Sea, wherein
he put his provisions, and sent into Sardinia and Africa for more. Afterward
Polyxenus father-in-law to Dionysius returning out of Peloponnesus and Italy
with 30 long ships, and Pharacidas the Lacedaemonian, to the assistance of the
Syracusians, they took a victualling ship from the Carthaginians. They doing
their endeavor to rescue it, the Syracusians drew out their whole Fleet, and
engaging, took the Admiral Gally, and spoiled 24 Vessels. After this the
Carthaginians durst not stir abroad, and the Syracusians puffed up with this
victory, thought of recovering their former liberty. Dionysius coming in at the
Port, called them together, encouraged them in the War, and gave them hopes of
finishing it shortly to their satisfaction. Another attempt against him.
Here before his face, one Theodorus in many words exhorted his fellow Citizens
to throw off the yoke, and either take the Militia into their own hands
according to the Laws, or deliver it up to the Lacedaemonian General. But
Pharacidas the Lacedaemonian, according to his instructions from his Superiors
(who had now established an Oligarchy wherever they could, agreeable with their
own Government and interest, or gave way to the power of a single man rather
than that of the people) said openly, that he was sent to help them against the
Carthaginians, and not to overthrow the power of Dionysius; so that the people
were at so unexpected a thing utterly quelled, murmuring much against the
Lacedaemonians, who had now twice deceived them in the recovery of their
freedom. Frustrated.
Dionysius afrighted hereat, made show afterward of great humanity, to gain
the affections of the people.

32. The Carthaginians were at this time seized with a most grievous Plague,
which Diodorus attributes to their rifling the Temples of Proserpina and
Ceres, as the Meritorious cause, and to the unwholesomnesse of the place beset
with Fens, as the effectual means that wrought the distemper. A grievous
disease had formerly falln upon the Athenians in the same place. A grievous
plague seizes on the Carthaginians.
For before Sunrise, because of a cold vapor that rose from the Fens, a cold
and shaking seized on the body, then at noon a suffocating heat. So many men
being gathered together into one place, the contagion first began with the
Africans, who, though they died in great numbers, were at first all buried.
Afterward the number increasing, such as looked to the sick dying also shortly
after them, none would venture to come near the infected. But besides want of
attendance, no remedy could be had for the evil. For from the stench of the
dead, and putrefaction of the Fennish air, in the beginning of the disease a
Catarrhe, and then presently an Angina, or swelling of the neck, took the
patient. These were followed by a Fever, pains in the Spina, and numnesse of
the legs, which drew after them a Dysentery, and Spots over all the body. Some
were taken with madness, and abolition of memory, who wandering up and down the
Camp beat all they met. At length all the endeavors of Physicians were void,
through the vehemence of the disease, and suddenness of death, for on the
fifth, or at furthest on the sixth day they died in great torment. Dionysius
understanding this sad condition of the besiegers, thought it convenient to
sally out upon them, and sent 80 ships to fall on their Navy. The Land Army
first arriving took two of their Forts, and diverted them from their ships,
which as soon as they saw in danger, they again retired to them; but with
little advantage. For the Syracusians boarded and slaughtered them in great
numbers, and Dionysius, with his Land Army, fired 40 of their Galleys that rode
at Anchor in the Haven of Dasco. The night approaching broke off the fight, and
then the Carthaginians sent to Dionysius 300 Talents, begging leave to depart;
which he granted (with exception to all Sicilians and other Mercenaries) being
unwilling they should be quite defeated, that through fear of them his subjects
might be the better contained in obedience. After the flight of the
Carthaginians, the Sicilians departed home, and all the rest were slain or
taken, except the Spaniards, who gathering themselves into a round body, sent
to Dionysius to enter into Alliance with him; which he accepted.

33. Dionysius being secure of the Carthaginians for some considerable time,
provided against his Mercenaries, which badly affecting him, he prevented, by
taking of their Leader, and bestowing on them the City and Territories of
Leontium. Then did he make new Leavies, and replanted Messana with its ancient
Inhabitants the Messenians; but seeing the Lacedaemonians his friends offended
with it, he removed them to another place near the Sea, which they called
Tyndarides, and wherein they did thrive exceedingly, Diod. ad Olymp. 96. ann. 3.
Conquering, and laying several places to their demesnes. Having fortified
Messana, the Inhabitants of Rhegium (who formerly jealous of his growth, had
shown their bad affection to him) conceived it to proceed from some design
against their City, which stood over against it in Italy, upon the very Crag
of the Promontory, where Sicily was supposed to have been broken off from the
Continent, whence it had the name of Rhegium. They sent Heloris to besiege
Messana, whereupon he determined to make War against them; but the Sicilians
seizing upon Tauromenium, he first resolved to recover it. He continuing his
siege all Winter, in a dark night got a certain Fort into his hands, and made
way for all his Army into the Town; but the Inhabitants gathering together, and
resisting, from the higher ground, beat back his men, whereof 600 were slain,
and he himself escaped very narrowly; after which the Agrigentines and
Messenians forsook him. Dionysius sets upon Rhegium.
The year after, Idem ad ann. 4.
he set upon Rhegium on a sudden; burnt the Gates, and set Ladders to the
Walls; but was repulsed by the strong opposition of the Citizens. By this the
Inhabitants of these Seacoasts of Italy, seeing how far his covetousness and
ambition extended, made a League amongst themselves, and appointed a common
Council, both for the resistance of him and the Lucanians, who made War upon
them at the same time.

Mago
34. Mago was yet in Sicily, and was once overthrown in battle by Dionysius. The
year following his Superiors sent over great supplies, gathered as well out of
Sardinia and Italy, as Africa, to the number of 80000 men, Idem ad Olymp. 97.
ann. 1.
wherewith he overran the Country, and withdrew most of the Cities from their
obedience, till he came to the Agyrinaeans, whom he could neither remove by
fair nor foul means from their resolution. Dionysius with his Mercenaries and
Syracusians marched out against him, sending before to the Agyrinaeans to be in
readiness, who thereupon met him, and joined their Forces with his Army. Mago
now in an Enemie's Country was sore straightned for provisions, which made the
other resolve to draw out the War in length, and not try his fortune quickly by
battle. The Syracusians being earnest for fighting, upon his refusal forsook
him and departed home. This put him upon a resolution to make free and list all
slaves, but even then came Ambassadors from Mago to treat of peace, which he
accepted upon this condition, Forced to return.
that the Sicilians should be under his authority; and so Mago returned home.
After this Dionysius seized on Tauromenium, and then banished the greatest part
of the Sicilians from that Town.

Dionysius his second expedition against Rhegium.
35. The next year but one, being the 3615th year of the World, Ad an. 3.
into which fell part of the third year of the 97th Olympiad, wherein Rome was
taken by the Gauls, as some compute, Dionysius once more undertook an
expedition against Rhegium. He landed his Army, consisting of 20000 foot and
1000 horse in the Territories of Locris, wasting all with fire and sword, A. M.
3615. Olymp. 97. ann. 3. V.C. 364. Artax. Mnem. 15.
his Navy, Rhegium.
which consisted of 120 Galleys, attending his motions all along, till at
length he pitched his Camp near the Streights. The Italians inhabiting that
part of Italy called Magna Graecia, hereupon dispatched away sixty ships to
help them of Rhegium, upon which he fell, and had taken or destroyed them, but
that the besieged issuing forth, repelled him with Darts and Arrows, and taking
the opportunity of a storm, drew the ships to Land; so that in this fight he
lost seven ships with 1500 men, and escaping drowning but narrowly, fled to
Messena. Then Winter drawing on, he made a League with the Lucanians, who after
his departure, for a private quarrel betwixt them, invaded the Thurians. These
sending for aid to the rest of the Italian Cities, would not stay for it, which
they might justly expect according to Covenant, but issuing out against the
Enemy, pursued them into their own Territories, who then taking them at
advantage cut off many thousands of them. The rest seeing some ships sail by,
cast themselves into the Sea to swim to them, thinking they belonged to
Rhegium. But it proved Dionysius his Fleet sent under conduct of his brother
Leptines to aid the Lucanians; yet Leptines took pity of them, and landed them
safe; he also persuaded the Lucanians for a pound of silver a man to release
their Prisoners, passing his word for the money; and at length made them
friends. But hereby he lost the favor of his brother (who hoped to devour both
sides, and make himself master of Italy, when they should have sufficiently
weakened one another) so that, being displaced, Thearides the other brother was
made Admiral in his stead.

36. Dionysius his mind was still upon Rhegium, to which City he bore mortal
hatred, because some years before having sent to them for a wife, they returned
him answer, His third expedition.
that their Hangman had a daughter, which if it pleased him to accept they
would give to him. Idem ad ann. 4. and Olymp. 98. ann. 1, 2.
Therefore the year following he set sail once more against them, who then
looking for no mercy in case he should take the Town, sent to him, desiring
they might be moderately used. He required a Tribute of 300 Talents, all their
ships, with 100 Hostages, and then went against Caulonia, the Inhabitants
whereof he removed to Syracuse, razed the Town, and bestowed the ground upon
the Locrians. But his design was not thus accomplished against them of Rhegium;
his resolution was not to dismiss them upon the former terms, but by taking
away their ships to prevent the bringing in of provisions by Sea, that he might
the more easily starve them in a siege. Bethinking himself how with any show of
credit he might break the League, at length hovering yet about the Straights,
he desired a supply of provisions from them, pretending he would shortly return
to Syracuse; but he put it off from day to day, excusing himself by his own
indisposition, or some other pretext, so that plainly seeing his drift, at
length they flatly denied to send him any more victuals. This he pretending to
receive with great indignation as an afront, he laid close siege to the Town,
and battered the Walls. The Inhabitans making one Phyto their General, armed
all that could carry Weapons, and making many brave sallies out upon him, burnt
his Engines, and gave him a dangerous wound with a Lance. But the siege
continuing, after eleven months they were driven to such want, as a Bushel of
Wheat was sold for ten pounds, and at length they were forced to come out of
the Walls, and there graze like Cattle, whereat he was so far from being moved
with compassion, that he sent beasts thither to eat up the Grass from them. He
takes it.
Great heaps of Carcasses lying in the Town, A.M. 3618. Ol. 98. ann. 2. V. C.
367. Artax. Mnem. 18.
and the visages of the living being by famine rendered like unto them, they at
last delivered up the Town. Such as could redeem themselves with a pound of
silver he released, and sold the rest. Phyto the General, after grievous
torments, he drowned in the Sea, with his whole family.

His studies.
37. After the destruction of Rhegium, Dionysius lying idle at home, applied
himself to Poetry, being heretofore much addicted to it. Idem ad ann. 3.
Whilst he lay before Rhegium he sent his brother Thearides to the celebration
of the Olympic games, there to repeat his Verses, which by their baldness
drew the auditors into such a distaste, that they rifled the Ambassador's tents.
He called together the best Poets from all quarters to judge of his skill. He
also drew over to him Plato the Philosopher, whom at first he used very
courteously, but afterward offended at him for his freedom of speech, he
brought him into the common Cage, and there for five pounds sold him as a
Slave. The Philosophers coming over on purpose redeemed him, and then sent him
into Greece with this memnto in his ear, That A Philosopher must either very
rarely, or very pleasantly converse with Tyrants. A year or two after this he
put out to Sea with 60 Vessels, pretending an intention to clear the Coasts of
Pirates, but wanting money, according to his custom toward the Temples of
Sicilie, he seized upon a Chapel near Argylla, on the Coasts of Italy, which
being exceeding rich, he plundered of 1000 Talents, Idem ad Olymp. 99. an. 1.
and got much spoil from the Inhabitants of the place, who opposed him. Being
now furnished with money, he resolved to renew the War against the
Carthaginians, and the next year drew diverse of their tributary Cities from
their obedience. The Carthaginians made great preparations for defense, raising
a numerous Army, which they committed to the conduct of Mago. Ad an. 2.
He poured out a great number of men both into Sicilie and Italy. In the
Island, Dionysius overthrew him in a battle near Cabala, He overthrows the
Carthaginians.
wherein were slain more than 10000 of his men, and 5000 taken: he himself with
the rest retired to an hill, where fighting manfully he was slain, and his men
sent to Dionysius to desire Peace.

38. Dionysius answered, that the only way to obtain their desire, was to quit
Sicilie, and pay the charges of the War. To this he seemed to assent, but
alleged they had no power to deliver up the Cities, and therefore desired a
truce for some time to advise about it. During the truce, Mago's son being
advanced into his Father's place, trained the Soldiers, and exercised then
continually, so as he brought them into a good condition for fighting, and then
at the end of the Truce led them down, and gave battle in stead of receiving
Peace. Now were the Sicilians so puffed up by their late Victory, as the other
took advantage of their carelessness, and so played the men, And receives an
overthrow from them.
that though Dionysius in his wing, and Leptines his brother in the other,
fought most valiantly, and the former prevailed; yet the later being slain, his
party was presently put to flight, in which great execution was done, the
Carthaginians giving no quarter; so as 14000 Sicilians are said to have been
slain. The Conquerours departed to Panormus, and thence sent to Dionysius,
offering to have the quarrel taken up, which he gladly embraced. Both sides
were to retain what they already had, only the Carthaginians took to
themselves the City and Territories of Selinus, with so much ground belonging
to Agrigentum as reached to the River Helycus, and required of Dionysius 1000
Talents. Long after this he rested from War, but still grudging the
Carthaginians any footing in Sicilie. Diodor. ad Olymp. 103. an. 1.
This moved him at length with great preparations both by Sea and Land to
invade their Territories, wherein he took some Towns, wasted the Country, and
besieged Lilybaum; but perceiving it very strong presently again rose up from
before it. Then hearing that the Arcenal at Carthage was fired, he carelessly
behaved himself, and sent 130 Galleys to seize on the Haven of the Erycinians,
commanding all the rest to return to Syracuse; but the Enemy unexpectedly with
200 Ships well manned, fell upon them in the Haven, and took most of them; then
winter coming on, they made Truce, and each departed to their own places. He
dies.
Not long after, Dionysius died of a Surfeit he got by feasting, for joy he was
pronounced Victor in Poetry at Athens, after he had reigned 38 years, in the
first of the 103 Olympiad, A. M. 3637. 366 before the ordinary Era of Christ.
It had been told him by an Oracle, that he should die when he overcame his
betters, which he had applied to the Carthaginians.

His wives and issue.
39. Dionysius married two wives in one day: Doris born at Locri, Vide Aelian
var. Hist. lib. 13. c. 10.
and Aristomache daughter to Hipparinus of Syracuse, and sister to Dion. By the
former he had a son called also Dionysius; by the later no children for a long
time (for which cause he put to death the mother of Doris, upon suspicion of
her having practiced something upon Aristomache to cause her barrenness) but
afterward begot of her two sons and as many daughters. Plutarch. and Corn.
Nepos in Dione.
When he lay sick, Dion inquired of the Physicians concerning his condition,
whether he was in any danger, that if so, he might move him about the sharing
of his Kingdom; for that he thought his sisters children might justly expect
their part therein. The Physicians told this to young Dionysius, who found
himself so concernd in it, that to prevent his Father's discoursing with Dion,
Dionysius his son succeeds him.
he compelled them to give him that which laid him so fast asleep as he never
could awake, and so he solely succeeded him.

His disposition.
40. Dionysius the younger at first g^ve such hopes of a pliable disposition,
that Dion prevailed with Plato to return to Syracuse, Plutarch and Nepos ibid.
thinking that by his instruction he might be made a good and temperate Prince.
But Dion's emulators fearing he might be changed from his former course, which
though bad in it self was more convenient for them, recalled Philisthus (one
who was banished by the late Dionysius, and being a learned man, A. M. 3637.
Ol. 103. an. 1. V. C. 386. Artax. Mnem. 37.
wrote the history of his life) that they might have one to oppose to Plato. He
according to what was enjoined, and his private interest, upheld him in his
extravagances, as many other flattering Philosophers did; especially Aristippus
of Cyrene the Scholar of Socrates, who had so great a command of his own
temper, that he could apply himself Omnis Aristippum decuit color and status
and res. Horat. Vide Diog. Laertium in vita.
suitably to all times and persons. Plato, when he came, found Dion in great
troubles, being for his nobility and courage both envied and feared by
Dionysius, who, four months after, seeing the People much addicted to him,
banished him to Corinth, pretending he sent him thither for the good of them
both, that one might be out of fear of the other. Because he saw that this
displeased all men, he sent him all his movables, Aelian var. hist. l. 12. c.
47.
but kept his wife and his son, marrying her afterward by constraint to
Polycrates one of his Guard. This much startled Dion's friends, and Plato
amongst the rest, by whom Dionysius fearing that something might underhand be
wrought against him, gave them good words, and labored to keep Plato, who
earnestly desired now that War was begun in Sicilie to be dismissed; especially
seeing his mind far remote from the love of Philosophy. By his importunity he
got leave to depart, upon condition that, when Peace was made, Dion should be
recalled, and he return with him.

41. When the time came, Dionysius earnestly desired the return of Plato, but
would have Dion discontinue a year longer, who earnestly besought Plato to
return to Syracuse, for that it was reported that the Prince now was
wonderfully taken with Philosophy. He stiffly refused to do it, objecting his
age, with the breach of Covenants, but being again urged on all sides, a ship
was sent for him, and large letters were written, wherein the Tyrant promised
to deal with Dion as his friends should judge reasonable; many of the best sort
also in Sicilie and his acquaintance were sent to accompany him over. Wherefore
Plato once more undertook the journey, with intention to reconcile Dion to
Dionysius, and reduce the Tyrant to a more strict and commendable life. But not
long after his arrival Dionysius stopped Dion's Revenues, which Plato taking
ill, once prevailed to have the stoppage removed, for otherwise he would be
gone; but when the ships were departed, and Plato's passage thereby prevented,
he again sequestered the Estate. After this he fell plainly out with Plato, for
holding that faith was to be kept with Heraclides, who was suspected to have
raised a Sedition, and put him out of his Court, so as the Philosopher was glad
to take up his quarters with the mercenary Soldiers, amongst whom also slanders
were spread concerning him, whence he signified his condition to his friends at
Tarentum in Italy, who with much ado prevailed with the Tyrant to send him
home safe. Such was the entertainment of Plato with Dionysius both father and
son.

42. Though Dionysius had left to him an hereditary War with the Carthaginians,
yet giving up himself wholly to luxury and sluggishnesse, Diodor. ad Ol. 95.
an. 2, etc.
he was unfit to manage public affairs, and therefore made peace with them.
But Dion being now at Corinth, together with Megacles his brother, and
Charicles the General of Dionysius, raised as many Mercenaries as he could,
which not in number passing 500, Plutarch in Dione.
he transported in two ships of burden into Sicilie, Dion invadeth Sicilie.
leaving Charicles (or rather Hercules) behind, to bring after more ships; such
was his courage, that he durst venture with so inconsiderable a force upon so
great a power. After his landing, mulitutdes flocked to him as he passed
through the Island, and out of Syracuse it self, whom Dionysius in suspicion
had disarmed. To them he gave weapons, having brought many over with him for
such a purpose. By the time he got unto the City he was 5000 strong, which he
easily entered, notwithstanding the opposition of those Captains that Dionysius
had left there, who at this time was upon the Coasts of Italy. Upon his
declaring to the People that he came to restore them to their ancient liberty,
they made him and Megacles their chief Generals with with full power. Dionysius
seven days after returned and got into the Castle, which standing in the
Island was severed from the rest of the City, whence he sent for Ambassadors to
treat of Peace, that he might gain time. The People overreached, sent their
Commissioners, whom he kept with him, till seeing the Citizens negligent and
careless by reason of their hopes, he poured out his Mercenaries upon them;
but Dion with much labor repelled them, and slew 800 men. After this he sent
again to desire a Treaty, but Dion answered, that his only way to obtain peace
was to lay down his power, and content himself with certain honors; whereat he
was much vexed, and took counsel how any way he might revenge himself.

43. Philistus whom he had made Admiral, fought with the Syracusians, now not
inferior to him in number of ships, and losing the day lost also his life;
having either killed himself, because he would not be taken, or been tormented
to death, after he fell into his Enemies hands, both which are said. Then did
Dionysius offer half of his Kingdom to Dion, A. M. 3649. Ol. 106. an. 1. V.C.
398. Ochi 6. Philip. 5.
and afterward was content to quit it all; but he was answered by him* that he
must leave the Castle, and be content with certain goods and honors: and it
was agreed, that with his movables and Mercenary Soldiers he should have leave
to pass into Italy. The People hardly granted this, as being confident to
subdue him by force; but he leaving some stout men to defend the Castle,
departed in the twelfth year of his Reign, with his treasure and rich stuff
into Italy, undiscovered by Heraclides, He expels Dionysius.
who ere this arrived out of Peloponnesus with a good force, and was set over
the Navy. Heraclides being much blamed for this, that he might re-ingratiate
himself, persuaded one to stir up the multitude to an equal division of the
grounds, which being opposed by Dion, he out of emulation procured him
ill will, and caused the People to create 25 Praetors, whereof he himself was
chosen one. Dion's Mercenaries by this new Model deprived of their pay, desired
him to use their help in revenging himself upon his ungrateful Countrymen. He
then took upon him to be their Leader, Is disobliged.
and marched away to Leontium. The Syracusians pursued, and opposed them in
their way; but being forced with loss to retire, the Leontines received him
with much honor, gave to the Soldiers their arrears, and made them free of
their City.

44. But ere long there was an occasion for the recalling of Dion. The Soldiers
whom Dionysius had left in the Castle of Syracuse, Redeemeth Syracuse.
being distressed by want of provisions, resolved over night, that the next day
they would yield it up; but that very morning appeared a Fleet sent to their
relief, over which Nipsius a Neapolitan had the command. The Syracusians
issuing forth against it, had the better; but then growing secure, and giving
up themselves to gormandizing and drunkenness, Nipsius thought a good
opportunity to be offered for the redeeming of his credit, and fell upon the
City, sending some over the wall, who killing the sentinels, opened the gates
for his Soldiers. The new Captains of the Syracusians being drunk, could take
no order for resistance, so as great slaughters were made in every place, the
Garrison Soldiers issuing out of the Castle, and great plunder with many
prisoners were taken away. Now the Citizens saw that no help remained for them,
but only in Dion, to whom they sent, begging of him, that laying aside all
thoughts of private injuries, he would now succor his distressed Country. He
being armed by precepts of Philosophy against private grudges, marched for
Syracuse, and was met by a number of old men, women, and children, who with
lamentable cries implored his help. As the Garrison Soldiers were busy in
plunder, and had set the houses near the Forum on fire, he brake in upon them,
distributing his men to the several quarters of the City. They fell upon them
all in disorder, and burdened with plunder, killed 4000; and so forcing up the
rest into the Castle, cleared all.

45. Dion having achieved much honor by this act, was made General of the
Land Forces; but Heraclides his emulater still retained his Admiralship. Envied
This vexed him so, Corn. Nepos in Dione.
that he gave out some words that a Commonwealth could not be well governed by
many, which procured him great envy, as if he thereby signified that he would
get the Sovereignty over all. He studied not how to palliate the matter, but
sought to carry on all things by an high hand, and in a way of force; and either
procured Heraclides to be made away, or connived at those whom he formerly
hindered from doing it; after which he seized on the goods of his Enemies, and
distributed them to his Soldiers. Plunged into great difficulties.
But presently again money failing him, and having none to run upon but his
friends, he was constrained either to lose them or his Soldiers, who being also
displeased for want of pay, the common People might safely revile him,
affirming that the Tyrant was not to be endured. Whilst he with thoughts of
these things tormented himself, came to him one Calliccrates (or Callippus) an
Athenian, a most cunning dissembler and irreligious person. He told him, that
seeing he was in such danger, both in reference to Soldiers and People, his
best way was to have some friend, who counterfeiting himself his Enemy, should
hold intelligence with his adversaries, and thereby discover all their plots
and practices against him. This part, by Dion's consent, he took upon himself,
and under this pretense really and indeed practiced his destruction, which
Dion's wife and sister hearing of, therewith acquainted him; but he regarded
them not, giving too much credit to what Callicrates had promised. Circumvented
by Callicrates, and slain.
The women nevertheless brought Callicrates into the Temple of Proserpina, and
there made him swear, that he had not at all plotted against Dion's life; but
he minding no Religion, but being egged on more forward to the accomplishment
of his design, sent certain young men, natives of Zachynthus, in to him, whilst
he was private in his chamber, who being easily admitted, for the knowledge his
family had of them, fell upon and presently bound him: but being unarmed could
not kill him, till one Lyco a Syracusian reached them a Sword in at a window;
his Guard hearing, but stirring not. He died in the 55 year of his age, and the
fourth after his retutn out of Peloponnesus, being much lamented after his
death, though before called Tyrant, and what ever else could express him
odious.

46. Callicrates after Dion's death seized on the Principality, which he held
but thirteen months; Callicrates expelled by Hipparinus, and slain.
for then Hipparinus son to Dionysius the elder, by Aristomache Dion's sister,
expelled him, and placed himself in his father's Kingdom, which he enjoyed two
years. Callippus (or Callicrates) with Leptines went against Rhegium, which was
held by a Garriron of Dionysius his Soldiers, which taking, he was there slain
by Leptines, and Polyspherchon, it is said, with the same 'word wherewith Dion
was killed. After Hipparinus, Nasaeus obtained the Sovereignty over Syracuse,
and then Dionysius recovered it in the tenth Nasaeus.
year after his expulsion. In this time of his exile he made himself Lord of
Locri, where his mother was born, Justin l. 21.
and tyrannized over the Inhabitants six years in a most cruel manner;
ravishing their Virgins, Dionysius recovereth Syracuse.
and playing other pranks suitable to his disposition. There he raised a
Company of men, and coming over on a sudden to Syracuse, Aelian l. 9. c. 8.
where finding all men in deep security, he expelled Nasaeus, and erected his
Tyranny afresh. When he was gone, the Locrians expelled his Garrison, and in
revenge for his ravishing their Virgins tormented his wife and two daughters to
death, by thrusting sharp Needles under their Finger Nails. The Commonwealth of
these Locrians being very famous, is commended much by the ancients, not only
Diodorus Siculus and Strabo, A.M. 3658. Ol. 108. ann 2. V.C. 407. Ochi 15.
Phil. 14.
but more ancient than they, as Plato and Demosthenes; the former in his
discourse which he makes to have been betwixt Socrates and Timaeus a Locrian
Philosopher of the Pythagorean Sect, concerning the nature of things, and
Original of the World; and the later in his Oration against Timocrates, an
Author of new and pernicious Laws. Something is therefore according to the
nature of our design to be said of it.

Zaleucus modelleth the Locrian Commonwealth.
47. Zaleucus (as he was accounted) a wise, just, and honest man, born of an
Eminent family at Locri, was the modeller of this Commonwealth. Eusebius
thinks he flourished about the 29th Olympiad, Lege Ubbonem Emmium de Repub.
Locre^sium.
but Diodorus and several others making him a Scholar of Pythagoras, who taught
in Magna Graecia, reckon him as Contemporary with Charondas the Lawgiver of
the Thurians, another of Pythagoras his Scholars, and who is famous for the
strictness and severity of his Laws, which he is said to have confirmed by his
death in the same manner as Diocles did his; the same story being told of him.
According to their account he must have flourished about the 80th Olympiad. In
the beginning of his Laws, or his Preface to them, this to some appears to
have been his design; to affect the minds of his people with piety toward God,
as the Original of all Right and Justice, the Lord and Governor of Heaven and
Earth, as also an hater and punisher of wickedness. Then mentioned he Laws,
not very many in number, but most effectual for the defense of Justice,
restraining Vice, preserving concord and tranquillity in the State, preventing
innovations, and for the establishment of themselves; which as long as observed
(and they were observed long) preserved the Commonwealth in safety. He thought
a few stable and unalterable Laws well obeyed, to be more profitable for a
State than an infinite multitude of weak ones, which are easily changed by
those that have a mind to innovate, and he concluded, that the spediest way to
the ruin of a Commonwealth was by change and innovation. That his opinion was
true, the example of Athens abundantly demonstrated, which erring in this point
paid dearly for it, as Demosthenes often complains; and Rome also, which
being infected with this itching distemper, at length was constrained to submit
to the power of one man. It being almost impossible, but that popular
Governments should totter, what ever might happen to this inconsiderable City.
He commanded his Laws to be strictly observed, and the Magistrate to proceed
according to the Letter of them, without giving his own gloss, or pronouncing
sentence according to his private fancy. To this purpose is most memorable of
all his Laws, that which Demosthenes and Lib. 12. 7.
Polybius relate concerning one who should afterward prefer a new Law,
abrogate any old one, alter any thing in it, or dispute concerning the meaning
of it. He was to come into the Council of 1000 men with an halter about his
neck, where speaking his mind, if to them he should demonstrate his opinion to
be profitable for the State, then was he to be dismissed safe, and the Law
admitted; but if it should appear contrary, then was he to be strangled
forthwith in the sight of the Council.

The form thereof.
48. Zaleucus chose 1000 men out of all the people, in whom he appointed the
Supreme power to reside. It is not to be doubted but he ordained also a Senate
of a far less number, by which daily and lesser matters should be dispatched:
that there were also certain Magistrates and Courts of Justice, which had
orders prescribed to them, we need not question; though we find one only
Magistrate in Quo prius.
Polybius, called Cosmopolis, who seems either to have presided in the
Senate, or the greater Council. Zaleucus took care for preventing dissentions
amongst Citizens, pride in the greater ones, and either favor or hatred in
Courts of Justice. For to cut off the pride and vanity of women, he forbad any
to go abroad with more than one waiting woman, except she were either drunk,
went out of the City by night, or betook her self to an Adulterer; to deck her
self either with costly apparel, except she professed the trade of a Strumpet.
He forbad men in like manner to wear Gold Rings, or a Milesian Garment, under
pain of being accounted Whoremongers and Adulterers. Aelian Var. Hist. l. 2. c.
37.
mentions a Law of his, prohibiting any one to drink strong Wine, except by
the Physicians order, though for health's sake, upon pain of death, and
another, Lib. 13. c. 24.
commanding that an Adulterer convicted should lose both his eyes. Concerning
the later a notable thing happened to the Lawgiver himself, whose son being
found guilty of this Crime, all the people were willing for his sake to remit
the punishment, but he would not suffer his Laws to be broken, but to preserve
sight to his son, commanded that one of his own, and another of the young man's
should be pulled out.

49. Contra Timara.
Demosthenes makes mention of another Law, commanding that he who struck out
his Neighbors eye should be punished with the loss of one of his own, as a
Lex talionis. It happened that a naughty man bearing a grudge to his Neighbor
that had but one eye, threatened him to strike it out, though with the loss of
one of his own. The poor man terrified exceedingly herewith, and judging
continual blindness worse than death, with a rope about his neck came into the
Council, and asked a Law, that whosoever should strike out his e^e that had but
one, or deprive him of the use of one who was pur-blind, should lose both his
own, or be punished with the like calamity and loss that he should bring upon
his Neighbor. This as just he easily obtained, and this was the only new Law
which in 200 years time was brought in, the Insolency of innovators being
repressed by the severity of the former constitution, as the Orator observes.
Another there was, that a thing controverted should remain in the possession of
him whose it was when the suit commenced, till such time as a definitive
sentence passed; concerning which Excerpt. 7. lib. 12.
Polybius tells a notable story of two men that contending about a slave, the
one having had him long in possession, the other got him into his hands two
days before the trial, and then the former went and taking him away, possessed
him the second time. The Judges referred the matter as an hard case to the
Cosmopolis, who determined in favor of the first and last possessor; but the
other contended with him about the sense of the Law, to whom he offered that
both of them should go with ropes about their necks and dispute about it. The
young man told him, he was old, and expecting but three or four years longer to
live, dying now would be no great loss to him, whereas he expecting a far
longer time, according to the course of nature, should have the far worse
bargain; with which facete reply he handsomely ended the dispute, and the Judges
confirmed the opinion of the Cosmopolis. Politic. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Aristotle mentions a Law of Zaleucus, which forbad inheritances to be sold
except in urgent necessity, and this was to be proved, which Law being
neglected amongst the Leucadians, made their Government degenerate into too
much Popularity. In Positiis.
Heraclides mentions other two, whereof the one forbad mourning for the dead;
it being the custom of the Locrians to feast after Funerals. The other
inhibited all retaling shops, commanding Husbandmen to sell their own
Commodities. This was the form of the Commonwealth of Locri, called
Epizephyrii, from the Promontory Zephyrium near adjoining, being a Colony of
Locri Lege Polybium lib. 12. Excerpt. 3.
Ozolae, one of the two Locri of Phocis in Greece: whereof the other was called
Locri Op^^tii and Epicnemidii. Dionysius the elder having got footing in Italy,
made himself master of this place; but yet left them to their own freedom, but
Dionysius his son Tyrannized in the manner aforesaid.

The Syracusians beg aid of the Corinthians.
50. When Dionysius recovered his Principality over Syracuse, the Citizens were
more inclining to one Hicetas born amongst them, who at that time was Lord of
Leontium; Plutarch. in Timoleon.
yet notwithstanding all their attempts he kept his possession. But within
awhile the Carthaginians from without invaded them, being thus at odds within
amongst themselves, which constrained the Syracusians to send, and beg aid of
Corinth their Metropolis. Hicetas with the Messengers sent some of his own, as
desiring the same thing; but held secret intelligence with the Carthaginians.
The Corinthians resolving to send aid to their Colony, Timolcon
pitched upon Timoleon for their Captain. He was the son of Timodemus or
Timenaetus, of a quiet and loving disposition, but a great Enemy to such as
mastered their neighbors, which he showed effectually against his own brother,
whom, having made himself Lord of Corinth by the help of some Mercenaries, he
gave way to have killed, being in the room, and bursting out into tears, whilst
his two companions did it. Some accounting this act as unnatural and impious,
though others commended it, he thereupon abstained from all employment for
twenty years, till this charge was laid upon him. Whilst he was preparing for
the Expedition, Icetas dealt underhand with the Carthaginians, Sent to their
aid.
that he might be advanced into the place of Dionysius, wrote to Corinth to
stop their proceedings, and procured the Carthaginians to send to forbid
Timoleon from setting foot in Sicilie. He besieged Dionysius, but rising up
upon other thoughts and returning homewards, the besieged followed him, and
falling on his rea^, forced him to fight. Having the better in this engagement,
he killed 3000 of Dionysius his men; then pursuing the rest to Syracuse, got it
all into his hands, except the Island. Timoleon being more earnestly pressed
forwards by his fellow Citizens, upon discovery of Icetas his treachery, though
he fell into the hands of the Carthaginians sent from him to intercept him, yet
escaped, and arrived in Sicilie with ten ships, and 1200 men. The several
Cities in the Island being accustomed to be deceived and ill used by others,
suspected him also; but finding the Inhabitants of Adran^m to be part for him
and part for the Carthaginians, he using admirable expedition, fell suddenly
upon the Enemies Camp, which taking, he was admitted into the Town. After this
diverse other places joined with him, and with speed marching to Syracuse, he
unexpectedly also broke into the City.

51. Syracuse was now held by three several parties, Timoleon's, and that of
Dionysius, and Icetas, in so many several quarters; moreover the Carthaginians
were in the Haven with 150 Galleys, which carried 50000 men. It troubled
Timoleon to see himself overmatched, but presently things turned very well for
him. Ten ships came laden with men and money from Corinth to his aid, and
Mamercus Tyrant of Catana, and diverse forts joined themselves to him, which so
discouraged the Carthaginians, as they weyed anchor and departed into their own
dominions: Icetas being destitute of their assistance was quite discouraged,
and Messana now also declared for Timoleon. He expels Dionysius,
Dionysius too being terrified at this his success, sent to him, and yielded
up himself with all he had into his hands, whom he suffered upon his delivery
of the Castle, and laying down his Principality, to depart Corinth, A. M. 3661.
Ol. 109. an. 2. V. C. 411. Ochi 19. Philippi 18. Justin ut supra.
some four years after the recovery of his former estate. Thenceforth, having
lost all by his sluggishnesse, Who lives in great want at Corinth.
he lived in great contempt and penury, so as he would walk up and down in
poor ragged clothes, frequent the Stews and drinking houses, gaze upon that
meat in the shambles which he had no money in his purse to buy, and at last
took upon him the office of a Paedagogue, in which he might best imitate his
former carriage toward his Subjects, in tyrannizing over his boys. Aelian
reports; that Philip of Macedon meeting meeting him on a time, asked him the
reason why he kept not that great and strong Principality left him by his
father; to which he answered, Var. hist. l. 12. c. 60.
That his father left him that inheritance, but not his fortune, whereby he
defended both himself and it. This was the end of the Tyranny of Dionysius
father and son, 64 years after the first beginning of it, in the second year of
the 109 Olympiad, A. M. 3661.

52. Icetas very unwilling to lose his hopes of preferment, procured the
Carthaginians to return to Syracuse. Mago filled the Haven with his ships, and
landing 60000 men, pitched his Camp in the City; Icetas then laid siege to the
Castle, which the Corinthians now held from the resignment of Dionysius.
Timoleon relieved them by provisions sent from Catana in little Vessels through
the Carthaginian Fleet; whereupon Icetas and Mago drew out a strong party and
besieged Catana; after whose departure, Plutarch.
Leon Captain of the Corinthians sallied out of the Castle, and falling upon
the besiegers lying in a secure and careless posture, killed some, and, the
other flying, took Achradina the strongest quarter of the City. This the two
Generals understanding, quicky faced about and returned; but missed of both
places, out of desire to possess both. Timoleon having secured Messana,
returned with 4000 men toward Syracuse, whereupon Mago for fear hoised up
sails and departed for Africa, having by his laziness and cowardice lost a
fair opportunity of reducing all Sicilie into the power of his Superiors.
Afterward Timoleon dividing his men, set upon such places of the City as
Hicetas yet retained, Timoleon recovereth Syracuse, and setleth the State
thereof.
and by force got them all into his power, without any bloodshed of his own
party: then threw he down all the fortifications and monuments of the Tyrants,
except Gelon's Statue, calling the People to the work by a public Crier. Then
he applied himself to the making of Laws agreeable to a Popular Government,
which yet he endeavored but to little purpose so to restrain, as to prevent
the inconveniences which formerly had their rise from too much popularity. In
explaining and illustrating Diocles his Laws, he used the help of Cephalus, and
Dionysius, both Corinthians. He ordained a new annual and chief Magistrate,
whom he would have called the Servant of Jupiter Olympius, in memory of their
recovered liberty, commanding that by his name the year should be signed, as by
the Archons at Athens, and the Consuls at Rome. The first that bore this Office
was Callimed^s, a man of prime note, being chosen by the Suffrages of the
People. Now whereas by reason of Wars, Seditions, and Banishments, the City was
even exhausted, he recalled the Exiles out of Sicilie, Greece, and Asia, which
being in number 10000, he increased by a far greater, consisting of Sicilians
and Italians of Greekish Original, to whom being made free of the City, he
distributed Lands and possessions.

53. Icetas having retired to Leontium, Timoleon laid siege to that City; but
finding it strongly manned, rose up from before it, and went about to other
places, to which he restored liberty, expelling their Tyranni. In this
meanwhile Icetas went against Syracuse; but was forced to retreat with great
loss. Timoleon's renown was by this time so spread abroad, that many towns of
the Sicanians, and others subject to the Carthaginians, sent to him, to desire
they might be admitted into the social League. The Carthaginians herein were so
concernd, as to prepare amain for the renewing of the War, procuring Soldiers
out of Gall, Liguria, Spain, and Africa. Mago had killed himself after his
shameful return, and his dead body was nailed to a cross for the
mal-administration of his Office; therefore in the third year after they sent
over Asdrubal and Amilcar, with 200 long-ships, and above 1000 of burden,
wherein were so many men transported as made up those already in Sicilie 70000
Foot, and 1000 Horse, which with warlike Chariots marched against Timoleon. He
having composed the difference with Hicetas mustered all his forces, and
judging it wisdom to transfer the War into the Enemies Country, for this
purpose he chose out of all 12000 men, with which he marched away in haste; but
in his journey a great mutiny happened amongst his Soldiers. For one Thrasius a
rash impudent fellow, who with the Phocians had rifled the Temple at Delphos,
cried out, that Timoleon being mad, led them into most certain death, for that
the Carthaginians in number so far exceeded them: and he advised the
Mercenaries to return to Syracuse, and demand the pay already due to them.
Timoleon had much ado to take up the matter, and 1000 utterly refused to
follow him. But he rejoiced that the mutineers had already fallen off, before
they came to any engagement, and with the rest hasted toward the Enemy.

54. By the convenience of a mist he got near to the Enemy undiscried, then
lying upon the River Crimesus. Ten thousand of the Carthaginians passing the
River, he fell down upon them from the hills, and made great slaughter, and
their friends coming in to their relief, the fight was sharply renewed, and the
Carthaginians by their great numbers began to incompasse the other round, when
fell such a storm, as, together with the valor of the Greeks, forced them to
their heels. Flying into the River by heaps, the Foot amongst the Horse, and
Chariots, multitudes perished, being either pressed, wounded to death by the
swords of their Companions, drowned through the swiftness of the stream then
increased by rain, or else killed by the Enemy on their backs: The
Carthaginians receive a great overthrow.
the Sacred band so called, consisting of 2500 of the choicest Soldiers,
fig^ting most valiantly, all died in the place. Near upon 13000 were slain, and
15000 taken, with 200 Chariots (the greatest part whereof was broken in pieces)
and 1000 brigandines with 10000 shields; though most of the Arms were swallowed
up in the water: Those Carthaginians that remained, in great consternation
escaped to Lil^baeum. Their friends at Carthage hearing of their defeat, were
in no little fear, out of conceit that Timoleon would now come over thither.
Wherefore they recalled Gisco the brother of Hanno out of banishment, and made
him General over the Army, which they raised with money out of other Nations,
not thinking it meet to thrust themselves into such danger for the time to
come. But Timoleon returning to Syracuse, found it a convenient time to punish
the mutiniers, whom he banished Sicilie, commanding them to depart the City
before Sun set. Passing over into Sicilie they seized on a Town amongst the
Brutii, who rising and besieging them, took the place, and therein put them all
to the sword.

55. Hicetas often mentioned before, and Mamercus Tyrannus of Catana, joined
with the Carthaginians against Timoleon, persuading them, for fear of losing
their share in Sicilie, to send over some forces. They sent away Gisco, who
hired some Greeks, the first which served that Nation. They cut off some
hundreds of Timoleon's Mercenaries, and Hicetas invaded the Syracusian
Territories, whence getting much booty he marched into Calauria, in contempt of
Timoleon, who lay there now with inconsiderable forces in comparison of his.
Hicetas being pursued by Timoleon, got over the River Damyria, and then
endeavored to hinder his passage; but he pressing upon him, slew 1000 of his
men, and putting him to flight, pursued him into the Territories of Leontium,
Timoleon takes and puts to death Hicetas.
where he took him alive, with his son Eupolemus, and put them both to death as
Traitors to their Country, together with Euthymus his General of the Horse; for
that in a speech to the Leontines he had scoffed at the Corinthians, saying,
they needed not to be afraid, though the Corinthian women were come from home,
terming Timoleon and his men no other than women. Overthrows Mamercus.
After this Timoleon overthrew in battle Mamercus, killing 2000 of his men,
whereof the greater number were Carthaginians, who thereupon earnestly begged
peace, and had it granted on these conditions: That they still retaining all in
their hands within the River Lycus, it should be yet lawful for any one to
remove thence to Syracuse with his goods and family, and to renounce alliance
with them, and with all the Tyranni in Sicilie, which at this time had enslaved
many Cities of the Island. Mamercus fled over into Italy, Hippo and Mamercus
put to death.
and Catana was delivered up to Timoleon, who betook himself to Messana, where
he besieged Hippo by Land and Sea, and taking him in his flight, delivered him
up to the Citizens, who put him to death. Mamercus yielded himself to Timoleon,
who having promised him he would not be his accuser, he cast himself upon the
People of Syracuse; but perceiving them as he began to speak enraged against
him, he attempted to dash out his own brains, and that not dispatching him, he
was taken up and executed as a robber.

56. Timoleon, after this, drove away Nicodemus, who ruled over the
Centorippini, Nicodemus and Apolloniades put out of their power.
and forced Apolloniades to lay down his power, which he exercised over the
Agynnaeans, whom having restored thus to liberty he made free of Syracuse. Then
did he restore all the other Cities to their desired liberty, one after
another, and received them into confederacy with Syracuse: and it was
proclaimed by the voice of a public Crier throughout Greece, A. M. 3666. Ol.
110. an. 2. V. C. 415. Ochi 23. Phil. 22.
that The People of Syracuse offered houses and land, to all that would join
themselves as members to their Commonwealth. Hereby it came to pass that
multitudes flocked thither as to a new inheritance. Timoleon setting himself to
the care of the State, corrected and explained the Laws of Diocles, and acted
other things necessary, SECT. 1.
as he thought, to the well being thereof, till growing old he lost his sight,
which calamity as he bore very moderatly, so by reason of it he intermitted not
public business. Not long after, he died, and was buried by the confluence of
all Sicilie, the affairs whereof he had settled; Timoleon 's death.
games being celebrated yearly in memory of him, as for an Hero. This happened in
the 58 year of his government, the last of the 110 Olympiad, and the last also
of the reign of Philip of Macedon father to Alexander the Great; about the year
of the World 3668, A. M. 3668. Ol. 110. an. 4. V. C. 417. Arsis 2. Phil. 24.
the second of Arses King of Persia, and seven before the beginning of the
Macedonian Empire, to the time whereof, what we have further to say concerning
the affairs of Sicilie, is to be referred; which affairs will show, that the
infirmity of Popular Government is greater than that Timoleon by his
constitutions could heal the distempers thereof, and further evince the worth
of Monarchy.

CHAP. IV. The affairs of the Romans contemporary with the second Empire.
SECT. I. From the Banishment of Tarquinius and first change of the Government,
to the alteration made by the Decemvivi, the space of 57 years.
1. THe Kingly Office being banished with Tarquinius (though both rebelliously
and impudently) that of Consuls succeeded. Consuls.
Who were so called a Consulendo. Festus observes out of Verrius, that the
word Consulas was used by the Ancients, not only for Consilium petas, and
perconteris; but also for judices and statuas: Moreover the word Consulere is
many times taken for providere, or prospicere. According to this Etymology
various is the opinion of Learned Men concerning this Office. Some derive it
from the duty or work of consulting the Senate, Whence so called.
which was incumbent upon the Consuls. Others interpret it of judging, which,
says De Magistrate. pop. Romans cap. 7.
Lipsius, I only read in Lib. 1. c. 9.
Quintilian, who puts the question, whether Consul was so named from
consulting, or judging, seeing that consulere was used also for the later,
whence arose that phrase: Rogat boni Consulas, that is, judices; but not only
Quintilian, but Festus also, in the word Consulas, gives this Etymology.
Lastly, some derive it from the end of the Office, which was consulere, or
providere, as Lib. 1. c. 9.
Florus and Justinian's Code. But those Magistrates were not first of all named
Consules but Praetores, which name, although it was common to others, yet stuck
to them by way of excellency. In voc. Praetoria Porta.
Festus says it expressly; and so does 24, and 25.
Justinian in his Novellae Constitutiones. Xonaras says the name of Praetor
continued till the Decemviri, who being banished, then at length crept in the
name of Consul. But he should rather have said, that then the name of Judex
crept in; for it appears out of Livie, that they were called Judices next
after Praetors, before the name of Consuls came in. The Historian in his third
Book speaking of such things as happened in the first year after the writing of
the twelve Tables adds: In these times it was the custom not to call the
Consul by the name of Judex, but Praetor. De Ling. Latina. lib. 5.
Varro out of ancient Commentaries confirms this, and De Legib. lib. 3.
Cicero gives the Etymology of all these Offices thus, a praeeundo, judicando,
consulendo, Praetores, Judices, Consules appellantur. Some upon good grounds
conjecture, that after the creation of Praetors, who were peculiar Judges, the
name of Judex was left, and that of Consul succeeded, which continued to the
last.

Their power.
2. The power of Consuls was at first the same with that of Kings, allayed only
by plurality of persons and shortness of time, so that Cicero calls it
Regium Imperium, and Regia potestas, and the Greeks chose to call them Hypatoi,
which signifies those that are most excellent or chief, as Dionysius tells
us. In the beginning they might imprison and sentence at their pleasure, having
the power of life and death over the Citizens, though scarce the authority to
make peace and war, as Lipsius affirms. By degrees this great power was
diminished, and that especially by two things, viz. Appeal, and Interposing,
called Provocatio and Intercessio. The former was presently brought in after
the banishment of the Kings, by Valerius Poplicola, who preferred a Law for
taking away animadversion upon Citizens from the Consuls, and giving liberty of
Appeal to the People as the higher Judge. But by the Interposition of the
Tribunes of the people who were afterward created, all actions of the Consuls
whatsoever might be obstructed, as by the voice of the people it self, whose
power and dignity thenceforth daily increased, and took authority over all
Magistrates. Hereby was that of the Consuls much diminished; Yet not quite
broken and dissolved as long as the Commonwealth continued; their Offices being
both many and large. For first they were the head of the State, all ordinary
Magistrates being subject and obnoxious to them, (except the Tribunes) in whose
actions they might interpose. Secondly, they had the chief Command in the War
over Citizens and Associates, as also over Provinces and Subjects, whom they
might punish; and Authority to appoint Officers in the Army, as appears out
of Cicero and Polybius in several places. Thirdly, they assembled the people,
consulted with it, preferred Laws also, which if enacted bore their names.
Fourthly, they received Letters from Governors of Provinces, from Nations and
Cities: gave audience to Ambassadors, and what was to be done either by Senate
or people passed through their hands as chief Ministers of State. Fifthly, as
the Senate handled and executed all things in peace and war, so did they
govern it in some sense, they assembled and dismissed it: therein they asked
the Members their opinions, counted and divided them: and in conclusion they
steered the ship of the Commonwealth. This was their power while the free State
continued; but after it was subjected to the power of one person, their
authority was again much impaired, few of all these privileges remaining to
them; for that the Prince assumed the rights of all Magistrates, but especially
those of the Consuls and Tribunes. Under the Emperors they were employed in
consulting the Senate, administering Justice, assigning Tutors or Guardians,
manumitting Slaves, letting out to farm the Customs (which Office formerly
belonged to the Censors) and managing public Games: besides, they had the
honor of having the year Characterized by their names, as formerly. These
things will be sufficiently evinced (at least most of them) in the sequel of
this History concerning Roman affairs.

Certain Rites concerning them.
3. There were observed certain Consular Rites, which it will rather behove us
in this place to relate, than scatteredly hereafter to give an account of them.
First of all the time wherein the Consuls assumed their Office was not set or
constant, but various, till the year of the City 532. when both they and other
Magistrates entered on the Calends of January, having before, as Ad A.M. 3676.
Simpson and others observe, Commenced on the Calends of Quintilis called July,
as well as at other times. The first day was an high day, and very creditable
to them, the Senate and people meeting at their houses, saluting, and
accompanying them to the Capitol, where they took their Oaths and Sacrifized.
Thence they went to the Senate house, where they were ordered by a Senatus
Consultum to give thanks to the Prince of the Senate; then sent they gifts to
their friends, and threw money to the people, which later expense was
afterward taken away by the Emperors, and appropriated to the repairing of
aquaeducts. They twice swore to govern according to the Laws (as all other
Magistrates did, none being to keep his Office above five days, except
publicly sworn) when first they entered; once in the Capitol, and then again in
the Rostra, in their hands to whom they succeeded: and at the laying down of
their Office again at the years end they swore in like manner, that wittingly
and willingly they had done nothing, contrary to the said Laws. Another Rite
there was, as Lipsius terms it, about their power, which thereby was so
increased as to become as absolute as the Kingly was. This was only upon an
extraordinary occasion, or in extreme necessity, when all lay at the stake, and
the City was in danger. Then a Decree of the Senate passed in this form:
Viderint Consules nequid Resp. detrimenti accipiat, or Dent operam Consules
nequid Resp. detrimenti Capiat, as De bello Catalin^.
Sallust has it, who adds, that this greatest power was given by the Senate
to these Magistrates, to raise forces, make War, all manner of ways to punish
Citizens, and associates, to have, both at home, and abroad in War, absolute
command and judiciary power. Otherwise without the command of the people no
Consul could do any of these things. In a word, by this Decree was restored to
them that power (or rather more given) which was taken away by the Appeal, and
other Laws.

4. What the Ornaments and Ensigns of the Consuls were, we have formerly
observed out of Dionysius, to which shall be added upon occasion what may be
thought requisite. The age capable of this Office.
As for the age wherein a man was capable of this Office, Annal. lib. 11.
Tacitus observes, that of old it was lawful at any age to sue for the
Consulship, and the supreme power of Dictator. But afterward being taught
otherwise by experience (in the 573th year of the City) the Romans thought fit
to set bounds to juvenile heat and ambition. This was, as Lib. 10.
Livy writes, by a Law which L. Julius (or Villius) Tribune of the people
preferred, whereby was limited a certain age before which it was not lawful to
stand for any place of Magistracy; but from Cicero it should rather appear that
there were several Laws made for the several Offices; and at length the Lex
Julia or Annaria, included, and abolished all the rest. For Philipica 5.
he makes them many, calling them in the plural number Leges Annals; and
Livy, saying that then first of all a Law was preferred by Julius, in effect
contradicts himself, relating elsewhere a Lib. 25.
passage concerning Scipio Africanus, that when he stood for the Aedileship,
the Tribunes of the people opposed him, alleging that he was not yet arrived at
the lawful age which was required for that Office; and yet he was many years
before Julius or his Law. Cicero Quo prius.
declares the 43th year to have been the age of Consulship, saying, that
Alexander the Great having died in his 33th year, came ten years short of the
Consular age. If his words be taken strictly, the 43th. but if more largely,
the 42th was the year, and this rather as many examples do confirm. A grave age
became this most grave and weighty Office; but sometimes the people dispensed
with the Law, as will be shown, the Emperors neglected it, and Caesar Dictator
before them, who made Dolabella Consul at 25. Its duration.
Lastly, as for the Term or duration of the Consulship, it was annual, as we
before hinted in Brutus his model, and so continued, till Julius Caesar made
several in one year, so that afterward Consuls were nominated for three, two,
and one month, and others substituted one after another. Hence came it to
pass that there were two sorts of Consuls, Ordinary and Substitute, the former
beginning on the Calends of January, and the later at other times. This custom
continued till Constantine, who again made the Office Annual, and instead of
the Suffecti, or Substitute, ordained a new kind, called Consulares, and
Consules Honorarii, whose Office was not called Consulatus, but Consularitas,
having derived its Original from the Consular Ornaments invented by Julius
Caesar. Of this titular promotion, Lib. 6. Epist. 21.
Cassiodorus is to be consulted.

The first Consuls.
5. But (to come to the matter in hand) the first Consuls were L. Junius Brutus,
and L. Tarquinius Collatinus, who began this Office, according to Lib. 5.
Dionysius his Computation, in the beginning of the 68th Olympiad, wherein
Ischomachus of Crotone was Victor, Isagrus being Archon at Athens. Because they
could not deny that many good things had been done by Kings for the
Commonwealth, Their Acts.
they would have the name preserved for ever in the State, and therefore gave
order to the Pontifies and Augurs to choose out some one, who taking care of
Superstition, and being exempted from War, should be called Rex Sacrificulus,
A. M. 3496. Ol. 67. ann. 4. V.C. 245. Darii 13.
to which Office allotted unto the Patritians, Manilis Papirius of that Order
first attained. Next after this, fearing that the people might have, as they
well might, an ill opinion of their intentions, and say that for one they had
got two Kings; to diminish envy, whereas each of them had as yet twelve Axes
carried before them, as the Kings used to have, they ordered that but one of
them should have twelve Axes, and the other twelve Lictors with Rods alone, and
each his month should have the Axes. This contained the people better in
obedience, as other things whereby they labored to render themselves popular.
For they revived the Laws of Servius Tullius, concerning public meetings and
assemblies, with other things which conduced to the satisfaction of the common
sort, who now looked upon their lawless liberties as recovered.

6. Tarquinius after his banishment first stayed at Gabii for some time,
whither many of his party flocking to him, after he could not prevail with them
of that place to make War in his behalf against the Romans, he betook himself
into Toscany, or Hetr^ria, where he could claim kindred by his mother, and
there winning men's minds by his munificence, and moving them with his tears, he
procured Ambassadors to be sent to Rome in his behalf. First they moved that he
might be received again, promising on his behalf very good demeanor for the
time to come, and when this equity could not be heard, they (or others sent
afterward, as Plutarch writes) desired he might have his goods, especially
such as were descended upon him from Tarquinius Priscus his Grandfather, who
had in no wise ill deserved of them. Brutus, according to his furious and
malicious temper, very vehemently opposed it, saying, that it would show little
forecast in them to furnish him with money to employ against themselves; but
his Colleague was for restoring the goods, and prevailed to have the Decree
pass on his side, by one Vote only overpowering the contrary party, according
to Dionysius. The Ambassadors having it in charge to labor with the friends of
Tarquinius, that they might do something effectually, drew out the time in
length, pretending they wanted carriages, and must sell such things as could
not be removed. They stayed so long as to draw over to them some of the two
notable families of the Aquillii and Vitellii, viz. two persons of this, and
three of that. Of all these Collatinus the Consul was Uncle, and Brutus also
had married the sister of the Vitellii, by which he had several Children,
whereof two youths they drew in, having convinced them of their fathers
vehemence, madness, and folly, and given them good hopes of great things to be
done for them by Tarquinius.

7. These men met in the house of the Aquillii to ripen their business. There
in the dark, a certain slave, Vindicius by name, Lege inter alios Dionysium l.
5. and Plutarch. in Poplicola.
fearing to be found in that room when they came in, and not with any intent to
harken, had himself behind a Chest, and heard their whole debate concerning
their purpose of killing the Consuls; about which they gave Letters then to the
Ambassadors (who lodged in the house, and were present at the meeting) to be
delivered to Tarquinius. The Slave in this case knew not how to carry himself;
for, to go to Brutus, and to accuse his own sons to him seemed an hard and bold
attempt, as also no less to do it unto Tarquinius their Uncle; no private
person he knew to whom he might communicate so great a matter, and yet a thing
of such consequence he thought was not to be buried in silence, nor yet the
discovery thereof deferred. At length he betook himself to P. Valerius, who had
also a great hand in casting out the King. Revealed.
Valerius exceedingly struck with the thing, that he might proceed warily,
first secured the slave to have him forth coming, then sending his brother
Marcus to seize the Kings house, and watch the servants there, that they should
carry away no Letters, he himself with his Clients and Friends went to the
house of the Aquillii where he got into his hands what was written to
Tarquinius. The Aquillii being abroad met him at the Gate, where they
endeavored to recover by force the Letters from him; but he through the help
of those about him drew them into the Forum, as his brother also having seized
on other Letters at the King's house, forced some of his servants thither. The
tumult being appeased by the Consuls, Vindicius related the Story, and the
Letters were read. The parties said nothing for themselves; all were astonished
and silent; at length some to flatter Brutus mentioned banishment; Collatinus
shedding tears gave the prisoners hope, and this was increased because Valerius
held his peace.

8. But furious and implacable Brutus calling both his Sons by their names (
Titus and Tiberius) asked them why they said nothing to what was laid to their
charge, and when they answered not at the third time, he turned to the Lictors
or Executioners, Brutus puts to death his sons.
and said, Now is it your part to perform the rest. They presently took the
youths, and stripping them tied their hands behind them: then did they beat
with rods, and after that beheaded them, he, whilst others could not behold so
abominable a spectactle, feeding his angry eyes with the object, till all was
done. Then left he the rest to the discretion of his Colleague and departed;
after which a stupidity, horror, and amazement, as the things required, for a
time possessed all. Collatinus his backwardness and delay encouraged the
Aquilii to desire time to answer, and that Vindicius their Slave might be given
up to them, and not continue in the hands of their accusers. The Consul was
about to do both, when Valerius who kept the Slave all this while in the midst
of his followers, would neither deliver him, nor suffer the People to depart
without censuring the accused, though Collatinus was ready to dismiss the
Assembly. He laid hands upon the Aquilii, and sent for Brutus, crying out, that
Collatinus did unworthily, to impose upon his Colleague a necessity of killing
his sons, and think of granting the lives of the other unto women. The Consul
being vexed, commanded the Lictors to take away Vindicius, so that they laying
hands on him, wounded those that kept him, and Valerius his friends fighting in
his behalf, the People cried out for Brutus. When he came he said, that by his
full authority he had animadverted upon his own Sons, and left the other
delinquents to the People, giving leave to every man to speak. There was no
need of this, The rest beheaded.
says Plutarch (though Dionysius relates a great contest betwixt the two
Consuls) but the rabble called to the vote, condemned them by all their
Suffrages, according to which sentence they were beheaded. Collatinus now, who
for being a kin to the King had been suspected, and whose name was hateful to
the People, having by his carriage in this business offended the generality,
voluntarily laid down his Office and departed from the City, seeing now to what
a sad pass he had helped to bring things, and too late repenting of his
rebellion. To him succeeded Valerius (the Comitia being held for an election)
whom Brutus much desired to have had his Colleague at first, but that the
greatness of Collatinus carried it from him.

Valerius Consul in the room of Tarquinius Collatinus.
9. Valerius being with the good will of all the multitude created Consul,
thought the first fruits of his Office due to Vindicius, whom manumitted he
made free of the Commonwealth, this privilege being given to him first of all
Liberti or Freed-men, according to Plutarch, (which Appius long after
communicated to them all) and from him a perfect and full manumission had the
name of Vindicta. This done, the Consuls gave the goo^^ of the King to be
rifled by the People, demolished his house, Dionys. lib. 5. Livius lib. 2. Val.
Maxim. l. 1. c. 8. Plutar. in Poplicola. Plin. l. 29. c. 1. Festus in voce
Insula.
and laid the Campus Martius which he had to himself, open as before, wherein
lying Corn cut down already, they threw it into the River, and sending trees
that grew there after it, these receiving gravel and such rubbish as came down
the chanel, at last grew into an Island called Insula Sacra; though some say,
this happened in after times, when Tarquinia a Vestal Nun gave the adjoining
field to the Public, and for that obtained great honors, as these amongst the
lest; of all women alone to appear as a witness in any cause, and liberty to
marry, which she refused. But Tarquinus seeing that reason failed, betook
himself to force, and brought a great Army of Tuscans against Rome. The Consuls
opposed him with another, and when they came to join, Aruns the son of Tarquin,
and Brutus the Consul, with greater wrath and fury than discretion, singled out
each other, and so carelessly demeaned themselves, as both of them lost their
lives. A great and bloody battle was fought betwixt the Armies, Brutus slain.
which night only broke up, and that with such equal fortune, as neither party
could boast it self, till at length either by a voice out of a grove, A. M.
3497. Ol. 68. an. 1. V.C. 246. Darii 15.
as the story goes, that the Etruscans had lost one man more, or some other
way, the Romans were so revived, and the other discouraged, that the later
forsook their tents for fear, and being fallen upon by the Enemy, were nigh
5000 taken prisoners, having lost 11300 in the fight. Valerius triumphed at his
return to the City (leaving an example to posterity which was duly followed)
and then buried his Colleague with great honor, making himself a funeral
Oration in his commendation, which custom Dionysius will have more ancient at
Rome than in Greece; although Anaximenes wrote that Solon was the Author of it.

Valerius suspected
10. But when the People considered how Brutus the father of their liberty, as
they accounted him, would not govern alone without a Colleague, and yet
Valerius made no haste to take a partner, they began to complain, that he had
not taken to himself so much the place of Brutus (which yet not at all belonged
to him) but that of Tarquinius, and were much offended with him. They confirmed
themselves in their hard opinion, from his having all the Rods and Axes carried
before him, and with them, in greater state than Tarquinius used, marched from
his house, which was much larger than the Palace that he demolished. His house
was very fair, situate in such a place as afforded him prospect round about,
and had a difficult ascent; so that the convenience of the site, considered
with his Kingly port and attendance, seemed to threaten their infant
Commonwealth, now an Orphan by Brutus his death. His friends remonstrating to
him these particulars, he contended not; Clears himself.
but that very night sent for Carpenters, who demolished the house ere morning:
the next day the People were presented with a new and unexpected sight, which
fully altered their opinion concerning Valerius; who now wanting an house of
his own, was glad to accept of the courtesy of friends, till the People gave
him a place, wherein he built a mansion less stately than the former. Further,
that he might render not only himself, but also his Office, in stead of
terrible, familiar and acceptable to all, he removed Axes from the bundle of
Rods, and, the Rods themselves, when he came into the Assembly, he bowed or
veiled to the People, thereby intimating, that in them lay the chief power;
which custom his Successors followed. Hereby, as to his own person, he lesned
not himself, but cut off envy, and got so much power, as he renounced of
liberty, the People willingly submitting to him, because he flattered them, out
of which respect they gave him the Surname of Poplicola, not Publicola, as
Sigonius has evinced. He gave free leave to any to sue for the Consulship; but
before a Colleague should be joined with him, being ignorant what might happen,
and fearing he might either through emulation or ignorance cross his designs,
by his sole authority, he gave birth to several Popular Constitutions, which at
length produced such effects as showed the excellency of that Government which
he had helped to destroy.

11. First he filled up the Senate which had been exhausted, by an addition of
164 Persons, as some delivered the number. Then made he several Laws, His
constitutions.
which gave beginning to that paramount or rampant liberty, whereof the People
was afterward possessed. By one he gave leave to an accused person, to appeal
from the Consuls to the People. By another, he made it death for any one to
take upon him an Office of Magistracy without the People's order. A third gave
relief to poor Citizens, by taking away the payment of Tribute. Another
punished disobedience toward the Consuls, and appointed the mulct to be the
price of five Oxen, and two Sheep: the price of a Sheep was ten Oboli (each
Obolus was worth 1 d. q.) and 100 the value of an Ox. For at that time the use
of money was but rare amongst the Romans; wealth consisting in plenty of
Cattle; whence riches were afterward called Peculia from Pecus, and upon the
ancient money an Ox, Sheep, or Hog was stamped, which gave it the name of
Pecunia: and hence they imposed upon their sons (as Plutarch observes) the
names of Suillii, Bubulci, Caprarii, and Porcii. Another Law Valerius made,
which gave power to any man to kill him unheard, that affected the Supreme
power, if he could demonstrate the crime. The last was a Law for the creation
of two Quaestors or public Treasurers, as Plutarch writes. For it being
necessary that the People should contribute money for maintenance of Wars, he
would neither undertake the keeping of it himself, nor commit the care of it to
his friends, neither thought it convenient that the Public money should be
kept in a private house: therefore he made the Temple of Saturn the Aerarium,
or Treasury, and caused the People to choose out two young men to be Quaestors.
The Quaestors.
The first were P. Veturius, and M. Minucius. A great quantity of money was now
brought into the Aerarium. For at the Census 130000 were cessed or valued,
besides Widows and Orphans. Thus much Plutarch delivers concerning this
Office.

12. But some give a more ancient beginning to the Quaestors, making theirs
antienter than any Office, except that of the Kings. Lib. de Potestatibus.
Gracchanus a Lawyer wrote, When first made.
that both Romulus and Numa had their Quaestors, created by the consent of the
People; however he says it is certain that Tullus Hostilius had his. Lib. de
officio Quaestoris.
Ulpian confirms the later, and Annal. l. 16. 11.
Tacitus seems to agree with either of them, affirming that under the Kings
there were Quaestors, which the Lex curiata shows, that was renewed by L.
Brutus. He adds, that the Consuls had power to choose them, till the People
took that honor to it self, and first of all created Valerius Potitus, and
Aemilius Mamercus, that they might follow the Army, in the 63 year after the
banishment of Tarquinius. Lipsius thinks this number should be read 23, that
it might agree with Lib. 8.
Dionysius, and also Lib. 3.
Livie, who first mentions the Quaestors in the 269 year of the City, 23
years after the banishment of the King, and differs only in one of their
names, having for Aemilius, Caeso Fabius. Concerning the antiquity of these
Officers Lib. 2. ff. de Orig. Juris
Pomponius also the Lawyer agrees with the rest. They had their name a
quaerendo says De Lingua Latin. lib. 4. page 22. ex Edit. Joseph. Scalig.
Varro, because they made inquiry after public money, and also Malefactors, or
the actions of such, which later employment was afterward committed to the
Triumviri for capital matters, so that Quaestor is written as for Quaesitor.
Justus Lipsius is of opinion, that though the Kings might have these Officers
for the punishment of vice, yet the Treasurers were not created till the change
of the Government, when the Public Treasure being increased there was need of
such. At the beginning they were but two by consent of all; Their number.
and those were made for the City, retaining afterward the name of Urbani. But
afterward when they were to look to the paying of the Armies abroad, and
selling plunder and booty, then were there other two made, to accompany the
Consuls, as Livie says, which happened about the 232 year of the City.

13. This number long continued, until all Italy was brought in; then was it
again doubled, no fewer than eight being thought to suffice for the Tributes of
the Provinces; and this happened when Silver money was first coined, about the
439 year of the City, as may be gathered from the Epitome of Livie's 15 Book.
Not long after Sylla procured by a Law, that twenty should be made for the
assistance of the Senate, as Tacitus writes, to which he had delivered the
judicial power: and for such an end did Caesar cause forty to be created. The
Quaestorship was the first step to Offices of Magistracy. Their duty, as is
clear from several Authors, was to gather, lay up, and pay out the public
revenues, Their duty.
to keep the military Ensigns of Gold and Silver (for they then used no
banners) in the Treasury, to sell plunder and booty, receive, lodge, and carry
out Ambassadors. They had also the government of certain places, as Ostia and
Cales. They received from Augustus the privilege of keeping the Senatus
consulta, which formerly belonged to the Aediles and Tribunes. And the
Emperors had a certain Quaestor of their own called Candidatus Principis, and
Quaestor Principis, or Augusti, whose Office Ulpian describes. This gave
original to the Quaestor Palatii (says Lipsius) to whom was granted great
authority, as to make Laws and Decrees, subscribe Petitions, return answers,
and to be as it were the keeper or President of the Laws, which name is now
changed into Chancellor. But, to speak something of the Treasury, the Temple
of Saturn was first made use of to this purpose, The Aerarium or Treasury.
as Plutarch tells us. Here also were kept the Libri Elephantini, Books
wherein the 35 Tribes were written, and the Decrees of the Senate; but the
Libri Lintei, or the Annals, were kept by the Pontifices, who therein recorded
such things as were memorable. In the Aerarium was also a more secret place,
where the twentieth part of the revenues were reserved for cases of extremity
only. The Aerarium was afterward called Fiscus, from the Fiscella, or bags
wherein the money was kept, according to Varro. The first Advocatus Fisci was
instituted by Adrian the Emperor, as Spartianus witnesses. Amongst other
tributes, the People of Rome had the twentieth part of all revenues of Corn
throughout Italy, besides Salt, which was the device of Livie, thence Surnamed
Salinator. Those that farmed the Tributes or Custom were called Publicans, and
the principal of them Mancipes, according to Pedianus, whom Volateranus
follows.

14. Valerius Poplicola having finished his constitutions of Setlement, held
the Assembly of the People for the election of another Consul. Lucietius the
father of Lucretia was chosen, Lucretius Consul.
to whom, as the elder, Poplicola granted the Fasces or bundle of Rods; which
respect of age was ever after observed by their Successors, till the time of In
poplicola.
Plutarch, as himself writes. This granting of the Fasces was yet but for the
first month, which indeed afterward was wont to be granted to the elder
Consul; but no longer than till the Lex Julia, in the seventh Chapter whereof
this privilege was given to him who had most children, either still in his own
power (that is to be understood not emanicipated) or already lost in War. But
if both Consuls had an equal number of children, he who at present was a married
man was preferred. If both were husbands and fathers alike, then the ancient
custom returned, and he who was eldest had first the Fasces. Concerning such
who were both unmaried, had the same number of children, or were both married
and had no children, the Law commanded nothing. But I hear, says Noct. Attic.
lib. 2. c. 15.
Gellius, that those who were exempted, were wont to yield the Fascos of the
first month to their Colleagues that far exceeded them in age, or in birth, or
entered upon their second Consulship. In the mean time that Consul who had no
Fasces, that he might be known by some note of distinction, had an Accensus (a
certain Bedle or Crier, concerning whom De Ling. Lat. page 62.
Varro is to be consulted) that went before him, and Lictors followed with Rods
and Staves, as Lib. 5.
Dionysius, Lib. 3.
Livie, and In Julio.
Suetonius de testify.

15. Lucretius died also a few days after his creation, to whom succeeded M.
Horatius, Horatius.
who continued the Colleague of Poplicola for the remaining part of the year,
Now was the Capitol finished which had been vowed by Tarquinius Priscus,
and begun by Superbus his grandson. Poplicola had a great ambition to dedicate
it, but the Nobility envied him the honor, and stirred up Horatius to stand
for it, whom when the other was constrained to be absent in the War, they
enjoined by a Decree to do it, and carried him up thither, knowing that in the
presence of Poplicola they could not have prevailed. Some write, that by lot
the War fell to Poplicola much against his will, and the Dedication to
Horatius. On the Ides of September, which fell in with the full Moon of the
Greek month Metagitnion (answering to August the 28 of the Julian year, as
Jacobus Cappellus computeth) when many flocked to behold the Solemnity,
Horatius having commanded silence, and finished all the usual rites, touched
the door, and pronounced the words of Dedication. Then Marcus the brother of
Poplicola standing near for that purpose, and watching for an opportunity,
said, Thy son O Consul is dead in the Camp, whereat when all others were
struck, Horatius nothing disturbed answered only, Then cast him out whither
you please, for I admit not of mourning, and went on with the matter in hand.
Neither was the story true, The Capitol dedicated.
but feigned by Marcus to deter him from the Dedication. The same fortune
happened to the Dedication of the second Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, after
this was burnt in the Civil Wars. For Sylla having rebuilt it died before the
Dedication, as Tarquinius was banished, and so that honor came to Catulus.
When this had perished in the sedition of Vitellius, Vespasian built the third,
and was herein more fortunate than Sylla, that, as he died before the
Dedication of his, so the Emperor lived not to see the destruction of this,
which presently after his death was also burned. The fourth which stood in
Plutarch's time was both built and dedicated by Domitian. Tarquinius, as was
reported, spent 40000 pounds of silver in founding his Temple; but the fourth
was not gilded for so little as the wealth of the richest private man. The
Marble Pillars Plutarch saw at Athens, being then of a thickness answerable to
their length, but afterward when they were new cut at Rome, they got not so
much splendor as they lost of proportion and beauty, being rendered too slender
in bulk or substance.

16. In the Polyb. lib. 3. p. 160.
Consulship of Junius Brutus and M. Horatius (that is in the same year that
Horatius succeeded, though not immediately, into the place of Brutus, who with
Tarquinius his Colleague governed but 4 months) when the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus was Consecrated, 28 years before Xerxes his expedition into Greece,
the first League was made betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians. The first
League betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians.
Herein it was provided, that the Romans should not sail beyond the Fair
Promontory, which lay before Carthage toward the North. Polybius thinks the
cause was, for that the Carthaginians would not have them take notice of the
places about Byzacium, nor the little Syrtis: which for the fruitfulness of
the soil they termed Emporia. But if it happened that any, either by Tempest or
Pirates, were forced in thither, they promised they would furnish them with all
things necessary, but forbad any thing to be taken by force, and commanded all
to be gone thence within five days. It was lawful hereby for the Romans to
Traffic to Carthage, and all that part of Africa which lies on this side the
Fair Promontory, as also Sardinia, and that part of Sicily then under the
Carthaginians, who promise upon their public faith that all Justice shall be
duly executed. From this League it appears that the Carthaginians speak of
Africa and Sardinia as absolutely their own, but far otherwise concerning
Sicily expressly distinguishing of that part thereof which they had subdued. The
Romans also include in this League only Latium, making no mention of the rest
of Italy, which was not in their power. After this another League was made, or
rather this renewed, wherein the Carthaginians comprised the Tyrians, and the
people of Utica. To the Fair Promontory were added Mastia and Tarseium, beyond
which it was neither lawful for the Romans to make any depredations, nor build
a Town. These things Polybius observes concerning these Leagues, which he also
exemplifieth, and to which we refer Students in History.

17. Tarquinius, after that great battle wherein he lost his son Aruns in a
Combat with Brutus, betook himself to Clusium, the King whereof Porsena by name
(one of great account for his power and munificence amongst the Kings of Italy)
he procured to take upon him his quarrel. He first sent to Rome, Porsena
warreth against Rome.
commanding them to receive their King according to their duty, Livius lib. 2.
and upon refusal, both threatened, and made War upon them. Plut. ut prius.
Now were created Consuls Poplicola the second time being absent, and T.
Lucretius Tricipitinus on the Calends of October, according to the Pompilian
year, which answered to September 14. of the Julian in the new Moon. Ad A.M.
3492. and 3507.
Jacobus Cappellus observes that the Consuls Commenced at this time of the
year from the first of Poplicola, till fifteen years after, in the 261st year
of the City. Sp. Cassius and Posthumous Cominius began their Office a month
sooner, viz. on the Calends of October. The reason might be, for that the new
Moon sell in with the Autumnal Aequinoctial on the 29th of Julian September,
from which the Pompilian, or Numan, September seems to have Commenced that
year, the Moon increasing, although without order. For the Calends of October
ought rather to have been on that day; but such errors were frequent in the
Pompilian year, either through the negligence, or wilful neglect of the
Priests. After the third year the Calends (or first day) of January recovered
their true place, viz. the next new Moon to the Winter Solstice; but September
obtained to be the beginning of the year until the 278th year of the City,
wherein the Comitia for Creation of Consuls were cast back to the Calends of
the month Sextilis (afterward called August) at what time A. Virginius
Tricostus, and Sp. Servilius Structus were made Consuls, in the Summer
Solstice, as Dionysius observes.

18. Poplicola returning to Rome, first resolved in magnanimity to outvy
Porsena, and for that purpose, when the King was now approaching, founded the
City Sigliucia (or rather Signia) which with great expense he fortified, and
then planted it with 700 Inhabitants, making hereby a show that he could
without any trouble or fear sustain the War. Plut. in Poplicol. Dionys. lib. 5.
Livius lib. 2. Florus lib. 1. cap. 10. Aurel. Victor de viris Illustr. Val.
Max. lib. 3. cap. 2, 3. Vide etiam Polyb. lib. 6.
But Porsena laying close siege to Rome, very fiercely with all his might set
upon the City. The two Consuls with much ado repelling the Toscans, at length
were both so wounded as they must needs be carried off, after which the Romans
fled from before their Enemies, who in their retreat into the Town followed
them close, and flocked upon the bridge. Horatius* Cocles.
There Horatius surnamed Cocles (either for that he had but one eye, having
lost the other in War, or because his Nose was so depressed that both his Eyes
seemed to go into one, whence intending to call him Cyclops, by ignorance of
the language they pronounced it Cocles) together with Herminius and Lartius,
opposed himself against the Toscans. Cocles stood before the bridge, and
repulsed the Enemy so long till it was broken down behind him, which done, he
cast himself armed as he was into the River, and swom out to his friends,
having received a wound with a Spear. To require him for the lamenesse he
contracted by this wound, and in admiration of his valor, Poplicola caused all
the Romans to give him, every one so much provision as would serve one for a
day, then conferred he on him so much ground as he could plow round about in
one day, and they erected to his memory a Statue in the Temple of Vulcan. But
Porsena drawing out the siege in length sore straightened the City. Poplicola now
executing his third Consulship, together with his last year's Colleague M.
Horatius Pulvillus, led forth his men, and giving the King battle, overthrew
him, and killed 5000 of his men. Yet this little availed, the honor of
finishing this War being reserved for the valor and policy of Mutius Cordus.

19. Mutius a man of excellent courage, and no less skill in War, resolving
with himself to ly in wait for the life of Porsena, Mutius Scaevola.
put on the Tuscan habit, and using that language, came into the King's Camp,
where observing the place in which the King was, but being ignorant of his
person, A.M. 3498. Ol. 68. ann. 2. V.C. 247. Darii 15.
he stabbed his Secretary who sat with him amongst several others. Being taken
in the act, when they went about to examine him, he thrust his right hand into
the fire, as intending to punish it for so great a mistake, and whilst it
burned beheld Porsena with a steadfast and angry countenance, who admiring his
resolution dismissed him, and reached him back his sword from his seat. Mutius
took it with his left hand (whence he had the name of Scaevola, which word
signifies one that uses his left hand, says Plutarch) and telling the King
that he was now overcome by his bravenesse of spirit whose threats he had
contemned, he said in way of requital he would reveal a thing to him which no
force of torment could have compelled him to discover. He affirmed there were
300 Romans now in his Camp watching an opportunity to kill him. As for his
part, having been by lot destined to make the first attempt, it did not trouble
him that he had failed in killing him a right good man, and one much worthier
of the friendship than hatred of the Romans. Porsena hearing this, inclined
presently to a composure of the difference, not so much out of fear of the 300.
as admiration of the Roman courage. Poplicola having notice hereof, was glad of
such a friend, and content to make him Umpire betwixt the Commonwealth and
Tarquinius. He often challenged Tarquinius to put the matter to arbitration, to
which the King answered courageously, that he would not admit of any Judge,
much less of Porsena, who having promised him aid now basely falsified his
word. Peace made with Porsena.
Porsena hereat displeased, especially through the solicitation of Aruns his
son, made peace with the Romans on these conditions: that they should quit
those Tuscan grounds they had got into their hands, restore all prisoners, and
receive all their fugitives.

20. For the establishment of this peace the Romans gave up twenty Hostages,
viz. ten young youths, and as many Girls, amongst which was Valeria the
daughter of Poplicola. All acts of Hostility ceasing, the young Virgins went
down to the River to wash, and taking an opportunity, when none were present
to hinder them, got over the water, and returned home. Some reported, Cloelia.
that one amongst them named Cloelia went over on hors-back, and persuaded the
rest to swim after. When they presented themselves to Poplicola, he neither
admired their resolution, nor approved of their return, fearing it would be
objected as a breach of faith to the Romans; so that apprehending then all, he
sent them back to Porsena. Tarquinius aware hereof placed in ambush a party to
entrap them and their Convoy; but Aruns the son of Porsena hearing of it, came
in, and rescued them out of danger. When Porsena saw them, he demanded which
had been the cause of their departure, and finding Cloelia the principal,
bestowed on her one of his own horses sumptuously adorned. Then to give a
further Testimony of his respect toward the Romans, besides other things
wherein he showed his magnificence, he commanded his Soldiers to depart out of
the Camp only with their Arms, delivering up to the besieged his Tents
furnished with victuals, and all other good things. Therefore for a long time
after, when public goods were set to sale, first of all the stuff of Porsena
was cried, to preserve the memory of his kindness: And about the Courthouse
was erected his Statue in a plain and ancient fashion. For the next year
Dionysius names as Consuls, Sp. Lartius and T. Herminius, of whom Livie
makes honorable mention, but not as executing this Office. He vvriteth that
at the bridge Sp. Largius and T. Herminius both nobly descended, together with
Horatius Cocles, sustained the first brunt of the Hetruscans. But Learned men
tell us that it ought to be written Lartius, not Largius.

21. The year following being the 250 of the City, A.M. 3501. Ol. 99. ann. 1.
V.C. 250. Darii 18.
and the fifth after the banishment of Tarquinius, the first of the 99th
Olympiad, says Dionysius, wherein Ischomachus of Crotone was Victor,
Acestorides being again Archon at Athens, in the 18th year of Darius Hystaspis
King of Persia, A. M. 3501. M. Valerius the brother of Poplicola, and P.
Postumius Tubertus were Consuls. War with the Sabines.
Now the Sabines made depredations in the Roman Territories, and proceeded so
far in their injuries that it engaged the parties in a War: Marcus by the
Counsel and assistance of his brother obtained great honor in his
undertakings. He overthrew the Sabines twice, in the later of which battles
were slain of them 13000. and not one of the Romans lost. Wherefore besides
triumphs this was given him as an addition of honor, to have an house built
for him in the Palace on the public cost. Besides, whereas all the doors of
other houses opened inwards, they would have this of his house to open outward
toward the street, as a mark of honor in this respect, that he was ever ready
to move for the public good. Indeed all the Gates of the Greeks are said most
anciently to have opened this way, and that by Testimony of the Comedies,
wherein they that are going out first knock within, that such as either go by
or stand near, may prevent being hurt of the door, which was c^st forward into
the street. The next year, wherein Poplicola was Consul the fourth time, and
his Colleague T. Lucretius Tricipitinus, the whole Nation of the Sabines with
the Latins conspired against Rome, which was also much disturbed by
superstition, for that all the women with Child miscarried of mutilous births,
and nothing came into the World perfect. When these things much dejected the
minds of the Romans, another erected them, and afforded considerable
encouragement to the War. Actius Clausus.
Appius or Actius Clausus, an eminent man amongst the Sabines for riches,
valor, virtue, and eloquence, being much against the War, was therefore
maligned by his emulators, as favoring the Romans, and designing to bring his
Country under their yoke. His Enemies gaining credit with the Vulgar, he feared
to put himself upon trial, and therefore raised a commotion, which retarded the
War. Then did Poplicola invite him to Rome, whither he came with 5000 Families
of his friends and dependents. The Families were made free of the City, and to
every man assigned two Akers of Ground by the River Aniene; but to Clausus
himself twenty Akers, and the degree of a Senator. Having got this opportunity,
he so improved it, as to become equal to the greatest, and raised his house so
much, that the Clausi, afterward called Claudii, became inferior to no one
Family.

22. His revolt much more exasperated the minds of his Countrymen to the War,
who coming with an Army to Fidenae, placed in ambush 2000 Foot, and then sent
some Horse to make incursions, commanding them to retreat, as if they fled, and
so draw on the Romans into the snare. Poplicola, having notice hereof by
certain fugitives, divided his Army into three parts, and taking the advantage
of a mist, fell upon the Sabines on so many sides, and did such execution, as
the nearness of Fidenae only hindered the destruction of them all. The Romans,
beside the advantage of much plunder, obtained that good by this Victory, to be
furnished with courage for all assayes; yet imputed they the whole merit to the
Consul, and sticked not to say, that he delivered into their hands their
Enemies, blind and lame, only to be dispatched with the Sword. Having
triumphed, and given up the charge of the Commonwealth to the the two new
Consuls, Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, and Publius Posthumous, Poplicola dies.
shortly after he died, finishing his life, as he had lived, in great grace
with the multitude whom he had so flattered. The People, as if they had nothing
at all required him when living, but ought him yet his whole reward, decreed he
should be buried at the public charge, every one contributing a small piece of
money. Some say, that he was so poor, as he left not enough to bury him. The
women by universal consent mourned for him, as formerly they had done for
Brutus, an whole year. He was by a special Decree buried within the City,
(which honor (says Dionysius) has only happened unto him to this day) and
that privilege was also granted to his family. But now, ( Plutarch writes)
none of them is there interred: the Funeral is only drawn out thither, and the
coffin being set down, one puts under fire, and presently again takes it away,
showing, that the deceased has a right there to be buried, but on his own
accord quitteth the privilege. This being done, the body was carried away.

23. The same year that Poplicola died, the Sabines provided of numerous
Forces, invaded the Roman Territories, as far as the City walls. The Consuls
taking the field against them, Posthumous was entrapped in an Ambush, and
escaping narrowly himself, lost many of his men, which defeat struck the
Citizens with great terror, who now ran to the walls, expecting the Enemy would
fall upon the City. But nothing being attempted in this kind, they marched out,
resolving to redeem their credit; and Posthumous, much more concerned in honor
than the rest, so behaved himself, as he made amends fully, and both the
Consuls obtained a notable victory, which had been completed by the slaughter
of all the Sabines, if the darkness of night had not interposed. The Senate
ordered the Consuls to return in pomp; Menenius with full honor in triumph,
sitting in a Chair, drawn in way of a Chariot, but Posthumous, because of his
late defeat, in a more humble manner, which the Romans called Ovation, so named
(says Festus, or Paulus from him, as he from Verrius) from the letter O, which
the Soldiers in way of joy were wont to echo at their return from a Victory;
or corruptly pronounced for the Greek word Euaste, as Dionysius conjectureth.
Ovation differed herein from a Triumph properly so called, Ovation what.
that the General entered not the City in a Chariot, but on foot before his
Soldiers; Dionys.
for the Robe interwoven with Gold, he only wore the Praetexta toga, the
ordinary habit of Consuls and Praetors; neither had he a Scepter, but only
Laurel; and on his head a wreath of Myrtle, when the War had not been
denounced, or finished without bloodshed. The Sabines beg Peace.
The year following, wherein Sp. Cassius Viscellinus, and Opiter Virginius
Tricostus were Consuls, the Sabines were overthrown in a great battle at Cures,
10300 being slain, and about 4000 taken, which defeat caused them to beg peace,
and purchase it with Corn, Money, and part of their grounds. Whilst Sp. Cassius
did this good service against the Sabines, his Colleague subdued the
Camarinaeans who had revolted, and having put to death the Authors of the
injury, sold the rest, and razed their City.

24. The year that followed, being the first of the 70 Olympiad (wherein
Nicaeas of Opus (a Town of Locri) was Victor, ( Myrus executing the Annual
Office of Archon at Athens) had for Consuls Posthumous Cominius, and T.
Largius. Now all the Latins) to the number of thirty several Cities, says
Livie) conspired against Rome, by the procurement of Mamilius Octavius, son in
Law to Tarquinius (who at present was with him at Tusculum) though Valerius the
Roman Ambassador pretended to answer to such accusations as were made, and
labored to dissuade the several People of Latium. In the mean time also the
Slaves at home contrived how to seize upon the Capitol, and burn the City, but
were discovered, and nailed to crosses. The following year wherein Ser.
Sulpitius Camerinus, and Manius Tullus Longus, were Consuls, a Faction in
Fidenae, having received some men from Tarquinius, killed or expelled their
adversaries, and caused the Town to revolt from the Romans. The Senate would
not make War upon the Latins in general, knowing many amongst them were
inclined to Peace, and thought it sufficient to block up Fidenae, for which
they sent out Manius with a strong Army. The besieged implored assistance of
the Latins, who in their general meeting heard also the complaints of
Tarquinius, and though they were much importuned by some amonst them, yet they
only ordered Ambassadors to be sent to demand the reception of the King, and
the removal of the siege from Fidenae, which was done also meetly to gain time,
giving the Romans a year to consider of the matter, and taking so large a space
for to make preparations, Tarquinius his endeavors for the recovery of his
Kingdom.
in case the overture were rejected. Tarquinius and Mamilius having little
hopes to prevail this way, seeing that the minds of the generality were averse
from War, endeavored to bring his right about in an easier way, by raising in
Rome an unexpected and intestine difference betwixt the rich and poorer sort.

25. For at this very time, as Dionysius writes, a great part of the common
People, especially the indigent and such as were burdened by usury, did not
like of the present state of affairs, which dissatisfaction was caused by the
extravagant course of Creditors, who seizing upon the bodies of their Debtors,
used them no better than Slaves purchased with money. Tarquinius not being
ignorant hereof, sent certain of his friends with Gold, who gave them some in
hand, promising more after the King's restitution, and procured thereby a
conspiracy of many poor Citizens, with such Slaves as had been offended with
their Masters the year before, for the severity shown toward their fellows.
The matter was discovered to Sulpicius, who after he had returned a denial,
though very civilly, to the Latin Ambassadors, by a wile drew the Conspirators
into the Forum; where incompassing them about, he put them all to the Sword.
The stirs being thus allaied for a time, the Consuls of this and the following
year looked abroad, and, A. M. 3504. Ol. 96. an. 4. V. C. 253. Darii 21.
Postumus Cominius Auruncus, T. Lartius, Ruffus. Coss.
in the next, Fidenae was yielded up to T. Largius Flavus. Hereat the Latins
were exceedingly startled, and now all railed on their principal men, for that
no order had been taken for relief of the Town. Tarquinius and Mamilius so
improved this opportunity, that all the Cities (24 in number, as they are
reckoned by Dionysius) decreed War against the Romans, engaging that none
should forsake their associates, nor make Peace without common consent, sealing
it with an oath, and direful curses against such as should break the League,
who were to be held as Enemies by all the rest. They gave liberty to Tarquinius
and his son in Law to levy what Forces they thought convenient, and that they
might have some kind of pretense, sent a message to Rome, whence the Senate
returned a stout and resolute answer.

War with the Latins in his behalf.
26. Great were the preparations of the Latins; the Romans sending round about,
could make no friends, and yet were not dejected, but trusting to their
domestic strength alone, were thereby rendered much more resolute and
courageous, as such upon whom lay a necessity of being ^aliant. But a great
difficulty was found in listing Soldiers; for the poor, and those that were
surcharged with debt, of which there was a great number, being cited, would not
appear, saying, they had nothing to do with the Patritians, except their debts
were remitted by Decree of the Senate, nay some talked of leaving the City, and
exhorted one another not to stay in that place, where no good thing was
communicated to them. The Patritians by good words labored to appease them,
but all in vain; so that the Senate fell into a serious debate about so weighty
a matter. Some were for a free remission of the debts, after the manner of the
Athenian Sisachthea, as the only way to remove all prejudice, and beget a fair
correspondence betwixt Nobility and Commons. Others condemned this as too great
a condescension, and which would encourage them to like Seditions for the time
to come, thinking it the better way to list such as would give their names, and
not at all value the rest, who though gratified at present, would hereafter be
unserviceable. Betwixt these extremes several other ways were propounded; but
this at length prevailed, that nothing should now be determined, bur the War
being happily finished, the Consuls should report it again to the Senate, and
in the mean time all suits and process concerning debts were to cease, that
Magistrates might make effectual provision for the matter now mainly incumbent.
This expedient, though something it wrought, had not sufficient strength to end
the difference; and therefore the Senate was put upon another exigent. Whereas
by the Law of Valerius, power of life and death was taken away from the
Consuls, and all constraint, by an appeal to the People, so that no man could
be forced to the War; It seemed necessary to create a Magistrate, who for six
months should rule as absolute above the Laws, and from whom should lie no
appeal. Thus having renounced Monarchy in effect, they had again recourse to
it, and showed as well the necessity as excellency of it.

The Dictaror.
27. This Supreme Officer was called Dictator, either for that he was dictus, or
named, by the Consul, according to De Ling. Latin. l 4. p. 56.
Varro, or rather from dictating, or showing and commanding what was to be
done, which Etymology Lib. 5.
Dionysius approves. He was also called Varro quo prius. Cicero de Fin. l. 3.
Festus in voc. Optima Lex.
Magister Populi, and Lex Antiqua.
Praetor Maximus. Both name and thing came from the Albans, whose Dictator
Metius Suffetius we have formerly mentioned. Spartianus says, it was an
ordinary Magistrate of old Latium. Dionysius brings the testimony of Licinius
Macer for this opinion; yet he thinks the Office first taken from the Greeks,
who had their Aesymnetae or extraordinay Kings made upon some urgent occasion,
with absolute power. The Dictator was created upon some urgent occasion of War
or Sedition, for fixing a nail in time of a Plague, to hold the Comitia for
election of Consuls, celebrate Games, make inquisition, choosing Senators, or
in sum, when there was need of a sudden and extraordinary command. The manner
of his creation was not, as of other Magistrates, by the Suffrages of the
People; but, at the command of the Senate, the Consul named some one of
Consular dignity whom he pleased, in the night, and who was approved by the
Auspicium, or divination from birds, a ceremony observed ever in the election
of some Officers. The occasion being many times sudden, they could not stay for
the Suffrages of the People, and the design being to restrain, or constrain,
the multitude, many times, he was not to be chosen out of their body, although
sometimes these rules were not fully observed, either through the absence of
the Consul, or some other respect. L. Cornelius Sylla alone was named by the
Interrex, as C. Caesar by the Praetor; both which nominations Cicero in his
Epistles conceives done contrary to right and order. The authority of the
Dictator was exteeding large. His power.
He had power of Peace and War, to levy Forces, lead them forth, and disband
them, and act all things according to his pleasure, without referring them to
the Senate. So that not only had he the power of both Consuls (whence the
Greeks called him Disypatos, or Double Consul) but more also, in that upon his
Creation all other Magistrates, except the Tribunes, laid down their Offices,
and the whole Government was left in his hands. He could punish as he pleased,
without all appeal, and for the ostentation of his power, had 24 bundles of
Rods carried before him, with as many Axes, or Hatchets, as Plutarch and
Polybius do testify; although Livie dissenting from them, will have Sylla
first of all others to have had 24 bundles. Hence this Office came to be so
terrible, as the Edict of the Dictator was ever observed as the command of a
Deity.

The bounds of his Office.
28. It was necessary, according to the Roman Government, that this
extraordinary power should be bounded by certain limits, wherein might lie
redress of inconveniences thence arising. Six months were the time assigned
for it is duration, and never was it lengthned, except for mere necessity, as
might be instanced in Camillus, L. Papirius, and Fabius Maximus: for the
perpetual Dictatorships of Sylla and Caesar were notorious violations of the
Laws. And not only the time but the place also was limited, it being unlawful
for the Dictator to stir out of Italy, lest being out of sight, he should take
advantage at the distance of place, to attempt some new matter; and this
constitution was never violated but once whilst the old Commonwealth stood, by
Attillius Collatinus. He was not to come on horseback, but march continually
on foot, to show, says Plutarch, that the Roman strength lay in the Legions,
or rather to teach him humility. Now because in great Expeditions this could
scarce be observed, he formally before his departure asked leave of the People
that he might ride, as Livie informs us. But those restrictions were
inconsiderable, in respect of the Appeal which afterward came to be made from
him to the People. Festus in these words Optima Lex, Appeal from him.
says, that first the power of the Magister Populi, or Dictator, was full or
absolute, as that of Marcus Valerius; but afterward an Appeal lay from this
Magistrate to the People. Lib. 8.
Livie seems also to hold out the same thing, where he brings M. Fabius in
behalf of his son thus speaking to L. Papirius the Dictator: Seeing that
neither the authority of the Senate, nor mine age, which thou go about to
bereave of my son, neither the virtue and Nobility of the Master of the
Horsemen named by thy self, prevails with thee; nor yet prayers and
entreaties, which are wont to appease an enemy, and the anger of the gods: I
appeal to the Tribunes of the People, and the People it self which I make our
Judge, (seeing thou regardest not the judgment of the Army and Senate) which
alone can do more than thy Dictatorship. I shall see whether thou will give
place to that Appeal to which the Roman King Tullus Hostilius yielded. Hereupon
the People assembled, and the Tribunes were present at the meeting. Papirius
denies neither the power of the one nor the other, but continues resolute for
the punishment of the Master of the Horsemen, who had fought in his absence
contrary to his command, showing how all discipline else would be destroyed. A
way was found out to preserve the honor of both Offices, the power of People,
Tribunes, and Dictator, with the strength of discipline. For the People betook
it self to entreaties, and was seconded by the Tribunes. Whereupon the Dictator
pardoned the party, granting his life to the request of those, who, as he
confesses, might have commanded it.

29. At what time this Appeal was brought in, or how long it continued in
force, seeing that Sylla and other Dictators made use of the old and absosute
power, is uncertain. It is probable, that the People being overwitted in
ratifying the Decree of the Senate (as Dionysius tells us they were) grew
sensible, how they had thereby given the power again out of their hands; SECT.
2.
it being lawful for the Senate at any time when they should pretend a
necessity, and that for the bridling of the People it self, to give order to
the Consul to name a Dictator, and therefore resumed its ancient power of
Appeal, without which no lawless freedom could be enjoyed. But in the
declining condition of the Commonwealth, when Dictators grew more imperious,
their Soldiers more dissolute, and the Tribunes of the people especially more
factious, an opportunity might be wanting for it to exert that right which as
yet it had not given up to any other. If what Dionysius writes of the
Dictator's being approved by the people after the Consul's nomination be true,
the State stood in less need of the Appeal; but it being not possible for a
multitude never to mistake in its opinion of a person, this defect might at
length experimentally be discovered, and thence a recourse had to that remedy
which was ever certain whilst it could be applied. By these cautions and
restrictions, with the modesty of the Romans, this Grand Office was for 400
years managed for the public good, as it was accounted, till Sylla, and
afterward Caesar, converted it into a Tyranny, as the multitude counted it, and
rendered the very name thereof so odious, that after Caesar's death, in the 710
year of the City, when M. Antonius and P. Cornelius Dolabella were Consuls, a
Law was made (from the former Consul called Lex A^tonia) whereby it was for
ever banished. The Magister Equitum.
The Dictator when he was Created made choice of one who had either been Consul
or Praetor, to be Magister Equitum, who, says Varro, had chief power over the
hors-men, De Ling. Latin. lib. 4. p. 22.
and Adcensi (Criers, Beadles, or public Messengers) as the Dictator had over
the Roman people, whence he also was called Magister Populi. The rest, because
they were of less value than these Magistri, were named Magistratus, as from
al^us Albatus. If the Dictator was absent, the Master of the hors-men executed
his place in the Army, but if he present, he commanded the horse, yet so as to
be obedient to the Dictator's orders, and not to fight, either contrary to, or
without his command. In the second Punick War, M. Fabius Buleo was made
Dictator for filling up the Senate, without a Master of hors-men. But he
alleged, that he could not approve of two Dictators to be at the same time, nor
a Dictator without a Master of hors-men, and having perfected his work on the
same day laid down his Office.

The time of the first Dictatorship.
30. Concerning the time of the first Dictatorship, Authors differ in the space
of two years, and do not full agree about the person. Dionysius, a grave,
faithful, and wary Author (by consent of the most learned sort of men)
refers it to the 255 year of the City; but Livy, and most Latin Authors
assign it to the 253. Dionysius says expressly, that T. Largius Flavus was the
first Dictator, The Person.
being Consul that year. Livy says it could not be certainly known from
ancient Authors who was the first, yet confesses that the most ancient
mentioned Largius, and upon good grounds approves of their opinion rather than
that which makes M. Valerius the son of Marcus yet living, and Grandson to
Volesus the first of all, which Festus seems to follow. Livy mentions no
other cause of the Original than a falling out with the Sabines, and the
conspiracy of the 30 Latin Cities, putting off the Sedition till after the
finishing of the Latin War; but as there can little hold be taken of one who
uncertainly relates matters; so no need would there have been of an absolute
Authority for the Latin War, if no stir had been made in the City, all giving
their names with alacrity, and obeying the Consuls, as in former Wars. And if
the Consuls had been suspected to favor the cause of Tarquinius (as some wrote
they were) then new ones might have been made in their rooms, nothing being
prevalent to alter the ordinary form of Government, but a necessity of absolute
power for a time; and no ordinary accident about War could make this necessity;
so that compulsion must have been the end, and the taking away that help from
the multitude, which was unalterably given to it against the Consuls by the
Valerian Law. Thus might the Nobility, if they had had that duty, have seen
cause to repent in time of their Kings banishment.

SECT. 1.
31. T. Largius, the first Dictator, having named Sp. Cassius for his Master of
hors-men (who had born the Office of Consul in the 70th Olympiad) c^used Axes
to be carried before him with the Rods, T. Largius the first Dictator.
as had been wont, till the time of Poplicola, before the chief Magistrates,
both Kings and Consuls. Having with these and other Ensigns of power terrified
the Seditions, he began the Census after the Pattern of Ser. Tullius, according
to the Tribes, taking the names and ages of such as were Cessed, and of
Children. In a short space, fear of losing freedom of the City, and Estates,
so prevailed, as 150700 of such as were ripe of age gave their names, which he
distributed into four parts, whereof taking one to himself, he gave the rest to
his Master of hors-men, and two others, one being to continue in the City for
the defense thereof. This done, he sent some who underhand dealt with the
several Latin Cities, and procured them to suspend the War, and make a Truce
for a year, notwithstanding all that Mamilius and Sextus Tarquinius could do to
the contrary. Then returned he home with the Army, and ere his 6 months were
out, the Consuls being appointed, laid down, no Citizen being killed, banished,
or otherwise chastized by any grievous punishment; which carriage was imitated
by his Successors, until the third age from that wherein we live, says
Dionysius. But in the time of our fathers, 400 years from the Dictatorship of
Largius, L. Cornelius Sylla first of all others behaved himself cruelly in this
Office, so that the Romans conceived then what before they had cause to be
ignorant of, that the Dictatorship was a Tyrannis.

32. When the Truce betwixt the Latins and Romans was ended, both parties
prepared for the War: The former were against their wills, it is said, Dionys.
lib. 6.
drawn in by the interest of Mamilius; but the later with all cheerfulness
embraced the opportunity. The Romans thought fit a Dictator should be Created,
and accordingly Virginius the Senior Consul named A. Posthumous his Colleague,
who chose for Master of hors-men T. Ebutius Helva, and hasting his Levies,
divided his Forces into four parts, whereof one he kept to himself, assigned
the second to Virginius, the third to Ebutius, and the fourth to Sempronius,
The Latins overthrown at the Lake Regillus.
who therewith was to defend the City. News being come that the Latins had
taken the Field, the Dictator with speed marched to the Lake Regillus (at this
day called Il Lago di Santa Severa) in the Country of Tusculum, where he
fortified his Camp against the Enemy, who as yet had not united his forces, and
expected assistance from the Volsci. The Roman Army divided into three parts
encompassed the Latins, who endeavored to beat off Ebutius from an Hill he
had seized on betwixt them and home; but he kept his ground in despite of
them, and fortified himself. The Latins hereupon being hindered from all
Provisions, resolved to fight: the Dictator at first was minded to end the War
without blood, by famishing his Enemies, but understanding that the Volsci were
expected within three days, changed his resolution. The right Wing of the
Latins was led by Mamilius, the left by Sextus Tarquinius, and the middle
battle by Titus Tarquinius his other son. On the other side against Mamilius
stood Virginius, Ebutius was opposite in the right Wing to Sextus Tarquinius,
and the Dictator led the middle battle against Titus, and the Roman Exiles. The
Romans brought into the field 24000 foot and 1000 horse, but the Latins 40000
foot and 3000 horse. When they joined, both parties missed of their
expectation; for the one trusting to their numbers, and the other to their
valor, thought to bear all down before them. The Dictator gave the first
opportunity of victory by over-powering Titus, after which, though Mamilius and
Sextus omitted nothing requisite to valiant and able Captains, yet both losing
their lives, their followers were discouraged and overthrown; scarce 10000
escaping home of the whole number. Of the Romans fell M. Valerius, whose dead
body his two Nephews by his brother Poplicola, Publius and Marcus, endeavoring
to get off, were also slain in the attempt.

33. After the fight, the Volsci, whom the Latins had expected, arrvied at the
Camp, which seeing full of dead bodies, and learning the issue of the battle,
some of them were for falling on the Romans now weary; but another party
prevailed to send Messengers to the Dictator, to tell him they came to his
assistance, thereby to ingratiate themselves with the Conquerours. But the
Dictator convinced them of falsehood by their Letters which he had intercepted,
and giving leave to the Messengers to return, whom the multitude would have
pulled in pieces, resolved on the morrow to fall on them; but in the night they
deserted their Camp and fled. From the place of this action the Dictator
obtained the surname of Rhegillensis.

The Latins sent to deprecate the anger of the Roman State, laying all the
blame upon their Nobility. The Ambassadors managed their work with such
earnestness and humility (casting themselves at the Feet of the Senate, and
making great l^mentations) that the motion of Largius prevailed in their behalf
for the former League to be renewed. This was the end of the War which in
behalf of the Tarquinii had been carried on for fourteen years: Tarquinius
himself being only left behind of all his stock, now almost ninety years old,
for that the Latins, Hetruscans, and Sabines, refused to harbor him, as also
all other neighboring Cities which were free, went into Campania to
Aristodemus the Prince of Cumae, with whom he shortly after died. Of the man we
may judge charitably, because his story was only related to posterity by his
bitter Enemies. However, his banishment our religion must censure as rebellion.
And such were the stirs, seditions and tumults afterward, and so many changes
and rechanges, as if the Reader seriously consider them, he will see that the
Romans suffered much for want of Monarchy, and the contrary Government did not
contribute to their happiness. That this may appear, he has here a fuller
view of their changes than in any other modern Writer.

34. The Romans now freed from this War, fell into a grievous sedition in the
City, Great stirs in the City
the Courts of Justice being again opened by the Senate, and the process
against debtors revived. The Plebeians alleged they were not able to pay their
debts, by reason of their losses sustained in the late Wars through want of
tillage, and plundring of their Cattle by the Enemy. Their Creditors replied,
that these losses had also befallen them, which made the remission of the debts
impossible; and so neither sort would yield at all, but many tumults were
raised, wherein the parties did not abstain from blows. Posthumous the Dictator
perceiving some expedition to be necessary for the quiet of the City, created
Consuls for the following year, and laid down his Office. The Consuls were
Appius Claudius the Sabine, and P. Servilius Priscus, who being of the
Dictators mind as to the War, resolved to go out against the Volsci, who had
assisted the Latins against the State, and now were making new preparations
for War; when they came to make Levies none of the Plebeians would give their
names, complaining that they having already undergone the heat, and danger of
the War, both for liberty and dominion, they were by their fellow Citizens at
home kept in bondage (it being the custom then for Creditors to make use of
them as Slaves bound in fetters) and many times cruelly beaten, till they could
pay their debts. They cried out, that the security of the common sort was more
provided for in War, and amongst their Enemies, than in peace, and with their
friends. The disagreement of the Consuls amongst themselves added to the
present distemper; Servilius being willing to comply something with the desire
of the poor, but Appius inveighing against them with great bitterness, and
earnestly urging force and rigor to be the most suitable means for appeasing
these tumults. Diverted by War.
The Senate was forced to betake it self to the popularitie of Servius, who
with fair words drew the people out against the Sabines, and when he had by
this good service deserved a Triumph* the honor was denied him through the
suggestions of his Colleague to the Fathers, for that by bearing with the
multitude he impaired the Dignity of their Order.

35. After the finishing of the War the common sort thought again of their own
concernments, and expecting performance of what Servilius had promised, Appius
exacted the payment of debts as rigorously as ever: This doubled the people's
rage, and made them carry on all things by force, so that they rescued their
Companions out of the hands of Sargeants, and holding secret councils by night,
Renewed.
denied to the succeeding Consuls to take Arms, till they could have a
relaxation of their burdens. This putting the Senate to a stand, Appius still
urged that nothing was to be granted to the rabble, and procured a Dictator to
be created. When most looked upon him as fittest for the time, the Consuls
judged quite otherwise, and made choice of M. Valerius the brother of Publius,
and son of Volesus, a popular man, being persuaded that the terror of the
Office alone would do the work, and that a man of mild temper would best manage
it. The Dictator promised the People, in case they would freely follow him, not
only what they justly required concerning their debts, but other rewards also,
and by this means listed ten Legions against the Volsci, Aequi, and Sabines,
who were all up in Arms, which being brought under, he divided amongst his
Soldiers some grounds taken from the Volsci, but requesting of the Senate, that
his and their promise might be made good, was checked for his love to the
multitude, and because he was an old man above 70, being unfit as he said to
contend, he laid down his Office. The People hereat much enraged, kept private
meetings, and consulted how to separate themselves from the Patritians, which
when the Senate perceived, they gave order to the Consuls not to disband the
Armies, pretending that the Sabines and Aequi had conspired against Rome. The
Soldiers being bound by the Oath taken at their listing (called by them
Sacramentum, and ever strongly observed) could not forsake their Standards, The
first separation of the Commons.
but the Consuls having their Camps near to each other, they all went into one
by the advice of one Sicinius Bellulus, and taking away the Ensigns from the
Consuls, departed to the Mount called afterward Mons Sacer, lying three miles
from the City beyond the River Aniene, now called Taverone.

36. Notice hereof being brought into the City, filled all places with
marvelous tumults. The Patritians were in great fear lest War should be made
upon them; the Plebeians grew exceeeding high, and many flocked to the Army,
though the other hindered it as much as possible. The Fathers had also great
strife amongst themselves, while some pleaded for the multitude, and others
would hear of nothing but carrying the matter through by strong hand. But the
former sort prevailed to send a message to the Armies, desiring them to return
home; promising that for the future all things should be forgot, and the Senate
would be ready to reward their faithfulness and serviceablenesse to their
Country; withal, the Ambassadors had it in charge to know the utmost of their
desires. To the message nothing would be returned but disdainful words, and
high complaints, something mixed with threatening language, which more
grievously afflicted the Fathers, not knowing what way to procure a
reconcilement; and now would not such as they had by their authority and
interest hitherto retained in the City, be withheld from going to the Army.
The time for creation of new Consuls was now at hand. The old ones appointing
the Comitia, no Candidates (so called because they appeared in white garments)
would stand for the Office, nor any accept of it, till at length the Consuls
appointed by their sole authority Posthumous Cominius, and Sp. Cassius, who had
born it before, and were equally in favor with the Nobility and Commons. They
having entered on the Calends of September (sooner than usual) in the 72
Olympiad (wherein Tesicrates of Crotone was Victor, and Diognetes Archon) first
of all consulted the Senate about the return of the Commons. Agrippa Menenius a
man of great wisdom and temper, being first asked his opinion, by all means
possible exhorted the Fathers to a composure. He showed what necessity there
was of it in regard of the Roman Dominion, which could not be either preserved
or increased without the inferior sort of People, and made it clear, that they
could not expect to have any of better temper than the present were, for as
much as all, whosoever they were, who by their labor and blood obtained power
and Sovereignty for the City, would expect to be sharers in it is advantages. He
pressed the danger they were now in from their Enemies round about, and having
used other motives, concluded with his advice, that they would send messengers
with full power to treat and conclude what they should find convenient, without
any more consulting the Senate.

37. After Menenius spoke M. Valerius, and upbraided the Senate for not giving
him credit when he foretold these distempers, He advised them to cure the wound
while it might be healed, showed what reason the Commons had to be concerned
more of late, because of the Dictatorship, which took from them their former
Appeal, as also for that the Senate had denied the honor of triumph to
Servilius when they desired it for him, because he was suspected to favor
them, and for that neither he, the Consul, nor he himself the Dictator, could
at all profit them in what had been promised. He inveighed against the avarice
and cruelty of creditors, and particularly fell foul upon Appius for his
rigor, and raising a Faction, which if others were not wise to prevent, would
utterly destroy the Commonwealth. Lastly, he commended the advice of Menenius,
and desired it might speedily be executed, so as whatever the Commons required
might be granted. Appius a man of an high spirit, most studious of the
Patritian dignity, and also of a sober and venerable carriage, being asked his
opinion next, in excuse of himself recriminated Valerius. With great animosity
he noted the ambition and senselessness of the multitude, admiring that any of
the Fathers should be so absurd, as having denied remission of debts to them
when friends, would grant it to them now Enemies, who would not Note.
rest here, but require also a communication of honors, The Prophecy of Appius
concerning the lawless rabble.
and what not? so that at length the power would come into the hands of the
rabble, and the Commonwealth degenerate into a Democracy. He lessened, or
rather endeavored to remove, the danger which threatened either from the Armies
revolt, or the hostility of old Enemies. He endeavored to persuade them, that
they were able enough to reduce them by force, having their wives and children
in the City; and alleging for further confirmation of this, that the multitude
were without any persons of good conduct, whereas the Patritian order abounded
with experienced commanders, concluded with this advice, neither to send any
message to them, nor remit them their debts, nor do any other thing which might
show the least fear or trouble: If they would lay down their Arms and returning
into the City, submit to the Senate, then moderately to determine concerning
them; seeing that all fools, especially the Vulgar, are insolent against such
as condescend, but cowardly toward those that resolutely demean themselves.

38. The wise speech of Appius so inflamed those of his party, especially the
younger sort, that nothing could be determined for the heat of contention. This
put the Consuls upon dismissing the Senate for that time, admonishing the
younger sort to carry themselves more respectfully and modestly for the time to
come, or else they would neither use them as Advisers nor Judges, but prefer a
Law for limiting a certain age for Senators. The graver men they exhorted also
to concord, letting them know they had a way to end the controversy, by
referring the matter to the decision of the People, which had right to judge of
it, as a case about Peace and War. At the next meeting the ancient men were of
the same opinion as formerly, but the younger modestly referred themselves to
whatsoever they should determine; so that the major part by far, being wearied
with the cries and solicitations of those who had relations in the Army,
rather than any reason, notwithstanding Appius stuck close to his former
resolution, resolved to follow the advice of Menenius, who with nine others
were commissionated with full power, both by Senate and People, to compose the
difference. At first the offers of the Commissioners could not be heard through
the instigation of two cunning and turbulent fellows, Sicinius, and L. Junius,
who conceited of his abilities, affected the name of Brutus also. Menenius, to
give full satisfaction, promised that such as were unable to pay their debts,
should be discharged both from obligation and imprisonment, and for the time to
come matters of this nature should be ordered by the joint consent both of
People and Senate. Then adding the Fable of the several members falling out
with the belly, as consuming all which they provided, and thence the ruin and
decay of the whole body, he so improved it to the present occasion, likening
the Senate to the belly (which digesteth and distributeth sustenance to all the
rest, though they provide it) that the whole multitude convinced of the
necessity of Union, cried out, He should lead them home without delay.

39. Little wanted of their departure without any other security than the bare
word of the Commissioners. But Junius Brutus a Plebeian formerly mentioned
withheld them, saying, that they were gratefully to acknowledge the kind
offers of the Senate; but whereas some men of tyrannical spirits might reserve
their anger to a convenient opportunity, the Commons wanted such good security
for the time to come, as might defend them from the unreasonable malice of
great ones, and he moved, that they might have certain Officers created yearly
out of their own body, whose power should only be to give relief to such
Plebeians as were injured, and suffer none to be defrauded of their right: and
therefore not to resist the Consuls, as some thought. This being received by
the multitude with great approbation, was insisted on to Menenius, and his
fellows, who thought not good to admit of a matter of such large consequence,
without leave from the Senate, and demanded time to know the pleasure thereof.
The Consuls reporting the matter, Valerius thought this favor was to be
granted to the Commons, and, though Appius opposed it earnestly, crying out,
calling their gods to witness, and truly foretelling what calamities they
would bring upon the Commonwealth, yet the major part inclining to Peace, it
was carried for them, and the Commissioners were sent back with the resolution
of the house. The Commons by the advice of Menenius, A composure by bringing in
the Tribunes.
first sent to take from the Senate a religious confirmation of this privilege,
and afterward in the Assembly of the Curiae elected L. Junius Brutus, and C.
Sicinius Bellutus, A. M. 3511. Ol. 71. an. 3. V. C. 260. Darii 28. A. Virginio
Montano, T. Veturio Gemiao, Coss.
to whom they afterward joined C. and P. Licinius, and Sp. Icilius Rugu. These
five first entered this new Office on the fourth of the Ides of December,
according to the History and computation of Dionysius, sixteen years after the
expulsion of Tarquin.

40. These Officers were called Tribuni Plebis, there having been from the
beginning other Tribunes in the City named Tribuni Celerum, so called from the
Peoples being divided into three parts at that time, from which so many were
sent into the Army, as Ling. Lat. l. 4. p. 22.
Varro and De Orig. Juris par. 20.
Pomponius derive the word; or because they were elected by the Tribes, or
oversaw them, as others. Varro seems to hold that the Tribuni Plebis were
called Tribunos, because they were first made of the Tribunes or Colonels of
the Soldiers. Livie names C. Licinius, and L. Albinus, for the first two, to
whom were shortly after added three more, viz. Sicinius, the Author of the
departure, and two others, concerning which, says he, Authors differ. In the
297 year of the City five more were added, and this number of ten so continued.
Their number.
As these Officers were elected by the Commons, so ever out of their body,
except where we read in Livie (in his third Book) of two Patritians; Nay most
commonly of the lower sort, till a Law ordained that they should be created out
of the Senate; that is, out of such Plebeians as were admitted into the Senate.
What time this Law was preferred, cannot certainly be discovered. Bell. civil.
lib. 1.
Appian says, it is not certain whether Sylla did it. It should appear from
Lib. 14. c. 8.
Gellius, that there passed a Plebiscitum or Decree of the People, for this
purpose, called Plebiscitum Atinium; but what Atinius this should be is also
obscure, there being one P. Atinius Tribune of the Commons when Julius Caesar
and Bibulus were Consuls. As concerning their power, De Legib. lib. 3.
Cicero says, they were opposed against the Consuls: but this is not true, the
occasion of their making not rising from the Consuls. At the beginning their
power was only to relieve the oppressed, Power.
as a shield to keep off evil, and not as a weapon to inflict it. They nulled
the unjust (as they accounted them) Decrees, and Commands of the Senate and
Magistrates; and to show their readiness to protect the meanest, Plutarch.
probl. 81.
their doors stood open night, and day to their complaints. Lib. 3. c. 2.
Gellius tells us, that they could not be absent from the City one day; not
an hour says Lib. 37.
Dion; and De bell. Civil. l. 2.
Appian going further, confineth them within the Walls. They interposed by this
one word Veto solemnly pronounced. They procured themselves afterward to be
accounted Sacrosancti, Privilege.
so as by a Law confirmed with an Oath, none might compel a Tribune to do any
thing, as one of the vulgar, neither strike, nor command him to be beaten;
neither kill, nor command him to be killed. If any did contrary, he was to be
held as Sacer, and his goods being Confiscated unto Ceres, it should be lawful
for any to kill him. And lest afterward the people should abrogate this Law,
they made all the Citizens take the most solemn Oath that could be devised,
both for themselves and posterity, to preserve it for ever inviolable, as Lib.
6.
Dionysius writes, who has also exemplified the Law it self. To this Pro Sext.
Cicero adds, that they were not only by sacred Laws fortified against Force
and Arms, but against words also, and interruption of speech.

41. But as their power of Interposing was most powerful against Consuls and
Senate, The balance to their power.
so also against themselves; the dissent of one man being sufficient to hinder
whatever all his Colleagues designed. This appears to have been the only
constant effectual means for moderation of that power which afterward they
assumed, when the Patritians could prevail with one of the College to
interpose. By that awe which their Sacrosanct Magistracy struck into all men,
improved through their prompt boldness (very common in men of meanest
condition) they took advantage to enlarge their bounds. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Exemp.
7.
Valerius Maximus writes, that at first it was not lawful for them to enter
into the Senate, but they had seats placed before the door, where examining the
Decrees of the Fathers, such of them as they suffered to pass they signed with
the letter T. But nothing in Dionysius is more common than their speaking in
the Senate, and their contentions with the Members thereof in that very place
at the very time, and that in the infancy of their Office. However, these
fellows at first presumed not to Tyrannise and disturb all, as afterward they
did, they presumed not at first to assemble the Senate, which afterward they
did in the 277 year of the City, and in process of time to dismiss it also,
when called by another. Within a small time they assembled the people,
preferred Laws, The extravagancy of their power.
executed their saucy Decrees against the Magistrates themselves, commanding
the Consuls to be carried to prison, (especially after the enacting of the
Hortensian Law, whereby the Plebiscita obliged the whole Roman people) for that
they were the chief Officers of the Commons.

42. Great were the Seditions and Tumults, which turbulent spirits backed with
such liberty, stirred up; so as notwithstanding their first end was to preserve
right, Lucan rightly terms them Turbantes jura. Sylla was the first that
bridled their extravagancy, by depriving them of liberty to prefer Laws, to
make Orations, and obtain any Office of Magistracy; but after his death
Aurelius Cotta by a new Law restored the later privilege to them, and all the
rest they recovered when Pompey and M. Crassus were Consuls. Their power thus
recovered they kept till the Emperors swallowed it up themselves, and left
them little more than a name, which continued till the time of Constantine. As
for the Ensigns of their Office, they wore not the Praetexta, had no Lictors or
Sargeants, neither used they a Curule Chair; only a sort of Beadle, called
Viator, went before them. For want of these Ceremonies, as because they entered
not at the beginning of the year, and laid not down their Office upon the
Creation of a Dictator, which others did, Plutarch writes that some held them
to be no Magistrates, but rather a curb and restraint to such. Several other
sorts of Tribunes.
Lastly, besides these Tribunes, and the Tribuni Celerum formerly mentioned,
there were afterward many other sorts, as Tribuni Militum, and Tribuni
Aerarii, during the Commonwealth: under the Emperors are found Tribunus
Voluptatum, Tribunus Matrimoniorum, Tribunus Chartariorum, Tribunus
Provinciarum, Tribunus Fori, and Tribunus Scholarum, concerning which
Cassiodorus in his Epistles, and Lissius in his Commentary of the Magistrates
of old Rome are to be consulted.

43. The Commons having got from the Senate a confirmation of the Office of
Tribunes, obtained further, that they might yearly choose out of their own body
two, to be as Ministers to these Officers; to Judge certain causes referred to
them from the Tribunes, take care of public buildings and provisions. These
were first called the Ministers and Assistants of the Tribunes; The Aediles
created.
but afterward says Dionysius from one of their Duties had the name of
Aediles. Many things of great consequence were committed to their trust, being
very much like to the Agoranomi amongst the Greeks. Festus acknowledging that
in the beginning Aediles was a Magistrate who took care both of public and
private buildings, yet says he was so called, quod facilis ad eum plebis
aditus esset. Truer is the derivation which Varro gives, agreeable to that of
Dionysius; that they were named Aediles, from Aedes the buildings, of which
they took care, or those particularly, wherein the Plebiscita were kept, of
which they had the oversight. This later Etymology is rendered by Pomponius,
who in his second book of the Original of Law, describing the several Offices
of Magistracy, makes the end of the constitution of the Aediles to have been,
that they might take care of that house where the Decrees of the people were
laid up. Whence soever the word was derived it came out of Latium, being a name
of certain Magistrates in the Latin Towns, as was also Dictator and Duumvir,
as some observe out of Spartianus. To these Aediles Plebis, who were instituted
in the 271 year of the City, at the same time with the Tribunes, were added
two more out of the Patritian order 117 years after, called for distinction
Aediles Curules, because they used the Curule Chair, whereas the other only
sat on Benches, as the Tribunes and Quaestors. The occasion of creating those
shall be shown in its place, the end was only then for celebrating of Games.

44. This number continued till the time of C. Julius Caesar, who in the 710
year of the City added two more, whom he would have created also, out of the
Patritians. They were called Diod. lib. 43.
Cereales from Ceres, being appointed to take care of, and make provision for
Corn. This number of six thus distinguished, continued till the time of
Constantine, as is probably conjectured, and were as most other Offices of
Magistracy taken away by him. The Aediles, Their Office.
says 3. de Legibus.
Cicero, are the Curators of the City, of provisions, and of solemn Games. Of
the City, because they looked to public works and Temples; made provision
against fires (which Augustus seems to have charged upon them says Lipsius)
had inspection over Funerals, and such like Rites of smaller moment; over
Marriages and Adulteries, Baths, Aqueducts, Sinks, and Streets, both for
repairing and cleansing of them. Of Provisions, for that they had the
oversight of all things to be sold, men, and other creatures, determining,
judging, and censuring by their words and edicts. Of solemn Games, and only
solemn (not votive and private ones) as the Ludi Florales, Circenses,
Megalenses, Romani, etc. Sometimes at their own charge they made these shows,
and ever examined the Fables written before they were acted. And (whether from
this inspection of Play-books it came or no is uncertain) they seem to have
been Licensers and Judges of other writings, being ordered by a Decree of the
Senate, as Annal. lib. 4.
Tacitus tells us, to burn the Papers of Cremutius Cordus. It is further
Janus Gulielmus.
observed, that the Generals when they returned home after some victory,
delivered up the Corn and Provisions which had been made prize, to them, as the
Captives to the Praetor, and the money to the Quaestor. All such Victuallers as
offended against the Laws, as also Monopolizers and others that transgressed in
this kind, they accused to the people, and with the Fines celebrated Games,
made Presents to their gods, or some public works. Lastly, it is observed, that
they took care that none but Roman gods, and those after the Roman manner
only, should be worshipped.

War with the Volsci.
45. But, to return to the story, the rabble having obtained these Officers,
willingly gave their names to the Expedition against the Volsci, under conduct
of Posthumous Cominius the Consul. Dionys. lib. 6. Plutarch. in Coriolano.
He took Longula and Polustia with no great difficulty, and presently laid
siege to Corioli a strongly fortified Town, and the head of the Nation. The
Antiates coming to the relief of this place, he left part of the Army to
continue the siege under the Command of Titus Largius, and with the other went
to give them battle. Largius attempting to storm the Town, the Inhabitants
sallied out, and charged the Romans so furiously, that they forced them back
into their Camp: all but a few whom C. Marcius, Marcius.
a Patritian of great Nobility, and greater Valor, kept about him. This
Marcius with so small a Company received the violence of the Enemy, and doing
great execution, forced him at length into the Town, and following himself
rushed in with him, whereat the besieged were so afrighted, that not
considering their own numbers, they fled to the contrary part of the City, and
suffered him to let in the rest of the Army. When the Soldiers now fell to
plunder, he suffered them nor, but hasted to the battle to help the Consul, and
with the good news of his success to cheer the Army.

46. He desired of Cominius that he might be suffered with his men to fight
against the middle battle, wherein the chief strength of the Enemies lay, which
obtaining, he showed there more valor than formerly, and was the greatest
cause of the victory. The day following the Consul gave him extraordinary
commendations, and a good share of booty before it came to be divided amongst
the Soldiers; but he would accept of nothing except an horse, Surnamed
Coriolamus.
which gained him greater honor from the whole Army, A.M. 3512. Ol. 71. ann.
4. V.C. 261. Darii 29. Sp. Cassio 2. Postumo Cominio Coss.
and moved Posthumous to bestow the surname of Coriolanus upon him for his
incomparable valor shown at that place. The Volsci were by this overthrow
forced to submission, and made their peace. This year was the League of Amity
and Confederacy renewed with the Latins with all cheerfulness, because they
had been faithful in the late Sedition and War, and had sent to congratulate
for the peace made betwixt Nobility and Commons. The Senate for this Civil
Union decreed supplications or thanks to their gods, a third feria, or Holy
day, to be added to the other two Latin Feriae, whereof Tarquinius had
dedicated one, when he Conquered Hetruria, and the People the other after the
banishment of Tarquinius. In this Consulship died also Agrippa Menenius, whom
the People out of gratitude resolved to bury at the public charge, every man
contributing something, because he died poor, and when the Senate would needs
defray the charge out of the Treasury, they bestowed the money upon his
Children. Now also the Census being celebrated above 110000 heads were Cessed.

47. The year following wherein T. Geganius Macerinus, and P. Minucius were
Consuls, a great dearth fell upon the City, the effect of the late Sedition. A
dearth,
For, the Commons having departed a little after the Autumnal Aequinoctial,
about the time of sowing, Dionys. l. 7.
the Country was forsaken of husbandmen; the richer sort betaking themselves
to the Patritians, and the poorer to the Army, and the division continued till
a little before Mid-winter. All the middle space of time there was no tillage,
though it was most proper for sowing, and for some time after the agreement, it
could scarce be renewed, for that Slaves had run away, and there was great
scarcity of Cattels by these means for the year following they were little
beforehand in Corn, either for seed or provisions. This put the Senate upon
sending into several parts of Italy, and also into Sicily, to buy Corn. But
notwithstanding their care, the multitude being exceedingly pinched with
Famine, raised tumults, getting together by companies, Which causes a Sedition,
and laying all the fault upon the Fathers, as if by their wilful neglect they
had in this way revenged themselves. The Volsci being acquainted with this new
Sedition, and the weak Estate of Rome, conspired how to improve the advantage;
but were diverted by a grievous plague, which so raged, as Velitrae a Noble
City of that Country was almost utterly exhausted, the small remnant of the
Inhabitants whereof gave up themselves to the Romans, desiring they would send
a Colony thither.

48. Of this advantage the Senate was very glad, to lessen the multitude of the
City; and the poor were content to inhabit so fertile a place; but when they
considered the danger of infection, they were again discouraged, and wrested
this to so bad a sense, as to make it a design to destroy them. But the Senate
laying a great penalty upon such as refused to go, many obeyed and went
thither, as also to Norba a Latin Town. This enraged more such as staid behind,
being still pinched by the famine, so that raising great multitudes, they
called the Tribunes into the Comitium. Great strife happened betwixt the Consuls
and them; The Tribunes affirming they had promised not to interrupt them in
their discourses to the People, to which the other answered, that it was only
when they called the People together, not when the Consuls themselves did it,
as now they had done, to promise them all fair accommodation from the Senate.
And this a new Law in behalf of the Tribunes.
Hereupon Brutus, who being so great a stickler before, was chosen one of the
first Tribunes, devised a Law, which under such a penalty as the Tribunes
should impose, forbad any one to contradict or interrupt them, when they spoke
to the People. Such as could or would not give security for the payment of the
fine, were to be put to death, and their goods be sacred to Ceres. If any
controversy arose about the fine, it was to be determined by the judgment of
the People.

49. This Law being enacted by the Suffrages of the Tribes, caused greater
disturbance; the Senate refusing to ratify the resolves of the People, and the
People the Decrees of the Senate; yet proceeded it not to any greater
inconveniency than words, and some blows without weapons. For the poor broke
not into the storehouses of the rich, but were content to purchase victuals at
an excessive rate; and when money failed were contented with roots and herbs:
neither did the rich deal harshly with the poor, but carried it toward them as
indulgent fathers, so that we must say, it was the infirmity of the Government,
and not any bad disposition of the People which caused the Seditions. The
Consuls, to divert their minds, and ease the charge, offered to lead them out
into the Enemies Country, but few or none would give their names; so that
Marcius Coriolanus with some Patritians, and a few of their Clients made
incursions, and returned home laden with booty; the knowledge whereof made the
poorer sort murmur against their Tribunes, who had dissuaded them from the
Expedition. The following Consuls M. Minucius Augurinus, and A. Sempronius
Atratinus, famous for their abilities both in War and Peace, bent themselves,
by making provision for Corn, to allay the present distempers; though not with
wished sucesse. They procured much to be imported, and this Summer returned
those that were sent into Sicilie, Corn brought out of Sicilie.
with a great quantity of Wheat, whereof half they bought at a very cheap rate,
and half was bestowed on them by Gelon, the Son of Dinomenes. Now the
Patritians considering how to dispose of the Corn; some were for selling it to
the poor at easy rates, thereby to win upon the multitude, but others urged
they were to be harshly used and afflicted, and the Corn to be sold to them on
dear rates; that by necessity they might be brought to sobriety, and become
subject to the Laws.

50. Amongst these was Coriolanus the chief, being offended with the Commons,
Coriolanus his counsel thereupon.
as was given out, for a repulse at the last election of Consuls. He had been
ever an extraordinary assertor of the power of the Nobility, which made the
People afraid to choose him; but now incensed he much more showed his
inclination, openly declaiming against the innovation of the multitude, and
exhorting others to resist the petulant endeavors of the Tribunes and rabble.
The Consuls calling together the Senate, he enlarged himself in a set speech to
this purpose, and pressed that by force they should take away the Tribuneship,
as the only means for the recovery of the State; concluding with his opinion,
that no favor at all should be showed to the multitude in the sale of Corn.
Some were offended with this freedom, perceiving what inconvenience it would
bring; but others approving of it, the Tribunes who were present (say both
Dionysius and Plutarch) ran forth, and crying out, called the People together,
and declared to them the effect of Marcius his speech. The multitude enraged,
would have violated the Senate instantly, but that the Tribunes stayed them,
laying the whole blame upon Marcius. They sent some Beadels for him to come and
answer it before the People, but they returning with nothing but ill words,
they went themselves, Put all into a flame.
and commanded the Aediles to apprehend him. These were Brutus and Icilius the
first Tribunes, who going to do what was enjoined, were repulsed and beaten by
the young Patritians he had got about him. This put all into a flame, the whole
City being gathered together and ready to destroy it self; but by the wisdom of
the Consuls the matter was put off ill the following day. Then the Consuls
labored to heal the breach, confirming as from the Fathers, what was formerly
granted to the Commons, and palliating as much as might be the supposed offense
of Marcius. The Tribunes answering, inveighed against the Senate, as desirous
to break their faith, and laying open the fault of Marcius, concluded the
action with a Decree of their College, That he should be forthwith cast down
headlong from the Tarpeian Rock. For, having given him liberty to speak, he was
so far from recanting his former speeches, that he flew out into the same
invectives, as they were termed.

51. The Aediles laying hands on him, the Patritians again rescued him, the
sober part even of them taking it ill he should be condemned to death without
due process, and the more understanding sort of the Commons not approving of
the attempt; so as a great tumult being raised, the Tribunes nulled their
former Decree, and set him a day wherein to answer, and stand or fall by the
judgment of the People. In the mean time the Senate, by selling the Corn at
moderate rates, and by entreaties, sought either to procure the trial to be
utterly laid aside, or at least to defer it till the wrath of the multitude
should be appeased, which was also to be employed in a War against Antium. When
the former could not be done, and the War was blown over, the Consuls being
very unwilling to let the People take so much upon themselves, as without
Decree of the Senate first had (according to the ancient custom) to pass their
judgment in any case, procured the Tribunes first to sue out such a Decree, on
this condition, that they might be heard speak their minds, and each Senator
before he gave his judgment, swear solemnly, as was usual injudicaturie
process, to deliver what he thought most behoveful for the Public. The
Tribunes then argued much in behalf of the Commons, who they said had undergone
the heat of all Wars, both in the time of Kings, in the expulsion of them, and
since in the enlarging the Roman Dominion; in consideration whereof, they could
not in conscience have lesser privileges than of late they had obtained. They
aggravated by several circumstances the crime of Marcius, who in so high a
manner had gone about to infringe them, and therefore as well for maintenance
of right, as the safety of the City, they desired he might be left to the
justice of the People. Appius Claudus stiffly impugned the Decree, arguing that
the Senate would be enervated, and the Commonwealth betrayed, if they granted
to the People power of judging Patritians.

52. M. Valerius, and other popular men made a better construction of the
People's desire, thinking they would use this power moderately, and in
opposition to Appius his politic reasons, strangely conceived it would make
for the security of the Commonwealth, and particular members thereof, if the
Commons were admitted to some share in the Government; that so it might neither
wholly lie in the Patritians nor Plebeians, but be tempered and poised betwixt
both. He urged, that they had allaied the Kingly power, by giving it to two
annual Magistrates, and that therefore there was no fear of it is degenerating
into Tyranny, being also awed by the oversight of 300 most prudent and worthy
persons, of which the Senate consisted. But for the Senate itself, there was no
curb; so that it might afterward (though of the present members he had no
cause to judge so) draw all things into extremity, and indeed ruin the State,
except the People might be admitted to have an hand in the judgment of such
faults as concerned the Commonwealth, as when any was accused of moving
Sedition, affecting Tyranny, Treason, or the like crimes; because the more
solemn and severe the trial was, ambitious men would be the more terrified from
such attempts. The generality inclining to give up the man, Marcius demanded of
the Tribunes whereof they would accuse him. They consulting with themselves
apart, knew not well how to form an impeachment out of his former words, which
might pass with the Senate, and therefore answered, they would lay the
affectation of Tyranny to his charge. Hereat he very cheerfully put himself
upon trial, not refusing the severest punishment, if it could be proved; and a
Decree of the Senate passed accordingly, time being given him till the the
third Market day, to prepare for it. For a Market was kept once in nine days,
at which time the People that lived in the Country, came either to traffic,
receive justice, or give their Suffrages in such matters as either primarily
concernd them, or were referred from the Senate. When the day came, a greater
multitude of Countrymen than ever formerly was seen, early in the morning
placed it self in the Forum, and the Tribunes called the People to the Comitia
Tributa, or Assemblies of the Tribes, severing each Tribe from another by
cords. Now it having been the custom for the People to give their suffrages by
Centuries in the Campus Martius in arms, and under their Centurions, the
Patritians called hard for them, and protested against this innovation; but by
the other way of Centuries brought in by Servius, the ordinary sort of People
being excluded, (for that most commonly the two first Classes carried it from
the other four) the Tribunes would in no case suffer it, and the crime of
Coriolanus seeming to concern all alike, at length they obtained the consent of
the Patritians to this innovation.

53. Minucius the Consul beginning the action, declared the worth of the person
now to be judged, and exhorting the People to mildness, signified that the
Senate became petitioners in his behalf. He answers before the People.
Sicinius one of the Tribunes said, he would neither betray the liberty of the
People, nor suffer another to do it; therefore if the Patritians would, as they
pretended, subject him to their judgment, he would give forth the balls without
any more to do, to which the Consul replied, they did so, but on this
condition, that he should answer to the charge of affected Tyranny, and
therewith protesting, went down. Sicinius then ripping up all that ever
Coriolanus did, that might any way make for his purpose, labored to put a bad
construction upon it. But when the party came to speak, he so related what
particular services he had done the State, and showed the skars received all
over his body; withal, those that he had saved in the Wars, made such
lamentation in his behalf, that the People generally cried out he was to be
discharged. Then Decius another of the Tribunes stepping up, said, that seeing
the Senate, as the Consul alleged, had absolved Marcius from those words he had
spoken in their house, and suffeted him not to be accused for them, he would
wave his words, and come to actions, by which he would make good the charge.
Their was a certain Law, that all booty and plunder got in War, should be
appropriated to public use, so as no General was to meddle with it, but give
it up into the hands of the Quaestor. Now, whereas no man ever brake this Law,
or so much as spoke against it, this Marcius, says he, has dared to contemn
it; for when in the late incursion into the Territories of Antium, we had got
great plenty of Slaves, Cattle, and Provisions, he neither delivered these
things up to the Quaestor, nor paid any money unto the Treasury, but divided
all the booty amongst his friends, which could not but be taken as an argument
that he intended to inslave his Country; it being the custom of Tyrants, this
way to procure themselves instruments for their purpose. Though he had done
this not with any sinister intention, but for the service of his Country, at
such time as all were full of Seditions at home, and the Enemy from abroad
wasted the Roman Territories; yet the multitude interpreted it in the same
sense as Decius, and the whole matter was quite changed; he being abashed at so
unexpected a charge, and the Consuls and Patritians utterly to seek what to
answer. Is banished.
The Tribunes then named perpetual banishment, and gathered the suffrages of
the Tribes, which being 21 in number, 9 only absolved him, and so he stood
condemned by the major part.

54. This was the first sentence passed by the people upon any Patritian, and
henceforth the Tribunes were wont to set the day to whomsoever they pleased;
whereby the power of the Commons was enlarged exceedingly, and the interest of
the Patritians was more and more diminished; Plebeians at length being admitted
into the Senate, Offices, and Priesthoods, which in former times were only
communicated to the other: the Senate partly against their wills and by
constraint, partly by a wise foresight giving way to it, as will be seen in due
place. Marcius being accompanied home with the lamentations and tears of many,
saluted his Mother, Wise, and Children, as they made pitiful complaints, and
without any appearance of trouble, bidding them bear their condition
cheerfully, strait way departed out of the City, attended only by a few
Clients, and without any thing to bear his charges. He went to Antium,
Dionysius Halicarnass. l. 8.
and there in the habit and posture of an obnoxious suppliant betook himself to
Tullus Attius, a man of royal condition amongst the Volsci, both for Nobility,
Riches, and Valor, whom he knew to be his greatest Enemy in that Nation,
because in battle they had often challenged each other, and out of Aemulation
added a private to the public hatred. But knowing him to be of a magnanimous
mind, and most willing to catch hold of any advantage against the Romans, he
cast himself at his feet, bidding him either avenge his Country of him, or
else him against Rome, which by her unnatural carriage toward him had forfeited
all duty and service that she might have expected at his hands. Tullus
embracing him with singular kindness, resolved to make use of his great
abilities. Marcius advised that some fair pretext might first be sought for
War, Stirs up the Volsci against Rome.
and for that purpose sending many of the Volsci to behold the solemn Games at
Rome, caused one to go to the Consuls, and accuse them of having some design
against the City, that so they forcing them out on a sudden, might be said to
have broken the peace. This accordingly succeeding (for the Consuls commanded
all by Proclamation to be gone before Sunset) Tullus so aggravated the matter
to his Contrymen, that he procured them to send to Rome to demand back all
the Towns and Territories which by War had been taken from them.

55. The Senate taking the message in great scorn, answered, that if the Volsci
first took up Arms, the Romans would last lay them down. Tullus then persuading
the Vosci to the War, procured Marcius to be joined with him as General, with
full power, who presently invading the Roman Dominions, wasted all such grounds
where ere he came as belonged to the Plebeians, not suffering any thing to be
touched which belonged to any of the Nobility. Invadeth its Territories.
His design was accomplished; for this raised great envy and malice against the
Patritians, who upbraiding the people that they had banished unjustly so
considerable a man, were accused with greater indignation, that to be revenged
for former injuries they had procured Marcius to invade the Country, seeing
they were idle spectators, when others were undone, and kept their goods, being
out of all danger of the War. Coriolanus leading home his men richly laden with
booty, was sent out shortly after with one half of the Forces, and taking by
surrender the Town of the Circeians, a Roman Colony, thence invaded the
Latins, who being Confederate with Rome sent thither for relief; but the
common people were averse to the War, and the Consuls being almost out of their
Office were unwilling to begin any thing; so that the Messengers were dismissed
without any satisfactory answer. Marcius then by storm took Tolerium, Lavici,
Pes, and Bola, which he plundered, and made the Inhabitants Slaves. Such as
yielded he mildly treated, but having stormed Bola, which lay within thirteen
miles of Rome, he put almost all to the sword that were of age. The Volsci now
so admired him, that such as were left to defend the Towns would not stay, but
all flocked to him, owning him only for their General. At Rome there was
nothing but confusion, all being in despair, and seeking no relief any other
way than by venting their spleen one against another: but when news cam^ that
Lavinium was besieged, it made a marvelous, yet absurd change in their minds.
The people now cried out that Coriolanus was to be restored by a repeal of the
Decree for banishment; but the Senate utterly refused to assent to it, and
plainly forbad it in full house; either for that they desired to oppose the
people in all things, or would not have his restitution ascribed to the
Commons; or else were incensed against Marcius, who was become Enemy to all,
though but injured by some, and had declared against his own Country, wherein
he knew the greater and better sort to sympathize with him, and account his no
other than a common grievance.

He marches toward Rome.
56. The resolve of the Senate being published, the people could do nothing as
to his restitution, the custom requiring that the Fathers should propound.
Marcius hereupon rose from before Lavinium, and marching toward Rome it self,
pitched his Camp at the Ditches of Cloelia, five miles from the City. This
forced Senate and people into agreement, all in common being seized with honor
and amazement, so that it was agreed a message should be sent to him, offering
him his restitution. The Messengers were Patritians, and such as for their love
to him he had most cause to favor; but though with all advantage possible they
made their address, yet he received them with wonderful severity in a Council
of Officers, and gave them this answer, that if they would expect peace, they
should restore to the Volsci all Towns and Territories taken away in War: and
make them free of the City as the Latins were: and he would give them 30
days time to consider of it. Hereat the Captains of the Volsci, especially
Tullus, took occasion to malign him, though he employed this time of Truce very
profitably, subduing seven great and strong Towns. When the time was out, and
he returned, another Message came to him, desiring that refraining himself he
would draw off the Volsci, and then consult in common; for they would do
nothing by constraint or fear: but if he thought the Volsci were to be
gratified, they would yield to him if they would lay down their Arms. He
replied, he carried himself not as General of the Volsci, but as a Roman
Citizen, and desired, that, having a respect to justice and moderation, they
would return within 3 days with a grant of what he had formerly demanded; else
he must proceed in his enterprise. Hereupon the Senate, in so great a Tempest
which threatened all, betook them to their sacred Anchor as they accounted it,
and ordered all the Pontifies, Priests, Governors of their superstitious
houses and Augurs, in their several habits, should go and beseech him to
compose the matter: But neither was Marcius moved with this Pompous train; but
required they should either accept of the terms, or expect hostility to the
utmost.

57. The Priests being returned, the Citizens were warned to be ready at the
Walls, thence to repel the Enemy if he came, for that no other hope remained,
than what time, and vicissitude of fortune might afford. The whole City being
full of tumults, trembling, and amazement, the women flocked to the Temples,
but the most, and especially the chiefest, made their supplications at the
Altar of Jupiter in the Capitol. Amongst these was Valeria the sister of
Poplicola, into whose mind came this device, that they should go to Veturia
(say Dionysius and Livy) or Volumnia (says Plutarch) the mother of Coriolanus,
and procure her, with Volumnia (say they) or Virgilia (says he) her
daughter-in-law, to go, and intercede for their Country. Veturia earnestly
pressed to undertake so pious a work, answered, they had little hopes to obtain
their suit, for that her son had never sent to see them since his departure,
being falln out with his own family as well as his Country; yet she was ready
to improve that interest she had in him, and set sorth toward him with her
daughter-in-law, and two Nephews. Coriolanus seeing the women come, resolved
fully to give them a denial; but when he perceived his mother amongst them, he
descended from his Tribunal, and went to meet her. Having courteously received
her with his Wife and Children, he gave ear to her request, which she made with
all the Oratory that she could compass out of the impending ruin of his own
Country, and the infamy which would necessarily follow a fruitless attempt.
When herewith she could not prevail, she put him in mind how much nature,
together with a careful education of him in her widdowhood, had engaged him to
obedience, and in conclusion cast her self down at his feet which she embraced
and kissed. A.M. 3517. Ol. 73. an. 1. V.C. 266. Darii 34. Sp. Nautio Ser. Furio
Coss.
He presently lifted her up, His mother prevails with him to retreat.
and cried our, Mother, thou have got the victory, advantageous to my Country,
but destructive to my self, and accordingly drew off the Volsci into their own
Country, who were variously affected. Some blamed both him and the action:
others that were studious of peace did neither; and some, though they condemned
the thing, yet absolved the man, who was constrained by so great necessity to
do it; yet none refused to obey his orders, but followed him, more through the
authority of his virtue than of his power.

58. But when he was come to Antium, Tullus, the great Aemulator of his glory,
supposing he had a sufficient advantage against him, required him to lay down
his Office, and give an account of his actions to the people. He refused to
resign his place, except commanded by the people to do it, unto which he said
he was not afraid to give an account of any thing he had done, at that present.
The people being called together, the principal of Tullus his faction
instigated them against him, but when he arose to speak for himself, those
turbulent spirits for shame gave way, and all sober and peaceable men openly
declared they would hear him heartily, and judge him according to right and
equity. Tullus then fearing the man's eloquence, and sufficiently apprehensive
how much repute the very Crime objected would bring him (for they could not
seem to be injured by him in not taking Rome, without considering that he had
brought things to that pass by his incredible valor and dexterity, that they
were near taking of it) would not expect the judgment of the multitude, but
crying out with his accomplices, that the betrayer of the Volsci was not to be
suffered to hold the Tyranny over them by refusing to lay down his Office,
rushed out, and slew him in the place. Though no man stood up in his defense,
yet that this wicked act displeased most, it presently appeared. He is slain.
For upon report of his death they came generally out of the Towns and buried
him honorably, adorning his sepulcher, as of a General and a famous Warrier,
with Arms and Trophies. Such was the end of the Eminentest man of that age for
valor, who by his sour rigidity procured extreme hazard to his Country, and
destruction to himself, whilst he preferred private revenge before public
good, and yet would not stoop to any provision for his own safety.

59. At Rome upon Marcius his retreat was such exultation, as is suitable to
the joy of those that are rescued from utter desolation. The Senate Decreed to
the women what honors they would ask, but they only desired they might build
a Chapel to Women's fortune, in the place where they had delivered their
Country, which was done at the public charge, and they at their own dedicated
the image. When the death of Coriolanus was heard, there was neither expression
of joy nor sorrow further than this, that the women were permitted to mourn for
him ten months: the longest time allowed by Numa for the nearest relations,
according to Plutarch. The Consuls not long after took the field with a
considerable Army, but had no occasion to make trial of it; for the Volsci and
Aequi joining their forces together resolved to take the Romans unprovided; but
in their march they fell out about a General, of whether Nation he should be,
and from words to blows, in such a manner that they fought a great battle, and
if night had not severed them, one party had been utterly destroyed. The year
following the new Consuls, C. Aquilius and T. Sicinius, overthrew, the one the
Hernici and the other the Volsci, amongst whom fell Tullus Actius, a man of
personal valor, but no good conduct. Their Successors, Proculus Virginius, and
Sp. Cassius took the field with the Legions; the Aequi falling to the former,
as the Volsci and Hernici to the later. The Volsci presently asked peace,
having in the last battle lost the flower of their strength, and after them
shortly the Hernici, refusing any more to contest for equality with the Romans.
Cassius having received money and provisions, as from such as confessed
themselves conquered, gave them truce, and referred them for conditions to the
Senate.

60. After along debate, the Fathers resolved they should be received into
amity, and that Cassius at his discretion might prescribe the conditions of the
League, confirming whatsoever they should be. Cassius returning home, asked,
and obtained a triumph, though he had neither taken any City, worsted any
Enemy, nor had any Captives or spoils for ornament of the solemnity, which
possessed men with an apprehension of his arrogance, and procured him envy.
After his triumph be published as conditions of peace, the very same that were
granted to the Latins, which gave great distaste, it being conceived an
unworthy thing to make strangers equal in privilege with their kinsmen the
Latins; such as could allege no merit, with those who had exceedingly well
deserved of the State: the Patritians took it also disdainfully that he would
determine fully on his own head a matter of such weight, without asking any of
them his advice. His three Consulships, and two Triumphs, made him seem to
himself far superior to any of the same rank, so that no less than the
Principality would now content him. Cassius aims at the Sovereignty.
Knowing that the ordinary way to it was to gain the favor of the People, by
some great act of kindness, he resolved upon that course, and first to divide
amongst them certain public grounds, which through the neglect of the
Magistrates, had been seized on, and possessed by the rich. The success might
have been dubious had he stayed here; but he would also have the Latins into
the lot with the Hernici his new denizons, that he might procure the favor of
those Nations. The day after his Triumph, calling together the People according
to the custom, he recalled to their memories the great services he had done in
his several Consulships: how in the first he had subdued the Sabines, in the
second reduced the Commons into the City, after the appeasing of the Sedition,
as also received the Latins into fellowship and Communion: in the third, the
Volsci of Enemies were made friends, and the Hernici, a great and powerful
Nation, received into close and inward confederacy. By these discouses he
insinuated, as if above all others he took charge of the Commonwealth, and so
would continue to do. And he concluded with a promise to do more for the
Commons, than any man ever did who was most in favor, and that should
presently appear.

61. The day following, he called together the Senate, which was very much
troubled at his speech, and declared, that because the Common People were very
useful both in procuring Dominion, and defending Liberty, it was convenient to
divide to them those public grounds, which were most impudently held from the
State by some Patritians, and pay the money back out of the Treasury, that they
had laid out for that Corn, which being given freely to the City by Gelon the
Tyrant of Sicilie, ought to have been divided amongst the Inhabitants. The
Fathers heard him with great disdain, and rejected the motion, his Colleague
Virginius grievously accusing him as seditious. For several days after,
Cassius discoursed of this to the People, and Virginius held the Senate
consulting how to withstand him. The Tribunes of the People at length, either
for that they were jealous of some design, or were displeased that they
themselves had not first proposed this thing, withstood it, alleging it was an
unjust thing that what they had dearly purchased with their labor and blood,
should be common to strangers as well as themselves. As this raised some
dislike, so Cassius again drew them to his party, by propounding that the
grounds might be divided amongst such as had most need, and by urging that it
was better to have a little, than by expecting much to be frustrated of all. As
the People were thus persuaded to and fro, C. Rabuleins one of the Tribunes
found out a way, which for the present ended the dispute. Virginius pretending
that he was for a division of the grounds, but not unto foreiners, hoping that
these would ever be joined; and Cassius being both for Citizens and strangers;
he took them both at their words; for the one and the other yielding there
should be a division, he bade the People accept of that, and defer that wherein
they dissented to another time.

62. For some days after this, Cassius kept his house, pretending sickness,
and studied how he might cause his Law, called Lex Agraria, to pass by force.
For this purpose he sent for the Latins and Hernici to be present at the
Comitia, that he might carry it by greater number of voices, so as the City was
filled with them. Virginius hereupon made Proclamation, that all such as dwelt
not in the City, should depart within a short time prefixed, and Cassius caused
it to be proclaimed, that all such as were free should stay till the matter
were determined. No end of the contention appearing, the Fathers feared it
might come to blows, or further inconvenience, and therefore assembled to make
some effectual provision for the public Peace.

After a little debate they came to this resolution, that ten men of Consular
dignity should be created to survey the grounds, and declare how much of them
was to be let out to farm, and how much divided to the People. That it should
be declared, that for as much as it was inequitable for the new associates, or
denizons, to expect part in such Lands as were gained to the State before their
admission, if any afterward should be got by their assistance, to each several
People should be assigned it is portion, according to the League. That for the
choice of the ten men, and the distribution of the ground, His design
frustrated.
the succeeding Consuls should make provision. This Decree being published to
the People, appeased all, and frustrated the design of Cassius.

63. In the year following, being the first of the 74 Olympiad, A. M. 3521. Ol.
74. an. 1. V.C. 269. vel 70. Xerxis 1, vel. 2.
wherein Astylus of Syracuse was Victor, Leostratus executing the place of
principal Archon at Athens, according to the computation of Dionysius, in the
first year of Xerxes his Reign, Q. Fabius, and S. Cornelius were Consuls. Now
two most noble young men, Caeso Fabius, the brother of the Consul, and L.
Valerius the grandson of Poplicola, being Quaestors, and thereby having
authority to assemble the People, set a day to Cassius the late Consul to
answer in the Comitia to the charge of affected tyranny. Then in full Assembly
did they lay open his actions; how he had bestowed upon the Latins the third
part of the plunder, who thought it happiness sufficient to be made free of
the City: then the Hernici, who could expect no less than to be deprived of
their own Lands, he chose rather to make Friends than Subjects, and Citizens
than Tributaries, whence both grounds and plunder being divided into three
parts, two of these must go to Subjects, and Strangers, so that if it were
found necessary afterward to give others the same privilege of the City, the
Roman Citizens being by right Lords of all, should not have remaining one third
to themselves. They aggravated this with the management of the business, as
his doing all without consulting the Fathers, and against the interposition of
the Tribunes. That these things tended to the designed establishment of a
Tyranny, they proved from the money and arms wherewith the Latins and Hernici
had furnished him, as also from the company of stout young men of those Nations
which he had about his person. In testimony hereof they produced several
credible persons, both Citizens and Associates, who averred it. To these the
People giving credit, notwithstanding his premeditated Orations, and his three
children, who with many friends and clients accompanied him in mourning habit,
and interceded for him; notwithstanding all his services, He is condemned, and
put to death.
and the honor obtained by them, they would not at all pity him, but out of
extreme hatred to Tyranny condemned the man, and that to death, lest being
banished, he should procure the State such trouble and danger as Marcius lately
had done. Therefore judgment being passed, the Quaestors presently led him to
the Rock near to the Forum, and thence cast him down headlong in the sight of
the People, this being the then ordinary kind of punishment. His estate was
confiscated, and his house razed. Some would have had his sons also put to
death, but the Senate refused to use such severity, and at Rome the children
never suffered for their Father's fault, although for high Treason, till the
Marsian War, wherein those that broke the custom miscarried, and he who
destroyed them restored it to the State, as Dionysius observes, who disliketh
the practice of some of his Countrymen the Graecians, in killing, or condemning
to perpetual banishment the sons of Tyrants themselves.

64. By the death of Cassius the Patritians were more elevated, and the Commons
grieved after they saw this, and considered how serviceable a man to their
interest, as they foolishly thought, they had cut off. They now called hard for
the execution of the Agrarian Law, but the Senate being resolved to put it off,
caused the Consuls to make provision for an Expedition. None would give their
names, and the Tribunes interposing hindered the Consuls from punishing any; but
it being given out that a Dictator would be created, the multitude fearing to
fall into the hands of Appius, listed themselves, and so Cornelius wasted the
Territories of the Veientines, as Fabius those of the Aequi. The year
following, being the 270 of the City, when Nicodemus was Archon at Athens, the
Patritians procured Caeso Fabius one of Cassius his accusers, and L. Aemilius,
to be created Consuls, during whose Office all was quiet at home, the Volsci
renewing the War upon the Romans. Fabius was sent to the assistance of the
Latins and Hernici whom they had invaded, and Aemilius led the other part of
the Forces to Antium, where he was worsted by the Volsci, and being forced to
desert his Camp, had with his whole Army been cut off, but that his Colleague
in good time sent some choice Companies to recruit him. For the next year M.
Fabius brother to Caeso, and L. Valerius son of Marcus, who put Cassius to
death, being Consuls, proposed it to the Senate to fill up the Army at Antium.
A Decree passing for new Levies, the People refused to be listed, calling for
the division of the grounds, and one of the Tribunes withstood the Consuls.
This put them upon this device, The Consuls evade the interposition of the
Tribunes.
to sit in the Campus Martius, where whosoever was cited and did not appear,
they punished him, if he had any Lands, by cutting his trees, and pulling down
his houses; or if he hired grounds, by driving away his Cattle, or other ways,
the Tribune not being able to do them any good, for that the power of his
Office was confined within the walls; so as it was unlawful for them to lie one
night out of the City, except in the Latin feriae, where all the Magistrates
for the common safety were wont to sacrifize in the Albanian Mount unto Jupiter.

65. This forced the Commons to submit, and so the Consuls making Levies led
out the Legions, Fabius to the defense of the associates, and Valerius against
the Volsci, who engaging with him in battle, came off on equal terms; and
afterward neither party were forward to fight. It was believed in the City,
that the Roman Army wilfully neglected an opportunity of victory, out of hatred
against the Consul, whom they despised as a man of no experience, and in
revenge against the Fathers who had so long frustrated their hopes about the
division of public grounds. At this time one of the Vestal Nuns Opimia by
name, being convicted of incontinencie, was shut up within the ground in the
Forum, and her corrupters scourged and put to death. At the next election of
Consuls there was great contention, the Patritians having a desire to prefer
some in whom they could confide, and particularly pitching upon the son of
Appius, a man of the same temper with his Father; and the Commons as much
laboring the Contrary. When the Consuls held the Comitia, the Tribunes
interposed, and when the Tribunes called the People together, the Consuls would
not suffer any thing to be done, Commotions in the City.
contending that it belonged to their Office. Both parties being encompassed
with those of their Factions, railed, and sometimes came to hand cuffs, so that
worse threatening, and the Senate consulting what was to be done, some moved to
have a Dictator named, who might first correct all distempers of late brought
in, and then deliver the power to men of approved integrity; but a middle way
pleased; to create Interreges for holding of the Assemblies. The first was A.
Sempronius, who for his five days governing assaires in a peaceable manner,
the other Magistrates having laid down, created according to the manner Sp.
Largius. He in the Centuriata Comitia made Consuls with the well liking of both
sides, C. Julius a favorite of the Commons, and Q. Fabius now the second time
elected, a man addicted to the power of the great ones. In their Consulship the
Aequi and Veientes invaded the Roman Territories, and did much hurt. Against
the later they were sent with the Legions, after some contest with the People
(who were hardly drawn in by Largius, because the Senate had now deferred the
execution of the Agrarian Law five years) and harrazing the Country returned
home with much spoil; neither was any thing else of moment done that year.

66. The year following (which was the first of the 75 Olympiad, wherein Xerxes
made his Expedition into Greece, Callias being Archon at Athens) had for
Consuls Caeso Fabius again, and Sp. Furius, Dionys. l. 9.
to whom came messengers from the Latins, desiring assistance against the
insolence of the Aequi; and all Hetruria was reported now to be in arms at the
desire of the Veientes. The Consuls were ordered to assist the one, and
suppress betimes the other; but when they came to raise men, Icilius one of the
Tribunes interposed upon the old pretense of the Agrarian Law. The work being
hereby hindered, Appius advised the Senate to set one Tribune against another,
by drawing ever some of them unto their side, as the only way to abate the
power of that Office now so sacred and inviolable. This course both at present
and afterward was effectual, Wars abroad.
and the Consuls with their Armies departed each one into his Province; Furius
against the Aequi, and Fabius into Hetruria. Furius harrazed the Enemies
Country, and returned home with great booty. Fabius, though an able Warrior,
was so hated by his men, that when they had in battle routed the Enemy, they
refused to pursue or do any thing more, but departing against his command to
their Camp, thence also marched home, lest they should procure him the honor
of a Triumph. The following Consuls Chapter Manlius, and M. Fabius, again were both
sent to carry on the War in Hetruria, where they held the Soldiers in the Camp
so long, till the Enemy was ready to fall upon it, and for shame they desired
to be led forth. Fabius taking this opportunity, upbraided them with their
disobedience to the Consul the last year, in that place; and showing them how
little cause he and his Colleague had to trust them, having sufficiently
humbled them, led them forth. A greater and longer battle was never fought by
the Romans, who were thought to be Victors only, because the Hetruscans, the
night following, forsook their tents. Manlius was slain, and for that cause his
Colleague refused the Triumph, saying, it was not right for him to take the
Laurel at his funerals. Having disbanded his Army, he laid down his Office two
months before the time, because his wounds disabled him for service; and by
the second Interrex in the Comitia, were declared Consuls Caeso Fabius his
brother (who having extraordinarily deserved in the late battle, was now
honored with this Office the third time) and T. Virginius.

67. Virginius being sent into Hetruria against the Veientes, was overpowered
by them, and had lost his whole Army, but that Fabius upon the intimation of
his extreme necessity came out of the Country of the Aequi, and brought him
off. When the Romans were retreated, the Veientes made excursions very near the
City, to the great loss and disparagement of the State. The Senate found it
necessary to have a constant guard upon the borders; but the Treasury was low,
the tributes of private men were not sufficient for this new charge, and it
seemed that none would give their names willingly to so constant a work. When
they were at a stand, the whole family of the Fabii, by the procurement of the
Consul, voluntarily offered to take both the charge and trouble upon it self
only, which was gratefully accepted. The family of the Fabii engage against
the Veientes.
The Fabii then under conduct of Marcus the last year's Consul, fortified a
Castle near the River Cremera, and not far from Veii. Their whole number was at
first 4000, whereof their Clients and friends made up the greater part, and of
such as bore the name of the Family there were 306: afterward another Company
followed, being led by Caeso Fabius the Consul. Out of this Castle, which they
named Cremera from the River, they made excursions, and much endamaged the
Enemy. This caused the Veientes again to implore the aid of all Hetruria, which
making preparations, news came that the Aequi and Volsci also had agreed upon
an invasion. The Senate hereupon ordered their Armies to be provided, whereof
L. Aemilius the next year's Consul led one against the Hetrusci, with whom
joined Caeso Fabius as Proconsul. C. Servilius the other Consul, marched with
another part against the Volsci: and Ser. Furius with the third against the
Aequi, having also the power of Proconsul. Furius no less happily than
suddenly finished his work. Servilius rashly managing his affairs lost many
men, and not daring to adventure all in a battle, drew out the War in length;
But Aemilius giving battle to the Veientes and their Associates, overthrew
them, and then storming their Camp, forced them to beg Peace.

68. Having purchased a Truce by the grant of provisions for two months to the
Consul's Army, and six months pay, they had leave to send to the Senate. The
Fathers upon reading of Aemilius his letters, who advised them by all means to
finish the War, resolved to make Peace, and left the conditions thereof to him.
He having a respect rather to equity than the profit of the Conquerours, made a
League with them, neither taking from them any grounds, nor any more money, nor
receiving any Hostages to secure their obedience, which procured him much evil
will, and deprived him of the due honor of a Triumph. They ordered him to
assist his Colleague against the Volsci; but he complaining grievously of them
to the People, and suggesting to the multitude that they were angry, because
the War was finished, out of a desire to have the Peoples thoughts diverted
from the Agrarian Law, disbanded his Army, as also that of Furius, and hereby
afforded much matter for contention betwixt the Nobility and Commons. The year
following, being the first of the 76 Olympiad, wherein Scamander of Mitylene
was Victor in the course, and Phaedon Archon at Athens, the new Consuls, C.
Horatius, and T. Menenius, found some obstruction in the Levies; the Commons
still complaining that the Agrarian Law was not executed. But necessity cut off
the dispute, eleven several Cities of Hetruria having declared against the
Veientes, for making Peace without public consent, and forced them to break
it. The pretense was, for that the Fabii were not drawn off from Cremera, who
sending intelligence to the Senate of this intended breach, it ordered Menenius
to march into Hetruria, as Horatius against the Volsci. While Menenius loitered
in his Expedition, Cremera was taken, and the Fabii all cut off. Some wrote
that it was by an Ambush, as they were returning to Rome, to sacrifize for the
whole family, according to their custom. But others delivered more probably,
that being accustomed to make depredations, they were drawn into snares by the
Hetruscans (who caused herds of Cattle to be driven thither, where they had
bestowed a sufficient quantity of men) and being overpowered, were all at
length destroyed, All the adventurers are cut off.
though with the great loss of the assaliants, except such as they had left to
keep the Cattle. These were so far from being discouraged at what had befallen
their fellows, that they also stood it out to the last man, enduring all
extremity, and fighting when half dead, with weapons wrested from the hands of
their Enemies.

69. A tradition remained to posterity, that 306 of this family being cut off,
none remained except one Boy, who for his youth could not serve in the
Expedition. Dionysius shows the vanity hereof, by these reasons. 1. All
except one could not be unmaried, or without children, for an ancient Law
commanded all at a legitimate age to mary, and provide for Posterity, which
being diligently observed till their age, the Fabii alone would not contemn:
but, Whether only one Boy remained of the family.
2. Grant this; it is not to be granted, A. M. 3528. Ol. 15. an. 4. V. C. 277.
Xerxis 9.
that none of those had a brother of young years. 3. If their Fathers had been
so utterly deprived of their Sons, yet certainly all would not have been so old
and dry, as to despair of any more issue, and consequently make no provision
for it by marriage. 4. And if they had no fathers living, yet would it be a
prodigious thing to suppose that none of them left any son as yet an Infant, a
Wife with Child, or a young brother. This is true, that of the three brothers,
Caeso, Marcus, and Quintus, in the family of whom the Consulship had continued
for seven years, Marcus only left a young son, besides whom none of this name
afterward being famous, thence the report might rise that none else was
preserved. Concerning the time of this defeat Authors something differ. Lib. 1.
c. 16.
Macrobius makes the day to have been the 17th of the Calends of Sextilis; In
Camillo and Problem.
Plutarch after the Summer solstice, and about the full Moon in the middle of
the month Quintuis, Lib. 6.
Livy and Lib. 18.
Tacitus on the fifteenth of the Calends of Sextilis, which suiteth with that
of Plutarch, and Fast. 2.
Ovid on the Ides of February.

70. The Veientes having recovered the Castle, went confidently against the
Roman Legions, which lay encamped not far of, and as was thought might have
relieved the Fabii, but that Menenius the Consul out of envy would not make use
of the opportunity. They took the advantage of his unskilfulnesse, and seized
on an Hill near unto him, where placing a Guard, they made sallies upon the
Camp, and so straightned it, that they brought him to fight upon very unequal
terms, and put his Army to the worst. The Romans forsook their Camp, and fled
in so tumultuous a manner, that had the Veientes not been too greedy of
plunder, they might utterly have destroyed them. The day following they invaded
the Roman Territories, and came as far as the Hill Janiculus, The Veientes
pierce within two miles of the City.
two miles from the City, whereon they seized, and thence made excursions to
the great disgrace of the Romans. Horatius the other Consul returning from the
Volsci, overthrew them twice, and gave the people some respit from their fear.
The following year two skillful men in Military matters, Sp. Servilius and A.
Virginius, entered the Consulship after the Summer solstice in the month
Sextilis. Now the Hetruscan War, though difficult enough, seemed profitable,
compared with domestic affairs; for the seizing upon the Mount, and the
depredations thence made had hindered Tillage for the last Winter, and no
Traffic having been for that time, there was such scarcity of Corn that the
City was brought into extreme want, containing 110000 men of ripe age, as
appeared at the next Census, besides Women and Children, Slaves, Merchants, and
Artificers (for no Roman Citizen was allowed to keep a Victualling-house, or to
exercise any sordid Trade) thrice as many. The people made great tumults, and
were ready to take away violently the provisions of the rich: the Tribunes also
made great disturbance.

71. The Consuls labored to satisfy the poorest sort by buying in all they
could, and causing such as had Corn to sell it, till their Levies were
finished. Then led they out by night against the Enemy, and passing the River
before day, unexpectedly fell upon him, and got a bloody victory; after which
the Mount was forsaken by the Garrison, which having no relief sent in, retired
to Veii. Menenius fined for the miscarriage of the Fabii.
This War being ended, Menenius the last year's Consul was called to an
account, and condemned in a pecuniary mulct for suffering the Fabii to
miscarry, whom the people so gratefully esteemed, that they hated all who
seemed to have been to blame as to their defeat, and placed the day thereof
amongst their Nefasti, or unlucky ones, wherein no good work was to be begun.
The following year also, when Servilius was out of his Office, he was called
before the people, for that in the last battle against the Hetruscans, he had
so unadvisedly pursued the Enemy, as thereby to lose the flowr of his Army; but
the man's abilities being considered, and his own defense with that of his
College weighed (who desired either to stand or fall with him) he was
acquitted. This year and that following, the Veientes were so overpowered,
having been overthrown in battle together with their associates the Sabines,
and now closely besieged, begged peace once more, and having with a whole
year's pay for the Consuls Army, and money for two months provision purchased
leave to send to the Senate, obtained a Truce for forty years. The next year
being the first of the 77th Olympiad, wherein Dates an Argive was Victor, and
Chares Archon, L. Aemilius Mamercus the third time, Great stirs about the
Agrarian.
and Vopiscus Julius were Consuls. Their Consulship was very turbulent through
the attempts of Cn. Genatius Tribune of the People, who required them to divide
the grounds formerly Decreed to the people by the Senate. They denied it
belonged to them to execute what had been Decreed in the Consulship of others,
and alleged that a Senatus Consultum was not of force, but for one year.
Because he could not compel his Superiors, he set the day to Manlius and
Furius, the last year's Consuls, to answer before the people, why they did not
divide the grounds, pretending some reasons wherefore they ought to be
questioned more than others, though it was now 12 years since the passing of
the Decree, and alleging, that except the present Magistrates were quickened by
a sense of punishment inflicted upon others, they would never set upon the work.

72. The Patritians exceedingly startled at so bold and impudent an attempt,
resolved by force of Arms, if fairer means would not prevail, to protect the
accused, and the City might have been in blood had not Genatius died suddenly
that very morning, no sign of violence appearing on the body. This allayed the
fury of the multitude, and the Sedition might have been quite appeased, had the
Consuls born their success with moderation, and considered what was fitting
for the time. But making new Levies, they would force one P. Volero, who had
before-time been an Officer, to go in the present expedition as a Common
Soldier, and when he alleged that he ought not to be compelled so to serve, for
that he had not deserved it by any offense, they commanded him to be stripped
and beaten. He flying to the assistance of the Tribunes appealed to the People,
wherewith they not being at all moved, he became a Tribune to himself, with
blows repelling one or two Lictors: and when the Consuls sent all their
Officers to take him, such Plebeians as stood by calling one upon another
rescued him from their hands. This diverted men's minds from thoughts of Land,
and raised a zeal for privilege and liberty; the Patritians complaining that
the Chief Magistrates should be so contemned, and the Plebeians alleging it was
a great breach upon their right for a Roman Citizen not to be heard when he
appealed to the people, but scourged like a Slave: and they demanded Justice of
the Senate against the Consuls; with these stirs, without any other thing of
moment, was their Consulship passed over. For the following year Volero an
impudent fellow, obtained, though a man of meanest condition, to be Tribune,
having made himself popular by resisting that Office, which was once equal to
the Kingly, and promising that he would clip the power of the great ones. He
proposed a Law for holding the Assemblies of Tribes at the Election of
Tribunes, instead of the other of the Curiae: betwixt which there was this
difference. In the Curiata Comitia were such things treated on, and confirmed
by the suffrages of the Curiae, A Law proposed for Creation of Tribunes in the
Assembly of Tribes.
as the Senate had first Decreed, and that with the auspicia; for except the
birds predicted good, the Comitia were null and frustrate. But the Tributa
Comitia were managed without any consulting of the Senate, without the
superstitious observation of birds (called Auspicia, and observed at the
Election also of Patritian Magistrates) and all things were determined by the
suffrages of the Tribes gathered apart.

73. When the day for determination of the question was come, great endeavors
were used on both sides; the whole time consumed in speeches, for, and against
the Law. The Tribunes then put it off till the Trinundinum, against which time
the Patritians improving all their interest, Volero resolved by force to keep
them from the Comitia, and the Consuls from diswading the thing, because they
carried it mighty highly, and with their friends, and Clients, took up a great
part of the Forum. He was prevented by a grievous plague, which like a Torrent
carried away multitudes, so as his year being out before he could accomplish
his design, by his great promises be obtained to be Tribune again, as also his
two Colleagues who sided with him in this enterprise. The Fathers to balance
him procured to be made Consul Appius Claudius, the son of Appius, absent,
against his will, and to their own prejudice. Appius and Quintius Consuls.
His Colleague was T. Q. Quintius Capitolinus, of a contrary disposition. Appius
was all for Wars, that by expeditions the multitude might be diverted from
Seditious attempts, the effects of idleness; and Quintius contended that
causes were not to be sought for, lest the ordinary sort being forced to
unnecessary War, should break out into rage, and trample Magistracy under their
feet; and the Government being his, says Dionysius, this month, he prevailed.
But Volero renewed his endeavor for the Law, and thereto added, that the
Aediles should be Elected by the Tributa Comitia, as also whatsoever should
concern the Commons, might be transacted, and passed in them; which tended to
no other than to transfer the power from the Senate to the people. Appius now
earnestly pressed to make Levies, and undertake some expedition; but Quintius
prevailed that they should rather go about to dissuade the people by reasons,
than to compel them by force.

74. Quintius to this purpose made a seasonable speech in the Assembly, and so
far prevailed, that the Law as unjust had been laid aside, but that his
Colleague used, though just and true, yet unseasonable words, speaking to the
Commons, not as free Citizens, who had an hand in making, and abrogating Laws,
but as a rabble of base persons. He upbraided them with unthriftinesse,
defrauding of their Creditors, revolting from the Consuls, and voluntary Exile;
Appius spoileth all.
as also perjury, and turning of the Weapons taken up in defense of their
Country, into its bowels. He said, it was no wonder that such as they were
should proceed thus from one wicked act to another, instancing in their
Seditious attempts for the gaining of the just power of the Patritians. Having
spared no contumelious, or afronting language, he came to that which gave most
offense: that the State would never be at rest so long as the Tribunitial power
remained; for as much as it was impossible that what took its Original from
violence, iniquity, sedition, fear of a Civil War, and other abominable things,
could produce any profitable effects. He concluded with an asseveration, that
as long as he was Consul, he would neither suffer this, nor any other Law to
pass without approbation of the Senate, and this he would stand by both with
Words and Deeds also if need should require; so that, if never before, they
should learn in his Office, of what force was the Consulship. Then stood up C.
Lictorius, the principal man amongst the Tribunes, and in answer to his
accusations related what labors the Commons had sustained before, and since
the banishment of Tarquinius; how, for all this pain and danger, they were not
made partakers of any thing which they had obtained by their blood, till forced
to separate from the Patritians. That then they got this Office of Tribuneship,
as a protection for the poor, with other Laws afterward, as of judging the
Patritians, and translating the suffrages from the Centuriata to the Curiata
Comitia, all which he accounted nothing. Then reproving Appius sharply, he told
him he would show him of what force that Office was upon which he had trampled,
and of the people called by him sordid, and without House or Harbor. Having
spoken this, he swore most solemnly that he would, and not live except the Law
passed, and commanding silence, Is commanded to depart the Assembly,
when all men expected earnestly what he would do, he sawcily required Appius
to depart the Assembly.

And to be sent to prison.
75. Appius not obeying, but incircling himself with a Company he had brought
for that purpose, having made silence to be proclaimed by a Crier, he declared
that the College of Tribunes commanded the Consul to be carried to prison, and
therewith sent an Officer to apprehend him. He was beaten back by the Lictors,
whereat Lectorius himself exhorting the multitude to stick to him, Is defended.
went to lay hands on him. Appius being defended with a company of stout young
men, a great and unseemly Contest followed with railings and thrustings to and
fro: and at length it came to blows, and throwing of stones. The Consul
Quintius by his entreaties throwing himself into the middle, and the more grave
Senators, hindered the tumult from proceeding to a further inconvenience, which
was ended shortly after by the night. Several days were spent with mutual
recriminations; but at length the Tribunes and People seized on the Capitol,
and there kept watch night and day. The Senators very solicitous what to do,
The People seize on the Capitol.
both in respect of the danger, and the difference betwixt the Consuls; for
Quintius thought the Commons desiring no unjust thing, were to be gratified;
but Appius would rather die than yield. Quintius taking great pains, at length
procured the Tribunes to refer the Law to the discretion of the Senate, which
after a long disswasion of Appius, The Law passes.
and persuasion of the Tribunes, permitted it to be put to the question of the
Comitia, wherein the Commons readily passed it. After this, the Consuls were
sent out with the Armies; Quintius against the Aequi, whose Territories he
wasted, and returned with honor, which his Soldiers were careful to purchase
for him; but Appius going against the Volsci, bore himself so austerely toward
his men, that they would not obey him, but out of hatred, and to procure him an
ignominious retreat, when they came to fight, retired to their Camp without
striking a stroke, Appius his Soldiers refuse to fight.
and no more could he draw them forth against the Enemy, so that he was
constrained to depart homewards, and in his way put to death such Centurions
and Ensigns, as had been faulty, with every tenth man in the Army. Some were
beheaded, and some knocked on the head with clubs: this decimation being an
usual punishment amongst the Romans, of such as had forsaken or lost their
Colors.

76. The following Consuls Q. Valerius again, and Tib. Aemilius, being both
well affected toward the Commons (the former out of envy to the Patritians,
for that they had denied his Father a Triumph, and the later because he would
reconcile himself to the multitude, offended by him for accusing Cassius the
Author of the Agrarian Law, when he was Quaestor) promised the Tribunes to
promote in the Senate the division of public grounds. The Tribunes in
confidence of their assistance, came into the Senate, and spoke very mildly in
favor of the Law, which the Consuls would not contradict, lest they should
seem to seek after contention, but asked the ancienter Senators their opinions.
L. Valerius Father to the Consul, pressed the division of Lands; but Appius so
severely and plainly withstood it by several invincible reasons, He crosses
the Agrarian, for which he is called to answer for his life.
that he carried it against the other, for which the Tribunes set him a day to
answer before the People for his life. The crimes were: That he gave ill advice
against the Commons, raised Sedition, laid violent hands forsooth on the
Sacrosanct body of the Tribune, and being General of an Army had received a
defeat, and returned with ignominy. The Patritian exceedingly concerned, left
nothing unattempted to save him, and desired him, that giving way to the time,
he would take the habit agreeable to his condition; but he flatly refused to do
any thing poorly, or unworthy of his Ancestors, adding, that he would die a
thousand deaths rather than touch the knees of any, as was the custom of
Suppliants. He forbad his friends to supplicate for him, saying, his shame
would be doubled, if he saw any do that in his behalf, which he himself
disdained to do. Giving out many such like speeches, he neither changed
apparel, nor his countenance, nor remitted any thing of his ancient
magnanimity, Before the Trial he kills himself.
and when he saw the whole City earnestly intent upon his trial, a few days
before the appointed time he killed himself. His friends gave out that he died
of a natural death, and the body being bought forth into the Forum, his Son was
there ready, and asked leave of the Consuls to commend him in a funeral
Oration, according to the custom. The Tribunes commanded the body to be taken
away without any ceremony; but the People were thereat displeased, and suffered
the young man to perform this last and usual Office of honor to his deceased
Father.

77. For this and the two following years the Romans fought successively
against the Aequi, Sabines, and Volsci. From the later was taken Antium, being
surrendered to T. Quintius Capitolinus the Consul, who placed therein a
Garrison. In the following year, wherein were Consuls Tib. Aemilius again, and
Q. Fabius (son to one of the three brothers, that with their Friends and
Clients died at Cremera) the Tribunes made new stirs about the Agrarian, and
Aemilius furthering the business, the Senate to gratify the multitude,
decreed that some part of the Lands lately taken from the Volsci and Antiates,
should be divided. Yet not many would give their names, being unwilling to
forsake their native Country, so that the Colony was made up out of the Latins
and Hernici. The Consuls marched, Aemilius against the Volsci, and Fabius
against the Aequi; both had success; the later forcing the Aequi to beg Peace,
the conditions whereof were left to him by the Senate. But the Aequi receiving
the Fugitives of Antium, suffered them to make excursions into the Territories
of the Latins, and refused to give them up, whereupon succeeded another War,
though the Romans obtained a bloody Victory, in the third year after the making
of the Peace. In the next Consulship which was executed by L. Ebutius and P.
Servilius Priscus, fell a more grievous plague upon the City than ever before
happened. A most grievous Plague.
It first consumed almost all Cattle, and from the Country came into the City,
wherein it swept away an innumerable company of slaves, and a fourth part of
the Senators, and amongst these the Consuls, with most of the Tribunes. Livie
writes, that the Aediles supplied the place of Consuls. The disease began
about the Calends of September, and continued that whole year, sparing no Sex
or Age.

78. When this was known by the neighbor Nations, the Volsci and Aequi, War
with the Aequi and Volsci.
supposing the time of destroying the Roman Empire to be come, provided all
things for a Siege, and to divert the Romans invaded the Latins and Hernici
their associates. These sending to Rome for aid, Eubutius was already dead, and
Servilius as yet alive, in small hope assembled the Senators, who were brought
half dead in their Litters to the Court. They gave them liberty to defend
themselves, which doing, when the Enemies had wasted their grounds at their
pleasures, they marched for Rome, but contrary to their expectations, they
found it sufficiently guarded, though with sick and feeble men. When the next
Consuls were created, L. Lucretius and T. Veturius Geminus, the Pestilence
ceased; and all things being quiet at home (for the Tribunes making ado
according to the custom about the Agrarian, were commanded by the People to
desist, and expect better times) they invaded those who had taken advantage at
the public calamity. They had good success abroad, and better near home, when
the Aequi in their absence came and thought to have surprised the City. For
understanding the walls to be furnished with armed men, and four cohorts of 600
apiece to stand before the gates, they altered their course when they came to
Tusculum; but Lucretius met and gave them battle, which they were hasty to
embrace before the coming of his Colleague. For a time they fought
courageously; but seeing a band of men behind them, which came from a certain
Castle, they thought it had been the other Consul, and fearing to be enclosed
ran away, having lost both their Captains, and many other valiant men.
Afterward without any let, the Consuls wasted the Territories both of the
Aequi and Volsci, and returned home at the time of the Comitia: Lucretius in
full triumph, and Veturius in the other called Ovation, by decree of the
Senate, with the like pomp in all things, except that he entered on foot, and
not in a Chariot; which words conclude the ninth Book of Dionysius his Roman
Antiquities.

79. For the year following (which was the first of the 80 Olympiad, wherein
Torymbas the Thessalian was Victor, and Phrasicles Archon) P. Voluminous and
Ser. Sulpitius Camerinus were created Consuls, Dionys. l. 10.
who having nothing to do abroad, employed themselves at home in defending the
power of the Patritians against the Commons, now much instigated against it by
their Tribunes. They were come so far, as to assert, that it was most agreeable
with the constitution of a free State, for the Citizens to have equal power in
Government. A. M. 3545. Ol. 80. an. 1, V. C. 294. Artax. Longius. 5.
The People now would have all things done by the prescript of Laws, Fresh
stirs about new Laws.
whereof as yet there were none written, the Kings having judged according to
their own discretion, and the Consuls by certain presidents of those Princes
formerly in power. The least part was recorded in the Books of the Pontifies,
which none could come at except the Patritians. C. Terentius, or Terentillus
Arsa according to Livie, Tribune of the Commons the foregoing year, had
endeavored to circumscribe within certain limits the power of the Consulship;
but left the matter unfinished, because the greater part of Citizens were
employed in the War; the Consuls on set purpose drawing it out in length, till
the Comitia. Now the whole College of Tribunes renewed the attempt by the
procurement of A. Virginius one of the number; the whole City being divided
about it. Much contention there was in the Senate, betwixt the Tribunes and the
contrary Faction; but at length, not doing any good in that place, they called
the People together, and proposed a Law, that ten men might be chosen in Lawful
Assembly, such as were most eminent for age, prudence, and dignity, and who
especially respected their repute, and honor: that these men should publish
Laws both concerning private and public business, by which right should be
prescribed, both to private persons and Annual Magistrates. The Question they
put off till the Trinundinum, giving any one leave to speak freely, either for
or against it.

80. The Patritians extraordinarily moved, that the Senate's authority in this
matter was utterly neglected, both by fair and foul means labored to hinder
the debate; casting the meanest sort like Slaves out of the Forum, who minded
their private commodity more than the public Peace. Amongst those sticklers
Caeso Quintius the son of L. Quintius Cincinnatus, Caeso Quintius called to an
account.
was principal, one of great Nobility, beautiful in person, and very stout and
expert in War. Him the Tribunes resolved to make an example to all young men,
and called him to answer for his life before the People. He refused to answer,
except at the Tribunal of the Consuls; but his Father earnestly entreated for
him, recounting the several eminent services he had done for the State, and
imputing this miscariage to his youth, and indiscretion. The multitude plainly
declared by signs, that they were ready to gratify him, which when Virginius
perceived, knowing, that if Caeso escaped without punishment, the insolence of
the young Patritians would be intolerable, he procured M. Volscius, one of his
Colleagues, to tell feigned a story, how in the time of the Plague he and his
brother returning from a friends house in the night, were set upon by Caeso and
his drunken Companions in the Forum, who killed his brother outright, and left
Volscius himself half dead. He added, that both the Consuls dying of the
Plague, he could have no satisfaction, and in the succeeding Consulship,
whenever he cited Caeso before the Magistrates (as several could bear
witness) he received nothing blows. This so enraged the multitude, that they
had torn him in pieces, but that the Consuls and some of the Tribunes kept them
off. His trial then was deferred, not without a great controversy, whether he
should lie in prison, or be out upon bail, the latter whereof at length was
accepted by the interposition of the Senate, and he fled into Hetruria, Flies
and is condemned.
leaving his ten sureties to pay the money, which was exacted of them by the
Tribunes, who also condemned him. His Father sold the greatest part of his
estate to reinburse the sureties, and content with a small quantity of ground
beyond Tiber, and a little cottage, sustained himself very laboriously by the
help of a few slaves; for grief and poverty abstaining from the City and his
Friends, and neglecting to divert himself with public solaces.

81. The Tribunes were much crossed in their expectations. For the calamity of
Caeso was so far from moderating the insolency of the young Patritians, that
they grew much higher, opposing the Question both by words and deeds; so as in
this Consulship the Law could not be preferred. For the following year P.
Valerius Poplicola, and C. Claucius Sabinus, were created Consuls; and the
Commans made the same Tribunes as the year before, who perceiving the Law was
not by persuasion to be enacted, sought to terrify both People and Consuls. A
plot of the Tribunes.
They caused various rumors to be spread, that Enemies had hatched a great
conspiracy against the Commons, then coming into the Senate, there affirmed it,
pretending they had letters from some friends to assure them of it. They said
certain Senators were in the plot, but that the greatest part consisted of the
order of the Equites, which it was not seasonable then to name; but they had
designed in Conjunction with Caeso Quintius the Exile, to murder the Tribunes
with others by night, and then at their leisure to rescind whatever had been
granted by the Senate unto the Commons: In conclusion they desired the
inquisition of so grievous a design might be committed unto themselves. The
Senate being very sollicitous, Claudius the Consul (who was fully persuaded
that what the Tribunes went about was the only conspiracy) by ripping up their
designs concerning the Agragrian Law, and the bad success of their endeavors
which put them upon this exploit, fully convinced the Fathers how the matter
stood, Discovered by the Consul.
especially when they would neither name their friends from whom the Letter
came, nor the Messenger: and though the Tribunes highly complained of him, and
the Senate, unto the People, yet the most sober amongst the Commons were
satisfied with his reasons. Whilst the heat of this contention remained, the
City fell into such danger from outward Enemies as never before, which, says
Dionysius, had been foretold by Sibyll's books that it would arise out of
intestine division, and was likewise signified by the prodigies of the
foregoing year, when besides strange sights and noises, it rained pieces of
flesh, of which some were devoured by all sorts of birds before they fell to
the ground, and the rest continued long upon the earth, without either change
of color or smell.

Ap. Herdonius seizes on the Capitol.
82. Ap. Herdonius a Sabine with 4000 men seized upon the Capitol, the and
called the Slaves to their liberty. At this time of extreme of danger, the
Tribunes made what disturbance they could, instigating the multitude not to
fight against the Enemy, except the Patritians would engage by Oath to Create
ten men for the making of Laws, and suffer the Commons to live with them upon
equal terms of privilege. Claudius would have wholely omitted them, and carried
on the War by the Patritians, and their Clients only; but Valerius thought it
necessary to have a closure in the body before it should go about to defend it
self from outward attempts, and therefore promised with an Oath, that if the
people would cheerfully carry on that War, as soon as peace was restored, he
would permit the Tribunes to put the question, Which is retaken.
and endeavor to satisfy the desire of the Commons. Claudius then being
appointed to look to the City, Valerius on all sides set upon the the Capitol,
which was taken by storm, though he lost his life, having omitted neither the
part of an able General nor valiant Soldier; For though he had received many
wounds, yet he gave not over, till climbing the Walls a great stone was tumbled
down upon him, which took away his life. The War being ended, the Tribunes
required of Claudius to make good the promise of his Colleague; but he deferred
the matter by several pretenses, and at length alleged he could do nothing of
himself. He appointed then the Comitia for Creation of a new Consul into the
room of Valerius. The Patritians were very sollicitous to get some chosen that
would defend their interest, and resolved upon L. Quintius Father to Caeso,
lately banished, who at the day appointed was chosen by all the Centuries of
the first Classis, as well Equites as the other, Quintius made Consul.
so that the rest of the Classes were not called. They that were sent to fetch
Quintius into the City, found him at Plow without as much as a Coat about him,
only in his Trusse, and a Cap on his head. Seeing the company make toward
him, he wondered what it meant, but being told by a Viator that run before, he
put on other apparel, and in a seemlier habit presented himself. Being saluted
not by his own name, but by that of Consul, invested with Purple, honored by
the Fasces, and other Ensigns of Magistracy, he was desired to begin his
journey, whereat pausing a little he answered with tears: Then for this year
this little field shall be unsown, and we shall be in danger of want. After
this, taking leave of his Wife, and commending his household affairs to her
care, he departed for the City.

83. Quintius restrained the Tribunes from preferring the Law, by denouncing,
that except they were quiet, he would lead out all the Citizens against the
Volsci. When they said they would not permit him to make Levies, he called the
people, and put the younger sort in mind of their Sacramentum, or Military
Oath, whereby they had bound themselves to the Consuls to follow whithersoever
he would lead them, and not be wanting to the Majesty of the Roman people. He
affirmed they were all obnoxious to him by this Oath now he was Consul, and
swear he would animadvert upon Offenders according to the Laws. Herewith he
commanded the Standards to be moved out of the Aerarium, and told them that to
make them know they should have no leisure for Tribunitial actions in his
Consulship, he let them understand, he would not return out of the Enemie's
Country till his Office was at an end, and bade them prepare for wintring in
the Camp. The multitude terrified hereat, His carriage in his Office.
desired him to forbear this rigor, and he did it upon this condition, that
they would not molest him for his whole time, but suffer him to spend it in
administering Justice. He behaved himself with such prudence, Justice,
painfulnesse, and courtesy, that the Commons thought they stood not in need
now of any new Laws, and the Senate was desirous to have him Consul for the
following year, to oppose him to the Tribunes, who executed that Office now the
third time. But as he approved it not in them, so he himself would not commit
the same fault as he counted it, and in the Assembly speaking much against such
as would not quit their Office when their time was finished, swore most
religiously, that he would not accept the Consulship till he had laid down his
present charge. Having finished a new Election, he betook himself to his little
Cottage, and his former laborious course of life.

84. The year following, the Aequi surprised Tusculum, which action caused a
War betwixt them and Rome, wherein they were worsted, together with their
friends the Volsci, and forced to beg peace. But in the next Consulship they
were drawn again to revolt, and making War upon the Latins, by Gracchus
Claelius their Captain, an industrious man, who had improved the power granted
him by his Country almost to regallity. Dionysius ut supra Livius lib. 3.
He drew the Roman Army into so disadvantagious a place, that it was thought
convenient to make a Dictator, He is made Dictator.
which was L. Quintius Cincinnatus. The Messengers found him newly dressed; for
when he espied the company, suspecting they came to him, he left the
Countrey-work he was in hand with, and put on his better Clothes. Seeing
himself made Dictator, by the trapped Horses, the 24 Axes, the Purple, and
other royal Ensigns, he was so far from being delighted with this honor, He
overthrows the Aequi.
that he said with indignation: This year's Crop will also be lost by reason of
mine employment, and my family must be famished. When he came to the City he
encouraged the people, and named Master of Hors-men, L. Targuinius, a man of no
great esteem by reason of his poverty, but a good Soldier: Having gathered
together the Forces, he gave Claelius battle, and beat him into his Camp, which
having besieged some time, he forced the Aequi to give him up, with other
incendiaries, to be punished with death according to their deserts, as also to
pass under the Jugum (two Spears set in the ground, and a third laid over upon
them in form of a pair of Gallows) in token of servitude; and because they had
the year following without any provocation plundered Tusculum, to suffer him to
deal in the like manner with Corbio. The choicest part of the plunder he caused
to be carried to Rome; the rest he gave to his own Soldiers, and those of T.
Quintius the Quaestor, saying, that the other of Minutius the Consul; who had
been besieged by the Enemy, ought to be content that they fell not as a prey
into his hands. Having caused Minutius to lay down his Office, he returned to
the City with a more illustrious Triumph than any Captain before him, (the
General of the Aequi, and other Eminent prisoners in Chains preceding his
Chariot) having overthrown a strong Army, and plundered, and fortified a City
of the Enemy within seventeen days after his Creation. That absolute power
which he might have kept for six months he presently resigned, having first
given an account of his administration. And when the Senate and his private
friends would have enriched him with public Ground, Plunder, and
Contributions, he utterly refused it, and betaking himself again to his small
Cottage, preferred a laborious life before Kingly power, for that he pleased
himself more in his poverty, than others in the abundance of their wealth.

85. The year following, the Sabines, whose grounds the other Consul Nautius
had wasted, as also the Aequi, were in Arms, having retaken Corbio, against
whom when Levies came to be made, the Tribunes again withstood them, being all
new Created the fourth time. Hereupon the Fathers with weeping eyes signified
to the People, that being forsaken by them, who hitherto had styled themselves
their Children, they would go forth and fight against the Enemy in their own
persons, wherewith the multitude being sore moved, and Virginius seeing that do
he what he could they would give their names, he averred it to be the
resolution of the Commons to live and die with them; only they desired some
reward for all their pains and danger, which was, that they might live in equal
freedom. If this could not be granted, they waved it, and desired another
thing, which he was sure would not entrench upon the Senate's privileges. The
Consul affirming the thing should be proposed if they would but refer it to the
Senate, he desired that the number of the Tribunes might be increased unto 10.
The Senate debating the matter, C. Claudius, the son of Appius the Elder, spoke
against it, alleging, that the Commons would never be satisfied; but Quintius,
who now bore the greatest sway, commended the opinion of Appius, that the Vide
supra Parag. 66.
only way to cross the design of the Tribunes was to set them one against
another; and if so, it would make more for the interest of the Senate to have
their number increased. The number of Tribunes increased to 10.
Accordingly a Senatus Consulum was drawn, that it should be lawful for the
Commons to increase their College of Tribunes to the number of 10. and it was
presently confirmed by the People. After this the Sedition being appeased, the
Consuls levied Forces, and managed the War succesfully against the Sabines and
Aequi.

86. The ensuing year, being the second of the 81 Olympiad, A. M. 3350. Ol. 81.
ann. 2. V. C. 280. Art. Longim. 10.
and the 297 year of the City according to Cato, as the 298 after the account
of Varro, had for Consuls M. Valerius and Sp. Virginius, who having nothing to
do abroad, had too much employment in the City. Before this time, the Tribunes
only reigned in the Assemblies, neither taking upon them to call together the
Senate, nor give their voices therein. But now they ventured to assemble the
Fathers, by the procurement of Icilius principal of the College, an
industrious, and eloquent man, who presumed to make a further innovation in the
State, requiring the Aventine Mount for the People to build upon, which being a
mile and an half in circuit, was not as yet fully inhabited, but public, Their
encroachments.
and full of vvood. The Tribune moving the Consuls to procure a Decree of the
Senate for his new project, and they deferring the matter, an Apparitor was
sent from the College to cite the Consuls before it. He applying himself to one
of their Lictors, was beaten, and sent back, which so enraged the Tribunes,
that apprehending the Lictor, they led him to the Tarpeian Rock, the Consuls,
though much troubled, not being able to rescue him; for that none could hinder
the execution of what the whole College resolved; all they could do was to
desire some of the Tribunes themselves to interpose. But this could not be
effected, they having resolved at the beginning not to dissent from one
another, that thereby they might preserve their Authority inviolable. As
concerning the Lictor, then they answered they were resolved, yet they put not
the man to death, giving his life to the entreaties of the graver sort of
Patritians, lest that order should be driven by just indignation to attempt
something extraordinary. Having then assembled the Senate, the Consuls sharply
reprehended them, but Icilius excused what had been done to the Lictor, by the
sacred Laws, which forbade all, both public and private, to cross a Tribune.
By a premeditated Oration he endeavored to show, that he had not unjustly
assembled the Senate, and when he had seemed sufficiently to have answered the
charge of the Consuls, he mentioned the Law: A Law for division of certain
grounds.
That what private men were possessed of, and was justly gotten, should remain
unto them; what ground by force, or fraud, was already furnished with
buildings, the expense of building be^^^ considered by arbitration, should be
recovered to the use of the People, and what was yet public be divided amongst
them. He showed that this Law would be exceedingly profitable for the
suppression of all Agrarian Seditions, forasmuch as the Commons would be
satisfied with possessions at home. No man dissenting, except C. Claudius, a
Decree of the Senate passed for it accordingly.

87. The remainder of the year was spent in building. For the next were created
Consuls T. Romulius and C. Veturius; Icilius and his Colleague being continued
in their Office: The civil dissentions supposed to be removed by the late Law,
were again revived, and the foreign Enemies of the Commonwealth were in Arms,
Dissentions renewed.
to the greater profit than discommodity of it. For such a vicissitude now
there was, that Peace brought Sedition, and War procured Concord, which the
chief Magistrates apprehending, wished for nothing more than external motions,
and when there was Peace abroad, sought occasion for War; as understanding the
growth of the Citie's prosperity to be procured thereby. The present Consuls
were of this mind, being jealous of the beggarly and idle multitude. And their
opinion was right, that they were to be diverted; but there they failed, that
whereas in so ill a crasis of the State, they ought to have proceeded gently,
they admitted the excuse of none who desired exemption from the War, but
severely inflicted penalties upon all; which gave occasion to the Tribunes to
make disturbance, crying out, that they violated the privilege of their Office,
by imprisoning such as appealed to it. From mutual revilings sometimes it came
to blows, both parties being berounded with those of their faction, and the
People not fully complying with the Tribunes in their demands, they went into
the Senate, where they required, that the Consuls might either lay down their
Offices, or answer their crime against the Sacrosanct Tribunitial power before
the People. The Senate determined nothing, seeing it dangerous to diminish the
power either of the Consuls or Tribunes, at which the later much discontented,
returned to the multitude. Some were for departing again from the Patritians;
others more moderate, would expect the course of Law against those who had
violated so sacred an Office; and a third (the most sober party) disliked this
as well as the other, for that the Consuls were the Supreme Magistrates; and
thought it meeter to punish their abettors. If the Tribunes had not at length
restrained their anger against Senate and Consuls, the City that day had
destroyed it self, so intent were both parties upon Arms and War. But they set
the Consuls a day to answer before the People, and then were prevailed with to
let the matter fall, telling the Commons, that they remitted what concerned
themselves for their sakes whom they ought not to deny it, but would revenge
the injury done to the whole, to prevent an ill example.

The Agrarian Law after 30 years with another of equal right published.
88. This was by promulgating the Agrarian Law, which hitherto had layn dormant
for thirty years, to which another was added of equal right, which the former
year could not be passed. Having with an oath promised to prefer these Laws,
they appointed a day for the Comitia, wherein having first themselves spoken
largely, several others related what good service they had done for the
Commonwealth, and labored to show how unworthy a thing it was for them to be
defrauded of those grounds, which by their labor and danger they had gained,
and admitted to no part of reward. The multitude gladly hearing such
discourses, none more affected men's minds than L. Siccius Dentanus, a man of
admirable shape, 58 years old, and furnished with military eloquence, for a
seditious attempt. He told them, he had served his Country in the Wars forty
years, and been an Officer thirty; sometimes a Centurion, afterward a Tribune.
He was raised to that honor by Sicinus the Consul, for defending the Ensign of
his Cohort, when the Centurion was slain, for which he was also adorned by his
fellow Soldiers with a golden crown. In another battle, wherein the Tribune of
the Camp was struck to the ground, and the Eagle (or Standard) taken, fighting
for the whole Legion, he recovered it and saved him, for which the Tribune
would have given him his place, but he refused it, and the Consul made him
Tribune of the first Legion, which Office was then void. Having thus purchased
himself honor; to maintain his credit he spared no labor, not refused any
danger, being ever rewarded by the Consuls with spoils, crowns, and other
rewards and honors.

89. In short; during those forty years, he had fought 120 battles, received 45
wounds, The achievements of Siccius Dentatus.
all before and none behind, whereof twelve that day wherein in he fought
against Herdonius, who seized upon the Capitol. As for rewards after the
several battles, he had obtained fourteen Civick Crowns (which says Gellius,
were bestowed upon him who had preserved the life of a Citizen, and were made
of Oak, because the most ancient meat was thought to be the fruit of that
tree;) three Murals (which were given by the General unto him who first mounted
the walls, and entered a Town, Lib. 5. c. 6.
being adorned with an image of the batlements) and eight Golden Crown; besides
83 Golden Chains, 60 Golden Bracelets, 18 pure Spears, which were Spears having
no iron at the ends of them, being also called Hastae donaticae, and Hastae
gramineae, and 23 Horse trappings, whereof nine were for killing Enemies that
he had challenged to single Combats. Lib. 2. c. 11.
To this relation of Dionysius, Gellius adds a Crown, called Obsidionalis
(which was given to one who had freed the presenter from a Siege) and
increases the number of Bracelets to above 160; that of Spears to 22, and the
other of Horse trappings to 25. He calls him L. Sicinius Dentatus, and
writes, that for his incredible achievements, he had the appellation of
Achilles Romanus.

90. Siccius proceeded, saying, that though he had fought so many years, served
in so many Expeditions, received so many wounds, and helped to gain such large
Territories for the Roman People, yet neither he, nor his fellow soldiers
partakers with him in the same dangers, had received any portion of those
Lands, being possessed by others, who could neither show title nor merit for
them. After this, he accused the Patritians of having put Cassius to death, for
no other cause than favoring the Commons, as also of privily murdering
Genutius the Tribune, eleven years after, which had terrified others since from
such attempts as his were. He mentioned the affronts lately made to the
Tribunes, and concluded with an exhortation to the multitude, to free
themselves from this Tyranny of the great ones, by passing the Law without
giving heed to the disswasions of any. The Assembly was so moved by his words,
that they seemed impatient of any thing to be said against it; but Icilius
rising up, after he had extolled the worth of the man, said, it was neither
just, nor agreeable with the custom of the City, to hinder any one from
speaking against the Law, especially such an one as asserted right, and opposed
violence. He adjourned then the Comitia till the next day, when he commanded all
to be present, who would speak any thing against it. The Patritians meeting at
the Consul's house in the evening, resolved, if they could not with words, by
deeds to hinder the passing of the Law, and betimes in the morning took up the
Forum, spreading themselves all over to hinder the uniting of the Commons. The
Comitia being full, those that spoke could not be heard, some encouraging, and
others interrupting them with great clamours. Tumults about the Law.
The Consuls protested against this carriage, and that if any violence
succeeded, the Commons were the procurers of it; and the Tribunes answered,
that they had heard long such discourses as they were now making. The day being
far spent, the People required the ballots; but then the young Patritians
hindered them from uniting in their Tribes, and snatched away the pots and
ballots, beating out of the Forum the Officers attending for the gathering of
Suffrages. The Tribunes crying out, and casting themselves into the throng,
they gave way to them, where ever they went, but hindered such as would have
followed, and rendered their Office thereby unserviceable. At length the
Patritians prevailed against the passing of the Law, by the means of three
Families especially, viz. the Posthumii, Sempronii, and Cloeli^, most eminent
for Nobility, Riches, and Clients, who also especially hindered the confirmation
of the Agrarian by a Plebiscitum.

91. The Tribunes consulting how to vindicate their cause, the most moderate
opinion prevailed, that neither the Consuls, nor any other Patritians, save
those of the three Families now mentioned, should be called to answer before
the People; and not for their lives, but estates, for resisting the Tribunes in
preferring the Law. The Patritians gave way to it, and having redeemed the
estates, restored them to the owners. Afterward, when the Tribunes again went
about to prefer the Law, news came that the Enemy was on his march to Rome, as
far as Tusculum, which place only stopped him, but could not long hold out.
Levies now being to be made, according to a Decree of the Senate, Diverted by
War.
the Tribunes endeavored to hinder them, but another Decree being published,
that the Patritians with their Clients, and such as voluntarily came in, would
undertake the War; some for shame, some for plunder, and others to gratify the
Nobility, gave their names; and amongst the rest Siccius himself, whom followed
a Cohort of 800 old Soldiers to do him honor, though excused from warfare by
the Laws. A strong Army being presently raised, the Enemies retired, and were
followed by the Consuls to Antium, where the Armies lying encamped one against
the other, the Aequi, confident of their strength, at length provoked the
Romans to fight. Romulius having then the command, sent for Siccius, as the
story goes, and gave him order with his Cohort to go a certain way, and fall
behind upon the Enemies Camp; A plot against Siccius.
intending either to disgrace him upon refusal, or destroy him by so impossible
an undertaking. When Siccius labored to show him that the thing could not be
done, he upbraided him with his speeches used in the Comitia concerning his own
exploits, and objected to him pretended valor. Hereat he undertook the matter,
and giving all to understand his case, departed with his men all weeping, to
the regret of the Army, who expected of these 800 to see no man return alive.
Siccius led them not the same way as the Consul thought, which being
mountainous, would have brought certain destruction to them ascending, He
escapes as Conqueror.
but another through a Wood, by which they came upon the Camp of the Aequi,
where it was forsaken of the guard, now gone to behold the fight of the two
Armies, before this time joined. Falling in with a shout, the Aequi supposing
the other Consul present, forsook the Camp and fled, after which Siccius and
his Cohort marched down toward the battle, whom the Enemy discovering on their
back, and knowing their Camp to be taken, were also discouraged and fled: The
Romans pursued them till night, and did great execution, but none so valiantly
demeaned himself as Siccius Dentatus.

92. Siccius having lodged himself and his men in the Enemies Camp, the next
day set it and all the stuff therein on fire, and with haste marched for Rome,
on purpose to deprive the Consuls of the honor they expected. Coming into the
Forum, he related to the Tribunes and People the whole passage, how he and his
old men being destined to ruin, had obtained the Victory. He revengeth himself
upon the Consuls.
Hereby he not only ingratiated himself with the People, but procured the
displeasure of the Senate also against the Consuls, who were denied the honor
of a Trimph. The Commons gratified Siccius in the highest measure they could,
making him one of their Tribunes for the following year, wherein Sp. Tarpeius,
and A. Ternius (or Thermus rather as Gellius has it) were Consuls. The first
he did relating to his Office, was to set the former Consuls a day to answer
before the People, for violating the power of the Tribuneship, and devising the
destruction of him and his Soldiers: and so resolved was the whole College,
that the judgment passed without interruption intended by the Patritians, and
they were both condemned in a pecuniary mulct. The present Consuls were hereby
rendered more inclinable toward the Commons; so that they procured a Decree of
the Senate, and a Law passed in the Centuriata Comitia, A new Law.
that All Magistrates should have liberty to punish such as violated their
authority, which was formerly the privilege of the Consuls only. But the mulct
was not left to their discretion, provision being made, that it should not
exceed the worth of two Oxen, or thirty Sheep; which Law was long observed by
the Romans. After this, the Tribunes propounded to the Senate, that Laws might
be made, which the City should use for ever. Romulius persuades the Senate to
submit to new Laws.
After a grave debate, the advice of Romulius the late condemned Consul
prevailed, who contrary to the expectation of both parties spoke in behalf of
the thing propounded. He said, he was for the interest of the Patritians as
long as there was any hopes of its continuance, but finding things in such a
condition, as it must necessarily decline, he thought it wisdom to comply with
that necessity, and advised that Ambassadors might be sent to the Greek Cities
in Italy, and to Athens, thence to fetch such Laws as were most excellent, and
befitting the Commonwealth. After their return was to be propounded to the
People the choice of Lawmakers, what their power should be, for how long, and
what other things should appertain to them. Siccius extraordinarily affected
with the man's ingenuity, said he was how friends with him, and remitted his
fine; but he refused to forbear the payment of it, because already sacred to
their gods. A Senatus Consultum being made, and confirmed by a Plebiscitum,
Ambassadors were chosen to fetch Laws from the Greeks. Commissioners chosen
fetch some out of Greece.
These were Sp. Posthumous, Ser. Sulpitius, and A. Manlius, to whose use
Galleys were assigned, and furnished at the public charge, as was suitable
with the Majesty of the Roman People.

92. For the following year, being the first of the 82 Olympiad, wherein Lycus
a Thessalian of Larissa was Victor in the course, Charephanes exercising the
Office of principal Archon, the 300th year of the City being now ended (as
Dionysius computeth, following the account of Cato) P. Horatius and Sext.
Quintilius were Consuls. Now fell a greater plague than ever had been known,
upon both City and Country, which swept away Quintilius the Consul, and Sp.
Furius chosen in his place, with four Tribunes, and many Senators. The
succeeding Consuls were L. Menenius and P. Sextius, who took care for Corn to
supply the City, which labored under a famine, by reason that the grounds lay
untilled the former year. In their year the Ambassadors returned out of Greece
with Laws, presently after which the Tribunes required, that according to the
Senates Decree, lawmakers might be appointed. The Consuls knowing not how to
deny them, yet unwilling to weaken the interest of the Patritians, deferred the
matter, saying, that the time of the Comitia was at hand, after which they
would labor, jointly with the Consuls Elect, in the business. The Tribunes
were content; but when the Comitia were past, wherein Appius Claudius, and T.
Genutius were chosen, they grew idle, and neglected the administration of
affairs, as now belonging unto others; and Menenius was sickly, pining away, as
was thought, by melancholy; of which Sextius took advantage, pretending he
could do nothing by himself. The Tribunes then betook themselves to the Consuls
Elect, and though they had not yet entered upon their Magistracy, importuned
them to gratify the Commons, by proposing great honors and rewards. Appius
being elevated with the hope of a new kind of Magistracy, grew popular, and
persuaded his Colleague to a compliance, so that Sextius was forced to call
together the Senate, and propound concerning Laws.

93. Many things were spoken, as well by those that desired a new model, as
others, who thought it sufficient to rest satisfied in the customs of their
Country. But the opinion of the designed Consuls prevailed, which Appius the
principal of the two delivered, being asked his advice, according to the
custom, before any other Senators. Their sense was, that ten men but of the
chief of the Senate were to be Elected, whose power continuing for a year
should be the same with that of the Kings and Consuls, and all other
Magistracies cease till they might be renewed according to Laws: in the mean
time the ten men, or Decemviri, were to administer Justice to private men, and
model the Commonwealth. When the day came wherein this Senatus Consultum was to
be confirmed by the People, the designed Consuls resigned their Office, for
which they were exceedingly admired, and remembered in the choice. In the
Centuriate Comitia were created App. Claudius and T. Genutius, late Consuls
Elect; P. Sextius Consul for that present year, the three Ambassadors who
fetched Laws out of Greece, P. Posthumous. Ser. Sulpitius, The Decemviri chosen.
A. Manlius, and one of the former year's Consuls T. Romulius, who had been
condemned by Siccius the Tribune, and afterward was the author of this popular
act: besides these, out of the Senate C. Julius. T. Veturius, and P. Horatius,
all of Consular dignity. The Tribunes, Aediles, Quaestors, and all other
Magistrates were for a time divested of all power. Instead of Horatius, Livy
mentions P. Curiatius.

SECT. II. From the Creation of the Decemviri to the War of Privernae, which
fell out the same year that Darius Codomannus died: the space of 121 years.
The second change of Government when.
1. THe second change in the Government (from Consuls to Ten men, A.M. 3554. Ol.
82. ann. 2. V.C. 302. Artax. Longim. 14.
or Decemviri, as the first was from Kings to Consuls) happened in the 302 year
of the City, according to the account of Cato, and the 303 after the
computation of Larrutius and Varro, which fell in with the 2 and 3 years of the
82 Olympiad, the 14th of the reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus, 449 before the
Era of Christ, A. M. 3554. and, as may be gathered both out of Dionysius and
Livy, on the Ides of May.

The acts of the Decemviri for the first year.
2. The Decemviri having taken upon them the Government, in reference to a new
constitution, agreed that only one of them at one time should have the Fasces
and other consular Ensigns. He assembled the Senate, confirmed the Decrees, and
did other things agreeable with chief Magistracy. The rest (for to lessen envy)
differed little in habit from private men, having only an Accensus, or sort of
Beadle, going before them, which Livy adds to the relation of Dionysius. They
succeeded by turns, for a certain limited time, till the year went about. The
present Possessor of the Fasces only says Livy, but all of them as Dionysius
seems to mean, judged private causes together with public ones belonging to
their subjects, and associates. All things they managed with such Justice and
moderation, that the Commonwealth seemed most happy under them, having no need
of appeal. Appius above the rest grew exceeding popular by his familiarily with
the ordinary sort; so as in a manner he carried away the praise from the whole
College, for that he had a further design than any of the rest.

3. At length having made a model out of such Laws as were brought out of
Greece, and their own Countrey's customs, they proposed it to the view of all
men in ten Tables, that any one might make exceptions; liberty being given to
private persons to inform the Lawmakers, who consulted much with the Nobility
about the work. When all approved of them; a Senatus Consultum passed, nemine
contradicente, for the ratifying of these Laws, and the question being put to
the People in the Centuriata Comitia, they were confirmed most religiously in
presence of the Pontifies, Augurs, and Priests. Then were they engraven in
brass, says Dionysius and others, in Ivory says Pomponius the Lawyer, and
proposed to the public view in the most conspicuous part of the Forum, as
Minos of old, according to Plato, and long after him Solon, caused his Laws to
be written in Tables by the Athenian: called (...) and (...).
Cyrbes and Axones. The year being almost out, the Decemviri moved the Senate
about the Comitia. After a great debate it was resolved to continue this kind
of Magistracy for the following year; because something seemed yet wanting to
the new model, through the shortness of time allotted to the work; but
especially for that by this Office the Tribuneship was suspended, of which the
Patritians had cause to be most jealous. The commons thought they had good
reason to concur with the Fathers in this choice, and the day for holding the
Comitia was appointed.

The most ancient and honorable of the Fathers stood for this Office, fearing
that if turbulent spirits were possessed of it, they might have a great
advantage against the State. Above all others was Appius extolled to the skies,
the Commons laboring earnestly to retain him in his place, for that none had
behaved himself better than he. He desired to be excused, pretending he had
rather be discharged of so troublesome and ungrateful a work. At length
overcome as it were by the entreaties of the people, he professed himself
amongst the Candidates, Appius obtains to be Decemvir the second time by
cheating the credulous multitude.
and by accusing all others, as owing him ill will for his public spirit, made
way for himself and his friends. In the Centuriate Comitia he was made Decemvir
the second time, and with him was joined Q. Fabius Vibulanus, who had been
Consul three times, a man hitherto of unblameable carriage: out of the other
Patritians by the procurement of Appius were created M. Cornelius, M.
Servilius, L. Minucius, T. Antonius, and Manius Rabuleius, persons of no great
Eminency, and out of the Commons Q. Petilius, Caeso Duellius, and Sp. Oppius,
whom he took in, the more to ingratiate himself with the rabble, saying, it was
just that the Commons should share in that Magistracy, which was to govern and
command all.

4. Appius, a man more popular than any Magistrate that ever governed, either
King or Consul, with his nine Colleagues, entered his Office on the Ides of May,
which says Dionysius happened in the full Moon, according to the course whereof
months at that time were observed. The first thing the Decemviri did, He and
his Colleagues labor to establish themselves.
was mutually to agree and confirm by Oath to be of one mind, not to hold the
Assemblies, but perpetually to retain the power in their own hands: to admit
none into their number, and to be of equal power and authority amongst
themselves; to make use of Senatus Consultum 's, and Plebiscitum 's, but
rarely, and never except in case of necessity, acting most things by virtue of
their own power. On the first day (which to the Romans was ever Festival and
Religious) after their superstitious Ceremonies were over, they all appeared
with regal Ensigns, which exceedingly terrified the people, especially the Axes
added again to the Rods, which Poplicola had laid aside, and none of his
Successors the Consuls used in the City. By this fear they sought to procure
themselves security, each of them getting about him a company of stout young
men, such as were most addicted to him.

Some preferring their private commodity before the public good flattered
them, and even amongst the Patritians themselves were not wanting, who though
Eminent both for birth and estate patiently bore the oppression of their
Country. The Decemviri indulging their pleasures, exercised now their
authority with all licentiousness, nothing valuing the Roman Senate and
people. Being both Legislators and Judges, many Citizens they unjustly put to
death, and deprived others of their Estates, whose causes were all formally
judged, that they might have some show, and pretense of Justice, accusers being
suborned out of their Dependents, each one affording all assistance herein to
his Colleague. Such private persons as in their suits feared their cause were
constrained to join themselves to the party of their Judges; so as it came to
pass in a short time that most of the Citizens were also corrupted. Such as
were offended with the extravigancy of the ten retired themselves, expecting
the Comitia for the Creation of new Magistrates.

They add two Tables of Laws to the ten.
5. The Decemviri added two Tables of Laws to the ten that were made the year
before. Amongst these new Laws there was one which forbad marriage betwixt the
Patritians and Plebeians, for no other cause as Dionysius conjectureth, than
lest the families being joined together, concord should ensue betwixt the two
orders. These Laws thus by accident, says Lib. 2. Dig. de Origin Juris.
Pomponius, came to be called the Laws of the twelve Tables, being written by
the Decemviri, through the persuasion of one Hermodorus an Ephesian, as some
reported, then banished into Italy, concerning which person Tusculan. lib. 5.
Plin. lib. 84. and Strabo lib. 14.
Cicero and others are to be consulted. These Laws being established, it
followed, SECT. 1.
that disputations and controversies of the Court should be necessary, for as
much as an interpretation was to be built upon the authority of the Learned.
This disputation, or this unwritten Law, composed by the Learned, is not called
by any peculiar name, as all other parts, but by the common one of Jus Civil,
or Civil Law only. Besides, out of these Laws, at the same time almost, were
composed certain cases, wherein men contested one with another, which cases,
lest the People should make them at their pleasure, were to be certain and
solemn; and this part of Law is called Actiones Juris, The Original of the
Civil Law.
or Cases at Law. Thus almost at the same time these three sorts of Laws arose,
viz. the Laws of the twelve Tables; from these flowed the Civil Law: and from
the same were composed Cases at Law. But the knowledge of expounding all these,
and the Cases themselves, were kept by the College of Pontifices, who appointed
yearly those that judged Private Persons, which custom the People used almost
100 years. Afterward, when Appius Claudius had propounded, and reduced these
Cases into form, Consule Valor. Max. l. 2. c. 5. exemp. 2. A. Gellium Noct.
Attic. l. 6. c. 9. and Cicero. pro Murena.
Gnaeus Flavius his Scribe, and the son of a Libertine (or of one whose father
was once a Slave) stole the Book, and gave it to the People, which accepted so
thankfully of the gift, that he was made Tribune of the Commons, a Senator, and
Aedilis curulis. This Book was called Jus Civil Flavianum, as the other Jus
Civil Papirianum. Yet Flavius added nothing of his own to the Book. The City
increasing, and there being as yet wanting certain sorts of Cases, not long
after Sextus Aelius composed other Cases, and gave a Book to the People called
Jus Aelianum.

How the parts of it came in by degrees.
6. There being now in the City, the Lex or Law of the twelve Tables, the Jus
Civil, or Civil Law, and the Cases of Law, it came to pass, that the Commons
disagreeing with and separating from the Patritians, appointed Laws of their
own making, called Plebiscita. After their return, there being a great
controversy about these, it was thought good to receive them also for Laws,
and so it was enacted by a Law preferred by Vide Livium, lib. 3. A. Gellium l.
15. c. 26.
Hortensius the Dictator; so though there was a difference in the form of
making a Law (called Lex) and a Plebiscitum, yet the authority was the same.
Then for that it was difficult for the People to meet, because of it is
multitudes, necessity it self devolved the care of the Commonwealth upon the
Senate. So the Senate began to interpose, and whatsoever it resolved was
observed: and that Law was called Senatus Consultum. At the same time the
Magistrates also administered Justice, and that the People might know what they
would determine concerning any thing, and to fore-arm themselves, they
published Edicts, which Edicts of the Praetors constituted the Jus Honorarium,
so named from the honor and authority of the Praetor. Lastly, as the course of
affairs reduced the making of Laws to fewer fashions, at length it came to
pass through several Factions ( viz. of Sylla, Marius, Pompey, and Caesar)
that there was necessity of the Commonwealth's being governed by a single
person. For the Senate not being able to govern all the Provinces, a Prince was
ordained, and what he appointed was taken for Law. So that in the Commonwealth
of Rome, all Law was either so constituted by a Law called Lex, as that of the
twelve Tables; or properly called Jus Civil, which being unwritten, consisted
in the interpretation of the Learned; or Cases of Law, which contained the form
of Pleas; or a Plebiscitum made without the authority of the Fathers: or the
Edict of a Magistrate, called Jus Honorarium: or a Senatus Consultum, which
without a Law ( Lex) was ordained by the sole authority of the Senate: or
Principalis constitutio, which the Prince himself enacted.

7. These things are written by Pomponius in this narrative of the Original of
Law; for the better understanding whereof, it is to be noted, that the word Jus
signifies all Law or right in general, and is that genus whereof Lex is but a
species, being defined by Seu Scribenianus Institut. l. 1. Tit. 2.
Justinian the Emperor to be that which the People of Rome upon the quaestion
put by a Senatorian Magistrate (for example a Consul) did enact. As for the
twelve Tables, they were furnished with Laws, partly borrowed from the
Graecians, partly added at the discretion of the Lawmakers, and partly the same
as formerly were in use. SECT. 2.
Of the first sort were such especially as concerned private interests. Of the
second was that which forbad marriage betwixt the Nobility and Commons. And of
the third, that Law which from Dionysius we formerly mentioned to have been
made by Romulus, giving power to a man to call together his wives kindred, and
judge her for drinking wine, or dishonesty: this is attested to have been taken
into the twelve Tables by Lib. 14. cap. 13.
Pliny; and Lib. 10. cap. 23.
Gellius also hinteth as much. From Jus triplex tabulae quod ter Sanxere
quaternae Sacrum, Privatum, Populi commune quod usquam est.
Ausonius is observed, that these twelve Tables were divided into three parts,
whereof the first contained what belonged to the Religion of the Romans, the
second what concerned the public, and the third the rights of private men.
Great are the commendations which many give of them, but the most eminent is
Cicero's Encomium, that we name no more. Disputing under the name of Crassus,
in Lib. 1. de Oratore.
one place he thus speaks: If diversity of Studies please any, in the twelve
Tables there is a great image of Antiquity: because the ancient use of words is
known, and certain kinds of actions declare the life and custom of our
Ancestors. If any look at Polity, you shall find it all in the twelve Tables,
which describe all the interests and parts of the State: or if any one be taken
with this glorious Philosophy, Cicero his commendation of the 12 tables.
I will speak more boldly, these are the fountains of all his disputes
contained in the Civil Law (Jure Civili) and Laws (Legibus.) Though all be
displeased, I will speak what I think: that little Book of the twelve Tables
alone, in my opinion excels the Libraries of all the Philosophers (if one
view the fountains and heads of Laws) both in weight of authority and
copiousnesse of advantage. In another De Legibus lib. 2.
place he writes, that when he was a boy, they were wont to learn the twelve
Tables as some necessary Poem. Lastly, a collection of the fragments of these
Tables out of approved Authors (such especially as conduce to the explication
of the Institutions, and of ancient Law with deep Antiquities) has been made
by I. Crispinus, to which the Reader is referred.

The Decemviri retain their power.
8. But (to return) the Decemviri at the usual time of the Comitia bidding
farewell to the customs of their Country, and the new Laws, neither regarding
the approbation of Senate nor People, continued themselves in power for the
year following, which was the third of the Decemvirate, the first of the 83
Olympiad, according to Dionysius, wherein Criso of Himera was Victor, Philiscus
being Archon at Athens. They so ordered the matter shortly, as even all the
considerable part of the Citizens, ( Patritians and others) they either killed,
or forced to quit the City. This pleased them well enough, but the Sabines and
Aequi thinking it a fit time to attempt some great matter against Rome, invaded
the territories thereof, and of the Latins. The Decemviri much troubled
hereat, after a consultation how to make resistance several ways, found
themselves constrained to assemble the Senate, wherein Appius with a
premeditated Oration propounded the matter of the War. They assemble the Senate
about War.
L. Valerius Potitus, the son of him that besieged the Capitol, and grandson of
Poplicola, first arose, and though he was commanded by Appius to forbear, flew
high against the tyranny of the present Usurpers. He being forced to silence,
was seconded by Marcus Horatius Barbatus, great grandson of the Colleague of
Poplicola, who having expressed great indignation, the Decemviri incensed with
his biting words, threatened to cast him down headlong from the Rock. All the
Senators at this cried out as at a breach of their privilege, and made a
tumult, whereat the Ten repented of what they had done, and excused themselves,
saying, they deprived none of speaking to the matter in hand, but interrupted
Seditious Orations, which they might do by their power of Consuls and Tribunes
received from the People, not for a year only, nor any limited time, but till
the work of Laws were finished, until which time they were resolved to act,
and then give an account of their administration. Appius having delivered this
in the name of all, Stirs in the Senate.
asked the opinion of C. Claudius his Uncle.

9. Claudius beginning his Oration with the occasion of their meeting, fitly
showed what was the occasion of it. The War he demonstrated to be begun by no
other inducements than what the present distempers of the State afforded, which
were bred by the arbitrary and tyrannical carriage of his Nephew, and his nine
Companions. He made out what these distempers were, and by virtue of his
relation to Appius, took upon him, after a sharp reproof, by the nearness of
their blood, their Ancestors, and the Decemvir's Father, with all that was dear
and religious to them both, to conjure him, that putting a stop to his
ambitious course (destructive to himself as well as the public) he would
resign his usurped power, and restore the Commonwealth to it is former
government and liberty. Appius answered him not a word, which so moved him,
that with tears he signified he would depart to Rhegillum, the seat of his
Forefathers, and there continue till that fell upon the Decemvirate, which he
guessed would happen in a short time; for as much as he could not endure to
behold his Nephew degenerate so much from the ancient worth of their Family. As
concerning the War, he advised the Fathers to resolve nothing, till the
accustomed Magistrates were first created. The graver and more eminent sort of
Senators that spoke after, were all of this opinion, which made the Ten resolve
to ask none now according to their age, as the custom was, but M. Cornelius
called upon his brother Lucius to deliver his opinion. He attributed all that
had been said against the Decemviri to envy, saying, it was because the
speakers themselves could not compass the Office, and labored to show, that
it was most foolish counsel to resolve upon new elections, which would require
time, and defer the War that threatened ruin and desolation. By pressing the
danger very close, and urging what necessity there was of committing the War to
the management of the Decemviri, he drew almost all the younger sort to his
party, there being many even in the Senate from whom fear wrested compliance.
After all these, the Decemviri gave Valerius leave to speak, whom first of all
they had interrupted. He professed he was of Claudius his judgment as to the
whole, and answered all the reasons of Cornelius by one proposal; that a
Dictator might be instantly named, showing, that if they missed of this
opportunity, they could not expect again to be assembled by the Decemviri.

10. Few that delivered their opinions after him remained unconvinced, and many
were changed from the sense they had before delivered. He required then of the
Ten, that the matter might be further considered of, and all might have liberty
to recall their votes, which caused a great contest betwixt him and Cornelius,
who desiring that the Decemviri might have the command in the War, cried out,
that the thing was already decided in a legal manner, and desired the parties
might be counted. Much heat being showed by both, the Fathers were also
divided, which advantage the Ten took to do what they pleased. Appius then
formally declaring for what cause they had been assembled, told them they were
divided according to the three several opinions of Claudius, Cornelius, and
Valerius, every one having had liberty to speak his mind freely: and seeing
that most had approved of what Cornelius had propounded, he declared his party
to have overcome. Then commanded he the Clerk to draw up a Senatus Consultum,
whereby power of raising Forces, and commanding them, was given to the
Decimviri; and therewith the Senate was dismissed. They were by this kind of
victory rendered more confident, and imperious, as having now in their own
thoughts established themselves, by having an Army at their command, which
Valerius had advised the Fathers earnestly to beware. They make use of the
Senate to their own advantage.
Horatius and Valerius made provision for their own defense, by gathering
together their Clients and dependents, and Claudius, as he had said, departed
into the Country of the Sabines, whose example multitudes following, left their
native seat, with their wives and chidren departing into voluntary exil. The
Decemviri troubled hereat, endeavored at first to hinder them by shutting the
gates, but again fearing they might out of fury attempt some dangerous thing,
they let them depart, but seized on such goods as they left behind, having
accused them of defection. These things being added to the former miscariages,
incensed much more both Patritians and Plebeians against them. Yet had they
proceeded no further in such like outrages, they might probably for a much more
longer time have secured their power, through that influence which the mutual
emulation of these orders afforded. For the Plebeians were glad to see the high
spirits of the Patritians dejected, and the Senate void of all power: on the
other side, the Nobility rejoiced that the Commons had lost their former
liberty, having not the least help, because the Tribunitial power was taken
away. But they neither using moderation in War, nor temperance at home,
constrained all to unite for their destruction, which followed certain heinous
offenses committed against the Commons.

They lead out an Army against the Sabines and Aequi.
11. They divided their Army into three parts, whereof one remained with Appius
and Oppius in the City, the two other their Colleagues led forth against the
Sabines and Aequi. The later forced the Romans to forsake their Camp, and
shamefully to fly, which caused great rejoicing in Rome amongst the Enemies of
the Decemviri, so that Appius fearing some attempt, wrote to his Colleagues in
the Army, by one means or other to destroy their known adversaries, which was
effected upon diverse. But at Rome, Siccius Denratus, the Roman Achilles as he
was named, amongst others spoke much against the Captains as Cowards and
unskilful, which Appius understanding, with good words persuaded him to go as
Lieutenant or Legatus to the Army then lying at Crustumeria against the
Sabines. He not suspecting what was designed, undertook the employment, for
that the Office of Legatus was most sacred and honorable amongst the Romans,
having the authority and power of a General, and the inviolablenesse and
veneration of a Priest. When he came to the Camp he was sent out with 100 men
upon service, who had order to kill him. He fought with them all, slew fifteen,
and wounded twice as many, Siccius Dentatus made away by them.
so that finding it too difficult a task to kill him by hand-stroaks, they
threw Darts and Stones at him, and thereby at length, and at a distance,
performed what was enjoined them. Though the murderers according to agreement
gave out he fell by the Enemie's hand, yet the Soldiers fetching him off to
give him honorable burial, by several circumstances plainly perceived the
truth, and demanding Justice against the instruments, when that was put off,
and they concealed, they easily understood who were the principal cause, and
thought of nothing more than how to revolt.

12. The Army lying at Crustumeria and Fidenae being thus incensed against the
Decemviri, another wicked act of Appius caused the other which lay encamped at
Algidum against the Aequi, not only to think of, but fully to effect a revolt.
There was one L. Virginius a Plebeian, who had a daughter the most beautiful
of all Roman women. The maid being but young and at School near the Forum,
Appius as he passed that way fell in love with her in such a measure as by no
means could he allay his brutish passion. Marry her he could not, being a
Plebeian, neither could he hope to obtain her for his Concubine: there remained
then no other way for him to enjoy her, than by procuring M. Claudius one of
his Clients to challenge her as his Slave, so that the matter being brought
before him to judgment, he might judge her so to be. Claudius laid his claim,
by affirming she was the true and natural daughter of his Slave, and that the
wife of Virginius, now dead, her self being barren, procured the Child, and
brought it up for her own; which though he and others knew well enough, yet
being young, he had not opportunity till now to right himself. The pretense was
so impudent, as raised the indignation of all persons no otherwise concerned
than as in the public liberty. Numitor the maid's Uncle by her mother, and
Icilius the son of Icilius one of the first Tribunes of the Commons, to whom
she was already contracted, sufficiently evidenced the truth; but Appius being
bent upon his lustful design, would hear no reason, and had not a tumult
happened out of the indignation of the multitude, would have given her up in the
hands of Claudius, till such time as her father could be sent for from the Army
to defend her cause. Being hardly drawn to put off the matter till the next
day, and not giving any more time, wrote to Algidum to hinder Virginius from
coming, bidding Antonius the Commander of that Legion to confine him, lest he
should hear any thing of his daughter. But Numitor, and the brother of Icilius,
prevented the Letters, and Virginius pretending the death of a near relation,
getting leave to depart, through by-ways returned to the City, fearing a
pursuit after the arrival of the Letters, which accordingly happened, but he thus
evaded it.

13. Virginius then was present in the morning to the great astonishment of
Appius, when his daughter was commanded to be brought forth. He proved the maid
to be his own daughter, and no supposititious brood; but Appius, a man of no
great natural abilities, besides the brutish, corrupted by the greatness of
his power, and inflamed with the excess of his passion, neither considered the
defense of Virginius, nor was moved by the bitter tears of the Virgin, being
angry at the pity of the standers by, who apprehended the case of Father and
Daughter no otherwise than as their own, as if he himself were more to be
pitied, enduring more for her beauties sake than she herself. Interrupting
those that spoke in her behalf, and commanding them silence, he told them, that
this was not the first time he had had knowledge of this matter, for that
Claudius his father being a Client to their family had committed him yet a Boy,
when he died, to his protection. In the time of his Guardianship he said it had
been cleared to him how Numitoria had procured the Girl of Claudius his Slave,
Appius his abominable practices for Virginia,
but he thought it more convenient to let the matter rest till Claudius was
grown up, either to take, or sell her as he should like best. Since he came
into employment he had not meddled with his Clients affairs, but he himself it
seems making an inventory of his goods, and having notice of this Slave, now
challenged his right, and accordingly he both witnessed, and judged him to be
the right Lord and owner of her. Great outcries and lamentation being made, as
well by the bystanders as the Virgin's relations, Appius commanded all to
depart, and gave order to Claudius to take possession of his Slave. Virginius,
seeing there was no way but to yield to the Tyrant's lust if his daughter
lived, desired he might speak with her a little aside, as to take his last
farewell, which being granted, he drew her, hanging upon him, and pitifully
bewailing her condition, toward a Butchers stall, whose knife taking into his
hands, he said, Daughter, I will send thee to our Ancestors, both free, and of
honest repute; for the Tyrant will not suffer thee to be either here; and
therewith he stabbed, and dispatched her.

14. With the bloody knife in his hand he ran through the City, calling the
People to their liberty, and coming to the Gate, rode Post to the Army; a
company of 400 Plebeians following after. In the same posture he came to the
Camp at Algidum, holding the knife, which together with his clothes was all
bloody. Calling the Soldiers together, he took occasion from his own misfortune
to let them see in what condition their liberty stood, and with urgent reasons
persuaded them to revolt from the ten, and redeem their Country. They being
conscientious, as to their Sacramentum, or Military Oath, whereby they had
sworn not to forsake their Leaders, but follow them whithersoever, he told them
they were discharged from any Obligation, because the Law for the Oath supposed
the Captains should be created according to the Laws, which the ten were not,
having usurped the power ever since the last time for the Comitia. Being
satisfied herewith, the Army departed, some few Centurious only remaining, and
took up its station in the Aventine Mount, and the next day fortifying the Camp
chose ten Captains, whereof M. Oppius was the Chief. Presently there came a
great party from Fidenae, and joined with them, being offended with the murder
of Siccius, and they choosing also ten men out of their body, to the twenty the
whole matter now contended for was referred. Appius in the mean while having
gone by force to suppress the tumult he had raised in the City, was
overpowered by the faction of Valerius and Horatius formerly mentioned, and now
perceiving that most of the odium lay upon himself as the principal cause, he
kept himself in his house. Sp. Oppius therefore assembled the Fathers, at which
time came the Captains from Fidenae, requiring that the revolters might be
punished. L. Cornelius accordingly moved that they should all be remanded back
to their charges, which if they obeyed, the Ringleaders only were to be
punished, but if they refused, the Senate then should consider how all those
might be dealt with, who had betrayed their trust. But the Fathers were too
sensible of present grievances, to hear the motion of such corrupt interest,
Procures the destruction of the Decemvirate.
and were prevailed with by Valerius and Horatius, to make Peace with the Army
(which by this time was departed to the Holy Mount) on condition that the same
form of Government should return, as was in being before the creation of the
Decemviri.

15. Valerius Potitus, and M. Horatius Barbatus, both inheritors of popularity,
The next Consuls prefer Popular Laws.
were created Consuls in the Centuriate Comitus, who (according to their
promise to the Commons when they procured them to lay down Arms, that they
would by all means possible procure their benefit) preferred diverse Laws to the
regret of the Patritians. One was, that such Laws as the Commons enacted should
pass in the Comitia of the Curiae, wherein they were more prevalent than the
Partitians, as those in the Centuriate, by reason of their influence upon the
Equites, and the richer sort of Plebeians, were ever too strong for the
multitude, by reason of the distribution of the several Classes into Centuries
formerly shown. After this the Tribunes, whereof Virginius was one, thought fit
to call the Decemviri to an account. Virginius being appointed the accuser of
Appius, insisted most, says Livie, upon that Law, which commanded the
defendant to have liberty till such time as his or her slavery was proved,
which Appius had gone about to violate in his daughter's case. Before the
trial, being committed to prison, for that no bail would be taken, he was there
found dead, as some thought secretly made away by the Tribunes, but as they and
others gave out, having hanged himself. After him Sp. Oppius, as next to him in
guilt, was accused, and being condemned, died the same day in prison by his own
hands, says Livie. The other eight banished themselves, and Claudius the
pretended Master of Virginius was driven out after them: with which justice the
State was satisfied, and indemnity given to all others. Things thus seeming to
be settled, the Consuls took the field against the Aequi, Volsci, and Sabines,
against whom their success was such, as deserved a Triumph, but the Senate
gave them a repulse, being grieved at the Laws they had made in behalf of the
Commons. Claudius also the Uncle of Appius accused them of the murder of his
Nephew, and other violent courses taken against the Decemviri, and their party,
whereas all ought to have been (according to agreement) buried in oblivion. The
Consuls appealed to the People, and complaining much of the Senate, procured by
the help of the Tribunes a Law to pass for their receiving the privilege of
Triumph from the People.

16. The Commons by all the privileges already obtained, were but more inflamed
with a desire of greater, each morsel out of the prerogative of the Patritians,
adding unto their appetite. After three years they required to be made
partakers of the Consulship, which hitherto the other had enjoyed, Yet the
multitude being insatiable and restless demand the Consulship.
being elected in the Centuriate Comitia, wherein they themselves had the
power. The Tribunes provided a bill for making the People free, and at their
own choice, whether they would create Patritians or Plebeians at every
election, which thing the Senators bearing most hainously, as seeing their
privileges utterly ruined thereby, thought all things to be endured, rather
than the Law should pass. The Allies of Rome now sent for aid against the
Aequi, and Sabines, who invaded them, and news was brought that the Veientes
and Ardeates would revolt; but the Tribunes those Popular Tyrants hindered all
Levies, Public business hereby hindered.
suffering none, that refused to be listed, to receive punishment; neither
could the Senate prevail with them, to defer the matter till the War should
be ended. The Consuls in so difficult a time held a private conference of
certain Senators, whereof Claudius, according to the genius of his Ancestors,
was all for resistance, urging that nothing was in this matter to be yielded to
the Commons, who went about to change the constitution of the State, and
thereby were enemies to it. But T. Quintius showed what inconvenience force and
civil War might bring, and the rather, for that their Ancestors had made the
Tribunes inviolable, by a curse laid upon themselves and posterity, in case
their persons were hurt, or the conditions then sworn to in their behalf should
be broken. When the rest were all of his opinion, Claudius proposed an
expedient as seasonable in so great necessity. He advised by no means to suffer
the Consulship to come into the hands of Plebeians but to create certain
Governors in the room of Consuls, six, or eight, whereof an equal number at
least should be Patritians; for hereby they should seem not to take too much
power to themselves, and yet not give up the other Office, wherein lay the
secret of their prerogative, to be managed by base and unworthy men. When this
project marvailously pleased all, that nothing might seem to be designed
beforehand, he advised the Consuls not to ask them the graver men their
opinions first, as the custom was, when the Senate should meet, An exedient
found out by Claudius.
but the younger and most popular: and he appointed T. Genutius the Consul's
brother to propound this way of reconciliation as his private sense.

17. When the Senate was assembled, Canuleius the Tribune, who chiefly
prosecuted the matter in hand, without pressing it, inveighed against the
Consuls, as holding secret meetings, and hatching clandestine designs against
the State: and those Senators who had not been called took the thing in some
disdain. But the Consuls protesting their innocence by an oath, said they would
also by deeds declare it, and therewith gave any of the younger sort leave to
speak, and when none rose up asked Valerius first of all his opinion. He
advised the Fathers to favor the Commons, who had deserved so well both in
acquiring dominion, and in getting and preserving liberty, and urged that the
City could not be free if there were not an equality of right; yet for that the
War was now urgent, he desired the thing might at present be forborne till that
was finished, upon promise that then the Law should be propounded. Horatius
being asked next, and others, seconded him; and at length Claudius being
desired to speak, that he might conceal the design, according to his own
custom, and that of his Family, flew out into invectives against the Commons,
and advised that the Law might never pass, neither then nor ever after. A
greater tumult following, T. Genutius was asked his opinion, and as of himself
propounded the expedient, that six Governors might be chosen, three out of
each order, who having Consular power, when the time of their Magistracy should
be expired, then the Senate and People meeting together, might resolve whether
they would have the same Office or that of Consuls for the following year; and
what was concluded by most voices, should prevail at the end of every year.
This was gladly embraced, both by Senators and Tribunes, and leave given to any
Plebeians to stand for the new Office. The fickle and inconstant humor of the
multitude.
But so fickle a thing is desire without reason, and so easily changing into
the other extreme, especially of the multitude, that those who so earnestly
before sought that the chiefest Magistracy might be communicated to their body,
threatening else to leave the City as formerly, and take arms, when they had
their desire, were glutted with it, and changed into the other extreme. For
many Plebeians standing for the Office, and using their utmost endeavors to be
preferred, they thought none of them worthy of that honor, but bestowed it
upon eminent Patritians only, who appeared as Candidates.

The third grand change of government to the Tribuni Militum.
18. This third change of the Government at Rome, happened in the third year of
the 84 Olympiad, as Dionysius computeth, Diphilus being then Archon at Athens;
but as others, in the first year of that Olympiad, which fell in with the 310
year of the City, and the 21 of Artaxerxes Longimanus, A. M. 3561. Ol. 84. an.
1. V. C. 310. Artax. Longim. 21.
M. Genutius and C. Quintius according to him, but L. Papyrius and L.
Sempronius according to them, being Consuls. These new Magistrates called
Tribuni Militum, were A. Sempronius Atratinus, L. Atilius Longus, and T.
Claelius (or Caecilius, as Livie has it) Siculus. Thus at first they were but
three in number, afterward it arose to six, and at length to eight. Pomponius
the Lawyer writes, that sometimes there were twenty, L. 2. ff. de Orig. Juris.
and sometimes more, which seems incredible, no other Author agreeing with him
herein, so that Budaeus with reason thinks the place to be corrupted from
Seni to Viceni. This number of Colleagues, together with the mixture of
Plebeians who afterward pressed in, procured, that although they had both the
power and ensigns of Consuls, yet their privilege and dignity seemed unlike,
whence a Tribune in way of contempt called them a Proconsular image, and P.
Manlius the Dictator, showing that a Master of horsemen was inferior to a
Consul, compares his power to that of theirs. Having been for some years
created, and for others laid aside, at length in the 388 year of the City, they
were quite cast off, at what time Q. Sextius a Plebeian was admitted to the
Consulship. But these first Tribunes having held their Office 73 days, Another
change after 73 days to Consuls again.
then were constrained to lay it down, for that the Augurs found some flaw in
their election, and the Government returned into it is former course, the Senate
naming T. Quintius Barbarus, who in the Comitia created L. Papyrius Mugillanus,
and L. Sempronius Atratinus, although it be doubtful, to say truth, whether
there were Tributes only, or Tribunes and Consuls both for this year.

Consuls.
19. But to be sure, for the year following the People having it in their power
whether to elect Tribunes or Consuls, resolved upon the later, and created in
December, the Moon being then full, M. Geganius Macerinus the second time, and
T. Quintius Capitolinus the fifth. This year were the Censors made, Officers
who being but contemptible at the beginning, rose to great dignity and power.
Their original and power might have been more clearly discovered, The Censors.
and here Dionysius his history is broken off, the following part being lost.
but that Dionysius his History is here in the beginning of this story broken
off, the remaining part being lost, to the great damage of the studious in
Antiquity. For not to speak of his smooth style, and the Attick purity thereof,
he has therein delivered the Antiquities of Rome from the first Original, with
such diligence, that he seems in this respect to have excelled all Writers,
both Greek and Roman. For what Latin Authors have neglected, as vulgarly known
amongst themselves, as Sacrifices, Games, Triumphs, Ensigns of Magistrates, the
universal discipline of the Roman Commonwealth, the Census, Auspicia, Comitia,
that difficult distribution of the whole People into Curiae, Classes,
Centuries, and Tribes: further, the authority of the Senate, and Commons, with
the Power of Magistrates, he of all others has delivered most accurately. That
these things may be better understood, It Is commendation.
he compares them with the customs of Greece, as where he speaks of Clients,
he occasionally makes mention of this relation amongst the Athenians and
Thessalians, as Caesar also writes it to have been ordinary amongst the Galls.
He compares the Roman Dictator with the Harmostes of the Lacedaemonians, the
Archons of the Thessalians, and the Aesymnetes of the Mitylenaeans. The Laws of
Romulus, Numa, and Servius, had perished but for him, as also the knowledge of
the Original of Rome in a great measure: and so choice are all his Collections,
that they tend, as to the instruction of the Reader in the depth of State
mysteries, so also to his acquiring or retaining a religious awe of Providence.
Such is his History (says Bodinus Method Histor. cap. 4.
one well able to judge) that if it had been kept entire (for it consists of
twenty Books, as Photius informs us) there would have been no cause of
bewailing the loss of Varro's treasures, with whom he was very familiar, as
well as Pompey the Great and Tubero; and from whom he seems to have derived
his choicest Antiquities. These things render a sufficient account, why he is
made use of in the History of Roman matters, rather than any other.

20. Servius Tullius the sixth King of Rome first instituted the Census, as was
shown before, and did the work himself, without any peculiar Officer, as also
did the Consuls until this time. But now in the 66th year from the banishment
of Tarquinius, and the 311 of the City, there having been no Census for
seventeen years, for that the Consuls were necessarily diverted from that work
by more urgent business, the Senate procured out of their own order two
peculiar Officers to be created, who were called Censores, because according to
their Censio or estimation the People was cessed, says Varro, or because every
one accounted himself worth so much, quanti illi censuissent; as they judged,
or estimated, according to Festus.

21. At the beginning they were created for five years, because according to
Servius his constitution the People were to be cessed at ever Lustrum, The
duration of the Office of Censors.
which contained so many. But their dignity and power so increasing, that they
seemed of too long a continuance, nine years after, in the 320 of the City, by
a Law which Mamercus Aemilius the Dictator preferred, Livius lib. 3.
the duration of their Office was confined within the term of one year and an
half. Though their Office at first was only to take an estimate of men's
Estates, and describing all public and private fiches, to distribute the
People according to their wealth into Classes and Centuries; Their power.
yet within a while they came to have inspection into manners also. For they
upon misdemeanour put out of the Senate, took away public horses, and cast out
of the Tribes. The former kind of punishment was inflicted upon Senators, the
second upon Equites, and the last upon mere Plebeians. Their removing Senaters,
was by passing them by at the new election. For, In voce Praeteriti.
such Senators says Festus, as were passed by in former times, were liable to
no disgrace, because as the Kings chose and substituted whom they pleased, so
after them the Consuls and Tribunes Military, such as they had greatest
interest in; first Patritians, and then after Plebeians, till by the
Tribunitial Law of Ovinius, it was ordained, that the Censors out of every
order or rank, should (curiatim) elect the most worthy into the Senate, whence
it came to pass, that such as were passed by or removed, were noted with
ignominy. This note out of Festus hinteth to us the ancient power of the Roman
Kings in making Senators, one of the greatest supporters of the Throne of their
Empire.

22. As for the disgrace which they put upon Equites; Vide Plutarchum historiam
narrantem in Pompeio. Livium lib. 29. Festum in voce censio.
It was the custom for every Eques at the public Census to appear before the
Censors with their Horses in their hands. If they approved of them, they bade
them pass by and lead away the Horse; if they determined otherwise, they took
away the Horse, and commanded him to be sold. The third note of disgrace
concerned the Plebeians, whom they either removed from their own Tribe into
another less honorable, according to Livie, or made them Aerarii, and
registered them in the tables of the Caerites, whereby rhey were deprived of
their Centurie, and remained Citizens only in this respect, ut pro capitibus
suis tributi nomine era solverent, as writes Asconius Pedianus upon the
Oration of Cicero against Q. Caecilius, called Divinatio, which disputes who
ought to be admitted the Accuser of Verres. Lib. 16. cap. 13.
Gellius tells us what was meant by the tabulae Caeritum. The Caerites
(inhabitants of Caere in Tuscany, once called Agylla) we understand to have
been first of all made Municipals, without any right of suffrage: and it was
granted them that they might receive the honor of being free of Rome, without
any trouble or burden, for that they received the Sacra (or idols) of the
Romans, and preserved them in the Gallick War; that is, when Rome was taken by
the Galls, as Livie has the story also in this fourth Book. Hence were those
called Tabulae Caeritum, vice versa, wherein the Censors caused such to be
registered as they deprived of the right of Suffrage. Although these several
sorts of punishment respected the several rancks of men, Livie lib. 4.
yet sometimes those of higher degree tasted of all or most of them, so that
Senators might not only be passed by, and Equites deprived of their Horses,
but lose their Tribes also, and be reduced to the condition of Aerarii.

23. This Office being committed to the prudent management of able persons, The
effects of it.
became effectual to the repression of such vice, as fell not under the
particular cognizance of penal Laws. Private faults, and domestic miscariages
were by them noted, with such actions sometimes as now would not simply incur
the censure of precise illegallity or indecency. Some of their questions upon
oath were such as these: Lege A. Gellium. l. 4. cap. ult.
Have thou a wife according to thy mind? to which one once making a jesting
answer, was made an Aerarius. A certain man yawning before the Censors had been
punished in that sort, but that he swore he did it unwillingly, being troubled
with that disease which the Romans called Oscedo. P. Scipio Nasica and M.
Pompilius being Censors, and finding a certain Knight very fat and count, whose
horse was exceeding lean and ill favored, they asked him the reason of that
difference, to which he answered: Because he looked to himself, but Statius to
his horse; for which irreverent answer he was registered amongst the Aerarii
according to the custom. Now Statius was a servile name, given by the ancients
to most Slaves, whence Caecilius the famous Writer of Tragedies was called
Statius, though it was afterward as it were turned into a surname, and he
called Caecilius Statius. They were wont also to take away horses from very big
and corpulent men, as unfit for service, but Lib. 7. c. 22.
Gellius observes, that this was no punishment, as some thought, but a taking
away of the employment without ignominy. This Census was managed in the Campus
Martius, and it being completed, the Lustrum was made, with prayers for the
public safety, and a sacrifice of the Suovetaurilia formerly mentioned.
Besides these employments, the Censors Live. lib. 39. Cicero de Legib. l. 3.
let to farm the customs, and sent Idem ad Attic. Ep. 1. and Joti passim.
out their constitutions throughout the Provinces, called Leges Censoriae. They
erected Live. lib. 42. Festus in voce Produit. ubi meminit Legis censoriae. vid.
public buildings, made other public works, and took care for their repair,
as also of the highways, in, and about the City more early; and in other
places afterward: they also provided for the expense of public sacrifices. But
not only were there Censors at Rome (as the Graecians also used the Census)
but the Colonies also had their Subcensors, who gave account to the other, what
numbers of men, and what wealth they found in the several places, which upon
information was registered in the public Tables.

24. The power of the Censorship remained untouched (although the power of the
Censors was weakened by restraining their time to a year and an half, though
they were named every fifth year) until the Tribuneship of P. Clodi^s, who by
a Law which he preferred Asconius Pedianus in Orat. Ciceronis cont. L. Pisonem.
forbad any Senator to be passed by, or any of the other Ranks to be noted with
ignominy, except lawfully accused, and condemned by sentence of both the
Censors. He took an advantage (as it seems from I^ Divinat.
Pedianus) at the hatred which had possessed the multitude against the severity
of the Office, which procured it to be intermitted for certain years. But
afterward (whether by reason of the corruption that was crept amongst Judges,
or for other reasons) Metellu^ Scipio the Consul procured Clodius his Law to be
abrogated, and so the ancient Vigor of this office returned. The various
fortune of the Censorship.
Lipsius writes, that under the Emperors it was diminished, and lay for dead
till the time of Decius. But C. Caesar the Dictator, that he might better
execute the Census, went to every ones house; and because the principal part of
the Office consisted in forming of manners, Diod. lib. 54. page 527.
he called himself Magister Morum, not Censor. Then the form of the State being
changed after the victory of Actium, Augustus having the care of manners
committed to him by the Senate, looked to nothing more diligently than the
Census, for thrice he performed it, not only in reference to Roman Citizens,
but all Subjects of the Empire, with such care and diligence as none ever
before him. Under Tiberius and Caligula the Census was not observed, Sueton. in
Augusto.
but under Claudius the 74th Lustrum was celebrated. Being intermitted during
the reign of Nero, Vespasian renewed it, and celebrated the 75 Census. Domitian
named himself amongst his other titles Perpetual Censor, Idem in Domitiano.
but made no Lustrum, so that for 160 years the Census was intermitted till
Decius the Emp. created Valerian Censor with unlimited power. Trebellius.
After this the Censorship was utterly omitted to the great detriment of the
Roman Empire, which being at length broken into Eastern and Western, Consule
Bodinum de Repub. lib. 6. cap. 1.
the Emperors of the former ( Greekish Emperors) made use of it, as others
also of later times, and it appears that in the intermission thereof, in the
days of Trajan, particular Provinces and Towns had their Censors, who made
choice of their Senators. Lastly, the Censors during the popular Government
were of Consular dignity, ever after the second Punick War, though it was
otherwise sometimes before. The same persons were never created twice. And in
case one of them died in his Office, his Colleague continued not therein,
neither was any put into the place of the dead, because in that year wherein
Rome was taken by the Galls it had so happened; Live. l. 5.
whereupon it was counted ominous, and a Law made against it for the time to
come. Their dignity was exceeding great, they being therein though not in power
above the Consuls, and having all other Ensigns the same with them except
Lictors.

25. The Fathers rejoiced they had got these Officers Created out of their own
body, and the Tribunes counting that power inconsiderable, Lege Live. l. 4. Val.
Max. lib. 5. cap. 3. Exemp. 2. and Lib. 6. c. 3. Exemp. 1. Florum lib. 1. cap.
ult. Ciceron. pro domo sua and pro Milone.
which at first was pretended to, gave way unto it. But the Commons egged on by
the continual complaints of the later, proceeded in their grudge against the
Patritians, taking it in ill part that marriage was forbidden betwixt the two
orders, and breathing after no less than equal power in the State. This
animated Sp. Maelius, Sp. Maelius his attempt for the Soverainty blasted.
a rich Knight, by his large bounty toward the poorer sort in time of a great
dearth, to hunt after popularity, and through it to aspire to the Soverainty.
He was hereof accused by L. Minucius, to whom the care of provisions was
committed, and the Senate afrighted with the strangeness of the matter, by the
advice of T. Quinctius the Consul, commanded a Dictator to be named. Quinctius
Cincinnatus now 80 years old was the man, who chose C. Servilius Ahala for his
Master of hors-men. The Dictator summoning Maelius to appear, when he would not
obey, Ahala killed him in the Forum, and was justified for so doing by
Quintius, who commanded his goods to be sold, and his house razed. It should
seem from Livy that Ahala escaped without punishment: But Cicero and Valerius
on the contrary affirm, that he was banished by the incensed multitude. This
happened in the 315th year of the City after Varro's account. Valerius and Livy
say, that the Area of his house for a memorial of his punishment had the name
of Aequi-Melium.

26. The Tribunes enraged about the death of Maelius, procured for the year
following Tribunes Military with Consular power to be created now six years
after their Institution, The Tribunes seek to revenge his death by bringing in
Tribunes Military again. The second Opima Spolia.
hoping that into the number of six some Plebeian might creep, which thing
would give them an opportunity to revenge the death of Melius: But three only
were created, and their expectation unanswered thereby. This year Fidenae, a
Roman Colony, gave up it self to Tolumnius King of the Veientes, and by his
Instigation murdered the Ambassadors sent thither. For this war Mamercus
Aemilius was named Dictator, who overcame the Enemies in battle, wherein
Cornelius Cossus a Tribune in the Army, slew, and spoiled Tolumnius, thereby
obtaining Opima Spolia. Varro thought they were called Opima ab opibus for
their riches; In Romulo and Marcello.
but Plutarch thinks rather ab opere, because the consecration of them was
granted to a Captain, who with his own hand slew the General of the Enemy. They
were consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius, so called, because the Trophy was
carried in a Feretrum, or certain little carriage, as some thought, at that
time there being many Greek words in use with the Latins, or a Feriendo, from
Jupiter his smiting with Thunderbolts, or else from the blows given in battle.
This honor of carrying in Triumph the Opima Spolia has only thrice happened to
Roman Captains says Plutarch until our time. First to Romulus, who slew Acron
King of Caenina; secondly to Cornelius Cossus, who killed Tolumnius, (the
Etruscan in one place he calls him, and the Tyrrhenian in another) and
thirdly to M. Marcellus, who so killed, and spoiled Britomartus (in one place,
but Virdumarus in another) King of the Galls. A controversy there was of old,
whether any but a General from a General could take Opima Spolia, which makes
Livy Apologize for what he writes in honor of Cossus; but Varro wrote, as In
Voc. Opima Spolia.
Festus witnesses, that a Manipular Soldier might rightly be said to take
them, so it were from a General of the Enemy.

After four courses of Consuls Tribunes Military again.
27. Two years after this, Fidena was taken by another Dictator, A. Servilius,
through the working of a Mine. But when the Consuls had kept the power four
years, they were forced again to give way to the Tribunes Military, for the
Creation whereof, though the Tribuni Plebis prevailed, yet the Chief of the
Commons missing all this while of being joined with the Nobility in the honor,
were much offended. At the end of two years the Senate took occasion from the
War wherewith the Aequi and Volsci threatened Rome, Consuls again.
to bring in Consuls, which also gave way to a Dictator, A. Posthumous Tubero,
against their wills, through the power of the Tribunes. He finishing the War
succesfully, laid down his Office. And in this year wherein T. Quintius
Cincinnatus the son of Lucius, and Cn. Julius Menio were Consuls, Livy by a
gross mistake would have the Carthaginians to have passed over into Sicily the
first time, by an occasion of the disagreement of the Islanders amongst
themselves. After five years the Commons prevailed to have Tribunes Military
created the fifth time, Tribunes Military again.
four in number, who showed how unprofitable the equal command of many in an
Army is, and gave occasion to the making of a new Dictator. For, Fidena having
now again revolted, and joined with the Veientes, three of those Tribunes were
sent against it and them, and the fourth left to Govern the City. When they
came to engage with the Enemy, A passage showing the excellency of Monarchy.
One cried fight, but another said Stay, and each one being of a several mind,
matters were at length brought to that pass, that the Roman Army fled. The
City was struck with great amazement at the report, and was in an uproar,
which caused Mamercus Aemilius the third time to be named Dictator, though the
Censors had removed him from his Tribe, for that in his second Office (to which
he was called, because of the stirs made by the Hetruscans upon the taking of
Fidena) he confined their Office to the term of one year and an half. Aemilius
being named Dictator, appointed for his Master of hors-men A. Cornelius Cossus,
who obtained the Opima Spolia of Tolumnius King of the Veientes.

28. By the prudence and valor of these two Fidena was retaken, and sacked
after the Hetruscans were overthrown; and the Dictator returning to Rome in
Triumph, laid down his Office when he had held it 17 days. For three years the
Tribunes Military continued, at the end whereof the Senate took occasion at the
War which threatened from the Volsci, Consuls.
and at their absence, to bring in the Consuls again, notwithstanding the
Tribunes of the Commons opposed it. But C. Sempronius, one of the Consuls,
managing this War very carelessly, Tribunes Military.
the Tribunes thence took advantage, and the Tribunes Military again resumed
the Chief power. This was for one year, at the end whereof the Senate again
procured Consuls to be made. Consuls.
When this year was expired, there was so great contention about two Quaestors,
which the Commons would have created out of their body, that the State fell
into an interregnum. L. Papirius Mugillanus being Interrex for a Composure
procured the Tribunes Military to be again admitted, Tribunes Military.
and four Quaestors for the following year to be created, either out of
Patritians or Plebeians, as the People should think fit in their Comitia; but
this satisfied not the Tribunes, nor the better sort of Plebeians, not one of
this order being preferred (though some stood) either as Tribune Military or
Quaestor. In the second year after this, the Slaves conspired to set fire on
the City, and seize upon the Capitol; Consuls.
but the plot was timely discovered. The Tribunes Military held the Government
for seven years, and then another Interregnum because of the Contention
following, Fabius Vibulanus the Inter ex brought in Consuls again.

Disturbances made by the Tribuni Plebis, the Grand Popular Tyrants.
29. The Tribuni Plebis according to their custom made a bad construction
hereof, and having now and then mentioned the division of public grounds,
pressed it earnestly with an extent now to all that at any time had been gotten
by War. The Patritians no less vigorously opposed it, and the Tribunes hindered
the Levies of Soldiers, so that with much ado, and upon extreme necessity only
could the Consuls procure any to oppose the Aequi and Volsci, who now made
incursions. In the fifth year the Commons being crossed in their intentions by
the Senate, of resuming the Tribunes Military, created three of the Quaestors
of their own rank, and the chief amongst them designing to be created Tribune
Military for the next year, Tribunes Military.
sti^kled hard for that kind of government. The Senate at length was
constrained to yield; else no opposition could be made against the former
Enemies, who now again made inrodes into the Roman Territories, and by
confederacies exceedingly strengthened themselves. For this cause also, though
much against the mind of the Tribunes, a Dictator was named, who overthrowing
the Enemy in one battle, wasted his Country and returned. In the third year
after this, the two orders were something reconciled, by the plunder of a Town
taken from the Volsci, and especially by a Decree of the Senate for the public
pay of the Armies (with brass money) before which time every one bore his own
charges in the War. But such was the contentious disposition of the Tribunes,
those grand incendiaries, that they drew this into odium, as grievous to such
who had formerly maintained themseves in the Wars, and now were to pay others.
They effected, that for a time the pay was denied, The first Plebeian amongst
the Tribunes Military.
and after three years they procured one Plebeian (P. Licinius Calvus) to be
chosen amongst the Tribunes Military, wherein they mightily applauded
themselves, and readily permitted the pay of the Army to be gathered. Licinius
carried himself so well in the Office, that for the year following all the
Tribunes Military save one, were Plebeians.

30. For these several years the War abroad was carried on with the Hetruscans,
with various success, and Veii the principal of their Cities was besieged, no
less in compass than Athens, and exceeding wealthy, being within twenty miles
of Rome. It Is Inhabitants, called Veientes, had in behalf of the Fidenates,
waged War with Romulus, afterward being conquered, had seven times rebelled,
and ever perfidious in time of Peace, always wasted the Roman Territories.
They compelled the Fidenates also to rebel, persuaded them to kill the
Ambassadors, and the Romans thither sent to inhabit, for, they vied with the
Romans themselves for power and riches. They had moreover injured the Roman
Ambassadors, and not once procured Hetruria to rise against the State;
wherefore the People offended with so many injuries, resolved utterly to
destroy Veii. Whereas the Soldiers until this time, were wont in Summer only
to be abroad in War, and winter at home in the City, now were they constrained
both Winter and Summer to continue the Siege. The seventh year thereof drawing
toward an end, the Tribunes Military were blamed of remissness, so that for
the following year new ones were created in their rooms. Furius Camillus.
Amongst them was Furius Camillus, who having got much credit in the battle
fought with the Aequi and Volsci under Posthumous Tubertus the Dictator, was
honored other ways, as by being created Censor; in which Office he caused the
Bachellors to mary the Widdovvs of such as had lost their lives for their
Country, and first of all others obliged Orphans to pay Tribute, for that the
depending Wars, especially the Siege of Veii, were very chargable to the
State. Being now Tribune Military the second time, he did nothing against
Veii, Plutarch in Camillo.
it having fallen to his lot to repress the Falerienses and Capenates, who
disturbed the Romans in their enterprise. Made Dictator.
At length in the tenth year of the Siege, they created him Dictator, as the
most fit person they had to finish it.

31. Camillus appointed Cornelius Scipio to be his Master of Horsemen, and
first overthrowing in a great battle the Falisci and Capenates, went against
Veii. Finding it full of difficulty to take a place of such strength by storm,
Surprizeth Veii.
he wrought a mine up into it, through which his Soldiers issuing, he easily
surprised it. Being elevated by so great an achievement, whereby he had thus
subdued the corrival of Rome, in the tenth year of the Siege, he triumphed in a
Chariot drawn by four white Horses, which his Countrymen thinking proper only
to the King and Father of their gods, were much offended at it: and indeed no
man neither before nor after him (says Plutarch) assumed to himself so much
honor. Being offended with this carriage, they found themselves as much
concerned in another matter. The Tribunes of the Commons proposed a Law for
dividing asunder the Senate and People, whereof the one should stay at Rome,
and the other remove to Veii; this parting as they thought, being a ready means
for the enrichment of both, by the possession of two such considerable Cities.
The Plebeians now many and rich vehemently pressed it, and the Patricians
judging it would prove the overthrow of the State, as earnestly opposed the
Law, betaking themselves to Camillus, Incurreeth the displeasure of the
multitude, for hindering the separation of Patritians and Plebeians, and
otherwise.
who put it off by diverting the multitude into other courses. Having
contracted an alienation of mind from them upon these accounts, another thing
cast him into an absolute hatred, and that if not upon a just, yet a plausible
pretense. He had made a vow, that if he took Veii, he would dedicate the tenth
part of the plunder to Apollo, but when the City was taken, either because he
was unwilling to displease the Soldiery, or forgot it, the thing was omitted.
After he had laid down the Office of Dictator, he moved the People in it, and
the Priests reported that the sacrifices portended the anger of their gods,
which must be appeased by gifts; so that the Soldiers who had already spent
what they had got upon their necessary uses, were forced upon oath to restore
the tenth part, wherewith a present was made to Apollo. Because there was little
Gold in the City, the women contributed their ornaments, in way of requital
whereof the Senate decreed, that at their burial they should also be commended
by funeral Orations, which before this had not been in use.

32. The Tribunes again moving for a separation, the War with the Falisci
opportunely fell out to divert the multitude, for which Camillus was chosen
Tribune Military with five others. He besieging the Falerii, who inhabited a
strongly fortified City, the Schoolmaster thereof drew out his boys into his
Camp, and offered to give them up into his hands, which treachery he so far
detested, as to cause the Paedagogue to be stripped, and put rods into the
hands of his boys, wherewith they drove him back into the Town. Herewith the
Falerii were so affected as they yielded, and the Senate referring them for
conditions to Camillus, he only fined them a sum of money, and received them
with all the Falisci into friendship. But the Soldiers who hoped to have
enriched themselves with the plunder of this place, inveighed grievously
against him, and now the Tribunes pressing again the Law for separation, he
used such freedom in opposing it, that they out of revenge accused him of
having pilfred the plunder in the Hetruscan War, whereof some brazen doors had
been, as they said, seen in his house, The multitude now upon several accounts
exasperated against him, resolved to show their spleen. So that not having any
way to evade their displeasure, he went into exile, He goes into exile.
lifting up his hands toward the Capitol, and praying, that if he was unjustly
and merely by the lust and malice of the multitude banished, they might
suddenly repent it, and that it might appear to all men, how much the Romans
stood in need of and desired his presence. Being gone, he was fined 15000 Era,
which sum in Silver made up 1500 Denarii. For Aes or brass was then used for
money, and Denarius thence had the name, for that it contained ten Asses
thereof. But within a while it fell out, that Camillus was both missed any
desired, according to his wish.

33. Many thousands of the Galls called Celtae, finding their own Country too
narrow for them, with their wives and children left it, to seek out new seats.
Some of them passing over the Sea, pierced as far as the Riphaean mountains,
and placed themselves in the utmost limits of Europe, others took up their
habitation betwixt the Pyrenaans and the Alps, near the Senones and Celtorii.
These a long time after having tasted of some Italian wine, were furiously
transported with a desire of inhabiting so rare a Soil, as brought forth such
fruit, and passing over the Alps, got into their power all that Country once
belonging to the Etruscans, and which reached from the Alps to both the Seas:
for, that the Etruscans once inhabited all this Country, Plutarch proves
thence, that the Northern Sea was named Adriatic, from Adria, one of their
Towns, and the Southern, Tyrrhenian, from the Tyrrheni the same with Hetrusci.
At this time the posterity of those Galli Senones under the conduct of their
King Brennus, besieged Clusium a City of Hetruria, The Galls besiege Clusium.
whose inhabitants sent to Rome, desiring of that State to interpose, by
sending Ambassadors and Letters to their unjust oppressors. The Senate
performing this neighbourly part, the Galls required part of the Territories of
the Clusini, who were, as they said, unable to manage them all, and Brennus not
condescending to any other conditions, the Ambassadors (all three of the Fabian
family) in great anger went into Clusium, and caused the Inhabitants to make a
sally out against the besiegers. It happened, that in the fight Fabius Ambustus
one of the three killing a Gall, whilst he disarmed him, was discovered;
whereupon Brennus conceiving just indignation, broke up his Siege, and marched
toward Rome.

34. Yet because he would not seem to proceed unjusty, he sent thither,
requiring that the Ambassadors might be given up to him, as having broke the
Law of Nations. But favor so far prevailed above equity, that the matter being
referred from the Senate to the People, no satisfaction could be had from
either: Defeat the Romans at Alia.
nay the Ambassadors on the contrary, were with three others created Tribunes
Military, for carrying on the War. Brennus then continuing his march, and
breathing revenge, was met by the Tribunes at the River Alia, eleven miles from
the City, who scarce striking one stroke, quickly betook them to their heels,
and their Army after them. The Galls persued them, being amazed at the flight
and cowardice of those who had already obtained for their valor a great name
in the World; but were astonished when they found the gates of Rome open, and
none upon the walls to make resistance; for it had been resolved to quit the
City and secure the Castle. The greater part of the People departed into the
adjoining Country; the rest possessed themselves of the Capitol, all but
certain old men of Senatorian degree, who in their robes placed themselves in
the Forum, resolving to take such quarter, as the disposition of the Enemy
would afford them. Brennus at first fearing some stratagem, Come to Rome which
is forsaken all but the Capitol.
after he perceived all to be clear, entered the City. His Soldiers were amazed,
to see the grave Senators sitting without fear in the Forum, and hurt them not,
till one handling the long beard of M. Papirius, the old man struck him with
his staff upon the head, whereupon the Gall slew him, and then all the rest
were killed, with all of both Sexes and all ages that were found about the
City, which was also now burnt to the ground, and the Capitol closely besieged.

35. While the Galls lay before the Capitol, A. M. 3615. Ol. 97. an. 3. V. c.
364. Artax. Mnem^ 15.
they carelessly demeaned themselves, as secure of any Enemy, and were scattered
into the Country adjoining. Camillus at this time living in exile at Ardea,
procured the Inhabitants of that City to issue out upon them, and killed many;
which the Romans, who lay at Veii, understanding, chose him for their General,
desiring him to forget injuries, and succor his distressed Country. He
objected his condition of banishment, and refused to act, except by commission
from those in the Capitol, whom he considered to be the body of the Roman State
yet surviving. There was one Pontius Cominius, who undertook to procure him
leave from their friends in the Capitol, whither by a strange adventure he got,
Camillus made Dictator.
passing by the Enemy, and swimming the River till he came to the Rock, which
then he made a shift to climb, and having procured the Senate to pronounce
Camillus Dictator, returned in the same manner. By this time as well the
besiegers as besieged were well wearied, both parties for want of provisions,
and the Galls by reason of a Plague which raged amongst them; so as (having
once attempted to surprise the Castle, by climbing up the Rock, they were
discovered by the crying of the Geese, consecrated to Juno, and repelled by the
valor of one Manlius especially) they agreed for fifty pounds of Gold to rise
and depart. Yet so covetous were they, that they took out the Gold as it was
weighing, and added to the weight, which being complained of, Brennus cast in
his Sword also, crying Vae victis, which afterward became a proverb. But in
the mean time came Camillus, and nulling this compact, as made without his
consent, who before was Dictator, and therefore alone had power of making
Peace, overthrew them in fight, and did such execution upon them in pursuit,
Overthrows them and rescueth Rome.
as what remained of them, was overpowered and cut off by the Country. Thus
Rome, which was unexpectedly taken by the Galls about the Ides of the month
Quinctilis, was more unexpectedly recovered about the Ides of February, so that
as Plutarch writes, the Barbarians held it seven months, in the 365 year of
the City, and the sixteenth of Artaxerxes Mnemon.

Hinders the multitude from departing to Veii.
36. The Tribunes now renewed their importunity about removing unto Veii, which
caused the Senate to procure Camillus his holding of the Office of Dictator,
though contrary to the custom, for the whole year. He with gentle language
appeased the multitude, showing them, how unworthy a thing it was to forsake
the seat of their Ancestors, and of their Country rites (which were appropriate
to the same place) for to inhabit a conquered and enslaved City. Then was Rome
rebuilt in great haste, whereby afterward it became rather an heap of houses
than a well ordered Town, and that the watercourses formerly laid in the
streets, now ran for the most part under private houses. Camillus having laid
down his Office was forced the year following to reassume it, because of the
Volsci, who now took Arms, as also the Aequi and Etruscans, all which he
overthrew, Livius lib. 6.
and forced the Volsci to yield themselves after the War had continued with
them for 70 years. In the third year after this he overcame them again, and
with them the Hernici and Latins, whereof the later had ever from the battle
at the Rhegillan Lake been trusty and faithful until now: and from the
Etruscans he recocovered two Towns which they had taken from the Allies of
Rome. This he did being Tribune Military, though envied by M. Manlius, who
having done special service in the Capitol, by repelling the Galls, obtained
the Surname of Capitolinus. Being naturally haughty and ambitious, he was
herewith puffed up, so as to extenuate the deserts of Camillus, and by
ingratiating himself with the common sort, through paying their debts, and
railing against the great ones, plainly to aim at the Sovereignty. This,
together with the War depending with the Volsci, which was also aggravated by
the defection of the Hernici and Latins, caused the Senate to resolve that a
Dictator should be created.

37. This was A. Cornelius Cossus, as Livie writes, though Plutarch names
Quinctius Capitolinus, whom the other reports to have been Master of the
Horsemen to Cossus. Plutarch in Camillo.
He triumphing over the Enemies from without, called also by the help of the
Tribunes Manlius to account, and shut him in prison. The multitude much
afflicted hereat, took mourning garments, and made such disturbance, that after
some time he was set at liberty. But holding private meetings in the night, and
growing more bold in his design, the Senate committed it to the care of the
Tribunes Military, whereof Camillus was one, (as afterward in cases of great
exigency to the Consuls) to take care that the Commonwealth should receive no
damage. Being then brought to his trial again in that place, whence a view of
the Capitol might be had, he would ever point to it, and put the People in mind
of what he had done there for them; whereupon Camillus caused his Judges to
remove without the gate, Manlius thrown from the Tarpeian Rock.
into the grove called Lucus Petelinus, where being no sight of the Capitol, he
was condemned. He was thrown headlong from the Tarpeian Rock, the place both of
his honor and infamy: and it was decreed, that none of the Manlii should
afterward be called Marcus.

38. After these things the Latins rebelling, and the Volsci, were severally
overthrown without, and great tumults happened within, by reason of the debts of
the Commons, now again exceedingly increased. Their Tribunes incensed them
against the Patritians, and the contest was sharpened by Fabius Ambustus one of
this order, who having married one daughter to a Patritian and another to a
Commoner, this took such distaste at her husbands condition, being void of
honor, that Fabius told her he would so order the matter, that the same
dignity should be communicated to her house, as was to that of her Sister. From
this time he consulted with Licinius Stolo her husband, and L. Sestius, about
the preferring of a Law, for making one Consul out of the Commons. These two
being made Tribunes of the People, labored so vigorously about it, that after
long and great contention it came to that pass, that for five years they
suffered no Supreme Magistrates to be created. Nine years this dispute
continued, Wonderful Sedition and confusion about the Consulship.
those two continuing Tribunes still, and the matter had come to another
separation or worse, but that Camillus reconciled the parties. He was made
Dictator the fourth, says Plutarch, for this purpose, but finding the
multitude too stubborn, which threatened to Fine him except he complied, he
again laid down his Office. The Senate then caused another Dictator to be
named, under whom Licinius Stolo preferred a Law, which forbad any man to
possess above 500 Akers of ground, and afterward being found himself to have
above, was punished by virtue of his own constitution. Whilst the Contention
was on foot about the Consulship, news came that the Galls, many thousands in
number, were marching from the Adriatick-Sea toward Rome, which composed the
difference for the present, and made them cast their eyes upon Camillus as
Dictator the fifth time. Camillus the fifth time Dictator again overthrows
the Galls at the River Aniene.
He being near 80 years of age refused not the employment in this time of so
great danger, and perceiving the Galls to fight with swords, striking at the
heads and shoulders of their Enemies without any art or dexterity, he furnished
his men with light iron Helmets, and bound their Targets about with brass,
teaching them how to fence, and receive the strokes. By this device he rendered
the swords of the Galls so unserviceable, that giving them battle at the River
Aniene, he easily overthrew them, in the 23th year after he had recovered Rome
from their Contrymen.

39. After this fight the Romans despised the Galls whom before they
exceedingly feared, insomuch that whereas by a Law immunity from War was granted
to Priests, an exception and Proviso was added as to that with the Galls.
Camillus in his retreat had Velitrae given up into his hands; but having now
finished all his warlike exploits, a very considerable one remained to be
performed by him at home. For at his return he was received with fierce and
impatient Contests betwixt the Senate and Commons about the Consulship, and
retaining his power, that thereby he might serve the interest of the Nobility,
an Officer was sent from the Tribunes to pull him down from his seat in the
Forum, and bring him before them. His attendants repelling the man, Unheard of
Seditions.
such a noise and tumult followed as never before had been known, the multitude
crying out, pull him down. He laid not down his Office, but departing to the
Senate House, had a serious debate with the Fathers about the matter, and after
a great and various Contention, that party prevailed which granted to the
Commons that one of the Consuls might be created out of their body. Procure to
the Commons the Consulship, and the Offices of Praetor and Aedilis Curulis to
the Patritians.
For this they desired, and obtained of the Commons, to have a Praetor created
yearly out of the Patritian order for administration of Justice in the City.
By this agreement a good understanding being revived betwixt the parties, for
as long a time as the infirmity of the Government could bear, a Temple was
dedicated to Concord, which Camillus had vowed, moreover a fourth day was added
to the Latin Feriae, and the greater sort of Games were solemnized, which when
the Aediles of the Commons refused to manage, the young Patritians offered
themselves, and the Senate procured also of the People that two Patritians
every year might be made Aediles, who from the Chair called Sella Curulis, had
the name of Aediles Curules. What their Office was has been shown before. As
for this Chair, Gellius writes, Lib. 3. cap. 18.
that anciently such Senators as had born a Curule Office, were for honor's
sake wont to be drawn to the house in a Chariot, wherein was a Chair in which
they sat, and which thence (from the Chariot or Currus) was called Curulis.
But others think that both the Orthography of the word, and the dismension of
the thing crossed this derivation, What the Curule Chair was
and that it was called Curulis from Cures, a Town of the Sabines. The form of
it upon old Coins represents that of Spanish Chairs, used by Princes as Chairs
of State: It had also crooked feet, as Plutarch in the life of Marius
describes it; several ascents there were to it: it was covered with Ivory, as
several Authors show, and carved or engraven, according to Ovid.

What the Praetorship.
40. But as for the Praetor, there were two causes of the Creation of this
Officer: Aemulation and Use. The former was wrought in the Patritians by the
Commons, who now had wrested into their own hands the Consulship. The later was
brought about by reason that the Consuls were for the most part employed abroad
in Wars, and therefore there was a necessity of a Magistrate, whose peculiar
work it should be to administer Justice in the City. The Praetor was so called
a praeeund, as write both Praetor dictus qui praeiret jure and exercitu. A quo
Lucilius, Ergo Praetorum est praeire. De Ling. Lat. lib. 4. p. 22.
Varro and Vide Cap. hujus Sect. 1. Paragr. 1.
Cice o, and agreeably with this Etymology it was once the name of Veteres enim
omnem Magistratum cui pareret exercitus Praetorem appellaverunt unde and
Pretorium tabernaculum ejus dicitur, and in castris porta Praetoria, and hodie
quoque praefectus pratorio.

Asconius Pedianus in Verrem de Praetura urbis.


Consuls also, as we showed before, and of all, or most other Magistrates,
Civil or Military. It is probable, that this name, as the other of Dictator,
Aedilis, and Duumvir, might come out of Hetruria, there being such Officers
there of old, as Spartianus seems to hint, and otherwise may be gathered.
There being but one created at his time, viz. in the 388 year of the City,
afterward about the 500 year another was added, who administered Justice unto
strangers, so that for distinction the one was called Praetor Urbanus, and the
other Peregrinus, the former being in Dignity above the other, and his
Constitutions called Jus Honorarium, as we showed before out of Pomponius. This
same Author (having shown, that after the bringing in of this Praetor
Peregrinus; the Decemviri for judging of Causes, the Triumviri for coining of
Brass, Silver, and Gold, the Triumviri Capitales for keeping of Prison and the
Quinqueviri for both sides of Tiber for executing what belonged to Magistrates
in the evenings (at which time they were not to be abroad) were created by
degrees) writes further, that Sardinia being made a Roman Province, after that
Sicily, then Spain, and after Norbonensis; so many Praetors were made as there
were Provinces, who partly governed at home, and partly abroad. Lipsius more
particularly affirms, that, in the 520 year of the City, Sardinia and Sicily
being both made Provinces, there were two added, who as the former two assisted
the Consuls in administering of Justice, so these in the government of the
Provinces. When Spain (Hispaniae in the plural number) was subdued, in the year
557. two more were added. So there were in all six Praetors, whereof two only
remained in the City, and the other, as soon as declared, departed into the
Provinces, as they fell to them by lot: this order continued till the
examinations called Quaestiones Perpetuae were appointed, at which time the
Senate resolved that all the Praetors for the year of their Office should
continue in the City, and judge some controversies, either public or private.

41. Pomponius proceeds, saying, that Cornelius Sulla appointed other public
Examinations or Inquisitions: As, for example, De falso, De Paricidio, and de
Sicariis, for which he added four Praerors more; but Lipsius says he is
mistaken in the number, proving out of Cicero that he made but two. C. Julius
Caesar appointed other two, as also two Aediles called Cereales, and afterward
16 Praetors, as appears from Dio, who also relates the Triumviri with
greater liberty to have made 64. Augustus filled up the number to 16. says
Pomponius, though first Lipsius will have him to have confined the number to
12. Claudius added two, who where to judge only concerning Fidei Commissa, as
the Law term is. Titus took one from the number: but Nerva restored and
appointed him to hear and determine Causes betwixt the Exchecquer and private
persons. Another was appointed by M. Antonius Philosophus, called Praetor
Tutelaris. So, in all there were 18. till, as the Empire decreased, they
decreased also in number, and at length were reduced to that of three by a Law
of Valentinian and Marcian. As for the Office of Praetors, the Praetor Urbanus,
who was also called Praefectus Urbi (though the Praefectus was afterward only
chosen for the Latin Feriae) in the absence of the Consuls executed their
Office in the Senate and Comitia. But three things especially belonged to them:
Games, Sacrifices, and Judicature. The former only continued to them in a
manner when the Empire decayed. Their Judicature was either in public or
private matters. Private causes concerning meum and tuum, two only handled,
viz. the Urbanus and Peregrinus; Public or Criminal matters were managed by
all the rest, who yet had their several and distinct Crimes, one or two, which
they judged; and yet sometimes in their Provinces they managed Civil matters
also. They had the same Ornaments and Ensigns of power as the Consuls; only
but six Lictors apiece, whereas the other had twelve. In respect of their power
and honor, as also because they were created by the same Auspicia, Livy
calls them the Colleagues of Consuls.

42. The first Consul out of the body of the Commons was L. Sextius, Live. Lib.
7.
by whose Law the privilege was obtained; the first Praetor Sp. Furius, the son
of Camillus, and the first Aediles Curules were Cn. Quintius Capitolinus, and
P. Cornelius Scipio. To Sextius was given as Colleague from amongst the
Patritians L. Aemylius Mamercus, and so the Consuls again returned after 23
years, The many alterations in the Roman Government.
these being the 88 pair as they are found in Livy, and the Tribunes Military
were for ever laid aside after 48 courses of that Office, and fifteen changes
from the Consulship to it, and from it to the Consulship. Besides these changes
of Government in Rome, there were the two Grand ones from Kings to Consuls, and
from Consuls to the Decemv^ri; and to this time from the first of these
alterations had intervened 20 Dictatorships, besides the several Interregnums.
The first Interregnum was extraordinary, being betwixt the reigns of Romulus
and Numa, when the Senate governed for the space of a year: the other were
ordinary, and continued but for five days under particular men, at the end
whereof another was Elected, and called Interrex, having for that time the
power of Consuls. All these changes of Government, except the Interregnums
betwixt the reigns of the Kings (whereof none but one is considerable) happened
to the Commonwealth of Rome within the space of 134 years, scarce so many
having completely passed from the banishment of Tarquinius, to this alteration
in the Consulship. It is not in vain to have made these observations, that the
Reader may plainly see the ridiculous sicklenesse, weakness, and danger of the
Roman Government after that it came to be Antimonarchical.

43. In the beginning of the year, news came of the Galls their meeting
together, who had before been dispersed through Apulia, and of the intended
revolt of the Hernici; but all preparations were deferred by the Senate,
because it troubled them that any thing should be done by a Plebeian Consul,
and there was a great silence with a general intermission of business as in
some great Vacation. Only the Tribunes were not silent, because that for one
Plebeian Consul the Nobility had got three Patritian Magistrates, who sat as
Consuls in their Curule Chairs, and their Praetextae: especially were they
concerned about the Praetor, who administered Justice, was a Colleague of the
Consuls, and created by the same Auspicia. Modesty therefore suffered not the
Fathers to create both the Aediles Curules out of their own body; so that it
was agreed first that every other year they should be chosen out of the
Commons; but afterward they were Elected promiscuously. The year following
fell a grievous plague upon the City, which took away, besides great
multitudes of the common sort, One Censor, one Aedilis Curulis, and three
Tribunes: And who was more than all, Camillus with many others dies of the
plague.
Camillus himself now died, having born the Office of Consul more than once,
been five times Dictator, having Triumph four, and done such things as he
deservedly was written the second founder of Rome. The plague raging both in
this and the following year, gave place to no means that were used, so that all
men's minds being superstitiously bent, the Stage Plays were brought up to
appease their impure gods. The Actors were sent for out of Hetruria, in the
language of which Country Hister signifying a Player, thence was derived the
Roman word Histrio: these plays were very barbarous and antic at the first.
M. Curtius.
Two years after this the ground cleaving asunder in the Forum, M. Curtius is
said to have rode into the hole, and so being swallowed up, purchased conquest
for his Country, according to the Declaration of their gods. After this there
was action abroad with the Hernici and the Galls. One of these provoking any
one Roman to a single Combat, T. Manlius accepted of the challenge, and killing
his Enemy took a Torques or chain from his neck, Torquatus.
whence he and his posterity obtained the Surname of Torquatus. In this fight
the Galls had the worst, so also three years after, and eight years after that,
when M. Valerius a young man, and Tribune of the Soldiers, fighting with
another Gall, as Manlius did, had the same success. As he was fighting a Crow
came, and sitting upon his head, with beak and wings assisted him in his
combat, whence he had the Surname of Corvinus. Corvinus.
At this time also were several Victories obtained against the Latins and
Hetruscans.

44. But, (that we may join domestic affairs with those of the Camp) after the
Commons had enjoyed the Consulship nine years, the Patritians took it from them
again, A Plebeian Dictator made which causes great discontent.
out of disdain that the year before C. Martius Rutilius a Plebeian had been
Dictator. Hereat the multitude was so enraged, that at the end of three years
more, the Senate was forced to restore the Office, and because Usury was again
grown exceeding burthensom to the poorer sort, they appointed five men to order
the payment of debts out of the Treasury. For the following year also one of
the Censors was chosen out of the Plebeians. Hitherto were the Wars of the
Romans as it were at their gates: now they were removed further off, and
henceforth continued longer: For in the 412 year from the founding of the City,
and the 46 from it is restoration, began the War with the Samnites, a People of
Italy, Strabo l. 5. p. 228. c.
In Florio l. 1. c. 16.
descended from the Sabines, from whom also they had their name, or from Saunia
or Sannia, which in the Greek tongue signify Spears; The War with the Samnites.
or from the hill Samnium, where, as they came from the Sabines, they seated
themselves, according to Festus. They had the Sabines, Peligni, and Aequi on
the West, the Picentini and Apuli on the East, on the South the Campanians and
Sidicini, and on the North the Marucini, Dauni, and Apuli, as is observable out
of History, says In Florio l. 1. c. 16.
Joh. Stadius. It was the custom of the Romans by helping others to espouse
quarrels. The Samnites having unjustly molested the Sidicini with War, they
betook themselves to the Campanians for succor. These being luxurious and
effeminate, were easily worsted, and sent to Rome for aid, their Ambassadors
imploring it with tears, and giving up themselves and Country into the hands of
the Senate and People. The Senate was at first unwilling to use any force, for
that the Samnites were their friends in confederacy; but upon the importunate
cries and prayers of the Ambassadors, and the scornful denial of the Samnites
to abstain from the Territories of Capua and Campania, their request was
granted, and the Consuls sent forth, the one to Capua, and the other into
Samnium, where the Samnites were overthrovvn in both places, and many
thousands of them slain: For, in Campania, Valerius after a bloody battle
became Master of their Camp. In Samnium Cornelius having unvvarily led his Army
thither where they lay in vvait for him, P. Decius a Tribune in the Army,
possessed himself of an hill above the Enemy, who much wondering thereat,
applied themselves thither, and so gave liberty to the Consul to dravv forth
his men into a more convenient place. Then brake he through, though besieged,
vvhereat the Enemy was so much astonished, that the Consul falling on obtained
so great a Victory, that 30000 of the Samnites were slain.

45. This defeat, together with inroades made upon them the next year, drew
them to make a peace, the Sidicini being left to their mercy. They desired that
the Latins and Campanians might be commanded not to assist the Sidicini; but
because the Senate would not deny that these Nations were under their command,
and were also afraid to provoke them, so ambiguous an answer was made, as the
Samnites being left but dubious, the Latins and the other thought themselves
so far disobliged as to rebel. T. Manlius Torquatus now Consul the third time,
with Decius Mus his Colleague, was sent to chastize the Latins. Upon dreams
which they both had, that one General on the one part, and the Army on the
other, belonged to the Dii Manes and Tellus matter, they agreed, that in what
part the Roman Army should be distressed, he under whose command it was should
devote himself, and that strict discipline should be observed, so that all were
forbidden to fight without orders. The Army being sorely put to it in Decius
his wing, he devoted himself, and rushing into the midst of his Enemies, after
great slaughter made, lost his life. Decius Mus devoteth himself.
L. Manlius the other Consul's Son, passing with his Troop, A. M. 3666. Ol. 110
an. 2. V.C. 415. Ochi 23. Philippi 22.
before the battle, near the Camp of the Enemy, was challenged by Geminius
Metius Captain of the Tusculans, whom when he had slain and stripped, his
Father for a reward caused him to be put to death; whence cruel Commands were
wont to be called Manliana Dicta. Of the manner of the Combat Lib. 9. cap. 13.
Aulus Gellius, or Agellius is to be consulted. The Latins being overthrown
were wholly subdued, and begged Peace; which being given to them, though not
with the same conditions to all, Manlius returned, and was met by ancient men
only, the young ones refusing to do him that honor, who ever after both hated
and cursed him in reference to his son.

46. After his return, the Antiates and Ardeates made incursions into the Roman
Territories. Being by sickness rendered unfit for War, he named L. Papyrius
Crassus for Dictator, who appointed L. Papyrius Cursor his Master of Horsemen;
but nothing memorable was done. The Consuls for the following year, The Latins
overthrown.
T. Aemilius Mamercus and Q. Publius Philo, overthrew the Latins, who had
rebelled because of the grounds taken from them. Publius, by whose conduct and
auspicium the Victory was obtained, receiving into amity such Cities as had
been worsted, Aemilius led the Army against Pedus, which received supplies from
several places. Though he had the better in all skirmishes, yet the Town
holding out, and he hearing that his Colleague was returned home to his deceed
Triumph, he also left the Siege, and departed to demand that honor. The Senate
was offended, and denied to permit him the honor, except Pedus was either
taken, or surrendered, which caused him out of revenge all the year following to
join with the Tribunes against the Fathers, his Colleague not opposing it,
because a Plebeian. The Senate having a desire to be rid of them, commanded a
Dictator to be named, but it belonging to Aemilius to name him, he whose were
the Fasces for this month, named his Colleague, who appointed Junius Brutus his
Master of Horsemen. And his Dictatorship was very grievous to the Nobility,
being full of invectives against them, and the procurer of three Laws, whereof
the first altered the very constitution of the State. The very constitution of
the State changed.
This was, that the Plebiscita should bind all the Quirites, or the whole
People, comprising all ranks, and degrees. The second, that such Laws as
passed in the Centuriata Comilia, should be proposed by the Fathers before the
Suffrage. The third, that one of the Censors at least should be a Plebeian,
whereas now it was come to that pass, that both might be such. Thus did the
Government of Rome devolve fast to a Democratical temper, the interest of the
Patritians being now quite broken by the force of the former Law (which proved
as a Lex talionis to them, and as a punishment for their rebellion against
their Kings) in they 416 year of the City, after Varro's account, which fell in
with the first of Arses King of Persia, and the 23 of Philip King of Macedonia.

47. In the following year, wherein L. Furius Camillus and C. Maenius were
Consuls, Pedus was taken by storm, and the Consuls in pursuit of the Victory
subdued all Latium, All Latium subdued.
for which they triumphed, and had Statues on horseback set up in the Forum; an
honor but rare in those days. The several People of Latium, had several
conditions of Peace set them. To Antium was sent a new Colony, and the old
inhabitants were forbidden the Sea, had all their long-ships taken from them,
had leave to enter themselves in the Colony, and were made free of the City.
The ships were partly brought into the Roman Arcenal, partly burnt, and with
their Rostra or beaks was the Gallery or Pulpit for Orations adorned, which was
built in the Forum; whence that Temple was afterward called Rostra. The year
following Minutia a Vestal Nun was buried quick in the Campus Sceleratus, The
Rostra at Rome whence so called.
which I believe, says Livie, had it is name from Incest; for so the fault of
incontinency in those women was termed. And in this same year Q. Publius Philo
was made the first Prator out of the Commons; the Senate not regarding now what
happened in this kind, because they had been overpowered in things of greatest
consequence. Now also a War arose betwixt the Aurunci and Sidicini, whereof the
former were constrained by the other to forsake their ancient seat, and depart
to Suessa, which was afterward called Aurunca. The Aurunci had given up
themselves to the Romans, who thereupon ordered them relief, but the Consuls
deferring it, this fell out in the mean time. But the next year the Sidicini
and the Ausones who inhabited Cales were overthrown, and Valerius Corvinus now
the fourth time Consul for the following year, and the greatest Roman Captain
of this time, took Cales also, where a Colony was placed. In the second year
after the taking of Cales, the Census was solemnized, and two Tribes added,
Metia and Scaptia, for the newly admitted Citizens: the Acerrani were also made
free of the City, without the privilege of Suffrage, by a Law preferred by L.
Papirius the Praetor.

48. In the year following, above 170 women were put to death for the art of
poisoning, being discovered by a she Slave, whereas heretofore there had been
no inquisition made after this crime, which therefore was counted such a
prodigy, that a Dictator was made for fixing of a nail, which they had read in
their Annals to have been a remedy for the distempers of the State, when the
Commons separated from the Patritians. For the two succeeding years a War was
managed against the Privernates, who were drawn into it by Vitruvius Vallus,
War with the Privernates.
a man of principal note amongst the Fundani. In the first year they were
overthrown, in the next he was either taken or delivered up, and Privernum
either stormed or surrendered, both being affirmed by Writers, A. M. 3675. Ol.
122. an. 3. V. C. 424. Darii 7. Alexandri 7.
of whom Livie is to be consulted: the principal actors were together with
^itruvius put to death, and the rest of the Inhabitants made free of the City.
The first year of this War fell in with the last of Darius Codomannus, the
last King of Persia, being the 424 of the City, when L. Papyrius Crassus the
second time, and L. Plautius Venox (or Veuno) were Consuls.

AN INSTITUTION OF General History. The First Part. BOOK III. Of the Empire of
the Macedonians, and Affairs of the World Contemporary with it.
CHAP. I. From the beginning of the Monarchy of Alexander to his death,
containing the space of six years and ten months.
1. ALexander riding hard after Darius, came a little after he had expired,
Alexander bewaileth Darius.
saw the body, and bewailed his death with tears: he cast his own Garment over
him, and sent him to his Mother to be royally interred amongst his Ancestors.
Curtius lib. 5. cap. 14. Diodorus ad Olymp. 112. an^. 3. and 4.
His brother Oxyathres he received into the number of his own friends, and
maintained him in his former Dignity. Then did he begin to pursue Bessus; but
finding that he was fled far before into Bactria, he left off his pursuit, and
returned to Hecatompolis in Parthia, where his Soldiers being tickled with a
rumor that the Macedonians should have leave to return home, Curtius lib. 6.
Capp. 2.3.
rouzed him up from his idleness and luxury, to which now he began to give way
after the Persian fashion: but they were at length quieted, and persuaded by
him to perfect the work thus for carried on in Asia. Leaving then Craterus in
this Country with some Forces, he marched into Hyrcania which Nabarzanes had
seized on, who yielded it up, Marches into Hyrcania.
and himself to him. After this he invaded the Mardi, a neighboring people,
who, not being wont to be thus provoked by any, made resistance with 8000 men,
and intercepted Bucephalus his most beloved horse, which, being given him by
Demaratus the Corinthian, A.M. 3676. Ol. 112. an^. 4. V.C. 425. Alexand. 8.
when unsadled would suffer none to come on his back, and when adorned, none
but the King himself, whom to receive he bowed down. Alexander exceedingly
moved with the loss of him, after he had slain, and taken most of these men,
cut down all the Trees, and threatened the Nation with utter destruction in case
they did not restore the horse, so that for fear they did it, and with him sent
their Presents, and asked pardon, by 50 Messengers.

2. Returning back, he received 1500 men which had been sent out of Greece to
Darius with 90 Ambassadors. Over this party he made Captain Andronicus, who
brought them to him, and then went on to Zadracarta, the principal City of
Hyrcania, where he staid fifteen days. Hither Thalestris Queen of the Amazons,
Whether the Queen of the Amazons ever came to him.
is said, with 300 women, Consulae Plutarchum in Alexandro and Arrianum lib. 7.
to have come to have issue by him, which story, though it be delivered for a
truth by some, yet is there better ground to suspect it, seeing that neither
Ptolomy the son of Lagus, who was then with him, and wrote his Acts, neither
any other good Author of those times approved of it: and Alexander himself in
his Letters to Antipater, wherein he gave him an account of his affairs,
mentioned how the Scythian King offered to him his daughter in marriage, but
not a word of this matter. After this, he returned into Parthia, and purposing
now to go against Bessus (who in Bactria had taken upon him a royal Robe, and
the name and little of Artaxerxes King of Persia) he thence removed into the
Country of the Arii. He comes into the Country of the Arii.
Satibarzanes the Governor thereof meeting him at the City Susia, he confirmed
him in his place, but after his departure he revolted from him, whereby the
King was constrained to march back against him, which he hearing fled with 2000
men toward Bessus; so as Alexander following him some time, but in vain,
reduced the Country to obedience, and returned to his former expedition. Then
came he into the Country of the Zarangaei, which was governed by one
Barsaentes, who having had an hand in the murder of Darius, now fled into
India, whence he was afterward sent, That of the Zarangaei.
and put to death. Here in this Land of the Zarangaei (or Drangae) was a
conspiracy against Alexander discovered; first by Dymnus to Nicomachus, who,
though he swore secrecy, communicated it to Zeballinus his brother. Zeballinus
(or Ceballinus) acquainted with it Philotas the son of Parmenio, who, delaying
to tell it to the King, either through heedlesnesse, or on purpose, thereby
procured the destruction of himself and family.

3. For, Ceballinus suspecting him to be in the plot, because of his delay,
discovered the matter to Metro a young Nobleman, and Master of the Armory, who
acquainting the King therewith, he presently caused them all to be apprehended.
Dymnus knowing wherefore he was called, Lege Cartium lib. 6. and 7. Plutarch.
and Diodorum ut prius. Arrianum lib. 3.
killed himself. Ceballinus cast all the blame upon Philotas, who denied not
that he had been told of such a business, but said he revealed it not to the
King only through neglect, and because he esteemed it of no consequence. Being
brought to the Rack, Philotas put to death for Treason,
he either confessed the thing as it was, or feigned a story, and wrongfully
accused himself to escape the extremity of Torment; after which he was put to
death. Now was Parmenio his father, a man of 70 years of age, Governor of
Media, one who had done especial service for the King, and his father Philip.
Alexander, either for that he feared he was privy to the conspiracy, And
Parmenio his Father.
or thought it not safe that he should out live his son, sent one away with
speed, who delivering a counterfeited Letter to him as from Philotas, slew
him as he read it. Amongst others that were shot to death for this conspiracy,
was Alexander Lyncestes the son-in-law of Antipater, who had conspired the
destruction both of Philip and Alexander, and for his treason been kept in
durance now three years. This being done, the King proceeded in his Expedition
against Bessus.

4. Though the Soldiers condemned Parmenio and his Son while living, yet they
pitied them when dead, and conceived great indignation against their Judges.
Alexander understanding this, that he might know their several minds, gave out,
that he was sending into Macedonia, and whosoever would, might have an
opportunity thereby to write to their friends. By their Letters, all which he
caused to be opened, he knew who were discontented and ready to Mutiny, and all
those he gathered into one company, lest they should corrupt the rest, setting
over them one Leonidas, an intimate friend of Parmen^o. The King in his March
came to the Country of the Arimaspi, or Agriaspae, called also Euergetae by
Cyrus the Great; Diodorus ut prius. Curtius lib. 7. cap. 3. Arrianus.
for that when he went against the Scythians, they furnished him with
Provisions in his great necessity. He used them very courteously, bestowing upon
them Money, and as much Ground as they would ask, which was not much: And here
he heard that Satibarzanes, being returned from Bessus, had withdrawn the Arii
from obedience. Against him he sent 6000 Greekish Foot and 600 Horse, under the
command of Erygius and others, who joining Battle with him, he pulled down his
Helmet, and challenged any one to a single Combat. Erygius accepting of the
Challenge, slew him in the place, and then his Soldiers, who had followed him
rather by constraint, The King marches against Bessus.
than out of any good will, yielded themselves. Alexander having staid among
the Euergetae 60 days, passed on, and in his way subdued the Gedrosians, the
Drangi and Dragogi, as also Arachosia, where he got that Army into his power of
which Parmenio had the command, consisting of 6000 Macedonians, and 200
Gentlemen, besides 5000 other Greeks, and 600 Horse.

5. The next People he passed through were the Paropamisadae. This being in the
Winter-season, Passes the Mountain Paropamisus.
his Army suffered extremely through the coldness of the Climate: Thence he
came to the Mountain Caucasus or Paropamisus, (as that part of it was called)
which he passed in 17 days, A. M. 3677. Ol. 113: an. 1. V.C. 426. Alexandri 9.
and built some Cities about it. Bessus had now in Bactria about 8000 of the
Inhabitants up in Arms, who thinking that Alexander would rather turn toward
India than come against them, kept with Bessus, till they plainly perceived
that the King invaded their Country: Then they all betook them to their own
homes, and Bessus with his other followers passed over the River Oxus into the
Country of the Sogdians, being still accompanied with Spitamenes and Oxyartes,
in whose fidelity he confided. Invadeth Bactria.
But Alexander invading Bactria, after he had taken diverse Cities, had the
whole Country yielded to him; after which he passed to the great River Oxus,
but in his way was so distressed for water, that his Army languished; and when
it came at the River, so many drunk intemperately, that he lost more men
thereby than he had formerly done in any Battle. Ere he passed the River, he
sent home 900 Macedonians and Thessalians, the former being old and wounded,
and the later the remnant of the Volunteers: those he rewarded, and gave thanks
to such of the rest that remained as were willing to serve in the Wars yet
behind. He passed over the River upon Skins and Bladders joined together,
wanting materials to make a better Bridge, and came to the place where he heard
Bessus lay with all his Forces. Bessus was now forsaken by his friends, for
Spitamenes conspiring against him with Dataphernes and Catanes, snatched the
Diadem from his head, tore Darius his Roab from off his back, and gave notice
to Alexander, that if he would send any of his Captains with some Forces they
would deliver him up. Alexander sent Ptolomie the son of Lagus, Bessus
delivered up to him.
and one of his Guard, who brought him to his presence in an Halter, whence he
was delivered to Oxyartes the brother of Darius, to be tormented to death in
that place where he had most wickedly slain his Soverain, his Lord and Master.
Curtius l. 7. Strabo l. 11, and 14.


6. About this time he utterly destroyed the City of the Branchidae, with all
its Inhabitants, in revenge for a fault committed 150 years before. For, Xerxes
flying out of Greece, He destroys the Braachidae.
they betrayed the Treasures of Didymaean Apollo into his hands; and for this,
not daring to stay behind, they left Miletus and followed him, who gave them
this place, where their Posterity dearly paid for their fault. After this, he
marched to the River Tanais, (another than that which severeth Europe from
Asia) falling down from the Mountain Caucasus into the Hyrcanian Sea. Here some
of his Soldiers going forth to gather forage, were intercepted by the Enemy,
which to the number of 20 or 30000 betook himself to an Hill, and thence was
beaten down and wasted to 8000, Curtius and Arrianus.
yet with great difficulty, and hazard to the King himself, who received a
wound in his thigh. Comes to Maracanda.
Thence in four days he marched in a Litter to Maracanda, the chief City of
Sogdiana, where leaving a Garrison, he overran the neighboring Territories;
and shortly came an Embassage from the Scythians, called Abii, who thereby gave
up themselves into his power. But in the mean time the Barbarians of Maracanda
slew the Garrison of the Macedonians, being, together with the greatest part of
the Sogdians, drawn back by those that took Bessus, who also drew to their
party some of the Bactrians and Susians. Alexander sent to suppress them
Spitamenes and Catenes, who had delivered up Bessus; but they confirmed them in
their Rebellion, and became Leaders in the Revolt, giving out, that the
Bactrian Horse was sent for by the King on purpose to be made away.

7. To reduce these Revolters, Alexander presently sent Craterus, who besieged
Cyropolis the chief City, so called, because built by Cyrus the Great; and he
himself besieged another called Gaza, which be took, and put all of ripeness
of age to the sword, for a terror to their Countrymen. After this he reduced
several other Cities, and then went to the assistance of Craterus against
Cyropolis, which was defended by 18000 men. Here he lost many a valiant
Soldier, and by a stroke of a stone on his neck was felled down senseless; but
this increased his natural vigor, so that out of indignation he set furiously
on, and presently took the place. Eight thousand of the Inhabitants were slain,
and the rest retiring into the Castle, shortly after yielded for want of water;
and then one City remaining only of seven, whither the Barbarians had fled, he
reduced that also in a short time. Spitamenes now had shut himself up in
Maracanda, where he besieged the Macedonians in the Castle. Against him he sent
a Party, and began to build a City upon the River Tanais, which being raised in
few days, with a wall six miles in compass, he called after himself
Alexandria. Curtius ut supra Justin. l. 12. Arrianus l. 4.
His design was to have a convenient Fortress for the Invasion of Scythia,
which the Scythian King, inhabiting beyond the River, suspecting, sent his
brother with a party of Horse to beat away the Macedonian forces, and demolish
it. Coming to the narrowest place of the River, they not only cast over their
Darts, but opprobrious speeches, which so incensed Alexander, as though he was
extreme ill, and for some time had nor been able as much as to speak to his
Soldiers, yet he resolved to pass over against them.

Marches against the Scythians.
8. With admirable industry he got over his men, partly in Boats, and partly
upon Bladders, notwithstanding the earnest opposition of the Enemy, whom he put
to the Rout, and, though he was very much indisposed in his own person, pursued
them 80 furlongs, then fainting, he commanded his men to follow the chase as
long as the day would permit. The want of water in this place was such, that
the Army was thereby exceedingly distressed, and the King himself drinking of
some that was corrupt, fell into a Diarrhea. But not long after the Scythians
sent to excuse themselves, denying that the War had been undertaken by their
general consent, but only by a certain party that lived upon robbery. Giving
themselves up into his hands, he dismissed the Ambassadors courteously, and
with them the Prisoners he had taken. By this time Spitamenes had cut off the
party sent against him, which Alexander understanding, in three days time
marched 1500 furlongs to Maracanda, whither he had notice that he was returned;
but hearing of the Kings coming, he fled amain, and was pursued for some time,
but to no purpose. Alexander then dividing his forces, overran the Country
which had revolted, CHAP. I
and gave command, that all of ripe age should be put to the sword, for a
terror to others, by which severity fell 120000 of the Inhabitants of Sogdiana.
Leaving Peuc^laus there with 3000 Foot, he departed to Bactra, Comes to Bactra.
(a City so called from the River Bactrus which runs through it, being
otherwise named Zartaspa) where he caused Bessus to be brought to the head of
his Army: Here he made his nose and ears to be cut off, and then sent him to
Ecbaiane to be judged and executed by Sentence of a Council of Medes and
Persians. Bessus punished for his execrable Treason.
Thus Diodorus relates the the story; but Plutarch writes, that by Alexanders
command, the boughs of two Trees being first drawn together, and he made fast
to them both, they then were suffered to return to their natural site, and he
was thereby pulled assunder.

9. Having much increased his forces by the coming in of fresh supplies,
Arrianus.
he once more overran the Country of the Sogdians, as yet not fully subdued,
and the five parts of his Army afterward met and united at Maracanda, whence
he sent Hephaestion to lead out Colonies into the Cities of Sogdiana, as Caenus
and Artabazus against the Scythians, for to them he heard that Spitamenes was
fled, who with a company of Bactrians and Sogdians, and about 800 Horse of the
Massagetes, got a Castle near Bactra into his hands; then came against
Zariaspa, or Bactra, and by an Ambush cut off many of the Defendants in their
Sally out against him. Upon Caenus his approach the Massagetes fled, but he
pursued and killed many of them. Alexander having subdued more of the Sogdians
returned to Maracanda, Curtius lib. 8. cap. 1.
whither the King of the Europaean Scythians inhabiting above Rosphorus, sent
to him, offering him his daughter in marriage; or if this liked him not, he
desired, that the principal Macedonians about him might contract affinity with
his Nation; moreover he offered to come in person and receive his commands.
After this, Alexander hunted in the Forest of Bazaria, which had been
untouched for four Ages. Herein a Lion coming upon him, Lysimachus (who
afterward reigned, and had slain a Lion ere this) went about to stave him off;
Alexander kills a Lion.
but the King forbad him, and receiving the Beast, slew him at one stroke. Four
hundred Beasts more being killed, he feasted his whole Army, and again repaired
to Maracanda, where he slew Clytus.

10. In a Feast (to which he had invited him) being heated with Wine, Idem.
ibid. Arrianus lib. 4. Cicero Tuscul. Quaest. 4.
he fell of commending his own acts, and therein soared so high, as to speak
scornfully of the things performed by his father Philip. Clytus having also
drunk sufficiently was netled with this, and defending Philip, in his replies
plainly reproached Alexander; Kills Clytus.
who therefore ran him through and killed him outright, having a little before
designed him to the Government of Sogdiana in the room of Artabazus, who
excused himself by his old age; For being the son of Dropis, and brother to
Hellanica Alexander's Nurse, he had done good service to both Kings, and was
now an old Soldier. Alexander, when he came to himself, considering what he had
done, would have made way for following him by his own hands, and when he was
hindered by his friends from violent attempts, would have done it by fasting
four days. On the fifth, his attendants brake into his Tent, and comforting
him, caused him to eat. The Macedonians judged Clytus rightfully put to death,
and decreed he should not be buried; but he commanded this last office to be
performed to him. Leaving a good Guard with Canus to defend Sogdiana, and take
Spitamenes if he should come that way in Winter, Comes to Xenippa.
he marched to Xenippa, where, after a sharp Encounter, he received the
Bactrian Exiles, A. M. 3678. Ol. 113. an. 2. V. C: 427. Alexand. 10.
who having revolted had betaken themselves to that place, lying upon the
confines of Scythia. In the Spring following, being the 10th. year of his
Reign, he set upon a Fort in Sogdiana, situate upon a Rock, so strong by Nature
through its excessive height, that the Defendants counted it invincible, (many
having fled thither out of the Country) and upon his summons, Arimazes the
Governor, who held it with thirty thousand armed men, demanded if the
Macedonians could fly? But he proposed large rewards to such as would first
mount it, whereby certain young men being animated, made a shift to climb and
help one another up, and being got to the top, the besieged were amazed, and
thinking their number greater than it was, yielded the place. In this Fort
amongst others was Oxyartes the Satrapa or Governor (who had revolted from
Alexander) with his wife and children. Marieth Roxane.
Of his daughter Roxane the King was so enamoured, as he shortly after married
her, and persuaded the great ones about him to take them wives out of that
place.

11. He thence departed into Naura (or Parataca) where he understood that many
Barbarians had possessed themselves of another Fortress, situate as the
former, and fortified moreover with an exceeding deep ditch. This yielded to
him through the persuasion of Oxyartes, and then with his Horse he cleared the
Country of the revolters. About the same time Spitamenes coming into Sogdiana
was encountered by Coenus, Arrianus. curtius.
who drew from him the naturals of the place, and the Bactrians, so that he had
only left him a Company of Massagetes. Those flying with him into the
Wilderness, when they heard that Alexander pursued them, cut off their
Captains head and sent it to the King, though some write, that his own wife cut
it off, and presented it to Alexander, who detesting the treason, commanded her
to deparr his Camp. After this the Dahae who had revolted by the procurement of
Dataphernes, delivered him up, and returned to obedience, and Craterus with
Polysperchon having finished the War against the revolters in a short time,
they all met at Bactra. Alexander was now so puffed up, as to require divine
honors from his followers; which Callisthenes the Philosopher stiffly refusing
to give him, felt the effect of his ambition.

12. It happened that the King hunting on a time, one Hermolaus a Gentleman of
his guard, and Scholar to Callisthenes, killed a wild Boar, which Alexander
himself intended to have struck, for which he was beaten by his Command. The
young man bearing the disgrace most heavily, as also Sostratus his inward
friend, they conspired with others of the Guard to kill the King, Curtius ut
supra. Plutarch in Alexand. Orosius lib. 3. cap. 18. Arrianus lib. 4.
which to perform, they agreed that one night they would all watch together. It
was long ere they could so change their courses as to bring this about, but at
length having done it, it chanced that the King sat up drinking all that
night, so then the matter being frustrated, was revealed by one of them, and
they were all stoned to death. Now whether any of them accused Callisthenes, as
some reported, or Alexander did it himself, he was made away, though as to the
manner of his death, they who were present themselves agreed not in their
relation. Callisthenes put to death with others for treason.
Callisthenes was the Scholar of Aristotle, and the son of his Cousin germane,
of so severe a temper, that he could not order himself according to his
Master's directions, who when he sent him to Alexander, advised him, Either
very pleasantly or very rarely to converse with him, Valor. Max. lib. 7. cap. 2.
that so he might be either more acceptable for his discourse, or safe by his
silence. Aristotle also himself seems to have been threatened in a letter
written by the King to Antipater in Macedonia.

13. Alexander had ere this time resolved to make War upon India, and bound his
Conquests with the East. That he might not leave any impediment at his back, he
commanded 30000 men to be raised out of the Provinces, that he might have them
both as Soldiers and Hostages. Out of a conceit of the glory of the Expedition,
he adorned the shields of his Soldiers with silver plates, their Horses with
golden bridels, and their Armor was set out with gold and silver. Alexander
marches for India.
Leaving then Amyntas in Bactriana with 3500 Horse, and 10000 Foot, he set
forwards in the Spring, leading an Army of 120000 men. In ten days he passed
over Caucasus and came to Alexandria, which he had caused to be built in the
Country of the Parapomisadae, whence he marched to the River Cophenes, and sent
to Taxiles to meet him, who came with such presents as India afforded. Dividing
now his Army, with one part of it he sent Haephestion and Perdiccas another
way, with command, that when they came at the River Indus, they should provide
things necessary for passing over it. He with the other invaded the Aspians,
Thyraeans, and Arasacans; and crossing the River Choe, the first City he came
at opposed him. He himself and Ptolomy the son of Lagus were wounded in the
storm, but he took the place, and putting all the Inhabitants to the sword,
burnt it. In the Country of the Aspians he got a booty of 40000 men, and 230000
head of cattle, whence marching toward the Gruraeans, Curtius. Justin lib. 12.
with difficulty he passed over the River Gruraeus. Invading the Assacenians he
took the City Massaga, the King whereof being lately dead, his mother Cleophis
reigned, and by the prostitution of her body to Alexander, procured a
confirmation in the Kingdom.

14. After this, he took Bazira, and Nora was forsaken by it is defendants, who
betook themselves to a strong rock called Aornos. This place was exceedingly
fenced by it is wonderful height, and the River Indus which ran by one side of
it; as also by deep pits and craggie rocks, by reason whereof the report went,
that Hercules himself attempted, but could not take it. The story of Hercules
inflamed the King with a desire to master it, who having first taken several
other places, brought his forces, and by means of an old man who showed him the
only passage, closely besieged it. By incredible diligence he filled up the
ditches, so as he could bring his men to fight, but yet he was not able to
storm the Rock, and therefore resolved to starve them out, leaving a way for
their escape; and they seeing his resolution, took the advantage, but many were
slain in the persute. Taking order then for the full clearing of the Country,
he passed on to the River Indus, near to which he hunted Elephants, and
continuing in the plains thirty days for the refreshment of his Army,
sacrificed to his gods, and celebrated games and exercises. Now Hephaestion and
Perdiccas had finished all things necessary for passing the River; and not of
this only, but others also with one (almost) and the same labor. For, diverse
Rivers running through India (as besides Cophenes, Coes, and Indus; Hydaspes,
Acesines, Hyarotis, Hyparus, and Ganges,) they so framed the boats, as they
might easily be taken in pieces, and being conveied in cariages, be as easily,
upon occasion, again joined together.

15. In the eleventh year of his reign, and the fourth after the death of
Darius, Crosses the River Indus
in the Spring, Alexander passed over the River Indus, and was received above
his expectations. For, Omphis, or Mophis, A. M. 3679. Ol. 113. an. 3. V. C.
428. Alexand. 11.
King of the Country, had persuaded his Father when yet living to submit
himself, and now having suceeded in the Kingdom met him in the way, and gave it
up into his hands, who restored it to him, and permitted him to assume the name
of Taxiles, common to all Kings of that Country, of what family soever. Coming
to Taxila the Metropolis, he was sumptuously entertained, and receiving great
gifts, gave also very liberally, to the disdain of those about him, of whom
Meleager in his cups congratulated with him, that at length in India he had
found a man worthy to receive from him in way of free gift 1000 Talents.
Alexander remembering how he had repented the killing of Clytus, contained
himself, but not impertinently answered him, that Envious men are nothing else
than their own torment: The next day Abisarus King of the Indians inhabiting
the mountains, and who together with Porus had wars with Taxiles, by
Ambassadors gave up himself and Kingdom. Alexander leaving a Garrison in
Taxila, marched toward the River Hydaspes, beyond which reigned Porus:
Thinking by the terror of his name to affright this Prince into obedience, he
sent to him beforehand, willing him to pay tribute, and meet him on the
frontires of his Kingdom, to which he answered, that he would do the later
only, and that armed. Near unto Porus reigned another of his name, and his
Nephew, who out of hatred to him, sent Ambassadors, and gave up all he had into
the hands of Alexander.

16. Curtius ut prius. Diodorus. Arrianus l. 4. Orosius l. 3. c. 19. and
Plutarch in Alexand.
The boats formerly spoken of being conveyed from Indus to the River Hydaspes,
Alexander with Taxiles, several other great persons of the Country, and 5000
Indians more came thither: Barsaentes the Governor of the Drangae being
presented to him in his way, whom he afterward put to death for his treason
toward Darius. On the opposite bank of the River lay Porus with an Army very
great indeed, though the dissension of Writers about the numbers almost
equalize the bigness of it. He had his Elephants ready to affright the Horses,
and keep the Army from landing, which Alexander perceiving, made as if he
intended to pass the River at the place over against which Porus stood, And
Hydaspes.
leaving some there to make a noise, as if he still remained, and in a dark and
rainie night got into a little woody Island, which lay lower down the River,
whence in the morning, though with much difficulty (through the rising of the
water by abundance of rain) recovered the further bank, where he defeated a
Party led by Porus his Son, who by some is said in this engagement to have lost
his life. Porus, understanding this, drew down his battle in the form of a
City, whereof the Elephants, being many in number, were as walls. They
grievously distressed the Macedonians for some time, and the Indians
continually retired to them as a bulwark; but at length being driven up close
together, they made great slaughter of the Indians themselves, whom Alexander
also encompassing with his men did great execution upon them. Porus himself, a
person terrible to encounter (his height, as is said, being five cubits, and
his breadth such as his Armor extended it to the proportion of two lusty men)
fought himself most valiantly, and encountering Alexander hand to hand, slew
his Horse under him, so that he was saved merely by the interposition of his
Guard, many of his men having fallen at his side.

17. Porus gave not over as long as he had any to stand to him; when all had
left him, he retreated on his Elephant most stately to behold. As many of the
Indians were slain in the chase as had been in the battle, by reason that
Craterus and others, who had been left behind, came over afresh to the persute.
Alexander having a great desire to save their King, out of respect to his great
valor, sent after him Taxiles the Indian, whom perceiving to come toward him,
he ran at him with his lance as his ancient Enemy. But others being still sent,
and amongst the rest Meroes an Indian, Porus hearing his voice, and being sore
distressed by thirst, stood still, and then alighted from his Elephant.
Alexander coming on spoke to him first, and asked him what the thing was which
he desired, to whom he ansvvered, that he might be used like a King. The other
replied, that this should be done for his own sake, Overthrows and takes
Porus.
and bad him ask for his own commodity what he pleased, to which he made
answer, that all things were contained in his former demand. With this the
Conqueror was so well pleased, that he received him into the number of his
friends, and restored to him his Kingdom, enlarged with new Territories.
Alexander hoping that by his late Victory all India was laid open to him,
intended to sail into the Ocean; and perceiving there was in this place much
wood, he caused such a quantity to be cut down, as might suffice for the
building of ships. He gave order also for the building of two Cities: one in
the place where the battle was fought, which he called Nice, and another on the
other side of the River, named after his Horse Bucephalus, who here died, being
about thirty years old.

18. Leaving Craterus to perfect these Cities upon the River Hydaspes, he
marched into the Country adjoining to that of Porus, Curtius lib. 9. cap. 1.
which having subdued he bestowed on him, and also the Kingdom of the younger
Porus, who out of fear of his Uncle had now fled, with as many as he could draw
after him to the Gangaridae. After this he subued several Nations beyond the
River Hydraotes, and invaded the Cuthaeans, who together with the Ocydracae and
Malli opposed him, of whom in the siege and storming of the City Sangala
perished 17000, and about 70000 were taken Captives. These Cuthaeans had a
Custom, that when any man died, his wife was to be buried with him, to which
the wickedness of one woman that poisoned her husband gave occasion. The City
Sangala was destroyed, and their Lands given to certain Indians, who lived in
the form of a Commonwealth, and had formerly given themselves up into the hands
of the Conqueror. This severity made other Cities without any resistance
surrender themselves. Sopithes yields.
Then advanced he into the Kingdom of Sopithes, who meeting him with his two
Sons, with a Rod of Gold adorned with precious Sons, delivered up into his
hands himself, his children, Kingdom, and all he had. Having received back his
Kingdom, Aelian Hist. animal. l. 8. c. 1.
he magnificently entertained Alexander and his whole Army. Amongst several
other presents, he gave him 150 Dogs begotten of Tigers, as is reported, and of
strength and activity, as appeared by four of them which were let out upon a
Lion extraordinary for strength and bigness.

19. Ere Alexander stirred from this place, Curtius lib. 9. Diodorus. Arrianus.
Hephaestion returned to him from his expedition, (having subdued India in a
great compass that way he was sent) whom he received with honor suitable to
his worth. Afterward he departed into the Kingdom of Phegeus (or Phegelus) who
also submitted himself, and receiving the Conqueror, entertained him very
magnificently. After two days he marched toward the River Hyphasis (or Hyparis)
taking Phegeus and Porus along with him. The River Hyphasis the Eastern limit
of his Expedition.
At the River side he enquired of Phegeus what Countries lay beyond it? He
answered, That there was a vast Wilderness of 11 or 12 days journey, and next
to that ran the River Ganges, beyond which inhabited, besides others, the
Gangaridae, over whom reigned Agyrammes (or Xandrames) provided of 20000 Horse,
200000 Foot, above 2000 Chariots, and about 4000 Elephants. These things
seeming incredible to the Macedonians, he asked Porus of the truth of them, who
confirmed what the other had said as to the strength of that King, but withal
added, That being by a Barber begotten on the Queen, who had killed her Husband
that he might reign, he was for this cause despised by his People. Alexander
now considered the labors and perils undergone by his Soldiers, who from the
beginning of his reign had followed him eight years; withal, how of late for
70 days together they had been sorely distressed by Rain, Thunder, and
Lightning; that he might oblige them, he gave them the plunder of the enemies
Country, being very rich, and in their absence gratified their wives and
children. Then after their return to the Camp, with a praemeditated Oration he
labored to persuade them to undertake the War with him against the Gandaridae,
but in vain.

20. For, Caenus the son of Polycrates, answered him in such a manner, as he
might easily perceive how contrary the affections of the Soldiers were to the
Expedition. After which, as Arrianus writes, he kept himself close in his
Pavillion for three days, and would admit none of his friends to his presence.
Then sending for his Officers, he told them, That seeing the minds of his men
were averse from proceeding any further, he intended to return home; yet, ere
this, he had sacrifized for passing over the River, but finding that the
Intrals of the Beast were not lucky, he settled himself in a purpose to retreat.
He caused twelve large Altars of fifty cubits height, like to some warlike
Towers, to be erected near the River, whereon he sacrifized according to the
custom of his Country, and he celebrated Games in the grounds adjoining. After
this he caused to be made a Ditch 15 foot broad and 10 foot deep, whereon, of
the earth, he raised a considerable Wall, making the compass of his Camp seem
three fold larger than indeed it was. He commanded the Foot, that each one in
his Tent should get two Bedsteads of five cubits apiece, and the Horsemen to
make theirs with the Mangers of their Horses as big again as they were wont to
be. He caused Arms, Bridles, and other things to be framed after the same
proportion, to amuse posterity with a false appearance of a Gigantick
proportion of his own person and his followers.

He retreateth.
21. He returned the same way he came, settling the Government of the Provinces
in his passage, till he arrived at the River Hydaspes. Ever since his departure
hence, the weather had been rainy, which spoiled much of his new City
Bucephalaea; but he caused it to be repaired; and here died Caenus his trusty
and faithful friend, but one who had grieved him by his Answer to his late
Oration. Down this River Hydaspes he resolved, according to his former purpose,
to sail into the Southern Ocean, and therefore providing for such places as he
should leave, he reconciled Porus and Taxiles by affinity contracted betwixt
them, and made the former, King, not of that Country only lying betwixt
Acesines and Hydaspes, which formerly he had given to him, but also of such
free Nations, as lying betwixt Acesines and Hyphasis he had lately subdued.
Having increased his Army by a new supply sent him out of the West, he divided
it into three parts, whereof two he committed to Craterus and Hephaestion,
commanding them to march on either side the River, He saileth down the River
Hydaspes.
down which he sailed with the third in a Fleet of 1000 Vessels. Loosing from
shore about the beginning of November, he first landed upon the coasts of the
Sibari, who being reported to be descended of those Greeks that with Hercules
attempted the storming of the Rock Aornos, claimed kindred of him, and
submitted themselves. Making excursions into the neighbor Countries, he
destroyed many thousands of the Inhabitants that would not yield; and then
returning aboard, hasted against the Oxydracae and Malli, who, as he heard, had
carried their wives into their strong Towns, and intended resistance.

22. Coming down thither where Hydaspes and Acesines meet, the Chanel being
narrow, and the Stream exceeding great, two of his tallest Ships miscarried,
and he himself missed narrowly of being Shipwrack'd: Curtius and Diodorus ut
prius. Arrianus lib. 6. Plutarch ut supra, and Orosius.
Here his Soldiers also began to murmur that they should begin a new War, but
he quieted them easily by a Speech. The Indians having gathered together 80000
Foot and 10000 Horse, showed themselves near the River, having chosen their
General out of the Oxydracae, who made many fires, and used other vain attempts
to affright the Macedonians; yet as soon as these began to Arm, either out of
fear, or by reason of dissension amongst themselves, away they fled to the
craggy Mountains. He fights against the Malli and Oxydracae.
Alexander then marched with all speed, through a large, dry, and barren
Country, against the Malli, to defeat them ere they should join with the other;
and coming unexpectedly upon them, many he slew, both in the Country, and those
strong places which he stormed. After this he marched to the River Hydraotes,
where he killed many of them, and thence to a City of the Brachmans, whither he
heard that some of them had fled: This he took, with the Castle into which they
retired, as also the chiefest City of the Malli, whence they fled beyond the
River Hydraotes, on the bank whereof they drew up into a Battalia. He followed,
and with his Horse skirmished a little, not thinking it fit to engage with them
in Battle, being 50000 in number, till the Foot came up. Then they betook
themselves to the next fortified Town, where by his hardiness he ran into
extreme danger.

23. Demophoon his Priest acquainted him, how that by his art great danger was
portented to his person, and therefore he advised him, either to omit, or at
least to defer the siege. But he rebuked the man, because hereby he weakened the
valor of his Soldiers, and dividing them into two parts, set upon the Town,
whereat the Defendants left it and fled into the Castle. The King with those
about him broke open a Gate, and entered first; Then he commanded Ladders to be
set to the Castle wall, which being but slowly performed, he took one from a
Macedonian, and rearing it mounted himself: after him went up Peucestes, who
bore usually his Shield before him, (which being taken out of the Temple of
Pallas at Ilium, he would always have so carried) and after him Leonatus by the
same Ladder, and one Abreas by another. The Argyraspides also, (or those who
used the sivered Shields) sollicitous for the Kings safety, mounting hastily
broke the Ladders, and thereby hindered others as well as themselves. The King
upon the Wall was laid at with Darts on every side, and when his left arm was
wearied with holding his Target, his friends would have had him leap down again
unto them, who were ready to receive him in their arms. But by an unparalled
attempt he leaped down on the other side into the Fort, where if he had not by
good chance light upon his feet, he might presently have been slain or taken.
But casting himself to fall upon them, and seeing a Tree hard by, he applied
himself to it, so as he had it on his right hand, and the wall on his left.

24. None of his enemies were so hardy as to come near him, only they plied it
with Darts afar off, whereof the greatest part being kept off by the boughs
and leaves of the Tree, the rest he received on his Target. But the Indians
drawing nearer, Casts himself into extreme danger.
threw showers of Darts upon him, and with stones broke his Helmet. Being
spent, and not longer able to stand, he fell upon his knees, whereupon
despising him they came to him; and yet he so received them with his sword, as
two fell down dead before him, and after this he killed their General who
boldly set upon him; then none would venture to approach nearer, but plied it
with Darts afar off. By this time those three that mounted the wall after him
were got down, and fought stoutly for him, of whom Abreas was shot in the face
and fell; the King also in the breast with an Arrow, which piercing through his
Armor near his Pap, some affirmed, that blood and breath issued together out of
the wound, and he swooned, being covered by Peucestes with his shield. Now the
Macedonians brake into the Castle, and put all to the sword, sparing neither
Sex nor Age. They carried their King out on a Target, not knowing whether he
was alive or dead; but shortly after he came to himself, and his wound was
dressed, (some say by Critobulus the Physician, others by Perdiccas) out of
which much blood issuing, he swooned again, and that very thing staunched the
bleeding. While he stayed a little in this place, a report flew to the Army
then lying with the Fleet at the meeting of the two Rivers Hydraotes and
Acesines, that he was dead, and it gained such belief, that the Letters he sent
were taken but as counterfeit. Therefore he hasted to the Camp, where he
presented himself to the view of them all there.

25. Having escaped this great danger amongst the Malli, (for amongst them it
was, and not amongst the Oxydracae as some have mistaken.) and returned to his
Fleet, he sailed down the River, and on the fourth day came to a place forsaken
of its Inhabitants, but convenient for to make some stay in. Here he rested
many days for the better curing of his wounds, and employed his men this while
in building of ships. Hither the Malli and Oxydracae sent to ask pardon, and
submit themselves. After which he sailed further, and came to the confluence of
Hydraotes and Acesines, the former whereof loses it self in the later.
Proceeding further, he came through Acesines into Indus, subduing a certain
People in his way who lived in a Free State; Saileth into Indus.
and here he made Philip Governor of the Malli and Oxydracae, with all the
Country down to this place, wherein he also gave order for a City to be built.
Following on his voyage, he arrived at the Country of the Sanbestae, (or
Sabracae) who living also in a popular way of Government, were very populous
and strong, and hearing of his coming had got together 60000 Foot, and near
8000 Horse, but upon a sight of his Fleet they let fall their courage, and sent
fifty of their principal men to ask peace. From this place on the fourth day he
came to the seat of the Sogdae, who also yielded themselves; and here by the
River Indus he caused to be built another Alexandria, Upon which he builds an
Alexandria, and subdueth Musicanus,
which he furnished with convenient Havens and Arsenals. Thence he sailed down
with such expedition into the Country of Musicanus, that he was upon him ere he
heard of his coming; therefore the Indian met him with such gifts as his
Country afforded, and gave up himself with all he had into his hands,
acknowledging his fault that he had no sooner done it.

26. Having here commanded Teryestes, whom he had set over the Paropamisadae,
to be put to death, for abusing that People by a covetous and tyrannical
Government, he caused a Fort to be raised in the chief City of Musicanus,
wherein he left a Garrison, because the place seemed very convenient for
keeping the neighboring Nations in obedience. Leaving Musicanus in his former
power, though not authority, he sailed down to the Praesti, another Indian
Nation, over which ruled Oxycanus. Here he stormed two Cities, in one whereof
their King being retired into the Castle, sent to him to beg pardon, but too
late; for ere the Messengers could come at Alexander, two Towers fell down,
which made way for the Macedonians, who entering, and Oxycanus.
killed Oxycanus amongst the rest; which being reported to the other Cities,
they all yielded themselves. After this he came into the borders of the
Brachmans, whose King Sabus (or Sambus) caused the Gates of his principal City
to be opened, but afterward revolted at the instigation of his Subjects, some
of whom paid dearly for it in a certain City wherein they were taken, Sambus
himself with thirty Elephants escaping. Some of them were upon pain of death to
answer to certain hard Questions, which having done, they were dismissed with
rewards, as Plutarch informs us. But ere this, Musicanus had revolted,
against whom Pithon was sent, who overpowering him took him prisoner. He was
Crucified in his own Country by Alexander's Command, with all such Brachmans
as had drawn him to revolt.

27. Returning to the River Indus, in the fourth day he came to a City of the
Brachmans, called Hamatelia, the inhabitants whereof hearing that he was
invincible, poisoned the heads, of their Arrows, trusting to their own valor,
and the natural strength of the place. He sent a party, which by approaching
their Walls, and then retreating, drew them forth, by which stratagem, of 3000
he took 1000. and killed 600. Many of his own men died, and those who survived
were brought into extreme danger, amongst whom was Ptolomy the son of Lagus. He
being almost ready to die, the story goes, that Alexander in a Dream had an
Herb showed to him, which drunk, and outwardly applied, helped against the
poison; the truth being, Strabo lib. 15.
that the virtue of this plant was by some declared to him, and this story
feigned out of flattery. For all this, the besieged yielding, had indemnity
granted to them, and then came Maeris King of the Island Pattalena, which he
gave up into the Conquerours power. Alexander restored, and sent him back,
commanding him to provide all necessaries for his Army; but sailing down
thither he found that he had left the City, and retired to the Mountains, with
all his subjects, both of Town and Country. Alexander sent some hors-men to
persuade them to return, which accordingly diverse did. Then did he order
Hephaestion to build a Fort in the City, and sent a party to dig Wells in that
Coast of the Country which wanted water. The Enemy fell upon these men out of
the Wilderness, and killed many of them, which forced the King to send others
for a supply. He sayleth to the Island Pattalena.
Now had he sailed almost 10 months when he came to Pattalena.

28. At this Island the River Indus parts into two branches, whereof both
retained the name as far as the Sea it self. Alexander taking the right hand
sailed down that Channel, his Army being led according to the custom, near the
Rivers side. The next day arose such a Tempest, as exceedingly distressed the
Fleet, some ships being driven so far as scarcely could they be recovered;
whereupon for some time the King stayed here at a ceatain Island, and sent men
on shore to take up some Natives to be their Guides. Coming lower, where the
Chanel was very broad, another Tempest forced them into a certain Creek, where
as great a fear seized on them, and so much the greater, because they were
unacquainted with the occasion of it. It happened, that the Tide being exceeding
high (as it is at this day at Cambaia, Is distressed upon the water.
where the River Indus falls into the Sea) all the grounds near the River were
overflown, except certain Hills, which appearing like so many Islands to them,
the Macedonians swom, and left their Boats. When the water fell again, the
Vessels were left on the dry ground, some being overwhelmed, and others turned
upon their sides. But the River according to the course of the Tide overflowing
again at the due time, such Vessels as stuck fast in the Mud were lifted up
unhurt, but those that the water found otherwise placed, were either dashed
against one another, or miscarried after some other fashion.

29. Repairing his Navy, as he could, he sent before two Boats to make
discovery of another Island below, by the Indians called Cilluta, but by him
Scillastis, near which he must needs sail down into the Ocean. Hearing that it
was large, and very Commodious to harbor in, he gave order for the Fleet to go
thither, but he himself proceeded further, to search whether there was easy
passage at the River's fall for the whole Navy into the Sea. Having passed some
200 furlongs, he discovered another Island, and then returned to the Fleet,
where having sacrifized to some gods, he went back, and performed this service
to others after another fashion, saying, he was commanded so to do by the
Oracle of Jupiter Hammon. Sailing out of Indus into the Ocean, he sacrifized
Bulls to Neptune, and after the burning of Incense cast out a Golden Vial with
Golden Cups into the Sea, Passes into the Ocean.
praying for a prosperous voyage to his Navy, (which he intended under command
of Nearchus his Admiral should sail through the Ocean into the Persian Gulf,
and so up Euphrates and Tigris) and that no mortal after him might pass the
bounds of his expedition. Then returned he up the River to Pattala, whither he
found Pithon come with the Forces, purposing to leave half the Fleet at the
City (to this day called Pattala in Cambaia) he commanded Hephaestion there to
make an Haven, and provision for shipping. He himself sailed down the stream on
the left hand, which first lead him to a Lake, where he left Leonnatus with
most of the Soldiers, and with 30 ships passed through this Mouth of Indus into
the Ocean.

30. His design was to see whether the Fleet might not best sail this way into
the Sea; and he satisfied himself that it might. Then did he Travel up the
shore, and caused Wells to be dug thereon to furnish the Navy with water.
Returning then to Pattala, he sent part of his Army to dig more, and going to
the Lake, he caused Havens to be made, and provision for shipping: he also left
there a Garrison with necessaries for 8 months. At this time the Etesian
winds in this Country blowing from the South (though in other places from
other quarters) hindered Navigation, wherefore he was constrained to leave
Nearchus at Pattala with the Fleet till they should cease. He journeyed through
the Country of the Arabitae (or Arbitae) to the River Arabius (or Arbis)
digging pits on the shore for the use of the Fleet in its passage by these
Coasts, Nearchus the Admiral sayleth the Ocean.
Nearchus and his followers were two months after Alexander's departure driven
out by the Inhabitants of Pattalena, and compelled to begin their Voyage ere
the season of the year well served. Coming to the mouth of the River, they were
forced to cut through a Rock (for some way) such a Ditch as by the help of the
Tide might convey their ships safe into the Ocean. The Arabitae hearing of
Alexander's approach, fled into the Mountains, so that without opposition he
passed over the River Arabius, and came into the Country of the Oritae, of
whom killing some, and taking others, (because they had not submitted
themselves) he thence marched into the Borders of the Gedrosians, with whom the
Oritae had joined, but upon his approach sent and begged peace, which he
granted, on condition that they would depart to their dwellings. He set over
them Apellophanes with whom he left Leonnatus one of the keepers of his body,
with a party of horse and foot to expect the coming of the Fleet, and in the
mean while to build a new City, and settle the affairs of the Country.

31. In his passage through the Country of the Gedrosians, great loss and
damage happened to him than in all his expedition through Asia besides; because,
what for want of water, by excess of heat, ill diet and hunger, he carried not
out the fourth part of those forces he brought into India. Alexander passes
the Country of the Gedrosians with incredible difficulty.
Yet was not this loss sustained through ignorance; for some tell us that he
knew of the danger very well; but hearing that this Country had been formerly
invaded both by Semiramis and Cyrus, whereof the former was forced to fly but
with 30 Attendants, and the later with 7. he had an itching desire to pass
through it, and in the glory of his adventure to excel them. After incredible
trouble undergone, for 60 days, he came to Pura the chief City, where (as it
was time) he refreshed his Army, and thence marched toward the Borders of
Caramania. Hither news came that Philip, Governor of the Oxydracae, and of
other Indians, was killed by the Mercenary Soldiers; but that his death was
revenged upon them by the Macedonians; vvhereupon he vvrote to Taxiles and
Eudemus to take care of the Country, till such time as he could send one to
succeed Philip. Coming into Caramania not far from Persia, he animadverted upon
the Governor, as upon Cleander and Sitalces, who being sent to kill Parmenio,
had after his death committed grievous outrages upon the people in those parts.
He also punished Ozines and Zariaspes, who had solicited the Persians to
revolt, and Heracon, who had rifled the Temple at Susa: here also he made
Peucestes one of the keepers of his body, they being before this seven in
number. In the mean time Nearchus having passed the borders of the Arabii,
Oritae, Gedrosians, Ichthyophagi, came into the Persian Gulf, and arrived at
Armusia (now called Ormus) where understanding that his Master was but distant
five days journey, he went to him, and having made a report of his Voyage,
returned presently to the Fleet, with order to pass up to the mouth of
Euphrates, and thence row unto Babylon.

32. It beng now very good sailing, Alexander sent Haephaestion by Sea into
Persia, He comes to Pasargadae in Persia.
with the greatest part of his Army, and shortly after departed himself and
came by Land to Pasargadae, where he bestowed money on the women, according to
the custom of the Persian Kings when they came thither. Here he much lamented
the violation of Cyrus his Sepulcher, which since his former being here, had
been robbed of all it is riches, except a Litter, Curtius lib. 10. Diodorus,
etc. A. M. 3680. Ol. 113. an. 4. V.C. 429. Alexand. 12.
and a golden Urn wherein was the body; and this also was cut and mangled, the
cover being taken away, and the body cast out. He commanded the Urn to be
repaired as well as might be, and the relics of Cyrus being therein
deposited, To Persepolis.
the dore-place to be walled up. From Pasargadae, now called Chelquera, he came
to Persepolis, the seat of the Persian Kings, where great complaints being made
against Orxines (who being descended from Cyrus and the seven Conspirators, had
contained the Persians in obedience after the death of the Governor
Phrasortes) he was crucified through the malice of Bagoas the Eunuch,
Alexander's minion, who hated him, upon no other account, than for that
bestowing great gifts upon the Courtiers at their return, he neglected him.
Phradates also, who had been Governor of the Mardi, Hyrcanians, and Tapyri,
was here put to death, for affecting Kingly power. But, Peucestes who protected
the King among the Malli, and as a reward had been received amongst the Keepers
of his body, was now further made Governor of Persia, and thereupon fully
conformed himself to the fashions of the Country.

33. Alexander had a great desire to sail through Euphrates and Tigris into the
Persian Gulf, to compass about Arabia and Africa, Arrianus lib. 7.
and so to pass through the Straights leading into the Mediterranean (now
called the Straights of Gibraltar) for which purpose he commanded wood to be
cut down in Libanus, to be catied to Thapsacus in Syria, and being made into
ships, thence to be conveyed to Babylon. Not long after, Nearchus brought the
fleet up Pasitigris to a bridge newly made for the passing over of the
Land-army, where for the meeting of both the Armies, after six months sail,
Alexander sacrifized, and celebrated games. Thence marching to Susae: the
Provinces by their Deputies there accused many of their Officers, besides other
offenses, of violating their Temples. He caused them all to be put to death,
without respect to any former friendship, and with them Cleander, Sitalces, and
Heracon, whom he had formerly condemned in Caramania. This severity noised
abroad, netled many that knew themselves faulty; Some scraped together much
money and fled, and others that commanded the mercenaries revolted, which
caused him to send up and down Asia to disband the Stipendaries, who being thus
put out of employment, robbed all over, and at length met at Tenarus, a
Promontory of Laconia in Greece, whither many of their Captains fled to them.
Alexander now married Statira the daughter of Darius, and gave her younger
sister Drypetis to his beloved Hephaestion, He marieth Statira the daughter of
Darius.
having a great desire that his children might be cousins to him. To some 80
more of his Commanders he gave wives of the daughters of the chiefest Medes and
Persians, to which he assigned dowers. He made one great wedding-feast for
himself and them all: and to the other Macedonians that had married wives in
Asia he gave gifts.

34. Moreover he paid the debts they had contracted in Asia, and because they
were unwilling by giving up their names to let him see how bad husbands they
had been (for they suspected him of such an intention) he caused the money to be
given them, without taking account to whom, and this expense reached not fully
10000 talents (as appears from Diodorus, Curtius, and Plutarch; though Justin
and Arrianus mention 20000) so that as Curtius observes, this Army which had
conquered so many Nations, brought more victory than booty out of Asia. He also
rewarded them severally, as they had done him most eminent service; and to
Pencestes, Leonnatus, Nearchus, Onesic^atus, Hephaestion, and other keepers of
his body, he gave golden crowns. But this did not satisfy the Macedonians, so
as to keep them from mutinying. For, having sailed the River Eulaeus to the
Sea, thence to the mouth of Tigris, and up this River as far as Opis, he there
calling them together, gave liberty to all who were rendered unfit for service,
either through age or maimednesse, to return home, promising great rewards to
such as would voluntarily stay and finish the War with him. Though he intended
hereby to gratify them, yet they made a bad construction of it, as proceeding
from contempt of them and their service, as counting them unfit for War. They
called also to mind how he used the Persian habit and customs, as did some of
his favorites; The Macedonians mutiny,
that the barbarous Nations were admitted amongst that Troop called his
friends; and that he had lately caused 30 odd young men to be picked up out of
the Provinces, whom trained up in the discipline of Macedonia, he called
Epigoni, or his posterity. Considering these things, and thinking that he now
despised their persons, fashions, and Country, they all desired to be
disbanded, and bade him go alone to the Wars with his father Hammon, seeing he
set so light by his Soldiers.

35. The King enraged, presently caused thirteen of the ringleaders to be
apprehended, and drowned in the River; and reviling the rest bade them all be
gone home. Then entering his Palace, for that day and the next he would admit
none to his presence. On the third, having confined the Macedonians to their
tents, he called such strangers to him as followed his Camp. Their
faithfulness to him and the former Kings he commended, he related what favors
he had showed them, and told them he now took them as fellow Citizens, gave
them the Arms of the Macedonians, and would have the Kingdom of Europe and that
of Asia the same thing. Out of them he chose 1000 young men, to whom he
committed the charge of his person in the Court; he bestowed the commands of
the Army amongst them, and made choice of some, whom naming his kinsfolk, he
permitted to kiss him. These things cut the Macedonians to the heart, and made
them seriously repent of their rashness. Coming to the Palace, they threw down
their Arms at the gate, But having humbled themselves he is reconciled.
and with great lamentation desired to be admitted, offering to give up the
incendiaries, and desiring him rather to kill than thus disgrace them. He
refused to admit them, but they continued still two days and as many nights
before the gates, professing that they would not depart till he had compassion
on them. On the third day, perceiving them thus humbled, he came forth to them,
and Callines after mutual weeping, told him, that it troubled them to know
others received into his kindred, and themselves excluded from it. He answered,
that he received them also, and so would call them thenceforth; then he offered
himself to be kissed by as many as would. Being thus received again into
favor, they returned with great joy to their tents, and afterward were
feasted by him, together with Persians and others, to the number of 9000 guests.

36. He dismissed now such as were unserviceable for the Wars (though some say
it was not till a little before his death) to whom he paid not only their
arrears, but gave them money to bear their charges, and a talent to every man
besides. He sent home with them Craterus his beloved friend to govern Greece
and Macedonia in the room of Antipater, who was to bring over a supply of men.
Then made he a progress through several places, and came to Ecbatane the chief
seat of Media, He comes to Ecbatane in Media, where Hephaestion dies.
where Hephaestion by drinking got a Fever, and then impatient of a strict
diet, died of it in seven days. In the absence of Glaucus his Physician (who
was gone to the Theater to behold the sports) he eat his dinner, and after it
drank a cup of cold wine, which, as it was thought, increased the distemper.
Alexander took his death most heavily, fasted three days, and refused to be
comforted. He commanded the Physician to be crucified, bespoke an universal
mourning, wherein the Cities shared by the removal of their ornaments from the
walls. He ordered Perdiccas to convey the body to Babylon, where he intended
him a most sumptuous monument, and refused to fill up his place of Captain of
his Thousand friends, lest his name should be forgotten, by which he would have
the Company still called. Then, for diversion, he made War upon the Cossai, a
People bordering on the Oxii, which having stood out against the Persians,
despised him also, in respect of their valor, and the strength of their
Country, situate upon the mountains of Media. Yet for all this, and the
coldness of Winter, he brought them under within 40 days.

37. Having a great desire to sail the Caspian Sea, he sent Heraclides with
diverse Ship-carpenters into Hyrcania to build ships, and then he took his
journey toward Babylon. Being distant from the City two or three days journey,
the Chaldaeans sent to warn him that he should not come into the City, for they
were told by their god Belus, that, if he did, it should be fatal to him. He
intended to follow their advise; but being persuaded otherwise by Anaxarchus
and other Graecians, at length he resolved on the contrary. Then they desired
him that he would not enter with his face upon the West; He comes to Babylon,
but it being difficult not so to do, by reason of the Fens about the City,
having slighted their former advice, he also rejected this. Being arrived, he
gave audience to Ambassadors sent to him now from all parts, not only out of
Asia, but from Africa and Europe also; Out of Africa, A. M. 3681. Ol. 114. an.
1. Urbis conditae 430. Alexand. 13.
from the Nations situate upon the Seacoasts as far as the Atlantic Ocean:
from Europe, besides the Graecians, Thracians, Illyrians, and Scythians, from
some Nations of Italy, as the Brutii, Lucani, Tusci; from Sicilie, and
Sardinia; as also from the Spaniards and Galls, then first known to the
Macedonians; but as for the Romans, though some ranked them in the number, yet
have we no reason to give credit to their report. At the celebration of the
Olympic games, he caused it to be proclaimed, that all Greek Exiles might
return home, except such as were banished for Sacrilege or murder, against
which the Athenians and Aetolians only made resistance. Then celebrated he the
funerals of Hephaestion with vast magnificence, and sacrificed to him as an
Hero. After this he made great preparations for shipping, intending also to
invade and conquer Arabia, which, hearing that it was no less than India, he
sent some to discover.

38. While these preparations were making, and an Haven in digging at Babylon,
he passed through Euphrates into Pallocopa, a River, which being supplied with
water from the former, thereby hinders it from overflowing the Country. Here
he opened the passages, made a new one toward the Lakes, and coming into the
borders of Arabia, built there a City, Then deriding the Chaldaeans, for that
he had both entered, and sailed in safety from Babylon, he thither returned, and
liking the City exceedingly, intended to make it the seat of his Empire; though
it was but for a short space, as it fell out. Where he falls into a Fever.
For, having sat up feasting and drinking very late one night, as he was
departing to go to bed, he was again invited by Medius a Thessalian to another
carowze, where challenging, and being challenged, he drank so much wine as put
him into a Fever, whereof he died the eleventh day. Vide praeter Plutarchum
and Diodorum Senecae Epist. 83. Athenaeum l. 11. c. 17. Macrobium Saturnal.
lib. 5. cap. 21.
Some have delivered that he was poisoned by the proc^rement of Antipater, who
suspecting he was through the malice of Olympias called out of Macedonia for no
good toward himself, sent his son Cassander with poison to be delivered to
Iollas and his other sons, that then wa^ed on the King. Indeed Cassander was
not at all favorable, as he ought to ^^ve been, to the interest of Alexander's
posterity, as neither to his reputation; and coming to him a little before his
death, he did but little strive to suit his humor. For seeing the Barbarians
adore him, and being unacquainted with such asight, he burst forth into
laughing, for which Alexander caught him by the hair, and knocked his head
soundly against the wall, as Plutarch tells us. But as for matter of poison,
the long lying of his body in so hot a Country, during the contentions of his
Captains, betrayed no symptoms thereof, and therefore others give no credit to
the report. Moreover, the course of his sickness presents us with no such
symptoms, as it is described to us by Plutarch and Arrianns out of his Diaries.

39. On the 18th day of the (Macedonian) month Daesius ( May the 12) he slept
in a Bath, because of his fever. The day following he returned to his Bed
Chamber, and spent it with Medius at Dice: then being washed at night, and
having finished his devotions, he supped something liberally, and all the night
was much distempered. On the 20th day he washed, and having finished a solemn
sacrifice, in the Bath heard Nearchus relate the story of his Navigation, and
of what he had seen in the Ocean. On the 21th. having done the same thing his
Fever increased, and he had an ill night. The day after he was held with a
sharp Fever, and was removed near the great place for swimming, where he
discoursed with his Officers about supplying Vacant places in the Army with the
fittest persons. On the 24th his disease increasing he sacrificed, being borne
out to the place, and commanded the principal of his Officers to stay in the
Court, and the rest to watch before the Gates. Being removed into the inner
Palace on the 25th day he rested a little; but the Fever abated not, and when
the Captains came to see him he spoke not a word. So he passed over the 26th
day, whereupon the Macedonians thinking him to be dead, came with great noise
to the Door, and compelled his friends to let them in; so in their Coats every
man of them passed by his bed's side. The same day Pithon and Seleucus were
sent to the Temple of Serapis, to ask if he should be removed thither, and
received answer, that he should continue where he was. On the 28th day toward
the evening he expired. Though he Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 1. Exter. Exemp. 1.
fainted by the violence of his disease; yet leaning on his Elbow, he reached
out his hand to all Soldiers that would touch it in their passage, and (which
seems incredible) Curtius lib. 10. cap. 7.
continued in the same posture he had set himself, till the whole Army had
saluted him.

40. The Soldiers being all gone, he asked his friends about him whether they
thought they should have such another King. When all kept silence he said, that
as he was ignorant hereof, so he knew, could Prophecy, Justin lib. 12. Corn.
Nepos in Eumene. Curtius ut supra.
and almost see with his eyes how much blood Macedonia would shed in this
controversy, with what slaughters and bloodshed it would make him a
Parentation when he was dead. At length he commanded his body to be buried in
the Temple of Hammon, and when his friends asked him to whom he would leave his
Kingdom, he answered, to the most Valiant. Yet having taken his Ring from his
finger he gave it to Perdiccas: whereby all conjectured that he commended his
Kingdom to him till his Children should grow up. Again, Perdiccas demanding of
him when he would have Divine honors given to him, Of which he dies the
eleventh day.
he replied, then, when they (his followers) were happy: which were his last
words, and a little after he departed. He Justin. Curtius. Diodorus.
lived 32 years and eight months, reigned twelve, and also eight months. He
died six years and ten months after the murder of Darius, in the first year
of the 114 Olympiad, A. M. 3681. 322 years before the Era of Christ.
S^s^gambis the Mother of Darius having with some patience born the loss both
of her Son's life and Empire, when she heard of Alexander's death refused to
live any longer. So, refraining from all sustenance she died the fifth day
after.

CHAP. II. Of such things as happened after the death of Alexander amongst his
Captains, till their Cantonizing of his Empire into their particular Kingdoms,
and their taking the Style and Title of Kings upon them, containing the space
of 17 years.
Alexanders Issue and Lineage.
1. ALexander, though he had taken several Wives, yet left but one Son already
born of Barsine, the Daughter of Artabazus a Persian, and another in the belly
of Roxane, the Daughter of Oxyaries. His Son called Hercules was despised upon
his Mothers account by the Captains, who much scorned the Conquered Nations. He
had a sister named Cleopatra, Widow to the King of Epirus and their Uncle, who
was slain in Italy; and a base brother called Aridaeus (begotten on Philinna a
woman of Larissa) who married Eurydice the daughter of Amyntas, whom being the
right Heir, and his Nephew, Philip kept from the Kingdom of Macedonia, after he
had exercised the Office of his Protector, and on him bestowed a daughter of
his own in marriage. This Amyntas bore patiently the want of the Kingdom all
Philip's time, but in the beginning of Alexander's reign, with the loss of his
life, attempted something. His title through the prowess of the two late Kings
was utterly forgotten; Cleopatra (as a woman perhaps) was not thought of.
Aridaeus neither by birth, personage, or qualities was fitly endowed; yet upon
him the election fell, for want of a better, because the Captains were at a
loss what course to take.

2. For, Ptolomy the son of Lagus (as he was called; but reputed the son of
Philip, who, as it is said, having used the company of Arsinoe his Mother, put
her off in marriage to Lagus, Contention amongst his Captains about the
succession.
when great with Child) rejecting the title of the half Persian brood, though
as Alexander's Children they should have been considered, was for the Captains
their taking the rule upon them, and deciding all things by Vote of the major
part. But as he might think this course most likely to serve his own ambition,
so Aristonus perhaps on the same grounds betook himself to the words of
Alexander, which he interpreted as meant of Perdiccas, because, saying, that he
left his Kingdom to the worthiest, at the point of death he delivered to him
his Ring. He was seconded by many, who either bore good will to Perdiccas, or
out of fear that he would carry it, would not venture to oppose him. But he
would needs make a show of modesty, thinking thereby the more to indear
himself, whereat Meleaeger an envious man, and one who bore to him a particular
grudge, took advantage to inveigh against him, and disturbed all Councils, by
persuading the Soldiers that whosesoever was the Empire, they had the best
title to the Treasure. During the uproar Aridaeus was mentioned, and his name
laid hold on by some peaceable spirits, who laboring betwixt the parties
wrought a composure for the time, wherein yet Perdiccas had the better of his
adversary. Aridaeus declared King.
It was agreed, according to the desire of the Infantry, that Aridaeus the base
son of Philip should be King, and for as much as he was stupid and dull (rather
through the practicing of Olympias upon him, as some thought, than any Original
indisposition) Perdiccas was made his Protector, and Commander of his Forces,
who hereby in effect was King for a time, though that title, with the name of
Philip, for a greater grace was conferred upon the other.

3. Then did the Officers distribute the Provinces of the Empire amongst
themselves. Macedonia and Greece were left to Antipater, Thrace with the
neighboring Countries was assigned to Lysimachus; Egypt, with all that which
of Cyr^ne, The Provinces distributed amongst the Captains.
Africa, and Arabia had belonged to Alexander, was set over to Ptolomy the son
of Lagus. Syria and Phoenicia were committed to Laomedon; Armenia to
Neoptolemus; Mesopotania to Arcesilaus. In Asia the less, Cappadocia and
Paphlagonia, with the Countries thereto adjoining, which Alexander had passed
by in his Conquests, were assigned to Eumenes; A. M. 3682. Ol. 114 ann. 2. V.
C. 431. Ante Christum 321. Ptolom. 1.
Pamphylia, Lycia, Lycaonia, and the greater Phrygia to Antigonus; the lesset
Phrygia as far as the Hellespont to Leonatus; Cilicia to Philotas, together
with Isauria; and Caria to Cassander. Menander was confirmed in the Government
of Lydia given him by Alexander. The Isle of Cyprus remained in the power of
certain Governors to which he had granted it; and all that part of his Empire
from Babylon Eastward continued in the state wherein he left it. Diodorus l.
20. ad Ol. 118. ann. 4. Ammianus Mar. l. 23.
Thus was his Dominions disposed of otherwise than he intended, for one tells
us that he made a Will, which he delivered to the Rhodians, and another
affirms, that thereby all was given to one only Successor. After this his
Funerals were thought of, his body having lain seven days neglected. Yet no
corruption had seized on it, and it looked as fresh in the face as though it
had been living, Justin.
which as it is said made the Egyptians and Chaldaeans afraid to touch it;
Curtius l. 10. Diodorus ad Olymp. 114. ann. 2. and 3.
but having prayed that mortals might lawfully do it, they embalmed, and after
that adorned it with royal Ensigns. The care of the burial was committed to one
Aridaeus (not the King, though some have so mistaken) another of the Captains,
who spent two years in making preparation for it, which made Olympias tax the
late ambition of her son, and bewail his misfortune together in the same
speech, as Var. Hist. lib. 13. c. 30.
Elian observes. For, the burial of Alexander was to be ushered in by the
Funerals of many of his followers.

Ptolomy gets possession of Egypt.
4. Ptolomy got possession of Egypt without any trouble, and settled himself
therein, partly by his fair carriage toward the Inhabitants, and partly by the
power of an Army, which he raised by the virtue of 8000 Talents. Hearing that
Perdiccas had an intention to deprive him of his Government, he contracted
affinity with Antipater, and making away Cleoments his Lieutenant, because he
was much addicted to the Protector, fortified the Country. Antipater was now
employed in the Lamian War against the Athenians and Aetolians, The Lamian War
in Greece.
who refused to receive their Exiles, as was hinted before, and so distressed
him in battle, that he was forced to fly to Lamia, a City of Pthiotis. Here
Leosthenes the Athenian General besieged him; but when he perceived him
forsaken by the Aetolians he issued out, and slew him in the charge, being an
excellent Soldier, and one who had deserved well of Greece. Leonatus
Governor of the lesser Phrygia, allured by promise of his daughter, came over
to help Antipater; but marching through Thessaly was driven into a Fen by the
Graecians, and there slain. At his mishap Antipater (who coming thither the
day after, united his Forces with his own) is said to have rejoiced, because
he had determined to make himself Master of Macedonia. At this time Perdiccas
taking the King along with him, went against Ariarathes of Cappadocia,
Perdiccas subdueth Cappadocia.
whom getting into his hands he Crucified, and subduing those Countries which
Alexander had passed by, gave them to Eumenes, according to agreement. A. M.
3683. Ol. 114. ann. 2. V. C. 431. Ptolom. 2.
Craterus not long after passed over into Macedonia, to the assistance of
Antipater, with 10000 Macedonians, and 150 Persians, which Force united to
the Army of Antipater, overpowered the joint strength of the Graecians.

5. After this begun the Civil Wars betwixt the Captains themselves. For, Civil
Wars amongst the Captains.
Perdiccas breathing after the Sovereignty, and knowing how able the other were
to withstand him, grudged Ptolomy exceedingly the possession of Egypt, and
through the persuasion of Eumenes procured much enmity, Diod.
in that having married Nicaea the daughter of Antipater, by his advice, he
resolved to put her away, and take Cleopatra to wife, the daughter of Philip,
Arrianus.
and sister to Alexander. This being made known to Antigonus, Justin. l. 13.
he certified Antipater of it, and being calumniated by Perdiccas (who intended
to make him away) he fled unto him, with Demetrius his son. Perdiccas
consulting with his Officers what in this case was to be done, resolved first
to set upon Egypt, lest Ptolomy during his absence in Greece, should seize upon
Asia. And to keep Asia against Antipater and Craterus, Perdiccas goes against
Ptolomy.
he left Eumenes with large power over the Provinces, joining with him Alcetas
his own brother, and Neoptolemus. Perdiccas taking along with him Aridaeus the
King, and young Alexander now born of Roxane (who was eight months gone with
child of him when his Father died) for a more specious pretense, marched
against Ptolomy. Antipater, and Craterus, hearing how things went, clapped up a
Peace presently with the Aetolians, A. M. 3684. Ol. 114. an. 4. V. C. 433.
Ptolom. 3.
and leaving Polysperchon to govern Macedonia and Greece, passed over the
Hellespont, and dispatched away messengers to Ptolomy to enter into a league
and society with him.

6. Alcetas, with those Macedonians he commanded, flatly refused to fight
against them; and Neoptolemus envying Eumenes the chief command, plainly
revolted. Eumenes left by him in Asia gets the better.
After this, some were sent to feel Eumenes, but he answered, that he would
rather die than betray his trust, whereupon Antipater and Craterus divided
their Forces. Antipater marched toward Egypt to join with Ptolomy, and
Craterus stayed to oppose Eumenes, with whom fighting in Cappadocia, his Horse
stumbled, and he was run through with a Lance, and after the fight died of the
wound: Neoptolemus also grapling with Eumenes was slain by him. By this time
Perdiccas with the two Kings came to Pelusium in Egypt, where though Ptolomy
purged himself of the crimes objected against him, yet he would pursue his
enterprise, though contrary to the inclination of his Soldiers, his end being
hereby to be brought about. Diverse of his friends presently forsook him; yet he
set upon a Castle near the Nile, and not being able to gain it, marched away
and came over against Memphis, where the River parting into two streams, makes
an Island very convenient for the lodging of his Army. Endeavoring to bring
his men into it, he lost 200 in the Ford, for that those who first waded over
so removed the sand at the bottom, that the River was too deep for such as
followed. Yet did he command those who had got safe over to return; of whom
part were drowned, some carried down the stream to the Enemy, and others being
tossed to and fro in the River were devoured by Crocodils. Idem, Pausan. in
Atticis.
By this imprudent act the minds of his followers were so turned against him,
Perdiccas slain.
that 100 of his chief Officers revolting, he was slain by certain Horsemen,
after he had continued in his power almost three years. Corn. Nepos in Eumene.
One reports, that he was slain at the River Nile by Seleucus and Antigonus.

7. Ptolomy came over to the Kings, whom with the Officers he magnificently
entertained, and then an election being to be made of a new Governor for them
in the room of Perdiccas, though he could easily have procured himself to be
chosen, yet he got two others elected, viz. Pithon one of Alexander's most
intimate friends, and A^idaeus, who having the care of the funeral committed to
him, Pithon and Aridaeus chosen into his place.

And Eumenes declared an Enemy. Pithon lays down and Antipater chosen into
his place.


had at the desire of Ptolomy buried the King's body at Memphis, against the
will of Perdiccas. The Army now being displeased at the death of Craterus,
declared Eumenes an Enemy, and chose Antigonus together with Antipater Generals
for the subduing of him. But Pithon and Aridaeus held not their places long,
for Eurydice the wife of Aridaeus the King, being a woman of a notable spirit,
would have nothing done without her knowledge, and grew so intolerable, that
Pithon therewith wearied, and seeing the Macedonians too much addicted to her,
called the Soldiers together, and laid down his Protectorship. Into his room
then Antipater was elected with full power.

8. Against him also Eurydice raised such a Sedition in the Army, A. M. 3685.
Ol. 115. an. 1. V.C. 434. Ptolom. 4.
taking occasion at the want of pay, that with much ado he escaped the danger
of his life, by the means of Antigonus and Seleucus. After this, he anew
divided such Provinces as he saw convenient, placing and displacing Governors.
He created Antigonus General against Eumenes, sending his own son Cassander as
Colonel with him, He creates Antigonus General against Eumenes.
by whom he might be certified, in case he attempted any thing for his own
establishment; and then with the two Kings he marched for Mace^onia. Eumenes
having intelligence concerning these Councils, made all preparations possible
for resistance. In the Spring Antigonus came against him into Cappadocia, where
he first attempted by Libels thrown into his Camp, to draw his Soldiers from
their obedience, offering a great reward for his head. Eumenes gave his
Soldiers thanks for their fidelity, but told them, that these Libels were
feigned by himself to try them, which was a notable device (and of such he was
full) to make them wary of giving credit to such for the time to come. Yet some
proved false to him, as one Perdiccas, who drew away a considerable party, but
was pursued and taken, and being put to death, the Soldiers returned to
obedience. But Apollonides his General of the Horse did most mischief, Eumenes
worsted through treachery.
for being corrupted by Antigonus, when they came to join battle he passed over
with his Troops to him, whereby Eumenes had the worst of it, and lost about
8000 men, with his Cariages.

9. Apollonides the Traitor he caught and hanged: then, flying a private way,
he returned to the Camp, and there buried his dead, to the wonder and amazement
of the Enemy, after which he could have plundered the carriages of Antigonus but
for burthening his Soldiers with the booty. Being driven to and fro in this
flight, at length he betook himself to a Castle called Nora, situate in the
Confines of Cappadocia and Lycaonia, and dismissed all his Army, except 500
Horsemen, and 200 Foot, as also such friends as were unwilling to undergo the
hardship of a Siege. Antigonus before he would lay close siege to the place,
called him forth to a Treaty, requiring him to come to him a Superior, to
which he answered, that he accounted no man his Superior so long as he had a
Sword by his side. Besieged in Nora.
This parley, though managed with much respect, came to nothing, and Antigonus
leaving a party sufficient to carry on the Siege, marched against Alcetas and
Attalus, A. M. 3686. Ol. 115. an. 2. V. C. 435. Ptolom. 5.
two of Eumenes his confederates, whom he suppressed. About this time Antipater
died in Macedonia, and at his death more swayed by the Public good than any
selfish respect, Antipater dies and leaves his place to Polysperchon.
left Polysperchon (who after himself was the oldest of Alexander's friends now
living) Protector of the Kings, and Captain, with full authority. Cassander his
son stomached this very much, and consulting how to advance himself to be
chief, secretly entered into confederacy with diverse Captains. Amongst these
was Ptolomy, whom he desired that he would send him some ships out of Phoenicia
(for all that Country, together with Judaea, he had now got into his power)
into the Hellespont. But the death of Antipater strangely also made way for the
enlargement of Eumenes.

10. For, Antigonus now being lest chief in Asia, thought of no less than
getting it all into his power, and for that end strove to ingtatiate himself
with the several Captains. Judging that the conjunction of Eumenes might be of
great advantage to him, he sent Hieronymus his Countryman (who being an Vide
Vossium de script. Graecis. l. 1. c. 11.
Historian, wrote of the acts of Alexander and his Successors) to desire him,
that forgetting the fight in Cappadocia, he would enter into society with him,
and receive a larger Province. He required that he should take an oath, which,
slightly passing over the Kings, he had framed to his own advantage. His death
procures the inlargment of Eumenes.
Eumenes unwilling to swear fealty to him, with the assent of Hieronymus and
the besiegers, changed the form of the oath, and swore to have the same friends
and enemies, not only with him, but with Olympias, and the Kings. Hereupon the
Siege was raised after a years continuance, which he had born with admirable
cheerfulness and prudence, and now being let loose drew many followers after
him, so that within a few days, besides the 500 which had continued with him
in the Castle, he had 2000 at his devotion. Antigonus was very angry that he
had changed the form of the oath, and by Letters checked the besiegers, for
admitting of it, requiring them to besiege him again; but it was too late.
Thus, they were as far from closing as before; and still were further set at
distance by the affairs which now were on foot in Macedonia.

11. Polysperchon having succeeded Antipater (as was before said) recalled
Olympias out of Epirus, A. M. 3687. Ol. 115. an. 3. V. C. 436. Ptol. 6.
whither her enmity with Antipater had driven her, inviting her to take the
care of her young grandson upon her. But Cassander resolving to venture for
Macedonia, entered into confederacy with Ptolomy and Antigonus, the later
whereof gladly promised him assistance, out of love to the memory of his
father, as he pretended, but indeed desirous that he should be diverted by so
great a War, whilst he in the mean time might make sure of Asia. Polysperchon
to secure Greece, in the name of the Kings published an Edict for the
abolishment of all such Oligarchies, as since the passing of Alexander into
Asia, had been erected in any of the Cities, which by virtue hereof he restored
to their former liberty, hereby to oblige, and keep them from yielding to
Cassander. In the same name he also wrote to Eumenes, upon whom he confirmed
his former Government, and bestowed more, Cassander labors for Macedonia,
and Eumenes is stirred up to stand for the King's interest.
beseeching him, that together with himself, he would take upon him the
protection of the King's house; if he pleased, in Macedonia, but rather in Asia
against Antigonus, who now had visibly revolted from it: Moreover, he wrote to
the Treasurers in Cilicia, to furnish Eumenes with money, and to the
Argyraspidae (or the old Soldiers with Silver Shields) to obey him in all
things. Olympias also by letters desired his help, owning him as the most
faithful of those remaining, who could assist against the ruin and desolation
of her family.

12. Eumenes not able to stay any longer in Cappadocia, because Menander was
sent from Antigonus against him, hasted into Cilicia, where the Argyraspidae
being 3000 in number joined with him. Fearing the envy of the Macedonians, for
that he was but a Stranger of the Cherronesus of Thrace, he carried it with
great civility toward all, and made himself but equal to the other Captains.
To contain them in order, Diod. Plutarch and Corn. Nepos in Eumene. Polyaenus
Stratagem. l. 4.
he feigned that Alexander had appeared to him in a dream, sitting upon his
Throne, and commanding as formerly, in compliance wherewith, he caused a Throne
to be erected in a Tent as for the King, whereon was also laid a Diadem and
Scepter; and here the Council of Officers were always to assemble: Then
sending his friends abroad he raised many men, the report of the largnesse of
his pay drawing Soldiers out of Greece it self. Ptolomy and Antigonus sent to
take off the Argyraspidae, and Teutamus one of their Captains was persuaded by
them, but was reduced to his former resolution by Antigenes his Colleague, and
the common Soldiers were quieted by Eumenes, who came upon them while yet they
were in fear of Antigonus, who threatened, that except they would deliver him
up, he would come and destroy them with his Army. After this, Eumenes marched
into Phoenicia, intending there to provide shipping, that if need were, he
might have intercourse with Polysperchon. He also intended to rescue Phoenicia
out of Ptolomie's hands; but finding himself unable to accomplish this design,
he began his march through Coelesyria, and passed on till he came to Carrae
near Babylon, Who marches to Carrae.
where he took up his Winter quarters.

13. Antigonus having overthrown at Sea Polysperchon's Navy, and attempted
something against the Governors near the Hellespont, now hasted to make a full
conquest of Asia. He chose out of all his Army 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse,
wherewith, for expedition, he marched with speed into Cilicia to supresse
Eumenes his forces ere he could get them together, which caused the other
sooner to depart into Phoenicia, whence he marched to Carrae. Whilst he here
remained he sent to Seleucus Governor of Babylon, A. M. 3688. Ol. 115. an. 4.
V.C. 437. Ptolom. 7.
and Pithon of Media, for aid against the enemies of the Kings; to which they
answered, that they were ready to assist the Kings, but not him, who was
condemned by a Council of the Macedonians, and they solicited the Captains of
the Argyraspidae to forsake him; but in vain. After this he resolved for Susa,
To Susa.
thinking to get aid out of the upper Provinces, and money out of the
Treasury, and thither he came with much difficulty, Seleucus having so drowned
his Camp, that he was forced to get off his men with boats. It happened that the
Governors of the Provinces were at this time gathered together with many
forces against Pithon, who having slain Philotas, had placed his own brother
Eudramus in his stead. Fearing the like might be attempted against themselves,
they armed, and having overthrown him in battle, drove out of Parthia to
Babylon, The Governors of the upper Provinces join with him.
where he fled to Seleucus for relief. Having formerly sent them Letters from
the Kings, he now also solicited them for aid when thus met together, to which
they agreed, and came down. These were Peucestes Governor of Persia, one of
the Keepers of the late King's body, and now chosen by the rest for their
Generalissimo; Polemon of Caramania, Sibyrt^us of Arachosia, Stasander of Aria,
and Drangiana; Andrabazus, who was sent from Oxyartes Governor of the
Parapomisadae, and Eudamus (or Eudaemon) Governor of the Oxydracae and Malli,
who brought with him out of Ind^a 120 Elephants (besides other Forces) which he
got into his hands after he had slain Porus the King. Their united Force
consisted of above 18700 foot, and 4600 horse, which being joined to Eumenes
his Army, made up a considerable body.

14. They had falln out about choosing a new General, had not Eumenes his former
device of setting up Alexander's Pavilion and Throne prevented it, whither he
persuaded them to repair, and rule in common; after which he took as much money
out of the Treasury at Susa as his wants required. Antigonus marches against
him.
In Spring Antigonus being come into Mesopotamia marched to Babylon, A. M.
3689: Ol. 116. ann. 1. V. C. 438. Ptolomaei 8.
where joining in Confederacy with Seleucus and Pithon, he received some Forces
from them, and passed the River Tigris. Eumenes hearing of his coming went down
to Pasitigris, where he fell upon such of his Soldiers as were got over the
River, which he filled also with Carkeises, and took 4000 prisoners. Antigonus
therefore bent his course another way to the City Badaca situate upon the
River Eulaeus, whence he journeyed through the Country of the Cossaeans with
great difficulty, and hardship, into the habitable parts of Media, where he
refreshed, and quieted his men now ready to mutiny, by reason of their teadious
journey. Eumenes marched into Persia, where the whole Army was Magnificently
entertained by Peucestes the Satrapa, who now thought to establish himself in
the Chief power, but by the great cunning of Eumenes, together with the other
Captains, was retained in his former condition, and brought to a greater
observance of him. Antigonus, following him into Persia, he returned to meet
him, but feasting his Army, he drunk so excessively, that a great distemper
thereby contracted, stopped him for some days, and then was he carried in a
Litter out of the noise, till such time as the Front would not march without
him in the head of them. He was therefore constrained to lead them, and shortly
after to frame the battle in his Litter, which Antigonus saw, and laughed at it.

15. Four days were spent in light skirmishing, during which time Antigonus
endeavored to draw away Eumenes his men; They meet.
but to no purpose; and afterward resolved to go 3 days journey off into
Gabiene, for that the Armies were both much straightned for necessaries.
Eumenes hearing this, sent some, who as Fugitives should acquaint him how as
that night he intended to fall in upon his Camp, which he believing, stayed,
expecting him, and then did Eumenes make haste to get into Gabiene before him.
Antigonus seeing himself deluded, marched after with great expedition, and
leaving behind the rest of his Army, with a party got before him. He presented
then himself to his view upon the Mountains, which Eumenes seeing, and thinking
he had all his Forces with him, made an Alt, and so they mutually deceived each
other. Here in the Country of the Paraetaceni they joined battle, wherein
Eumenes had the better, though the other got the advantage of ground; but then
his Soldiers beginning to be refractory would needs depart to their baggage,
The victory controverted.
and not stay to bury their dead. Whereupon Antigonus doing this first, the
victory came to be controverted.

16. Antigonus finding himself to have had the worst of it, Diodorus ut supra,
Plutarch. in Eumene, and Cornel. Nepos.
went his way to Gamarga in Media, where was plenty of Provisions, and then
Eumenes finding his Army in no good case to pursue him, departed to Gabiene.
Here he divided his Forces into their Winter quarters, not according to his own
desire, but the pleasure of the Soldiers, for the old ones which had followed
Alexander in his Conquests were grown so high, as they would rather give Laws
to their Captains than receive them. Antigonus hearing this, thought to
surprise them on a sudden, and for that they should know nothing of it,
resolved to take a by-way, which yet was declared to Eumenes, who not being
able to call his Soldiers together so soon as was requisite, betook himself to
his seldom failing policy. He caused fires to be made on the Mountains where
the Enemy was to pass, which they beholding, thought he had there with him his
whole Army, and so took the common way, after they were come into the midst of
their journey. Antigonus stayed one day to recruit his Army, and Eumenes
gathered in the mean time his Forces together, which admired his prudence so
much, as they ordered him to be the Chief, which made him come into the danger
of life, diverse of the great ones conspiring against him, which made him say he
was amongst a company of wild beasts, and caused him to make his Will, and tear
his Letters, lest any of them that had wrote unto him should be troubled after
his death. This as it was faithfully done to his friends, so was it also in
good time, as it after fell out.

17. For, shortly after, Antigonus and he came to a Pitch-battel, which decided
the controversy, though not for the Conqueror. Eumenes lead into the field
36700 foot, 6050 horse, and 114 Elephants, Antigonus brought 2^000 foot, 9000
horse, and 65 Elephants. The Argyraspides (or silver shields) got the victory,
for they put all Antigonus his foot to flight, and killed 5000 of them, so that
though Peucestes withdrew himself out of the fight with his own horse, and 1500
more; yet Eumenes with the loss of 700 on his side got the day. But neither
valor nor wisdom could befriend him, for the place where they fought being
exceeding dusty, so as ones sight was taken away at a little distance, Eumenes
gets the better,
Antigonus sends a party of his horse to plunder his Enemies baggage, so that
the Macedonians though Conquerors, after the battle fell into a deep melancholy
for the loss of their Wives and Children taken away, and Teutamus first
without the knowledge of any one sent to Antigonus, who Covenanted with him to
restore him all, on condition Eumenes were delivered to him, and they would all
pass into his Camp, whereupon the Macedonians, But is betrayed by his men,
the 1000 which Peucestes commanded, and most of the other Captains revoked,
and Eumenes having his hands tied behind him was delivered up; his Army
shamefully following him to the Tents of Antigonus, leading it self in Triumph
after him. Antigonus for shame would not see Eumenes his old fellow Soldier in
that condition; but assigned him to Keepers, at first requiring he should be
strictly looked to, but afterward remitting that rigor till almost all
persuaded him to make an end of him. This he was loath to do, and took 7 days
to consult in; but then fearing some Sedition might arise in the Army, he
commanded his daily allowance of meat should be withdrawn, saying, he would
never lay hands upon him. Two or three days he languished in this condition,
and then the Army being to march, And killed.
one was sent in, and killed him without the knowledge of Antigonus; so fell
this brave man, excelled in Military glory but by few Captains, in the eighth
year after the death of Alexander.

18. Cassander having obtained of Antigonus 35 ships, and 6000 men, Diodorus l.
18.
sailed with them to Athens, which together with the Haven he had got into his
power, by means of Nicanor, whom he had sent beforehand for that purpose.
Against him came Polysperchon, intending to besiege him, but his Provisions
failing, he left his son with a party in Attica, and with the greatest part of
the Army marched into Peloponnesus against the Inhabitants of Megalopolis, who
only amongst the Cities had refused to take away their Oligarchy, and had
joined with Cassander. Here he had the worst of it, and that brought him so
into contempt, as most of the Greek Cities revolted from him to Cassander, and
the Athenians seeing they could not shake off his Garrison, agreed with him
that he should retain the Fort Munychia, till the War was finished with the
Kings, but that the City should be governed by one whom he appointed, which
was Demetrius Phalereus the Philosopher, Theophrastus his Scholar, who Governed
ten years with moderation, and was honored with 360 Statues. Laertius in vita
Phocionis.
Then Cassander making an expedition into Macedonia, found there many friends.
The year after, Polysperchon by the help of Aeacida, King of the Molossians,
reduced Olympias with Alexander the son of Rhoxane her Grandchild into
Macedonia, whereupon Eurydice the Wife of Aridaeus the King fortified herself,
and sent to Cassander for aid, but the Macedonians fearing the Majesty of
Olympias fell away from her, Olympias destroys Aridaeus and his Wife.
and she with her husband being both committed to prison, he was first made
away, and then Olympias sent her a Sword, an Halter, and Poison, to choose which
of them she pleased; so she praying the gods that she might have at length such
gifts sent unto her, hanged her self with her Garter. This happened after
Aridaeus had enjoyed the title of King six years and four months.

19. Olympias killed Nicanor the brother of Cassander, Diodorus l. 19.
and destroyed the Sepulcher of his other brother Iollas, and then choosing out
100 of his chiefest friends put them to cruel deaths. Kills Nicanor and
others.
But he hearing she was arrived in Macedonia, marched out of Peloponnesus
against her, whereupon she made Aristonous her General, and commanded him to
meet Cassander, she betaking herself, with Alexander her Grandson, his Mother,
and others, into Pydna, hoping she should have many assistants, but she was
deceived. For, A. M. 3690: Ol. 116. ann. 2. V. C. 439. Ptolom. 9.
Cassander besieged her by Land and Sea. Aeacida was coming to assist her, but
by his means his men fell away from him, and banishing him his Country, joined
themselves and Kingdom to the other; others in Macedonia intended to aid her,
but fearing Cassander, fell off also to him, and as for Polysperchon in whom
rested now all her hope, Callas being sent against him corrupted also most of
his Soldiers. The siege, therefore lasted without any let, till famine so
prevailed in the City, as many of the Defendants came out, and she was then
driven by necessity to yield, very hardly obtaining promise of safety to her
person. Afterward he caused such as whole Kinsfolks she had put to death to
accuse her to the Macedonians, who naturally hated, and now incensed by them,
She is also murdered by Cassander.
condemned her. Then did he send some of her friends to her, willing her to
fly, but she denied it, and resolved to plead her cause before the people, so
that he fearing their affections might be moved toward her, sent some Soldiers
to kill her. They were so struck with her Majesty, as they returned without
doing their errand, but then some the friends of whom she had made away came
in, and slew her, not at all amated, or behaving herself otherwise than as the
Mother of Alexander, whom she had out lived for eight years.

20. Pithon the Governor of Media, envying Antigonus his power, and
greatness, labored to draw most of the Soldiers now in their Winter quarters
to his own party, Pithon put to death by Antigonus.
intending to establish himself, which Antigonus being aware of, gave out that
he would commit the East unto him, and by diverse friendly Letters drew him to
him, after which he got him condemned in a Council of his Associates, and put
him to death. Then marched he into Persia, being received by the Inhabitants as
King, for that now without controversy he was Lord of Asia. Here calling a
Council, he confirmed diverse in their Governments, and amongst the rest
Sibyrtius of Arachosia, to whom he delivered 1000 of the most turbulent
Argyraspides (who had delivered up Eumenes) under pretense to serve him in the
Wars, Who ordering matters as he pleases in the East,
but indeed to destroy them, giving him secret order to expose them to ruin,
that so they might never see more Macedonia nor the Greek Sea. Perceiving
Peucestes to be in great favor here, he removed him from the Government, to
the great grief of the people, and then got the Treasure at Susa into his
hands, out of which he made 25000 Talents. Thence he journeyed to Babylon,
where Seleucus the Governor royally entertained him, but offering to punish a
certain Officer of the Army without his knowledge, he called him to an account
for the Revenues of the place. Seleucus denied to account, saying, that place
was given him by the Macedonians for his faithful service performed to
Alexander; but the Contest grew sharper everyday, so as he remembering, and
fearing the case of Pithon, Seleucus flies into Egypt.
with fifty horse in his Company fled into Egypt. Antigonus was glad he had
gotten Babylon, and that without any violence offered to his ancient friend;
but being told by the Chaldeans, that if he let him go he should get all Asia
into his power, and he himself should die in a battle against him, he sent some
to pursue him, but in vain.

21. Seleucus being courteously entertained by Ptolomy, sent his friends into
Europe to stir up Cassander and Lysimachus against Antigonus, who suspecting
some such matter, sent also to retain them in his friendship, but they entered
into confederacy together with Ptolomy against him, and all three sent their
Ambassadors to him, as he was now marching toward upper Syria, to demand that
Cappadocia and Lycia might be restored to Cassander Governor of Caria; Makes
the Captains combine against Antigonus.
Phrygia upon the Hellespont to Lysimachus, all Syria to Ptolomy, and Babylon
to Seleucus, and to divide all the treasure he had got into his hands since the
death of Eumenes, with them and the other Macedonians who had lost their
Governments. To this he answered sharply, and that he was already pteparing for
Ptolomy, so that the Ambassadors returning without any effect, they made great
preparations both by Sea and Land. He understanding how full his hands would
be, sent about to the chief States to retain them in friendship, and also to
hire more Soldiers; he himself went into Phoenicia, where he besieged Tire,
used great endeavor for the making of ships, and took in Joppe and Gaza.
Aristodemus also he sent into Laconia, who there by the permission of the
Lacedaemonians raised 8000 Soldiers, and joined Polysperchon and Alexander his
son in confederacy with him, of whom the former was made General of Greece, and
the later he desired to go over to Antigonus, who going accordingly, in an
assembly of the Army accused Cassander, for that he had put Olympias to death,
had committed Rhoxane and her son to custody, married by force Thessalonica the
daughter of Philip and sister of Alexander, and so plainly affected the Kingdom
of Macedonia: moreover, that he had re-edified Thebes destroyed by Alexander,
and restored the Olinthians; whereupon he was declared an Enemy, except he
would amend what was amiss, and obey Antigonus, and set all the Graecians at
liberty, and so Alexander rewarded with 500 Talents was sent back. Not long
after he revolted to Cassander, being for that declared General of
Peloponnesus, and shortly after was traitorously slain by the Sicionians.

22. Seleucus in Cyprus prospered against the party of Antigonus, Diodorus ut
prius.
and Polyclitus his Lieutenant overthrew Theodotus his Admiral both at Sea and
Land, after which Ptolomy and Antigonus met and conferred together; but to no
purpose. Cassander shortly after fearing Antigonus might pass over into
Europe, to divert him, sent an Army over into Caria to help those Cities which
were confederate with Seleucus and Ptolomy, Cassander the Governor there
joining with him, which Antigonus fearing, left Demetrius his son in Syria,
with order to entrap Ptolomie's forces if they should march that way, and for
that he was but then 22 years old, left 4 grave men his friends to counsel and
direct him. Upon his coming to Caria, Cassander the Governor having too great
a burden upon him, made a Peace, on condition to keep his place, and gave his
brother for an Hostage, whom yet he getting again out of his hands, he
presently revolted, after which Antigonus got diverse Cities into his hands, and
restored the Milesians to their liberty. At this time the inhabitants of Cyrene
revolting, Ptolomy reduced them again to obedience by the means of Agis his
General, and in Cyprus suppressed some of the Kings which were of the contrary
faction. Returning home he was solicited be Seleucus to undertake an
Expedition against Demetrius then in Caelesyria, Whose Son Demetrius is
defeated by Ptolomy.
so that with 18000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, he marched to Gaza, where Demetrius
expected him. In the fight the forces of Demetrius seemed rather to prevail,
till his Elephants being wounded and taken, his Horse out of fear ran away. He
himself fled accompanied with many till he came to pass by Gaza, but then so
many forsook him and went in thither to fetch out their goods, as multitudes
flocking to the gates, and they therefore being hindered from being shut, the
enemies entered with them and took the Town. Ptolomy took Sidon also, and
besieged Tire, whose Governor Andronicus upon summons refused to yield, and
reviled him; A. M. 3693. Ol. 117. an. 1. V. C. 442. Seleuci 1. Ptolom. 12
yet he getting the place into his power through the sedition of the Soldiers,
when he looked for present death, not only forgave him, but entertained him
courteously as his familiar friend.

23. Ptolomy getting the places about Syria into his power, returned into
Egypt, being followed thither by many which were drawn by his great courtesy
and clemency. But Seleucus thinking this a good opportunity for him to return
to his former Principality, obtained of him 800 Foot, and 200 Horse, and with
them marched for Babylon. In his way in Mesopotamia he got, partly by fair
means, partly by foul, those Macedonians which quartered at Carrhae to join
with him, but when he came to Babylon, the Inhabitants there willingly received
him, and he shortly after stormed the Castle which was held by Antigonus his
garrison. Nicanor the Governor of Media hearing this, came against him with
above 10000 Foot, and 7000 Horse, whom he went out to meet with but few more
than 3000 Foot, and 400 Horse, and knowing himself too weak to engage in a set
battle with him, he hid his men in the Fens till he was past with his Army, and
then came upon him lying carelessly in the night without any strict guards;
Seleucus recovereth Babylon and the Eastern parts.
so as the Persians coming to fight, Euagrus their Captain was slain, with
other Officers, at which being struck, and also weary of Antigonus his
government, they revolted, and Nicanor with a few at his heels escaped, being
glad he was not delivered up. Seleucus by this means getting a strong Army,
easily made himself Master of Susiana, Media, and the Countries thereto
adjoining; so as getting hereby Royal Majesty, and Glory suitable to his
dignity, some have from this year fetched the rise of that Era, which
afterward was called that of the Seleucidae, and of the Greeks; for that his
Kingdom proved the most considerable; about the year of the World 3694,
Eusebius in Chronico, alii.
the first of the 117 Olympiad, 309 years before the Era of Christ, and twelve
years after the death of Alexander.

24. When Antigonus heard of it, he sent his son Demetrius against him, who had
now redeemed his credit by the overthrow of Cilles, sent to expel him out of
Syria by Ptolomy, and upon it called thither his Father, so as they recovered
all that Country, and Phoenicia out of his hands, he not daring to stay and try
a battle with Antigonus. Demetrius his attempts against him.
Demetrius led with him an Army of 15000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, with order to
recover the Principality of Babylon, and then go down to the Sea. Patrocles, A.
M. 3694. Ol. 117. an. 2. V.C. 443. Seleuci 2. Ptolom. 13.
whom Seleucus had left Governor of Babylon, hearing of his coming, advised
the inhabitants to leave the City, and fly some into the Desert, or over the
River Tigris, he himself with a Band of men flew up and down, taking advantages
at the Enemy, and sent to Seleucus into Media for aid, so that Demetrius coming
and finding the City forsaken, stormed one of the Forts therein, and for that
his time was out, beyond which he could not stay, he left Archelaus with a
strong party to besiege the other. Then giving leave to his Soldiers to plunder
all they could, he departed according to his Father's order to the Sea, where
he besieged Halicarnassus, but was beaten off by Ptolomy, and so as it were
took his leave of that Province for ever, taking what he could get along with
him, and perhaps for this reason the Chaldaeans with the Author of the second
Book of the Machabees in this year (one after the other) fix the Era of
Seleucus. Not long after, Ptolomy, Cassander, and Lysimachus, made a Peace with
Antigonus on these terms: An agreement betwixt Ptolomy, Cassander, and
Lysimachus.
that Cassander should be Captain General of Europe; Lysimachus should retain
Thrace, and Ptolomy Egypt, and the rest which he now enjoyed, until Alexander
the son of Roxane should come to age, and that Antigonus should be over Asia,
and the Greeks live after their own Laws. This agreement was not kept long,
each one seeking under any pretense to enlarge his Dominions, and indeed they
might better do it, seeing he for whom they pretended themselves
Administrators, and was their Sovereign Lord, was taken away. For Cassander
taking notice that young Alexander grew up, and that the People began to talk,
that now he ought to be delivered out of custody, and to enjoy his Fathers
Kingdom, he fearing his own interest, commanded secretly Glaucius his Keeper to
kill him and his Mother, and concealing their bodies, to acquaint no person
living with it: Thus he who was unborn when his Father died, The death of young
Alexander.
died by the hands of violence and treason, thirteen years after him.

25. He had a brother yet living elder than himself, who being begotten of
Barsines (never married to Alexander) was held as illegitimate by the Captains,
Hercules his brother.
though born before his Father's death. His name was Hercules, being now kept
at Pergamus, whence he was called shortly after the death of the other, by
Polysperchon, who now being in Peloponnesus, and envying Cassander the
Principality of Macedonia, sent about to his friends, entreating, that the
youth being seventeen years old, might be brought, and established in his
Fathers Throne. The Aetolians especially, with others, embraced the motion, so
as he got together about 20000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, in no great space, and
within a while after gathered up a numerous Army, with which he marched and
came on his way to Stymphalia. Diodorus ad Olymp. 117. Justin lib. 15. A. M.
3696. Ol. 117. an. 4. V.C. 445. Seleuc. 4. Ptolom. 15.
Here Cassander opposed him, and seeing that his Macedonians took well enough
this reduction of their Prince, and fearing they might revolt to him, sent to
Polysperchon, and with vast promises secretly persuaded him to make away the
young man, which accordingly was performed. Made away,
About this time Demetrius overthrew Ptolomy his Lieutenants in Cilicia, and he
to be revenged invaded Licia, where he took some Cities, after that sailed into
Greece, where he endeavored in emulation to Antigonus to set the Cities at
liberty, but the Greeks not keeping their promise of sending money and corn,
having received Sicyon and Corinth from the Widow of Alexander the son of
Ephaestion (who had revenged stoutly her husbads death, and kept still these
places) he agreed with Cassander that each should retain such places as he had
in his power, and returned.

26. Alexander had yet a sister living called Cleopatra, Diodorus l. 20. ad
Olymp. 118.
formerly the Widow of Alexander King of Epirus (who making an Expedition into
Italy, perished, against the Lucanians, as Livie tells us) and after that
married to Perdiccas, whom also now being at Sardis, Antigonus seems to have
wooed. But she inclining rather to Ptolomy, stole out of Saxdis to go to him,
whereupon Antigonus took such order by the Governor of the Town, that she was
not only stopped in her journey, And Cleopatra their Aunt.
but by means also of some women secretly made away, after which to color the
matter he put some of them to death, and buried her body with royal
magnificence. Shortly after this, Demetrius was sent into Greece to set the
Cities at liberty, which he accomplished at this time for Athens; Demetrius
Phalareus being driven out, and conducted to Thebes, where he lived till
Cassander's death, and then fled to Ptolomy. After this, Demetrius being
recalled to make War in Cyprus, thither he passed, where he overthrew Menelaus,
Ptolomy his brother and Governor there, and pursuing him to the City Salamine,
slew 3000 of his men, and took 1000, and then besieged him in that place.
Ptolomy hearing of the defeat of his men, came both with Sea and Land forces,
and engaged the besiegers in battle, Demetrius his Victories against Ptolomy
whereupon Antigonus and then the rest take the title of Kings.
wherein though he overthrew that Wing against which he himself fought, yet the
other prevailing, he was discomfited with the loss of 8000 men, and all his
ships save eight, with which he fled away, and Demetrius became Master of the
Town and Island. Idem ibid. Plutarch in Demetrio. Justin lib. 15. A. M. 3698.
Ol. 118. an. 2. V.C. 447. Seleuci 6. Ptolom. 17.
Antigonus being elevated with this success, received the title of King given
him by his friends, and a Diadem set upon his head, which title and honor he
also gave to his Son Demetrius. The Egyptians also hearing this, lest they
should seem to be dejected for their loss, gave the name of King to Ptolomy,
who thenceforth in all his Letters styled himself so. Neither now would the
other great ones come behind these; for Seleucus, Cassander, and Lysimachus,
after their example, took upon themselves the same dignity and title, all the
near relations of Alexander being quite extinct.

CHAP. III. From Alexanders Captains taking the Title of Kings, to the death of
Seleucus the Surviver of them, containing the space of 24 years.
1. ANtigonus animated by his late success against Ptolomy in Cyprus, Diodorus
ibid.
now thought of no less than outing him also of Egypt it self; wherefore
recalling his son from the Island, he commanded all his Forces to meet at
Antigonia (a City newly built by him upon the River Orontes in Syria, as
convenient for the lying in wait against the upper Provinces and Egypt) which
afterward Seleucus destroyed, and translated the Inhabitants to his Seleucia.
Antigonus leading the Landforces himself, committed the Fleet to his son,
which was to sail along upon the Coasts with the Army as it marched. Having
good Provision both for men and beasts, he marched through the desert; the Navy
went through great hazard at Sea, but the Tempest ceasing in good time,
Antigonus his fruitless expedition against Ptolomy.
they came all together unto Nile. Ptolomy by this time had so fortified the
several mouths of the River, as the Sea-forces could do no good, though they
removed from one to another, and the Land-Army could not find any food at that
time of the year, the water being very high: Moreover, A. M. 3699. Ol. 118.
ann. 3. V.C. 448. Seleuci 7. Ptolom. 18. Ptolomaeus in Regum Canone.
many fell away to the Enemy, being allured with his promise of 2. l. to every
common Soldier, and a Talent to an Officer; so that Antigonus was fain to
retreat into Syria. Ptolomy being exceeding glad hereof, sent to his
Confederates to acquaint them with his good success, and now having thus
defended his Kingdom, accounted himself rightly to enjoy it, and hereupon some
have accounted the beginning of his reign from this very time, fixing it at 19
years distance from the death of Alexander.

2. This want of success allayed not the ambition of Antigonus, For, Diodorus
ibid.
he sent his son Demetrius presently against the Rhodians, who had formerly
displeased him by a denial to send him aid, and ships. For, they endeavoring
as near as they could to keep in with all these great ones; yet were drawn by
their private interest, especially to favor Ptolomy, from whose Kingdom they
got the greatest part of their livelihood by way of Traffic. And as fruitless
against Rhodes.
Demetrius according to his fathers command, went, and besieged their City,
lying before it nigh a whole year, during which time he made all sorts of
opposition he could, till ordered by his father to make peace with them, which
they were prone to accept of, though Ptolomy with others sent them Provisions,
A. M. 3700. Ol. 118. ann. 4. V.C. 449. Seleuci 8. Ptolom. 19.
and supplies of men. Departing from Rhodes, Demetrius passed into Greece to
restore the Cities which Cassander and Polysperchon had lately mastered through
the absence of Antigonus his Forces. Chalcis he freed from a Garrison of the
Boeotians, whom he also withdrew from Cassander's friendship, joined in society
with the Aetolians, and afterward restored Sicyon, Corinth, Athens, and other
places to their freedom. Cassander seeing things by the help of Demetrius to go
well with Greece, sent over to Antigonus to desire peace, but he refused it,
except he would refer himself whole unto him. He being affrighted at this, sent
to Lysmachus in Thrace, to come and Consult with him, and then they both
dispatch away Messengers to Ptolomy and Seleucus, to let them see how they were
concerned also to resist Antigonus. A Combination against him.
They hearkened willingly to the offers made unto them, and joined in
Confederacy against him as their common Enemy, promising great supplies for
carrying on the War.

3. Cassander thinking it good policy not to stay for the Enemy to come upon
him, but invade him first, gave part of his Army to Lysimachus to pass over
with it into Asia, and with the rest marched for Thessaly, there to oppose
Demetrius and the Greeks. Stirs preceding the great battle.
There meeting, and incamping with vast Armies, neither of them would begin the
battle, expecting how things went in Asia, till Demetrius was recalled thither
by his father. Lysimachus being landed there, the Inhabitants of Lampsachus
submitted to him, whom he restored to their liberty, stormed Sigeus, and placed
a Garrison there; then he takes in Phrygia upon the Hellespont, and diverse
other places, by the means of Docimus, an Officer of Antigonus, whom he had
drawn over to him; Prepelaus also, whom he sent with a party to subdue the
Cities of Aeolis and Ionia, took other Towns. Antigonus was at this time
celebrating public Games at Antigonia, when hearing this news, he presently
broke them off, and with all speed marched against Lysmachus. Whom he reached,
and besieged him in his Camp for some time, till he taking the opportunity of a
dark and rainy night fled away: Then hearing that Seleucus was drawing down his
Forces from the upper Provinces, he sent for Demetrius to come over with all
expedition. Seleucus had lately made peace with Sandrocottus (or Androcottus)
who being a man of no quality, had solicited the Indians to revolt after the
death of Alexander, and to kill his Officers, and thence took an occasion to
subdue them under himself. Bactria being subdued, Seleucus had waged War with
him, but now for a Composure gave to him some Country lying upon the River
Indus, which Alexander had taken from the Arians, and received 500 Elephants
again of him in exchange. Ptolomy with a complete Army had come into
Caelesyria, where he reduced diverse Cities; but as he was besieging Sidon came
a false report that Antigonus had overthrown Seleucus and Lysimachus, and now
was coming thitherward, wherefore he made a Truce with the Sidonians for five
months, and returned, but not long after came up again to that fatal
engagement with Antigonus.

4. Plutarch. in vita Demetrii. Appianus in Syriacis.
The Forces of these several Princes were drawn down to be in readiness
against the Spring. Antigonus had an Army of 70000 foot, 10000 horse, and 75
Elephants, the contrary party had made up amongst them 64000 foot, 1500 horse,
400 Elephants, and 120 Chariots. Antigonus bragged that he would scatter the
meeting of these Kings together, as one might do the flocking of birds
gathering Corn, with the throwing of a stone; but when they approached, he was
more melancholic than usual, and was seen to discourse with his son in private
in his Tent, which he never used to do; commended him also to the Army as his
Successor. This battle was fought at Ipsus, a Town in Phrygia, in which
Demetrius leading the best party of horse, engaged with Antiochus the son (and
afterward Successor) of Seleucus, whom he routed, and put to flight; but being
too hot in the pursuit undid all: for retiring back he could not again join
himself with the foot, by reason that the Elephants were gotten between them.
Seleucus seeing this, made as if he would have falln upon the Infantry, thus
destitute of the horse, wherein his expectation failed him not, for they
fearing it, part revolted to him, and the rest were broken, Antigonus slain in
it.
and put to flight. Antigonus standing his ground, expected continually
Demetrius to come to relieve him: but in that expectation ended his life by a
multitude of Darts thrown against him, being now something above 80 years old.
Demetrius his son with 5000 foot, and 4000 horse fled to Ephesus, but there
fearing his Soldiers might be some way false to him, A. M. 3704. Ol. 119. ann.
4. V. C. 453. Seleuci 12. Ptolom. 23.
he sailed to Salamine in Cyprus, which he then held. This fell out in the 3704
year of the World, the fourth of the 119 Olympiad, 23 years after the death of
Alexander, and six after their taking the Title of Kings upon them.

5. The Conquerours parted his Dominions amongst them, as we are told; Iidem.
but it seems to have been chiefly Seleucus and Ptolomy, who did not well agree
about their prey, and upon this account left a contention to their Successors.
Seleucus fell presently upon building Cities, the first of which he called
after himself Seleucia; and the later, to which he transferred the Inhabitants
of Antigonia (to the number of three thousand five hundred) as we said before,
he called Antiochia, either after his father or son's name; for both are
affirmed, and this afterward proved the Metrapolis of Syria. Ptolomy after the
death of Antigonus got Syria again, with Cyprus, Vide Usserium in prima part
Annal. page 461.
and afterward Cyrene also into his power, and married his daughter Arsinoes
unto Lysimachus, as few years after his other to Agathocles the son. Seleucus
seeing that thus these two strengthened themselves in affinity, The Alliances of
the Kings.
thought not amiss to join also with Demetrius, though gone down the wind; and
accordingly sent to him for his daughter Stratonice. He receiving this
unexpected Message, sailed with her into Syria. Passing by Cilicia, which then
Cassander held, Plistarchus his brother cried out that he would invade his
Territories, and went strait to Seleucus to expostulate with him his being
reconciled to the common Enemy. But Demetrius landing went to Quinda, where
finding yet 200 Talents left in the Treasury, he took them away, and so went
and met with Seleucus at Orossus, who taking his wife away with him to Antioch,
Demetrius seized upon Cilicia, and sent his wife Phila to Cassander her
brother, to purge him of those things laid to his charge by Plistarchus.

Notwithstanding Cassander he held Cilicia; Plutarch. ibid,
but Seleucus his son-in-law required, that for a sum of money he would give it
up into his hands, which he refused, and then he with some anger demanded Tire
and Sidon of him, not being content, though he held all from the Syrian Sea, as
far as India, that his father-in-law should rest quiet with it, A. M. 3707. Ol.
120. ann 3. V.C. 456. Seleuci 15. Ptolom. 26.
being sufficiently tossed with adverse fortune, but he as stoutly denied this
also, saying, that though he were a thousand times more overcome, yet would he
never purchase the affinity of Seleucus, Cassander dies.
and fortified the Cities with Garrisons. The next year Cassander King of
Macedonia died of a Dropsy (which was so loathsome, as Lice withal broke out
of him) after he had ruled that Country 19 years; 26 after the death of
Alexander, A. M. 3707.

6. He left three sons by Thessalonice the daughter of Philip, Idem ibid. and
in vita Pyrrhi. Just lib. 16.
and sister to Alexander; Philip, Antipater, and Alexander. The first succeeded
his father, but died presently of a Consumption, Antipater coming after him
killed his mother, for that after her husbands death she seemed to favor his
younger brother Alexander more than him in the division of the Kingdom; though
she besought him by her breasts that gave him suck to spare her life. After her
death he endeavored to expel his brother out of Macedonia, who therefore
craved aid of Demetrius, and Pyrrhus King of Ep^rus, who being expelled out of
his Kingdom, Stirs betwixt his sons about the Kingdom.
had married Ptolomy's Wives Daughter, and by him was restored. Demetrius being
now employed otherwise, the other came, and received some Countries in way of
encouragement and reward for his service, which he fortified with his own
Garrisons. Antipater now had his recourse to Lysimachus his father-in-law, who
being also hindered with other affairs, and fearing Demetrius his coming,
advised him to make an agreement with his brother; and for that he knew Pyrrhus
would in any thing seek to gratify Ptolomy, that he might take him off, he
feigned a Letter to him from him, wherein he advises him for 300 Talents
received from Antipater to forsake his Enterprise. Pyrrhus as soon as he opened
the Letter, easily discerned it to be counterfeit, for that it was not directed
after the usual manner, as from the father to the son, but as from the one King
to the other.

7. Lysimachus his persuasion seems to have wrought so with the Elder, together
with the presence of Pyrrhus, as they came near to an agreement; but the coming
of Demetrius spoiled all. For, Plutarch. in Demetrio. A. M. 3711. Ol. 121. ann.
3. V. C. 460. Seleuci 18. Ptol. 30.
he having lost Cyprus lately to Ptolomy (which forced him to quit Lacedaemon,
after he had taken Athens, and now had almost taken it also) came into
Macedonia to amend his fortunes. Procures the destruction of them all.
Alexander being troubled at his coming, seeing he knew the peace was partly
made, went out to meet, and received him with great honor, but told him he now
had no need of his help; but he either having, or pretending to have a
suspicion of him, procured him to be slain, telling the Macedonians a fair tale
afterward, who seeing the one of Cassanders sons thus dead, and hating the
other for his impiety toward his mother, received him as King, Some have
delivered that Alexander used Demetrius his help, Pausanias in Boeoticis.
first in killing his brother Antipater, and so revenged the death of his
Mother upon him. Others say that Lysimachus after Alexanders death, Justin ut
supra.
for that he was employed in a War with Dromichetis King of the Getes,
delivered also up to Demetrius, that part which belonged to Antipater his
son-in-law, and afterward slew him also, when he complained to him that by his
means he had lost his Kingdom, and imprisoned Eurydice his wife, his own
daughter, for partaking with him in the complaint. But thus (one way or
other) Antipater was revvarded for his mother's death; and so in a short time
fell the posterity of Cassander, by the just Judgment of God, as Heathen
Writers observe.

8. For some time Demetrius enjoyed Macedonia, during which he still aspired
after his former height and power: Plutarch ibid.
for now having this Kingdom and Thessal^e in his hands, as also Athens and
Megara, and the greater part of Peloponnesus, he subdued the Boeotians. Then
hearing Lysimachus to be taken prisoner by the King of the Getes (who shortly
after yet set him at liberty) he resolved to return for Thrace; Demetrius
getting Macedonia aspireth still after his former height.
but the Boeotians revolting caused him to retreat, though on his march
thither; coming back he found that his son Antigonus had overthrown the
revolters in sight, but Thebes still remained untaken, and whilst he was going
about that, Pyrrhus of Epirus (being now alienated from him since the death of
Deidamia his sister which Demetrius had married) invaded Thessaly from his own
Frontiers, and pierced as far as the Straights of Thermopylae. Demetrius
hearing this, left his son in the Siege, and hasted against him; but he stayed
not his coming but retired, and then Demetrius fortifying Thessalie returned to
Thebes, where the Inhabitants so stoutly defended themselves, that he lost many
men, and himself was wounded in the neck; yet according to his skill and fortune
in taking of Cities (whence he had the Surname of Poliorcetes) he stormed the
place, and though he pretended at first severely to punish the Inhabitants, yet
he satisfied himself with the death of ten or thirteen, and banishing a few,
pardoned the rest.

9. Finding that his Macedonians were quiet when abroad, but seditious at home,
he fell upon the Aetolians, to divert them. Plutarch.
Wasting their borders there he left Pantauchus with some Forces, and with the
rest marched against Pyrrhus, who hearing it, came out to meet him, but they
missed of each other, and went several ways; Demetrius into Epirus which he
harrased; Pyrrhus light upon Pantauchus, who challenging him to fight gave him
a wound, but he received two for it himself, and thereupon falling he had been
slain, but that his friends presently rescued him, after which his Army was put
to flight, and 5000 of them taken. After this, Demetrius fell sick at Pella,
and then Pyrrhus again invaded his Territories a great way, no body resisting
him; nay, he had such an opportunity, as scarce could he have desired a better,
for seizing upon the whole Kingdom, many revolting to him, and Demetrius his
Captains making but slow endeavors to hinder his progress. But he having his
mind set more upon booty than any thing else, stayed not their coming, but fled
away, losing many of his men in the retreat. For all this Demetrius seeing him
have a restless spirit, thought it not amiss to reconcile him unto him; but
especially at this time, for now he resolved to make for his Father's Kingdom
with all the might he possibly could, and therefore lest he should leave an
Enemy at his back, concluded a Peace, and entered into a league with him.

10. Greater preparations he made than ever had been since Alexander his time.
For he got together little less than 100000 Foot, and 12000 Horse, a Navy
also of 500 sail; But laboring to get
some ships whereof were of extraordinary bigness; Seleucus, Ptolomy, and
Lysimachus, being startled hereat, combined together for resistance, and
jointly sent to Pyrrhus to move him to break the league which Demetrius had
made with him, as they alleged, not to rest in peace, but to make War upon whom
he pleased. He believing as much, agreed with them, for that he hoped Demetrius
might as easily lose Macedonia as he had got it, and then Ptolemy sailing into
Greece, solicited there the Cities from their obedience. Lysimachus from
Thrace, A. M. 3717. Ol. 123. v. 1. V.C. 466. Seleuci 25. Ptolom. Lagi 30.
and Pyrrhus from his borders made inroads into Macedonia. Demetrius first
began to march against Lysimachus, but afterward hearing that Pyrrhus had
gotten Berrhaea into his hands, returned and went against him thither, where
when he was come, diverse from the Town came into his Camp, and so extolled the
valor and kindness of Pyrrhus, as the Macedonians, first in little Companies,
and after all the Army revolted to him; so as Demetrius was much deceived, who
fearing they might do so to Lysimachus, little suspected this toward the other
being a stranger. Pyrrhus thus obtaining all the Army without a stroke, Loses
all,
was saluted King of Macedonia by the Soldiers; but Lysimachus coming shortly
after, alleged the endeavor of suppressing the Enemy to have been common to
them both, and demanded the parting of the Kingdom; to whom he assented, for
that he did not trust the Macedonians, and so the Countries and Cities were
divided amongst them.

11. Demetrius thus outed of his Kingdom fled to Cassandria, Idem.
and thence into Greece, where after a little time he got some Forces together,
and being angry with Athens, for that revolting from him, the Inhabitants had
sent for Pyrrhus, And flying up and down.
he besieged it; but upon the entreaty of Crates the Philosopher (whom being a
man of great authority they had sent to him) he gathered together his ships and
sailed away into Asia with 11000 men. His design was to take ^f he could, Caria
and Lydia from Lysimachus, and he took diverse Towns, and seized upon Sardis,
but Agathocles, Lysimachus his son, coming down with an Army against him, he
marched for Phrygia, with intention to pass into Armenia and Media; and so
attempt to make himself Master of some of the upper Provinces of Asia, which at
the worst would afford retreating places enough, and other helps to a beaten
party. In his way he was superior to Agathocles who pursued him, but being
brought into great distress for want of provisions, there fell withal such a
Plague upon his Army, that he lost 8000 men, and so was forced to retreat, and
came to Tarsus. This place being under Seleucus, he was very loath to hurt, for
fear of giving him offense, but being forced by want, he wrote to him, whereby
he excused himself, and sadly lamented his condition. Seleucus, pitying him at
first, commanded his Governors to use him and his Army with great respect; but
Procles one of his most familiar friends, filled his head with such suspicions,
that he led down an Army toward Cilicia against him, whereat he wondering
retired to the most convenient place of the mountain Taurus, where he sent to
him to give him leave to seize upon some Country of the Barbarians, where he
might put an end to his flight and wanderings, and spend the residue of his
days.

12. Seleucus making a bad interpretation of the message, Idem.
only would give way, that giving up for Hostages the chiefest of his friends,
he might quarter for two months in Catoania (a Country bordering upon
Cappadocia) and secured the passage out into Syria. Here he was kept up as a
wild beast, what by Seleucus on one side, and Agathocles on the other; so that
he was constrained to betake himself to force, and wasting the Territories
always had the better of Seleucus in their encounters, and got possession of
the Straights which led into Syria. This so encouraged him, that he thought now
of giving battle to Seleucus, but falling into a sickness thereby his affairs
were ruined, his Soldiers falling away from him to the Enemy, or running away,
yet he recovered after forty days, and away he marched, and getting over the
hill Amanus wasted the bordering Territories. Then Seleucus coming near him, he
joined and fought him, and overthrew one of his wings, but then all his Army
revolted, and he with a very few fled into the Woods, whence endeavoring to
pass to the Sea through the mountains, At length is forced to yield himself to
Seleucus.
his discovering there the Enemies fires prevented that attempt, and then one
saying he must even yield himself, he drew his Sword and would therewith have
ended his life, but being hindered by his friends, he sent to Seleucus by their
advice and yielded. Seleucus caused him to be royally received at first; but
the great confluence thereupon to him lessened that respect he else would have
allowed him; so as sending Pausanias with 1000 men, he caused him to be carried
straight (without as much as seeing him) into a Peninsula of Syria. Here he
vvanted nothing desirable, not only for necessity but pleasure; only his
liberty, which yet to comfort him there was hope given of, after that
Antiochus should come with his wife Stratonice, whom his Father Seleucus
upon his passionately falling in love with her, had yielded to him. Antigonus
his son much interceded for him; so did diverse Princes and States; only
Lysimachus offered 2000 Talents to have him killed, which Seleucus abhorred.
At first he exercised himself much with hunting and such toiles; but by little
and little grevv sluggish, And dies after three years in restraint.
and, as if he had never been Demetrius Poliorcetes, gave up himself to
drinking and dice, whereby he grevv fat, and contracted a disease of which he
died 54 years old, after he had continued three of them in restraint.

13. Idem.
Lysimachus and Pyrrhus after his expulsion out of Macedonia presently fell
out, for the former seeing Demetrius thus made sure and captivated by Seleucus,
grew secure of his condition, despised Pyrrhus, and upbraiding the Macedonians
for suffering him (being an alien, whose Ancestors always had served them) now
to reign over them, drew many from him, Pausan. in Atticis. Justin lib. 17.
Appian in Syriasis.
and afterward overthrew him and Antigonus son of Demetrius in a great battle,
and so quite dispossessed him of Macedonia. After this he killed his eldest son
Agathocles at the instigation of his wife Arsinoe* who was sollicitous for her
own children, if they should fall into their brother's hands after their
Father's death. Lysandra the widow of Agathocles, and sister to Arsinoe,
accompanied with Alexander another son of Lysimachus fled to Seleucus, whom
they desired to make War against him; and after this he putting diverse of his
chief Subjects to death for bewailing the young man, many of his Captains and
Governors followed, all earnestly desiring that Prince to make War upon him.
Seleucus was easily persuaded to it now, having the whole strength of Asia and
Syria united into one Kingdom after the fall of Demetrius, Lysimachus having
expelled Pyrrhus out of Macedonia is slain in battle against Seleucus,
which the other being aware of, thought it best first to begin with him, and
so passed over the Hellespont. A. M. 3722. Ol. 124. an. 2. V. C. 471. Seleuci
30. Ptolom. Philadelphi, 2.
These two being now only alive of the 36 Captains and fellow soldiers of
Alexander, joined in a great and bloody battle in Phrygia, where Lysimachus,
though fighting most valiantly, was overthrown and slain, having formerly lost
fifteen children diverse ways, and now completing the ruin of his Family,
after he had lived 80 years, and held Macedonia four, A. M. 3722, the second of
the 124 Olympiad, and 40 after the death of Alexander the Great.

14. Seleucus being exceedingly elevated with the thoughts of his Victory, and
more with consideration that he only survived of Alexander's followers,
resolved to pass into Macedonia and there to end his days, giving up Asia to
his son Antiochus. Who being the surviver of Alexander's Captains is slain by
Ptolomy Ceraunus the same year.
He passed the Hellespont, and journying toward Lysimachia came to a place
called Argos, where his time being but to live seven months after Lysimachus,
he was slain by Ptolomy Surnamed Ceraunus the son of Ptolomy the first by
Euridice daughter to Antipater, who having fled out of Egypt, for that his
Father preferred his younger brother before him, joined himself first to
Lysimachus, Justin ut prius. Memnon apud Photium.
who had married his sister, and afterward to Seleucus, by whom he was lovingly
entertained, though he thus requited him. Ptolomy, as soon as he had done his
feat, posted away to Lysimachia, when putting on a Diadem, and taking a Company
of Gallants along with him, he went to the Army, which received him as King,
having all Seleucus his money given unto them. Antigonus Genatas (so called
it is probable, from a place in Perrhaebia, where he was born) son of Demetrius
Poliorcetes presently after undertook an Expedition for the recovery of
Macedonia, hoping to justle out Ptolomy ere he could be well settled; but he
having notice of his coming, and enjoying Lysimachus his Fleet, went and met
him at Sea, where he overthrew him, and forcing him to retire into Boeotia,
then confirmed himself in his Kingdom.

CHAP. IV. The Macedonian Kingdom. From the death of Seleucus to the Captivity
of Perseus, and the end of this Kingdom, containing the space of 139 years.
Ptolomy Ceraunus King of Macedonia makes Alliances.
1. PTolomy, that he might provide for the time to come, made Alliances with
other Princes, as Antiochus of Asia, and Pyrrhus of Epirus, who now being about
to pass into Italy, made him Overseer of his son, and Kingdom: he also wrote
to his brother Ptolomy Philadelphus, pretending to acquiesce in the missing of
that his fathers Kingdom, being sufficiently satisfied with this taken from his
fathers Enemy. Moreover, he counterfeited himself to be in Love with his sister
Arsinoe, and married her, for that it was according to the custom of Egypt,
promising to adopt her Children, which he badly performed, for being received
by her into Cassandria, he caused them to be first killed in the bosom of their
mother, and then thrust her out of the City, from whence she went to
Samothracia. At this time the Galls being too many for their own Country,
under three Captains went to seek their fortunes so many several ways; some
toward Thrace, under the Conduct of Cerethrius; others unto Pannonia under
Brennus and Acichorius, and the rest to Macedonia, being headed by Belgius or
Bolgius. These Ptolomy met with a straggling company, being more heady than
wise, refusing 20000 men offered him by the King of the Dardanians, and peace
by the Galls, if he would but buy it, which he scornfully rejected, and
answered, he would not yield them it, except they would give up the Chiefest
amongst them as Hostages, and deliver up their Arms. Joining battle, his Army
was overthrown, and he being sore wounded was cast by an Elephant on which he
rode, Is slain by the Galls.
and so taken alive by the Enemy. They tore him in pieces, and cutting off his
head, put it upon a Lance, and carried it about to the terror of his followers,
of which a few escaping, all the rest were either taken or slain. This end came
Ptolomy to, after he had held Macedonia scarce a year and a half.

2. Meleager his brother succeeded, but only for two months; Porphyrius in
Graecis Eusebii. Justin lib. 24.
for then the Macedonians cast him out as unworthy of the Dignity, and in his
room placed Antipater son to Philip, the brother of Cassander, whom they
surnamed afterward Etesia, because he continued but 45 days, during which
term the Etesian winds blew. After this succeeded an Interregnum (if we look at
the title of King) for Sosthenes, who gathering together a company of young
men, and thereby restraining the pride and covetousness of the Gauls, though
he might have been preferred before diverse of Royal Races; yet refused the
name, and made the Soldiers swear to him only as General. But Brennus hearing
of the good success of Belgius, and what plunder he had got in the East, with
150000 foot, and 15000 horse marched thitherwards; but 20000 falling off from
him by the way, and turning up for Thrace (where they brought under the Cities
of the Propontis) he came into Macedonia, where he made havoc of all things.
Sosthenes overthrown by Brennus.
Belgius, as it seems, before his coming being repelled or gone, Sosthenes
went, and met him with an Army; but carrying too few against so great a number,
was easily overthrown; after which the Macedonians securing themselves in the
Cities, Brennus wrought his pleasure in the Country and Villages throughout
the Land. When he had satisfied himself here, with an Army of 152000 foot, and
20400 horse; of Celtes (or Cimbres) and Illyrians together, he invaded Greece.
Each horsman had two servants followed him on hors-back, who were to succeed
their dead Masters; which custom they called Trimarkasia, or Trima asia rather;
for, Mare in the Teutonick signified the whole species, as also in our own
Saxon tongue) and so furnished, they entered Thessaly, and came to the Straights
of Thermopylae. Here they were opposed by the Greeks, so as they lost many men,
till being lead over the Mountains (the same way that in the expedition of
Xerxes, Hydarnes passed, and getting over, came upon the backs of the Spartans)
the Greeks then fled away, Who with his whole Army is destroyed.
and they went to Delphos then to spoil the Temple, where with Thunder and
Lightning, Cold, falling of Rocks, and the opposition of the Enemy, most of
them came to their ends. Brennus himself being wounded, and not willing (or not
daring) to outlive this shameful expedition of which he had been the Author at
home, first drinking much Wine killed himself, the rest flying were taken with
a Pannick fear, and killed one another for Enemies, and what by this means, the
rage of the Countries through which they passed, with hunger, and cold, scarce
any of them ever returned to their homes.

3. During their stay in Greece, Sosthenes died after he had ruled 2 years,
Eusebius.
and then Antigonus Gonatus having made peace with Antiochus Soter, returned,
and obtained his fathers Kingdom. Brennus departing into Greece, Justin lib.
had left some Gauls to defend the borders, and they lest they should be idle,
with 15000 foot and 3000 horse, first fell upon the Getae and Triballi, whom
overcoming, Antigonus Gonatus.
they then sent to Antigonus, offering him peace if he would purchase it with
money; but especially to spy his Camp. He entertained nobly the Ambassadors,
and to deter them from any warlike attempts showed them his strength at Land
and Sea; but they were so far from being afraid, as having an itching desire
after prey, they stirred up their Companions to endeavor the attaining of that
which they saw, no ways in words diminishing the goodlinesse of any thing. By
night therefore they set upon his Camp, but he being aware of some such thing,
had withdrawn his Army and all things into the Wood; Defeateth other Galls.
therefore they go and endeavor to plunder the Navy, but are so repelled
thence with such slaughter, as the credit of the victory over them procured
Antigonus his quiet, not only from them, but his Neighbors round about him.
About this time these Gauls, which parting at Dadania from Brennus, and going
into Thrace, Idem ibid. and Livius lib. 38.
had at several places passed the Sea into Asia, where uniting again under 17
Captains (of which Lutatius and Leoporius were Chief) they helped Nicomedes
against Zypaeas, who held part of Bithynia, and after he was overcome, wasting
the Country far and near, divided the Kingdom with him, and fixed themselves
about the River Halys, in that place which since has been known by the name of
Gallograecia or Galatia, A.M. 3727. the third year of the 125 Olympiad, the
Romans being now engaged in the War with Pyrrhus.

Plutarch. in Pyrrho. Justin ut supra.
4. But Pyrrhus having finished his fruitless expedition into Italy and Sicily
after six years, and being returned home, now wanting money sought an occasion
to divert and maintain his Army. He made therefore an excursion into Macedonia
(having strengthened himself with a supply of some Gauls) where he took diverse
Towns, and 2000 Soldiers revolted to him; then marching against Antigonus
himself, joined battle with him. The Gauls on Antigonus his part fought very
valiantly; but those which governed his Elephants being compassed in yielded
themselves, and the beasts, after which the foot being affrighted, Pyrrhus
making sign to them, and calling by name the Officers, But is expelled by
Pyrrhus.
drew them all over to his own party. Antigonus fled, but kept some of the
Maritime Towns still in his possession, and Pyrrhus became Master of the upper
part of Macedonia, and of Thessaly. For all this, Antigonus gave not out, but
retiring to Thessalonica, there recruited himself with Mercenary Gaulls, and
then endeavoring to re-establish himself, was again defeated by Ptolomy, the
son of Pyrrhus; so that again retiring to hide himself, Pyrrhus jeered him, and
called him impudent, A. M. 3731. Ol. 126. ann. 3. V. C. 480. Antiochi Soteris
9. Ptolom. Philadelphi 11.
because for all this he put not on a Coat but wore the purple still. He in way
of return compared Pyrrhus to a Gamester, which could throw the Dice well, but
knew not how to improve his chance; for he knew how to Conquer Kingdoms, and
get Victories, but could not improve his Victory, nor retain what he had
Conquered, as it had happened as to this Kingdom before, and now also shortly
followed.

5. Scarce two years did Pyrrhus hold Macedonia; for, Cleonymus the Spartan
being rejected by his Citizens from being King in the room of his father, Who
endeavors to restore Cleonymus.
procured him to march down against his Enemies. He went down thither with an
Army of 25000 foot, and 2000 horse, and wasting their Territories deferred the
entering of the City till the next day, out of contempt of the small number of
the Defendants; who taking that occasion, and making what means they could for
resistance, especially the Women, hindered him a little from entering, and when
entered, his horse being killed under him, forced him notwithstanding to
retreat. During his absence, Antigonus Genatas recovered again the Cities of
Macedonia, and taking it for granted, that after he had done his work in
Laconia he would return again thither, thought it best to hasten into
Peloponnesus, and prevent him. Being come to Argos, Pyrrhus provoked him to
fight for the Kingdom, but Ambassadors came to them both from the Town,
desiring they would depart from their City, and not suffer it (which was
observant of both) to come into the power of either. Antigonus obeyed, and sent
his son to them for an Hostage, Pyrrhus pretending he would, entered the City
in the night, being let in by Aristeus; whereupon Antigonus was sent for. He
sent in a strong party, and Areus King of Sparta was at hand with 1000 Cretians
and other Lacedaemonians; Pyrrhus marched up into the Marketplace, and there
saw a brazen Bull and a Wolf standing in a fighting posture, set there in
memorial of Danaus his election, and ejection of Gatenor, 1200 years before,
which startled him sore, for that it had been told him by an Oracle, that he
should die when he should see a Wolf and a Bull fighting together. Hereupon he
would have retreated, but fearing the straightness of the Gates, sent to his
son Helenus to break down part of the Wall, and come in; but he mistaking,
brought his men and Elephants through the Gate, which stopped so up the way,
that Pyrrhus in his coming back could not pass, and that occasioned his death.

6. He being sore crowded, what by them, those at his heels, and the Enemy, and
sensible of his danger, endeavored by force to remove the later. Plutarch.
Then receiving a wound through his Brigandine with a Lance, turned himself
against him that ran at him. Is slain at Argos.
This was the son of a poor Woman, who beholding the fight from the house, and
seeing him engaged thus with Pyrrhus, took up a stone with both her hands, and
cast it down upon the Kings head, which brusing the Vertebraes of his Neck, he
fell down from his horse, after which his head was cut off by one Zopyrus. A.M.
3733. Ol. 127. ann. 1. V. C. 482. Antiochi Soteris 11. Ptol. Philad. 3. Justin
lib. 26.
It being brought to Antigonus by Alcyoneus his son, who rejoiced at the sight
of it, he checked him, and wept over it, and after caused it and the body to be
magnificently burned: his bones being put in a Golden Urn, he delivered to his
son Helenus to carry them to his brother Alexander into Epirus, and then
receiving his Army, dealt very well with all his friends. After this the Cities
of Peloponnesus were betrayed to Antigonus, which caused great stirs in that
part of Greece; the Gaulls revolting from him, he cut off at Megara, besieged
Athens, and notwithstanding that Patroclus from Egypt, and Areus the King of
Lacedaemon came to relieve them, Antigonus recovering Macedonia, presently
loses it again.
yet he kept all Provisions from them, and after they had long stood out came
to composition, whereby he placed a Garrison in their Fort Museus, which yet
not long after he drew forth again. Areus for want of necessaries was forced to
return home; but they met again afterward at Corinth, where Antigonus slew
him, and not long after was forced to return home; for Alexander King of
Epirus, to revenge his fathers death, had invaded Macedonia. Coming thither,
his Army revolted from him, so that once more he lost his Kingdom, and was
compelled again to shift for himself: But his son Demetrius in his absence
gathering some forces together, so ordered the matter against Alexander,
Demetrius his son again recovereth it.
that he not only recovered his fathers Kingdom, but spoiled him also for a
time of his own. After this, nothing of great concernment occurs of Antigonus,
who died after his first possession of Macedonia 36 years, (having ruled in
some Greek Cities ten years before) when he had lived above 80. A.M. 3762. in
the 2d of the 134 Olympiad.

7. Demetrius his son succeeded him. Polybius ad principium l. 2.
He hired Agron King of the Illyrians to relieve the Mydionians whom the
Aetolians had besieged, which he performed, though the besiegers were before
ready to fall out about their prisoners, And succeeds him.
whether the old or new Praetor should have the honor to dispose of them and
their goods. When it was agreed that both in common should do it, the Illyrians
falling upon them, and killing many, forced them to break up their Siege, after
which Agron possessed with incredible joy, A. M. 3762. Ol. 134. an. 2. V. C.
511. Seleuci Callinici 4. Ptolom. Euergetae 4.
gave himself up to surfeiting and drunkenness, and thereby falling into a
Pleuresie ended his days, and was succeeded by his wife Teuta. She being
elevated also with the former Victory, and not thinking of any thing from
without, gave leave to her Subjects to invade all persons in what place soever
by Sea, whereupon they took Phoenice the wealthy City of Epirus, and injuring
those of Italy, drew upon themselves the displeasure of the People of Rome,
which the rashness of their Queen heightened to a War, as will be seen
hereafter. But by this act, Demetrius so set the hearts of the Aetolians
against him, that whereas before they took part with his Kingdom against the
Achaeans, now they joined in league with them against him.

8. He holding yet the Piraeus or Haven of Athens, Plutarch in Arato.
Aratus the Praetor of the Achaeans pretending a desire to set the Athenians at
liberty from that bondage which thence lay upon them, endeavored to take it
out of his hands, but was overthrown by Bithyes his General, whereupon a rumor
arose that he was slain or taken. Diogenes the Governor of the Piraeus hearing
this, sent word to Corinth to command all the Achaeans there to depart the
Town; and the Athenians to please him and his party very solemnly rejoiced,
wearing Garlands. But Aratus himself then was at Corinth, and hindering Diogenes
his design there, marched down to be revenged on the Athenians, and he came as
far as the Acadaemy, but then being overcome by entreaty, Justin. l. 28.
did them no harm. Some years after this the Aetolians endeavored to take away
part of Acarnanina from Epirus, which then Olympias sister and wife of
Alexander now dead, governing in right of her sons Pyrrhus and Ptolomy, betook
her self to Demetrius, and gave him her daughter Othiae in marriage. He had
before this the sister of Antiochus King of Syria to wife ( Antiochus Hierax as
it seems, who endeavoring to dispossess his brother Seleucus of his
Kingdom, is called King by Justine) who thereupon fled to her brother, and
stirred him up to make War upon her husband. The Acarnanians fled to the Romans
for help against the Aetolians, who were then commanded to abstain from their
incursions, but despising the Embassage, harrased the borders both of Acarnania
and Epirus; and Olympias having delivered up the Kingdom to her son, they all
shortly after died. Porphyr. in Graecis, Eusebius.
Demetrius also (whom we read * to have also enjoyed Cyrene and all Lybia, but
know not how he got it) survived not long after, dying when he had reigned ten
years, and 50 after the death of Alexander the great.

9. He left behind him a son called Philip, who being very young, and the
Princes of Macedonia fearing an Anarchy, Plutarch in vita Aemilii, and Pausan.
in Achaicis. 5.
they constituted Antigonus (the brother or uncle of the deceased, for both are
affirmed) his Tutor, giving his mother to him in marriage. At first he held the
Office by the title of Captain General, but afterward being found moderate and
civil, he was saluted King, being Surnamed Doson, Antigonus Doson.
for that he promised more than he did perform. After the death of Demetrius,
the Greek Cities begun to lift up their heads, Vide Polybium lib. 2.
and the several Tyrants, which, through the encouragement of him and his
Predecessors, had got many places, for fear renounced their power, and joined
themselves with the Achaeans, who being much reverenced of a long time by all
their neighbor Cities of Peloponnesus for their Justice and Prudence, had
united themselves together, in the 124 Olympiad, A. M. 3772. Ol. 136. an. 4. V.
C. 521. Sell. Callinici 14. Ptolom. Euergetae 14.
and drawn some others into a body against the Macedonians. Their affairs were
mightily strengthened by Aratus the Sicyonian, who drayning his own City,
though but young, joined it unto them, and afterward by his great wisdom and
industry secured and bettered their condition. The Athenians being encouraged
at Demetrius his death, now thought again of recovering their liberty, and he
having done what he might before to help them, though in vain, and they again
imploring his assistance, though sick, he made himself be carried thither; and
whereas Diogenes held for the Macedonians, Piraeus, Sunium, Munychia, and the
Island Salamis, he persuaded him for a reward of 150 Talents to deliver them
all up, War betwixt the Aetolians and Achaeans,
twenty of which Talents he presented of his own money. Whilst he thus labored
for the Public good, especially of the community of the Achaeans, the
Aetolians envying their condition raised a dangerous War against them, in which
Antigonus Doson came to be engaged.

10. Idem ibid. Plutarch in vita Arati and Cleomenis.
The Aetolians though they had been helped by the Achaeans against the house of
Macedonia of late, being vexed about the business of Mydionia; yet now seeing
their union, and the flourishing condition of their body, envying and also
fearing it, resolved to disunite if possible, and withdraw the Cities one from
another. At this time Cleomenes reigned at Lacedaemon, who resolving to better
the constitution of his Country by reducing it to it is ancient form, Wherein
Cleomenes King of Sparta comes to be engaged and how.
and taking away the Ephori those impudent and rascally Tyrants, sought for an
opportunity of War as most fit to bring about his purpose. Ever since the
Victories of Lysander, luxury and other vices had crept into Sparta, together
with the use of riches. And the equality of possessions in Land was taken away
by one Epitades an Ephorus, who having a son that displeased him, that he might
disinherit him, procured a Law to be passed, Lege Plutarchum in Agide and
Cleomene.
that any one might dispose of his Lands, either in his life time or at his
death, to whom he pleased. Hereby it was come to that pass, that there being
700 Citizens of Sparta and more, of those not above 100 possessed all the Lands
and Estate, and the rest being void both of wealth and honor lay idle at home,
unwillingly engaging in War, and expecting an occasion of change. The Ephori
tyrannized with unparalleld impudence, domineering over the Kings, and ordering
those at their pleasure, the servants of whom they had formerly been. Agis one
of the Spartan Kings, of the family of Eurytion, the son of Eudamidas, and the
sixth from Agesilaut, burned with a desire of bettering the state of affairs,
and as a means unto it, endeavored the reduction of Lycurgus his model for the
equal division of Lands; but Leonidas his Colleague being of a luxurious temper
opposed him, and he was wickedly murdered by the hands of the Popular Villains
the Ephori.

11. This noble spirited man being taken away, and his brother Archidamus
destroyed, Cleomenes the son of Leonidas was King alone, and being of a far
different temper from his Father, upon hearing what Agis had gallantly
endeavored, resolved to pursue and accomplish what he had attempted, and to
take away utterly the power of those Popular Tyrants, who usurped the whole
authority. Neither did these two Kings desire to become assertors of Popular
power by the restitution of the Lots of Lycurgus, but rather of Monarchy; for
the restitution of those Lots would not promote the power of the Commons who
were still to be kept under, as they were by the Laws of Lycurgus; but only
reduced them to that equality of wealth which might secure them from being
insulted over by their fellow Commoners, as they had been of late, by such as
had engrossed the riches of the State. As this might be intended by the two
Kings, so it appears from Plutarch, that Agis attempted to get himself
reputation, and Cleomenes for his preservation, by gaining the good will of the
People, and making them sure on their side when soever they should be ready for
the great design of destroying the Ephori. Now though Agis miscarried in his
attempt, Cleomenes kills the Ephori and restores Lycurgus his Laws.
yet Cleomenes perfected what he had intended. For he surprised the Ephori by
his Mercenaries, killed four of the five, overthrew all their chairs except
one, which he intended as a Chair of State for himself. Then restored he the
Laws of Lycurgus, as to equal possessions and discipline, and for that there
was none left of the family of Eurytion, made his own brother Leonidas King
with him. But as was said, perceiving this change would be better made in War
than Peace, he caused the War betwixt the State, and the Achaeans, and bribed
the Ephori to send him forth in the Expedition.

12. To him therefore the Aetolians sent, and stirred him up against the
Achaeans; and that they might strengthen themselves, and more easily suppress
them, they made peace again with Macedonia, and without doubt had brought about
their purpose, had they not had to do with Aratus, who undermined their
Councils. They suffered Cleomenes to take in diverse Towns which belonged unto
themselves, not only not opposing but confirming him in the possession of
them, which Aratus knowing well enough to be intended only to strengthen him
against his party, yet thought none were to be first opposed with War; but
after that Cleomenes with great boldness had begun to build a Fort in the
Territories of Megalopolis, then were the Lacedaemonians declared Enemies. At
first the Acheans undertook the War against them by themselves; partly for
that they thought it more honorable and safe to defend their own Estate, and
partly for that they were loath to displease Ptolomy (who had been formerly a
good friend to them) by seeking for the patronage of any other; but the War
going on ( Cleomenes now having overthrown the Achaeans in diverse battles)
Aratus thinking it a disgrace for him to be worsted by the young Lacedaemonian,
and being jealous still of the knavery of the Aetolians, concluded it was high
time to look about him; at least for a supply.

13. Considering with himself the power of Antigonus King of Macedonia, and
withal his faithfulness; and that he was prone to enter into Leagues and
alliances, he resolved to make a Confederacy with him; but that secretly, as
well because he knew the Aetolians would seek to prevent him, as for that his
people would be discouraged at the thought of expecting help from an Enemy.
Knowing therefore the Megalopolitans to be sore pressed with the War (having
little help from the Achaeans) and how good affection they bore to the
Macedonian Court ever since Philip the son of Amyntas, who deserved very well
of them, he sent for two of his friends thence ( Nicophanes and Cercidas) and
dealt privately with them to persuade their Citizens to crave aid of Antigonus.
These two were therefore sent to the Achaeans, and to Macedonia if they should
think fit, who giving way to it, they coming to the King, according to the
instructions from Aratus, proposed to him to consider, whither this conjunction
of Cleomenes and the Aetolians would tend; and whether when the Achaeans were
eaten up, he himself would not be in danger, seeing the covetousness of the
Aetolians, and Cleomenes his ambition could not be contained in lesser limits
than those of Greece it self. He answering, that if it should seem good to the
Achaeans, he would send aid to those of Megalopolis: these being at this much
encouraged, labored to persuade them to give way to it, but Aratus then
fearing that if the coming down of Antigonus should breed any inconvenience,
the blame would fall all upon him, dissuaded his People from receiving as yet
any aid, and made them try first what they could do of themselves, exhorting
each particular City to fight stoutly for their liberty: but Ptolomy finding
the Lacedaemonians now to be more for his pupose to withstand the Macedonian,
stirred up Cleomenes against him, and furnishing him with money, he also had
brought the Achaeans by diverse engagements to such a low ebb, as they were now
in great danger to lose all, and therefore they implored aid of Antigonus, and
Aratus sent his son to confirm whatsoever had been offered on his part.

14. He then marched down, though a great difficulty there was at first for
this to be hoped for by the Achaeans, by reason that the Castle of Corinth
which they had taken out of the hands of the Macedonians together with the
Town, Who marches down. And also Antigonus,
and which would be now mighty convenient for the carrying on of the War, they
knew not how to restore unto him. But Cleomenes now prospering exceedingly, and
having reduced nine Cities into his power, the Corinthians sent to him,
offering him their City, and commanded all the Achaeans to be gone; so that at
this Aratus taking occasion (who before durst not give them up into the hands
of the Macedonians without their consent) restored the Castle into the power of
Antigonus. Cleomenes (who after his taking the nine Cities, went and sat
down before Sicyon) hearing the intention of the Achaeans and the King,
marched with great speed to the Isthmus, and then fortified the place betvveen
the Castle of Corinth and the Mountains Onii with a ditch and bulvvark;
Antigonus with 20000 Foot, and 1400 Horse, coming through Aetiboen (for that
the Aetolians had forbidden him at his peril to pass through the Straights of
Thermopylae) found no little opposition from Cleomenes, till Argos revolting to
Aratus (by the means of Aristotle his friend, who with help from Sicyon set
upon the Castle, Megistonus who was sent to relieve it being slain) fot that he
feared if this Fort should be taken the Enemy might thereby stop up the
passage, and at his ease invade Laconia, he drew down his forces from Corinth;
then Antigonus entering Peloponnesus took Corinth in his way, where placing a
Garrison he followed Cleomenes to Argos, who having by a wile entered the Town,
labored again to reduce it, and took some parts thereof, but seeing him come
down from the Mountains against him, withdrew himself out, and so by Mantinea
returned to Lacedaemon. Is victorious.
Antigonus coming to Argos commended and encouraged the Citizens, and thence
marching presently for Arcadia, reduced diverse Forts, which he delivered into
the hands of the Megalopolitans: after which coming to Aegium to the general
meeting of the Achaeans (where he held consultations with them) he was declared
General of all the Associates, and there took up Winter Quarters for his Army,
viz. at Sicyon and Corinth.

15. At the beginning of Spring he gathered up his forces, and besieged Tegea,
Polybius ibid. Plutarch. in Arato.
where the Achaeans met him. Having this Town yielded to him, he thence marched
speedily into Laconia, where Cleomenes meeting him upon the borders there
passed some light skirmishes betwixt them, and then he hearing that the
Garrison Soldiers at Orchomenus were coming to help the Enemy, departed
suddenly thither, He takes Mantinea.
and presently stormed the place at the first onset. Thence moving to Mantinea,
that Town presently was taken, the chief of the inhabitants whereof (because
though when Atalus took the City, he restored them to their former privileges,
yet they again revolted, and put all his Garrison to the sword) for their
ingratitude were put to death; of the rest part were sold, and part sent into
Macedonia, their wives and children made slaves; and their Town was given by
Antigonus to the Argives, who thither resolved to send out a Colony, and Aratus
being made Praetor, made a Decree for changing the name of it into Antigonia.
After this, Antigonus took Herea and Telphussa, and Winter then drawing on he
went again to the general Assembly of the Achaeans, sending out his Soldiers to
their quarters, which Cleomenes taking notice of, and that Megalopolis was
three days march from Aegium, and wanted a sufficient Garrison, brake in
thither secretly in the night, where though he found such opposition as both he
and his were brought into great danger, yet became he Master of the place, and
so cruelly raged against it (as Polybius a Citizen thereof tells us) that no
hope then seemed to be left of Peopling it again. This City being taken, he
marched away to Argos (where Antigonus wintered) to harrase the Territories; a
rash enterprise as the Vulgar judged, but prudent enough of it self,
considering that the King's Army being at a great distance, and he thereby
unable to resist, the Argives would then murmur against him, and he thereby be
brought into contempt. This happened just as he imagined, but Antigonus though
very much spent of the Ptisick, lived to the next Summer to regain his credit.

16. In the beginning of Summer he led toward Laconia an Army of 26800 men
(his own and of the associates) which Cleomenes expecting fortified the passage
betwixt the two mountains Eva and Olympus, placing his brother at the former,
and securing the later himself, having in all about 20000 in his Army.
Antigonus wondering at his skill and industry in this fortification, pitched his
Tents upon the River Gorgylus, bethinking himself what he should do; at last
finding all passages made up, they both agreed to try the matter in battle. At
the beginning of the fight those on Cleomenes his party with the light Armor
placed amongst his Horse, seeing the Illyrian cohorts not to be backed by the
Achaeans, fell upon their Rear, and had done great mischief, but that
Philopomenes a Megalopolitan (then but young) giving notice of it to the
Officers, and they not regarding him, stirred up his fellow Citizens, and fell
upon the Enemies horse, which made the other return to their former place to
help their Companions. After this the fortune of the day inclined to Antigonus
his side, for Euclidas undid himself by the bad choice of his ground, receiving
the Illyrians not on the side of the Hill, (whereby though he might have been
repulsed, yet still he might have had the advantage of being higher than the
Enemy) but just on the top, so that being thence removed, and forced downwards
on the other side, the Illyrians had the advantage of him. Cleomenes perceiving
his brother overthrown, and the horse on the plain to have the worst, for fear
the Enemy should compass him in, was forced to remove the carriages from
behind his Army, and draw it out as well as he could to prevent that. Then the
Files coming to be engaged, Antigonus pressing upon the Macedonians in great
violence with his doubled Files, Defeateth Cleomenes.
put them to flight, and many being slain, Cleomenes escaped with a few in his
Company, and got to Sparta.

27. Cleomenes coming to Sparta, Polybius ut supra.
advised the people which flocked about him to receive the Conqueror, and then
by night getting to Gythium, thence went to Alexandria in Egypt, whereas if had
either deferred the battle a little longer, or stayed at home, he might easily
have recovered his former condition. For, Antigonus suddenly following him got
Sparta, and very nobly, and with great humanity used the Citizens, restoring to
them their ancient liberties, but shortly after was constrained to leave that
place, and Peloponnesus also, being called home by an invasion of the Illyrians
into Macedonia, where they made havoc of all things. From Sparta he came to
Tegea, which he again restored into the form of a Commonwealth, and thence to
Argos, at the time of the Celebration of the Nemean Games, where by the Decree
of the General Assembly of the Achaeans in common, and each of the Cities in
particular, he had all possible honor given him. After this he marched with
great speed into Macedonia, where he overthrew the Illyrians in battle, but got
his own death; for with exhorting his Soldiers, and shouting in the fight, he
so strained his Lungs that he spat blood, and thereby his Consumption was
heightened, which in a short time made an end of him, after he had discharged
the Office of a faithful Guardian, a good King, and of an expert and valiant
Captain ten years, Dies of a Consumption.
A. M. 3782. and the 2d of the 139th Olympiad, 100 years after the death of
Alexander.

18. Philip then succeeded this his Uncle, and once his Guardian, Pausan. in
Achaicis.
being sixteen years old, in whom the Prediction of Sibylla was verified, that
the Macedonian glory, as it began in a Philip, so it should end in one of that
name. Some three years after his coming to the Government he was also engaged
in the Social War of Greece, of which the Aetolians and Achaeans were the chief
parties. Polyb. lib. 4.
For now the Aetolians (who used to live by Piracy and Robbing) being weary of
peace, though awed by Antigonus as long as he lived, and having in contempt the
youth of Philip, and judging themselves stronger than the Achaeans, Philip
succeeds his Uncle, and comes to be engaged in the Social war of Greece.
they desired occasion to begin a War. The first occasion was given by
Dorimachus one of their body, who being sent to Phigalea, a City of
Peloponnesus in the Confines of Messena (under pretense of securing it, and its
Territories) to spy what was done in those parts, and seeing the Messenians to
live in security, and neglect of any martial Discipline, ever since the peace
was made by Antigonus, being covetous gave leave to certain Pirates to prey upon
their grounds and drive their Cattle thence, though they were friends to the
Aetolians. They complaining of this to him, A. M. 3782. Ol. 139. ann. 2^ V. C.
531. Antiochi Magn. 1. Ptol. Euerget. 24.
he went to Messena, but instead of giving them any relief, he derided, and
threatened the Owners of the Cattle, and by the persuasion of Sciron, then
Praetor of that City, he was secured. It so happened, that at this time there
was one Babyrta a filthy fellow, so like to this Dorimachus, that one could
scarce know them asunder had they been clothed alike, as therefore on a time
Dorimachus was malapertly inveighing against the Messenians, Sciron answered
him, Do thou think, O Babyrta, that we either care for thee, or thy threats?
This Jeer so affected him, The Original thereof.
as to be gone he restored them their goods; but getting him home, it sat so
deeply upon his heart, as by pretense of this injury alone did he stir up War
against the Messenians.

19. He durst not in public Conventions persuade the Aetolians to the War, for
that his private grudge was sufficiently known, but one Scopas being then
Praetor, him he persuaded to join with him in the invasion of the Messenians.
They two therefore, without any public Decree, took the advantage of that
time, wherein a few days only were remaining to Timoxenus, the Praetor of the
Achaeans, to continue in his Office (during which time yet Aratus, who was to
succeed him, could not execute it) and calling together the Aetolians to the
Promontory of Aegium, sailed over into Peloponnesus, and invading the
Messenians (who being unable to resist, had secured themselves within their
City Walls) wasted all with fire and sword. Not only the Messenians, but the
Epirotes, Achaeans, Acarnanians, and Macedonians also being declared Enemies by
Scopas, they gave out Commissions to Pirates to infest them by Sea. A ship of
the King of Macedonia was taken, and being brought into the Haven was sold,
with all the men, and things belonging to it; the Seacoasts of Epirus were
invaded, Thyreas a Town of Acarnania was set upon, and a band of men being sent
privately through Peloponnesus, a Castle there was seized on in the Territories
of the Megalopolitans, which yet Timoxenus reduced by the help of Taurion, whom
Antigonus had left to oversee his affairs in those parts.

20. The Achaeans meeting at Aegium, Idem ibid. and Plutarch. in Arato.
Decreed that aid should be sent to the Messenians; but Timoxenus whose time
was not yet out, being slow in his preparations, Aratus who was to succeed him
got the public signet five days before the time, made Levies, and sent to the
Aetolians to draw away their Forces out of the Messenian Territories, and not
to trouble Achaia upon pain of being prosecuted as Enemies. Scopas and
Dorimachus hearing the Achaeans were gathered together, marched toward the
Eleans their Allies (with whom the Aetolians always maintained friendship,
that they might the better Prey upon Peloponnesus) so that Aratus hearing this,
very indiscreetly, and not like himself (as Polybius shows) for that he
thought they would retreat, dismissed all his Soldiers except 3000 foot, and
300 horse, with which, Aratus is defeated by the Aetolians.
and Taurion his party, he marched against them. He constrained them to fight
in a disadvantageous place for himself, so that his forces were overthrown by
them, and many being slain, the rest secured themselves in the Towns
thereabouts, and the Aetolians passing without let or hinderance through
Peloponnesus, attempted to take Pellene, and wasting the Territories of the
Sicyonians, passed through the Isthmus, and so returned home. After this the
Achaeans assembling together, Aratus was grievously accused for taking up the
Office before his time, disbanding the Army when he knew Scopas and Dorimachas
were in Peloponnesus, fighting the Enemy with so few, when he might have easily
had aid from the Towns thereabout, and, which was worst of all, for engaging
not his best Soldiers in the plain, but only skirmishing at the Roots of the
Mountains, where the Enemy had the advantage of the ground, besides their being
the greater number. But as soon as Aratus appearing put them in mind of his
former services, answered to the things objected against him, and craved pardon
in case he had failed of his duty in the fight, and desired they would examine
the case not maliciously, but with humanity, the people changed so in their
affections, as they were angry a long time with his accusers, and rested upon
his Counsels alone for the future.

21. These things having given the occasion to the Social war, it presently was
decreed against the Aetolians. For, the Achaeans meeting together, ordered that
some should be sent to the Epirotes, Boeotians, Phocians, Acarnanians, and unto
Philip, to acquaint them that they had broken the League now twice by the
invasion of Achaia, to desire help against them, and to receive the Messenians
into the alliance; moreover it was resolved, that the Praetor should agree with
the Lacedaemonians and Messenians, what Forces should be raised by their
States. The Aetolians also assembling, that they might make a breach betwixt
the Achaeans and their associates, resolved to make Peace with the
Lacedaemonians and Messenians, but as for the Achaeans themselves, they
absurdly decreed, that on no other condition would they have Peace with them,
except they forsook the society of the Messenians. The Epirotes, and Philip,
after audience given to the Ambassadors, willingly received the Messenians into
the alliance; but as for the Aetolians, not at all wondering at their carriage
(for that it being but agreeable to their custom of piracy and robbing, A. M.
3785. Ol. 140. an. 1. V. C. 534. Ant. Mag. 4. Ptol. Philopat. 3.
their custom something excused the badnesse of the action) they resolved
still to keep Peace with them. But Scerdilaidas the General of the Illyrians
making an agreement with the Aetolians about his part in the booty, with them
invaded Achaia, and took the City of the Cynaethenses, being betrayed by some
Exiles, which their Citizens had lovingly received again; but to pay for their
ingratitude, these Exiles were put to the sword as well as the rest, and their
City was burnt down to the ground upon the report of the Macedonians coming
into Peloponnesus. Philip marching down the Social War is decreed against the
Aetolians.
For, Aratus had sent to Philip again for aid, who came presently with an Army
down to Corinth, where the Commissioners from the several associated Cities met
him, and unanimously decreed a War against the Aetolians, in the first year of
the 140 Olympiad (as Polybius tells us) and about that time that Hannibal
took Saguntum.

22. Whilst Philip was about Corinth, great stirs happened at Lacedaemon by
reason of him. For such as were his Enemies there, caused some of his party,
lest they should tell how they stood affected, to be slain, and afterward the
Ephori (who had brought the People to decree a continuance in the league with
him) to be murdered as they were sacrifizing, and then joined their State to
the Aetolians, and after they had heard of Cleomenes his death in Egypt, made
a new election of Kings (whereof one was Lycurgus, an obscure man, and not of
the race of Hercules) having lived in way of a Free State about three years,
ever since they were set free by Antigonus, till this time, when their liberty
so called, had bred great strife and emulation. Philip coming to Aegium to the
general meeting, the Achaeans renewed the leagues and confederacies formerly
made with his Ancestors, Changes at Lacedaemon.
and then with a great deal of credit he returned into Macedonia, there to make
provisions for the War, where spending the Winter in levying Forces, and
fortifying that Country against foreign attempts, he also so dealt with
Scerdilaidas, as he drew him over from the Aetolians to his own party, by
reason they had not made him partaker of the booty, as they had covenanted with
him. During this time several associates were sent to for assistance in the
War, and amongst the rest the Messenians, who though they gave the occasion of
it, yet answered, being overpowered by the Praetors of the Aetolians, that
seeing Phygalea was situate in their borders and belonged unto them, they would
not assist in the War, except it was first taken out of the hands of the
Aetolians. Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian King getting some Forces together,
invaded the borders of the Argives, and took several Towns, they not standing
at all upon their guard, expecting no acts of Hostility from their friends as
they counted them, and then was War proclaimed by the Aetolians against the
Achaeans. They were much elevated being now in a flourishing condition, the
other on the contrary were put to it, for that Philip in whom was their
chiefest hope, was only yet providing for the War: the Epirotes would do
nothing till they saw him begin, and the Messenians remained neuters; but
shortly after, the marching of Philip from Macedonia revived their drooping
spirits.

23. For having got together an Army of 15000 Foot, and 500 Horse, Polybius ut
supra.
he departed from Macedonia, for Thessalie and Epirus, intending through them
to invade Aetolia. Coming into Epirus, he was persuaded there by the
Inhabitants to set upon the City Ambracus and recover it, (which the Aetolians
had gotten out of the hands of the Epiortes) to which he was so unwise as to
agree, and thereby lost the opportunity of finishing the War presently, by
neglecting to invade the inland Countries of Aetolia, and by harkening to the
Epirotes, who more regarded their private profit than the public good. In the
mean time, in Peloponnesus things went on in favor of the Aetolians: for
though they had been repulsed with some loss from Aegira, a City of the
Achaeans, yet Euripidas the General of the Eleans made inrodes upon diverse of
the associates, got much booty, and took diverse Towns, with the Castle of the
Dimaeans; Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian took Atheneus a Town belonging to the
Megalopolitans, and Aratus son to the other the Captain of the Achaeans could
hire no Soldiers (because behind already with much pay) and with fear and
indiscretion managed the business. Scopas the Praetor of the Aetolians through
Thessalie invaded Macedonia, Scopas the Aetolian invadeth Macedonia
where wasting all with fire and sword about Pieria, he thence went to Dium,
which, the Inhabitants thereof not staying his coming, he burnt, and overthrew
the images of the Kings. Philip by this time had taken Ambracus in the space of
forty days, and thereby satisfied the greedy desires of the Epirotes; then
hearing what Scopas had done in Macedonia, he passed speedily over the Bay of
Ambracia, and through Acarnania invaded the Aetolians.

24. Pitching his tents before Phaeteas, Idem ibid.
after many sharp skirmishes he received that Town upon composition, And Philip
Aetolia.
and overthrew a party of 500 Aetolians, who were coming to relieve it; after
which, as he was wasting the Country, the Ambassadors of the Achaeans came to
him desiring help. He promised to take their business into consideration, and
marched for Metropolis, the Inhabitants of which flying into the Castle, he
burnt the Town, and thence moving toward Conope, some Horse endeavored to
hinder him from passing the River, but finding it to be in vain, retired into
the Town, and after this, none daring any more to show themselves, he passed
unmolested through the Country, taking many Towns and Castles, the walls of
which he demolished, only Oeniadae he resolved to fortify. Whilst he thus
employed himself, news came from Macedonia, that the Dardanians had resolved to
make an invasion; whereupon judging it requisite to look home, he dismissed the
Achaean Ambassadors with this answer, that as soon as he had provided for the
security of his own Kingdom, he would use his best endeavor to relieve them.
Returning that way he came, with great journeys he passed through Epirus, and
when he had arrived at Pella, the Dardanians hearing of his return disbanded
their Army, and then he presently marched back into Thessalie, intending to
pass away the remaining of the Summer at Larissa. Dorimachus now being created
Praetor of the Aetololians invaded Epirus, and harrasing the Country, robbed,
and then destroys the Dodonaean Temple; but Philip now in Winter, when it was
little expected by any, leaves Larissa, and passing over his Army from
Thessalie into Euboea, passed through Boeotia, and the confines of Megaris, and
about the Winter solstice, comes to Corinth, whither calling Aratus the elder
to him to consult of affairs, he writes to the Praetor, and several Cities of
the Achaeans, assigning them when and where to meet him.

25. Having taken this order he departed from Corinth to Dioscurium, Idem Ibid.
a City of the Phliasians, and thence to Caphyae, where he had appointed the
Achaeans to meet him, And Peloponnesus.
lighting in his way upon a party which Euripidas was leading toward the
Territories of the Sicyonians to waste them, whereof 2200 he took; the other
being slain by his men, and perishing amongst the high Rocks, 100 only escaped
with their Leader. This victory got him abundance of honor (it being heard he
was come, and had overcome also at the same time) which to maintain and
increase, after he was come to Caphyae, he joined Aratus the younger to him
with about 10000 men, and marched to Psophis an ancient Town of Arcadia,
situate in the middle of Peloponnesus, and upon the confines of the Eleans, who
then had it in their hands, and whither Euripidas their Captain had now
withdrawn himself after his defeat. This place Philip had a great mind unto, as
very convenient for the carrying on the War. He got the Town presently, and
after that had the Castle yielded to him, His exploits.
and staying there some time gave up the place into the hands of the Achaeans,
as also Lasione shortly after, which upon his approaching was forsaken by a
Garrison of the Eleans. After this he came into the Country of the Eleans,
which giving his Soliers liberty to sack and plunder, he passed the River
Alphaeus, and came into Tryphalia including nine Towns situate betwixt Flea and
Messena, which also the Inhabitants of the former had got into their possession
a few years before, with Aliphira that belonged to Arcadia. Passing his men
over by a bridge he caused to be made, he presently took Aliphira, and within
six days all Tryphalia, though Phylidas was sent from the Aetolians to aid the
Eleans with 600 men, to which were joined 500 Mercenaries, and 1000 of the
Inhabitants of Elea. Placing a Garrison in the Castle of Lepreatans, he came to
Heraea, where he divided all the booty amongst his Soldiers, and thence
marching to Megalopolis, in the midst of Winter, he afterward came to Argos,
where he spent the remaindert of that Season. During these motions Chilon the
Lacedemonian killed the Ephori who had made Lycurgus King, but the fact being
not approved, he was glad to betake himself to his heels.

26. Philip invaded again the Territories of the Aetolians, Polybius lib. 5.
and thence took very much booty, and returning to Argos to winter, sent his
Army into Macedonia. At this time Apelles (who was one of them whom Antigonus
had left his Guardians) much maligned Aratus, Apelles his plot against Aratus
and others.
and joining with Leontius Captain of the Cetrati (called so from the wearing
of a short buckler) and Megaleas the King's chief Secretary, resolved to remove
Taurion from the Government of Peloponnesus, and Alexander from his command of
the Lifeguard; and had he not been hindered by Aratus, he had accomplishd his
purpose. He had procured also one Eparatus to be chosen Praetor in the room of
Aratus the younger, and he managing his affairs very indiscreetly, the King
could get neither money nor provisions, but was fain to fly to Aratus for
relief; and now it being resolved to carry on the War by Sea, he consulting
with his two creatures, determined to stop up provisons from coming to the
Army, and went to Chalcis for that purpose. He so managed his business, as he
forced the King to pawn his plate, who now sailed against the Cephalenians,
whose ships the Aetolians constantly used in their invasions of Peloponnesus,
and coming to Patra, there drew up his ships on shore. He laid siege to the
City of the Pataeensians, and having undermined a piece of the wall, sent
Leontius to take the place, but he remembering the conspiracy of Apelles,
Megaleas, and himself, to hinder the affairs of his Master, had corrupted the
chiefest of the Officers, and suffered himself to be repelled, so that Philip
raised his Siege, and consulted what was to be done. By this time Lycurgus the
Lacedaemonian King had invaded the Messenians, Dorimachus also the Aetolian had
made an inroad into Thessalie, so that from both parts came Ambassadors to
crave aid. Leontius counseled Philip to go to Messenia; but Aratus to invade
Aetolia again, to whom he agreed, having had experience of his wisdom, and
beginning now a little to trust the other.

27. Writing to the Praetor of the Achaeans to relieve the Messenians, he
invaded their Country, and taking Thermus, gave his Soldiers leave to plunder
the Villages, in revenge for what the Aetolians had done at Dius in Macedonia,
rifled and burnt the Temple, for which he is grievously reprehended by
Polybius. After this returning on shipboard, Leontius and Megaleas in their
cups so abused Aratus, as to throw stones at him, for which the former
escaping, the later was imprisoned and fined twenty Talents at a Council of
War. Philip then sailed to Corinth, whence sending messengers to the associated
Cities to meet him at Tegea, he marched thither in two days, and getting some
Forces together he invaded the Lacedaemonians, and wasted their territories far
and wide, put to flight Lycurgus who came out of the City against him, and then
returned again unto Corinth. Whilst he prepared to attempt some notable thing
upon Phocis; Leontius, Megaleas, and Ptolomy, moved the Soldiers to sedition,
which though he knew very well, yet dissembled he it at present, but Leontius
sent for Apelles from Chalcis, who there had very naughtily behaved himself,
and now returning was not entertained by the King after the usual manner, nor
admitted to the Council. Megaleas hereat being affrighted fled, The treason of
him and his accomplices discovered.
leaving Leontius behind him engaged for the twenty Talents, whose Soldiers
Philip sent with Taurion into Triphyllia as upon service, and then threw him in
prison for the payment of the money, and not long after (the Soldiers
malapertly interceding for him, that he should not be tried till their return,
otherwise they should take it as a great affront) he put him to death. Then
came he to Patra, where he had appointed the Deputies of the Cities to meet him
about a Peace with the Aetolians, which the Rhodians and Chians had by
Ambassadors moved both parties to. Here letters of Megaleas were brought to
him, wherein he stirred up the Aetolians to proceed in the War, for that he
would be in great straights for provisions, whereupon he judging Apelles to
have been the chief cause of those evils, sent him in custody to Corinth, and
ordered Alexander to go to Thebes and pursue Megaleas. He hearing this killed
himself, and Apelles died soon after.

28. The Aetolians hearing of these stirs in Philip's Court, and thinking
thereby some great sedition would be raised, put off their meeting at Rhium
about the peace, which he was not at all sorry for, but exhorted the associates
rather to bend their minds toward thoughts of War. Then, coming to Demetrias,
there was condemned Ptolomy, Apelles his Companion, by the Macedoians, Ptolomy
put to death for treason.
and put to death; then, for that Winter was now begun, having sent his Army
before, he himself followed into Macedonia. The next year he got Bylazora the
chiefest Town of Paeonia into his hands, and Thebes Pthiotick also, which the
Aetolians holding, much molested Thessaly: but receiving news that Scerdilaida
being revolted, made great waste of all things about Malea, he returned into
Peloponnesus at the time of the celebration of the Nemean Games. Here he
received letters that Hannibal had overthrown the Romans at the Lake of
Thrasymene, and Demetrius Pharius, who had waged War with the People of Rome,
for the Illyrians, advised him to make Peace with the Aetolians, Philip having
vast things in design, puts an end to the Social War.
and undertaking the affairs of Illyricum pass thence into Italy, and think
of no less than arriving at the Monarchy of the World. Being elevated with
this fancy, he persuaded the Achaeans to agreement, and then sending Taurion
and Aratus to the Aetolians, who desired a Treaty, at their request he went
also himself down to them, and made Peace on this condition, that all parties
should enjoy what now they held. Agelaus of Naupactus persuaded the Greeks to
embrace amity, A. M. 3789. Ol. 141. an. 1. V. C. 538. Antioch. M. 8. Ptolom.
Philop. 7.
lest cutting one another throats thus, they might be devoured by the
Carthaginians or Romans. So all the Cities returned to their ancient ways and
customs, and this Social War ended after it had continued four years, in the
sixth of the reign of Philip, the first of the 141 Olympiad. A. M. 3789.

29. Polyb. lib. 5.
Philip applied himself to the recovery of the Cities which had revolted from
him, and then thought of nothing more than settling the affairs of Illyricum,
necessary for the promoting of his designs, especially the invasion of Italy,
upon which his mind was so settled, as sleeping and waking his fancy ran wholly
upon it, being spurred on by Demetrius Pharius, not so much for any great
affection born to him, as for the others private interest, who thought hereby
to recover the Island Pharus, which once he enjoyed; and out of hatred to the
Romans, who having overthrown him in War, about this time sent to demand him of
Philip, to whom he had fled. Livius l, 22.
After he had recovered the Cities, and sent his Army to the Winter quarters,
he bethought him that there would be need of ships for the carrying on of his
project; not for fighting with the Romans, but conveying of his men, so that he
caused 100 swift Barks to be built, and in the Spring exercising his Soldiers
a little in rowing, away he goes through Euripus near to Cephalenia, hearkening
continually after the Roman Fleet. But the report of it is coming, after a short
time put his men into such a pannick fear, that though he was now going toward
Apollonia, he tacked about, and in great disorder after a day and a nights sail
came back again to Cephalenia. For all this he was not discouraged from his
enterprise, He sends to Hannibal in Italy.
but understanding how Hannibal prospered in Italy, thought good to make him
his friend, and thereby get an entrance in thither. So this year being the 4th
of the 2d Punick War, he sent Ambassadors to him.

30. The Ambassadors landing near to the Temple of Juno Lacinia, Idem lib. 23.
went through Apulia toward Capua where Hannibal then lay; but in their way
fell into the Roman Guards, by which they were brought to M. Valerius Laevinus
the Praetor, then lying about Numeria. Being thus entangled, Xenophanes, one
bolder and wiser than the rest, told the Praetor they were come from Philip to
make a League and Alliance with the People of Rome; at which he rejoicing, that
after the revolting of their Associates in Italy so great a Prince should
desire their friendship, entertained him and his fellows very lovingly, and
sent them away with some to conduct them, so that coming into Campaniae they
presently got to Hannibal. The Terms of their Alliance.
The Alliance was made on these terms, that Philip with as great a Fleet as
possible (200 ships he thought he could procure) should pass into Italy, waste
the Maritime parts thereof, and help to carry on the War both by Sea and Land:
that Italy being Conquered should all fall to Hannibal, and the Carthaginians,
with all the spoil; and then they should pass into Greece, and there make War
upon what Princes or States Philip pleased, who should enjoy whatever places
could be got, either in the Continent or Islands, he being willing to content
himself with these conditions for a beginning. Things being thus concluded, the
Ambassadors were dispatched away, and with them some sent from Hannibal, who
shipping themselves again where they landed before, were discovered by the
Romans, The Ambassadors taken by the Romans.
who lay upon the Coasts of Calabria, and taken. Xenophanes, having had such
good fortune before, with his skill attempted the same thing again, but the
habit and language of the Carthaginians discovered them, and, the League being
found about them, all was brought to light, and confessed; and then they were
sent to Grachus the Consul to Cuma, and by him to the Senate.

31. The Fathers entered into serious debate about it, being much troubled to
find, that though they were scarce able to undergo the Carthaginian War, they
should be engaged in another with the Macedonian; yet notwithstanding they were
not dismayed, but considered how they might make work for Philip at home,
thereby to divert him from Italy. Having therefore imprisoned the Ambassadors,
and sold their followers, they gave order for fifty ships fitly furnished to
hover about Italy, and if the Kings attempts should appear answerable to the
Embassage, Marcus Valerius the Praetor was then to invade Macedonia. Whilst
these things were in hand, one of the ships which being taken accompanied the
Ambassadors to Rome, Others sent with better success.
escaped, and acquainted Philip how things had passed, who then not knowing
what was done or concluded betwixt Hannibal and himself, sent Messengers, who
dispatched the business with better success, but the Summer was too far spent
for him to do any thing this year. These high thoughts and designs he now had
in his head did so puff him up, that from an excellent Prince as he was at the
first, he turned tyrannical as men judged, so that he began to wax harsh
against the Cities of Greece, being set on by Demetrius Pharius, who advised
him to get Peloponnesus into his own power, and for that purpose to seize on
the two horns of that beast, (as he accounted them) the Castle of Corinth,
Polybius ex lib. 7. excerpt. 3.
and also that of the Messenians, who being now at odds amongst themselves, he
labored to increase their differences; and for that Aratus was displeased at
it, and labored to diswade him, he cast him out of favor. The year after he
had entered into League with Hannibal, finding it yet not convenient to make for
Italy, he took Oricus a Town of Illyricum, in order to the besieging of
Apollonia, both which had joined themselves in society with the Romans fifteen
years before. He is beaten at Appollonia, and driven home.
But when Laevinus the Praetor heard of it, leaving the Coast of Brundusium to
the care of P. Valerius, he hasted to Oricus, and presently recovered it, and
afterward sent a party under the Conduct of Naevius Crispus, which getting
into Apollonia, afterward fell upon the Macedonians lying so securely in their
Camp, A. M. 3791. Ol. 141. ann. 3. V. C. 540. Antioch Mag. 10. Ptol. Philog. 9.
that about 1000 men entered the Trenches before it was perceived. Hereupon
followed such a Pannick fear, as no body endeavored to repulse the Enemy, and
3000 were slain and taken here, the King getting out of his bed, fled half
naked to the ships, which Laevinus being aware of, secured the mouth of the
River, so that he was forced to fly with a poor and unarmed Army by Land into
Macedonia.

32. About this time, being angry with Aratus, Idem lib. 8. Excerpt. 9.
for being agrieved at his ill usage of the Messenians, he now procured him to
be poisoned by the help of Taurion his Lieutenant in Peloponnesus. At the first
the thing was not known, it being a slow working poison, but Aratus himself was
not ignorant of it, yet showed such calmnesse of mind as he acquainted none
with it, but Cephalo his nearest attendant, Poysoneth Aratus.
who observing him to spit blood upon the Wall, he only said, This reward O
Cephalo have we for our friendship to Philip; but after his death he was
honored by all the Achaeans as an Hero. Philip about this time casting his
thoughts upon Illyricum, got Lyssus a strong Town thereof, and Acrolyssus its
Castle into his power, Idem ibid. Excerpt. 10.
having divided his Army into two parts, one whereof he hid on the Land-side,
and drew the Defendants toward the Sea with the other, so as they in ambush
entered the Castle without opposition (otherwise impregnable) after which he got
the Town, though with much trouble, Livius lib. 26.
and then most of the Cities out of fear submitted unto him. But the same year
M. Valerius Laevinus withdrew the Aetolians from their society and alliance
with him, by showing them the civility of the Romans toward their friends, and
especially by putting them in hopes to recover Acarnania again into their
power, having Scopas the Praetor and Dorimachus to back him in this persuasion.
Laevinus the Roman Praetor makes him work enough.
In the League also were to be included the Eleans and Lacedaemonians, Attalus
King of Asia the less, Pleuratus of Thrace, and Scerdilaidas of Illyricum, if
they pleased. Laevinus took presently Zacynthus an Island near to Aetolia,
having a City in it of the same name, Oeniada also and Nassus, Towns of
Acarnania, all which he gave to the Aetolians, and then judging he had made
work enough for Philip to keep him at home, that he should not think of the
invasion of Italy, or of Hannibal, or the Carthaginians, he departed to Corcyra.

33. He was Wintring at Pella, when the news first came to him, Idem ibid.
therefore as he had determined to pass into Greece in the Spring, and first
to invade, and awe the Illyrians, he now made incursions thither, after that
into Pelagonia, and then took a City of the Dardanians in the Borders of
Macedonia, being as it were the Key into their Country. After this he hasted
into Thessalie, where leaving Perseus with a party to restrain the Aetolians,
he thence marched toward Thrace against the Maedi, which were wont to make
inroads into Macedonia when the King was absent in the Wars; from them he took
Jampharnia, and attempted other places. But the Aetolians now aiming at,
Polybius lib. 10.
and expecting great things, because of their conjunction with their Romans,
struck terror into almost all the other Greeks; wherefore the Achaeans,
Boeotians, Euboeans, Epirotes, and Acarnanians implored his help, for all which
he provided as well as he might, and sent a party to defend Preparethus the
Island, at which he heard that Attalus coming into Europe, arrived, being
chosen by the Aetolians their Commander in Chief. Scopas the Aetolian hearing
he was gone into Thrace, invaded Acarnania, the Inhabitants whereof sending
away their Wives, Children, and Aged into Epirus, vowed never to return except
as Conquerors, rather than to be again enslaved under the Aetolians. This the
Enemy hearing, was something amated at their resolution, and then knowing of
Philip his coming, returned home, and he when he heard they had so done,
returned also unto Pella. Idem lib. 27.
The year after he succored the Achaeans sore molested by Machanidas Tyrant of
Sparta, and the Aetolians, and went against Lamia, a City of the Aetolians,
who coming out to meet him, he overthrew them in two several engagements, after
which they shutting up themselves in the Town, he drew down his Army to Phalara
a Maritime City of Thessaly, whither Ambassadors came from Ptolomy, the
Rhodians, Chians, and Athenians, to compose the difference betwixt him, and the
Aetolians, though not so much out of love to these, as for fear that Philip and
his Kingdom should grow too great, and become burdensome to the liberty of
Greece. The Treaty was put off to the meeting of the States general of the
Achaeans, and a Truce made in the mean time for thirty days.

34. It was also began with this design, to keep Attalus, or the Romans, from
coming into Greece; The Aetolians refuse peace.
but the Ae^olians observing the Term of the Truce almost to be expired, and
hearing that Attalus was come to Aegina, and the Roman Navy to Naupactus,
hindered the conclusion; first complaining of some things done during the Truce,
and then plainly refusing to agree, except the Achaeans would restore Pylus to
the Messenians, and except the Romans, Athamanians, Sce^dilaidas, and P^euratus
were included in the peace. Philip holding it an unworthy thing that those who
had the worst of it in the War should give Laws to the other, broke up the
meeting, and leavying 4000 men for a defense to the Achaeans, went to Argos. In
the mean while P. Sulpicius coming with the Roman Fleet from Naupactus, landed
betwixt Corinth and Sicyon, and wasted the Country; but Philip lighting upon
his men drove them to their ships, and then going to Dymae, cast out thence the
Garrison of the Aetolians, called thither by the Eleans. Their Territories he
also wasted ( Cycliadas the General of the Achaeans having united his Forces
with his) and then went against the City it self. Philip again worsted by the
Romans at Elis.
It happened that Sulpicius was secretly got in thither with 4000 men, which
struck a terror into the besiegers as soon as they espied the Roman colors,
and Philip would fain have drawn off his men; but a skirmish being begun he was
forced to charge the Roman Cohort with his horse. His own horse being shot
under him, A. M. 3796. Ol. 142. ann. 4. V.C. 545. Antioch. M. 15. Ptolom.
Philop. 14.
a sharp conflict followed about his person now on foot, but being overpowered,
he was rescued by his followers, and mounting another fled away. Then pitched
he his Tents five miles from Elis, and the next day marching to Pyrgus a Castle
not far off, there took a multitude of Country people, which with their Cattle
had fled thither for protection; but as he was dividing the plunder, a
Messenger came out of Macedonia, and informed him, that a certain man of the
Aeropians had taken Lychnidus, and was raising the Dardanians; wherefore
leaving 2500 men under the Government of Menippus and Polyphas, for a Guard to
the Achaeans, away he marched into Thessaly, where he heard the Dardanians had
invaded his Kingdom, and that he was reported to be slain. After his departure
Sulpicius went and wintred at Aegina with Attalus, and the Achaeans fought
prosperously against their Enemies.

His acts in Greece.
35. The year after, Livius lib. 28.
P. Sulpicius Galba the Proconsul and Attalus departing from Aegina with their
Navies joined together (which made up fifty sail) came into Euboea, and there
took Oreus through the treachery of Plator the Governor. Philip now being at
Demetrias, great complaints came to him of the Aetolians, who being very high,
troubled grievously the Associates; the Achaeans moreover being molested again
by Machanidas Tyrant of Lacedaemon, and desiring aid, he dismissed the
Messengers with promise to provide for the safety of all as near as he could,
and appointed fires to be made on the tops of the Mountains, with a
Watchtower, to give him warning if the Enemy invaded the Seacoasts. The fires
upon the coming of the Navy to Oreus were by the cunning of Plator made too
late; but upon the sign given he hasted with his Army (having beaten off the
Aetolians who opposed him at the Straights of Thermopylae) and came to Elatea a
Town in Phocis. Attalus at this time, and the Proconul having attempted Chalcis
to no purpose, came to Opus, which being taken, the King's Soldiers were to
have the plunder of it, as the Romans had before of Oreus. Here he staying too
long to gather money, was almost surprised by Philip, and hasting to his ships,
had not got all his men aboard before he fell upon him; then departing to
Oreus, he there received news that Prusias King of Bithinia had invaded his
Kingdom, so that he presently returned home, and Sulpicius to Aegina. Philip
chiding the Opuntians for yielding so soon, went, and took Thronium inhabited
by them of Thebes Pthiotick, who being outed thence by him 8 years before, as
we said, the Aetolians had given them this Town to dwell in. After this
returning to Elatia (where the Ambassadors of Ptolomy and the Rhodians stayed
his coming to move him again about the peace) and hearing that Machanidas had
determined to set upon the Eleans, he resolved to prevent him. Machanidas
hearing of his coming, retreated presently to Sparta, and then went he to
Aegium to the general Council of the Achaeans, to whom he restored Heraea and
Triphylia; and Aliphera to the Megalopolitans. He made some depredations upon
the Aetoliam, then returned to Oreus, and so to Demetrias, where he gave order
for making of ships; (things being quiet there after the departure of Attalus)
and so into his own Kingdom against the Dardanians.

36. The two years following, Idem lib. 29.
little or nothing was done by the Romans in Greece, so that the Aetolians
being destitute of their aid (in which they most confided) were forced to make
a Peace with him on his own terms. Scarce was it concluded, The Aetolians
forced to make a peace with him.
when Publius Sempronius the Proconsul was sent to succeed Sulpicius (who
carelessly managed his affairs) with 10000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 35 Galleys,
who coming to Dyrrhachium raised the Parthini, and set upon Damallum. Coming a
little after to Apollonia, Philip having received the news of his arrival,
marched down thither, and would have given him battle, but the Proconsul
refusing it, and he not daring to attempt the Town, as also because he was now
inclinable also to Peace, he returned again into his own Kingdom. Not long
after the Epirotes bearing also the same mind, sent to him, desiring he would
think of Peace, which they despaired not of, so he and Sempronius would but
meet together. He condescended to go down into Epirus, and then came to an
interview with the Proconsul at Phoenice, together with Aminander King of the
Athamanians, and the Deputies of the Epirotes and Acarnanians, where it was
agreed that the Parthini, A general peace made betwixt him, the Romans, and
others.
the Cities Dimalum, Bargulum, and Eugenium, should fall to the share of the
Romans, and the Atintanae (because they had desired it from the Senate at Rome)
to Philip: in the confederacy were included on the Kings part, Prusias King of
Bithinia, the Achaeans, Boeotians, Thessalonians, Acarnanians, and Epirotes,
and on the Roman, the Inhabitants of Ilium, King Attalus, Plearatus, the
Eleans, Messenians, and Athenians, with Nabis Tyrant of Sparta, and successor
of Machanidas, Polybius l. 11. excerpt. c. 7.
slain in battle by Philopomenes, who now had begun to defend his Country from
the Lacedaemonians and others. A Truce was made for two months, to have the
consent of the People of Rome, who now having turned the War into Africa upon
the Carthaginians, were glad to free themselves from all other troubles, and
therefore the Peace was confirmed by the suffrages of all the Tribes.

37. But Philip's mind was so inured to action, Plutarch in Philopomene.
that he could not but make himself work; for perceiving Philopomenes (now
Praetor the second time of the Achaeans) to be in great respect for his
military skill and valor, he sent to murder him at Megalopolis, which being
discovered, he deservedly incurred the displeasure of all Greece. He kept some
correspondence (together with Antiochus the Great) with Ptolomy Philopator, He
incurreth odium several ways.
when living; but after his death, they two consulted together to deprive his
young son of his Kingdom, and might well have done it (especially seeing the
Egyptian Court was much vexed by the discord of the great ones) had they not
both been diverted by the Romans, And Having other enemies
and punished justly, as Polybius observes. Lib. 5. excerpt. 20. c.
And though he had been reconciled to the Aetolians, and used them as his
friends and allies, yet now without any pretense did he withdraw Lysimachia
from their society, and joined it to himself, after that Chalcedon; and to
gratify his Son in Law Prusias of Bithinia, enslaved the City of the Ciani,
though the Aetolians had sent them a Captain who commanded in chief, Ibid. c. 2.
which cruelty so incensed the Rhodiaus, as ever after they became his Enemies,
and joined with Attalus King of Asia against him. Very stoutly did he deal with
these his adversaries, never being discouraged by any bad success. He had the
worst of it in a battle at Sea near Chius, but driving Attalus on Land, and
taking his ship (though he had never lost so many men in any battle whatever
before) he ascribed the Victory to himself. A. M. 3805. Ol. 145. an. 1. V. C.
554. Ant. M. 24. Ptol. Epiph. 4.
For all this War in which he was employed by two powerful adversaries, He
ingageth against the Romans.
yet feared he not to undertake another with the People of Rome, which now a
few months after the end of the second Punick was decreed against him, about
fourteen years after his entering into confederacy with Hannibal, of his own
reign the 23, and the first of the 145 Olympiad. A. M. 3805.

38. For though there had been a peace made, Vide Livium lib. 31.
yet it was conceived he had broken it by his molesting the Aetolians, and
other associates, and of late by sending aid to Annibal in Africa, and the
Carthaginians: The Athenians by their Ambassadors also called upon the Senate
for help, whose Territories he had wasted, The grounds of the War on the Roman
part.
and forced them up into the City. The occasion of the War betwixt him and them
was from the Acarnanians; for two young men of that Nation coming to Athens,
chanced to go into the Temple of Ceres with the other company at the Feast,
being not initiated, and for that reason were put to death, as having committed
an unpardonable offense, though ignorantly they did it; now this the
Athamanians took so to heart, as they procured Philip to make War upon them. At
the same time were come to Rome Ambassadors also from Attalus, and the
Rhodians, complaining that the Cities of Asia were also molested by him; so
that now having little to do after the ending of the second Punick War, the
Senate unanimously made a Decree, by virtue whereof Marcus Levinus the
Vicepraetor was sent into Macedonia with 38 ships brought out of Sicilie by Cn.
Octavius: Afterward came news further that he was about to take Athens, and
then it being proposed to the People, the War (through the persuasion of
Publius Sulpitius Galba.
the Consul, to whom it fell by lot) was decreed against him. He had not
besieged that City himself, but, sending down Philocles one of his Captains
thither, went and subdued the Chersonesus of Thrace. Only the Inhabitants of
Abydus stood out against him, and that with such resolution, as following the
example of the Saguntines in Spain, they fought it out to the last, Idem ibid.
and Polyb. excerpt. lib. 16.
and made an end of themselves, after he had denied to receive them upon any
other terms than yielding to mercy. Yet Attalus and the Rhodians might have
relieved them had they not loitered.

39. Sulpicius the Consul coming to Apollonia, Livius ibid.
upon the desire of the Athenians, sent C. Claudius Cento with twenty ships out
of the Fleet which lay at Corcyra, furnished with Soldiers, to relieve their
City. He hearing that Chalcis was badly looked to, though fortified with a
Garrison of the Macedonians, went thither, took it with ease, then plundering
it set on fire, and returned to the Piraeus, or Haven of Athens. Philip was now
come down to Demetrias, where hearing this news he passed over Euripus on a
bridge, and through Boeotia hasted to Athens, thinking to surprise the Town;
but the Inhabitants having got notice of his coming, Philip's fruitless
Expedition against Athens.
stood upon their guard, and then he perceiving his craft failed him, betook
himself to force; but this being to no purpose (the Romans coming in, and the
Soldiers of Attalus from Aegina) wasting all about the Town, and not sparing so
much as the Sepulchers, he went to Eleusine thinking there to get the Temple
and Castle into his power; but the guards being strong, and the Navy coming to
help from the Piraeus, he marched thence to Megara, and so to Corinth. Hearing
now that the Achaeans were met at Argos, to consult how to resist Nabis Tyrant
of Sparta, he went down thither, and came upon them unawares, and promised he
would make War upon him, on condition they would but find him Soldiers to keep
Oreus, Chalcis, and Corinth. His design was to engage them in the War against
the Romans, which they very well understood, and therefore Cycliades the
Praetor answered, that it was not lawful to propose any other matter than that
for which they were assembled, and so a Decree being made for raising an Army
against Nabis, he broke up the meeting.

40. Nothing yet was done by the Roman Consul of himself, but encamping upon
the River Apsus between Apollonia and Dyrrhachium, he sent L. Apustius his
Lieutenant with a party to harrase the Enemies Country, who performed what he
went about, taking diverse Towns of Macedonia, and then returned with much
booty. Philip being come home, made all provision possible for the War, and
knowing the restlessnesse of the Aetolians, for fear they might side with the
Romans, (which yet they had not done) sent his Ambassadors to the general
meeting of them called the Panaetolium, whither came also L. Furius Purpureo,
sent from the Consul, and others from the Athenians. He courteth the Aetolians,
The Macedonian being first heard, advised them to remain in their society with
him; the Athenians inveyed bitterly against Philip, as having broken the Laws
of humanity and religion, in violating their Sepulchers, and Temple; then
Purpureo shows how the Romans had undertaken the War for them, though they
formerly made Peace without them, and now how good an occasion was offered them
of being restored into their friendship and society, except they would rather
perish with Philip. This inclined all their minds toward the Romans; but
Democritus the Praetor thought the business was to be put off to the next
Council. But his bad success against the Consul makes them join with the
Romans.
But not long after Philip fought twice with the Consul, and that so
unprosperously, as he had like to have been taken himself, and then they
embraced the society of the Romans, and invading Macedonia, took and burnt
Cercinium, after which going into Perrhaebia, Philip set upon them at unawares,
and killing many, forced the rest to fly for their safety under the conduct of
Aminander into their own Country. This year the Roman Navy joining to that of
Attalus and the Rhodians, took the Island Andrus, and Oreus, the City we have
often spoken of, in Euboea.

41. Philip taking all care possible for the managing of his affairs, Livius
l. 32.
the next Spring sent down his Auxiliaries and others through Epirus into
Chaonia, to seize upon the Straights near Antigonia, and he himself following
after with the strength of his Army, fortified the Vallie betwixt the
Mountains, through which the River Aons runs; Athenagoras his Lieutenant he
commanded to look to the Mountain Asnaus, and he himself pitched his Tents upon
the hill Aeropus. Tappulus the Consul does nothing.
To Sulpicius the Consul succeeded P. Villius Tappulus, who coming late did
nothing at all, for leading toward the Enemy, he with a few went to view the
Moors, through which his nearest way lay to him, and consulting many days
whether he should pass that way, or take the same Sulpicius went into
Macedonia, before he could determine, news came to him, that his Successor was
already come to Corcyra. This was T. Quintius Flamininus, created Consul ere he
was thirty years old, who falling this Province came sooner than usual,
bringing over with him 8000 Foot, and 800 Horse. Being arrived at the Camp,
after some consultation, he determined to set upon Philip's Army in the place
where it yet lay; Flamininus succeeds,
but how to do it was hard to be resolved, and forty days were spent in this
deliberation, which time Philip was content to make an opportunity to look
after Peace, With whom Philip has a fruitless treaty.
and attempt the procurement of it through the Epirotes. They met at the River
Aous (or Apsus) but the Consul demanded things seeming so hard to the other,
that he asked him if he would impose more hard conditions upon one conquered?
and so withdrew himself from the conference.

42. The next day followed some light Skirmishes, neither part receiving either
much good or damage, but as they continued in this condition, came a certain
Shepherd, sent by Charops Prince of the Epirotes, undertaking to lead the
Romans through the Mountains an easy way, and bring them upon the Enemies
back. The Consul glad of this opportunity, sent a party with him, And is beaten
by him.
and then gave an Alarm with the whole Army to the Camp, which the Macedonians
received willingly enough, and both Armies being greedy of fighting, they
marched out of their Trenches to receive the battle; but then those on their
backs setting up a shout, struck them with such terror, that some of them ran
away, others by reason of the difficulty of the place for fight were compassed
in, and 2000 slain. The King fled amain till he came five miles off, and then
rallying his men upon an hill, with a great Company went into Thessaly. Where
wasting diverse Towns to deprive the Enemy of Provisions, he thence passed into
Macedonia. The Consul following him into Thessaly, labored to get the good
will of the Epiro^es, and called to him Aminander King of the Athamanians to
conduct him on his way; then took he Phaleria (where were in Garrison 2000
Macedonians) which he plundered and burnt, at which also others being affrighted
yielded themselves, and Philip not daring to oppose, but keeping within Tempe,
sent relief upon occasion to such places as wanted. The Consul takes in
several places in Thessaly.
At Rhaga the Consul found such opposition as he raised his siege, but thence
departing took in diverse Cities of Phocis, and besieged Elatea, during which
things the Navy under the conduct of L. Quintius his brother, in Conjunction
with Attalus and the Rhodians, took two of the most considerable Towns of
Euboea, and then prepared to venture for Corinth; but by the Consul's advice,
they first sent to the Achaeans to see if they might draw them from Philip to
their own party.

43. Aristaenus or Aristinetus (as he is called by Polybius) their Praetor,
labored to persuade them by all means to embrace the society of the Romans, at
which the Dymaeans and Megalopolitans out of distaste went out of the Council,
as unwilling thus to betray Philip, and the rest unanimously entered into
Alliance with Attalus and the Rhodians, The Achaeans join with the Roman party.
and for that they could not do as much with the Romans without consent of the
People at Rome, put it off only till they might send their Ambassadors
thither, and Decreed at the present to dispatch away three to Lucius Quintius,
and their Army also to Corinth before which he now lay. The Town was stoutly
defended by the Inhabitants, and Androsthenes the Governor for the King, till
such time as Phi^ocles came with 1500 fresh men to their relief, after which it
seemed best both to Attalus and Quintius to raise their siege, and then
Philocles had Argos betrayed to him. The Consul in this mean time got Elatea,
and then taking up his Winter quarters, news came that the Opuntians were at
odds amongst themselves, some calling the Aetolians, and some the Romans,
desirous to give up their City to them. The stronger and richer part called
the Consul, but the Castle was still held by the Macedonians, who could not be
got out by any fair words or foul, and when it should have been stormed came an
Herald from Philip, desiring a time and place might be set for a meeting to
treat again of peace, which being granted, they met in the Bay near Nice at the
day appointed, where Philip would not come ashore for fear as he pretended of
the Aetolians. Another Treaty.
Much talk there was on both sides, Polybius except. e lib. 17.
the treaty being put off from one day to another; but it being required of the
King to quit all Greece, he refused to do it, having a great desire to keep
Corinth, Chalcis, and Demetrias; and then at his request he had leave given him
to send Ambassadors to the Senate, and a Truce was made for two months.

He sends Ambassadors to Rome.
44. The Greeks sent their Ambassadors also, and all came to Rome, when the
debate was about the Provinces of the new Consuls, whether one of them should
have Macedonia, according to the custom, or both stay, and carry on the War
against the Gauls then depending; for the Tribunes of the people opposed the
custom, alleging that the reason was why Wars were so lengthned, because there
was every year a new General according to the succession of the Consuls. This
being referred to the Senate, it was thought fit to continue the Command to
Quintius, and then had all the Ambassadors audience. The Greeks inveighed sore
against Philip, and earnestly labored that he should not be allowed to hold
Chalcis, Corinth, and Demetrias, for otherwise Greece could have no thoughts of
liberty. They alleged it to his own saying, that these three were the Fo^ters
of Greece, and that not without reason; for if he held Corinth, Peloponnesus
could have no breathing time; if Chalcis, the Locrians, Boeotians, and Phocians
durst not mutter; and if Demetrias, the Thessalians, and Magnetes should not be
able as much as to taste of liberty: seeing therefore he pretended to be
willing to quit all other places, this was but a shift for the present, seeing
if he was Master of these places he might recover what he had before; therefore
they desired he might either relinquish them, or that the War might be carried
on, seeing the greatest part of it was finished already. The Kings Ambassadors
beginning a long Oration, were interrupted at the first, and asked whether
their Master would be willing to leave the three Cities; they answered they had
no Commission to answer any thing to that point: and so being chidden by the
Fathers they made an end, and the affairs of Greece were again left to the
management of Quintius.

To no effect.
45. Philip seeing how things went, Livius ut supra.
wrote to Philocles to deliver up Argos to Nabis the Tyrant of Sparta, on
condition that if he prospered he should again restore it to him; but he
presently after his getting into the Town, sent word to Quintius, who giving
him a meeting, desired he would make peace with the Achaeans, and send aid
against the King; the later of which he promised to perform, and as for the
peace granted a Truce for four months. Philip shortly after came down again
into Thessaly (it being no policy at all to expect the Enemy in his own
Kingdom) which Quintius understanding marched thither, where wandering after
each other, Polybius excerpt. e lib. 17.
they both at length in a thick mist came near to some Hills, from the
likeness of the heads of Dogs, called Cynoscephalae. Here both their
foreguards fixing came to the discovery of each other, and from the
skirmishing, and engagement of them, to a set battle, Is overthrown at
Cynoscephalae.
though the King at first did not intend it. A. A. 3808. Ol. 145. ann. 4. V. C.
657. Antioch. Mag. 27. Ptolom. Epiphanis. 7.
The victory seemed at the beginning to incline toward the Macedonians in one
Wing; but the other being overpowered, they both at length were overthrown by
the skill and valor of the Romans, 8000 perishing, and 5000 being taken
prisoners: Of the Romans 700 were slain. Philip, when he saw how things went,
fled toward Tempe; at the entry of which he stayed for such as had escaped,
and then passed through that Country into Macedonia. The Romans coming to
plunder the Enemie's Camp, found the Aetolians got thither before them, at
which they sore repined, and grumbled at their General, as if he exposed them
to danger, and granted the Prey to others. Flamininus was sore displeased to
see the greediness of the Aetolians after Prey; and as this gave occasion to
that hatred, which afterward manifested it self, so it made him the more
willing to agree with the Enemy, that he might not leave them Masters of Greece.

46. Idem excerpt. Legation. 6.
Philip sent presently to the Roman General to desire another Treaty about a
peace, who receiving them in a Council of Officers, without calling the
Aetolians, used them very respectfully, and presently granted a Truce for
fifteen days. This seeming strange to the Aetolians, they presently concluded
he was bribed to it by Philip, not accounting better of others than according
to their own covetous humor; but he being displeased with them, not only for
the matter of the plunder, but also for that they gave out sleighting words of
the Roman valor (attributing the good success to themselves) hearing also
that Antiochus King of Asia was coming toward Europe, and so fearing Philip
might join with him, and then a new Consul coming might take the glory of
concluding the War away from himself, he resolved to make an end of the
difference, and appointed a day and place to meet at, to which he summoned the
Allies. Being met together he willed them to declare their minds concerning the
peace, on what terms they would have it made. Aminander very modestly desired
Provision might be made for him, else he was like to undergo the malice of
Philip, who would be able presently to crush him. The Aetolians were point
blank against the peace, saying, all would prove fruitless, except the
Macedonian were outed his Kingdom, and that Quintius, except he did it, would
neither answer the expectations of Greece, nor of those that sent him; to which
he replied, that it was not the custom of the people at Rome utterly to undo at
once those with whom they warred, and that the liberty of Greece would better
be provided for by the standing of the Macedonian Kingdom, so weakened as it was
like to be, than by the destruction of it; seeing then it would be obnoxious to
the invasion of the Thracians and Gauls. The day after arrived Philip himself,
and the next, coming into a full Council there, very wisely allayed the heats
of all parties against him, offering to ratify the former demands of the
Romans, Obtains a Truce, and sending again to Rome,
and for the rest to submit himself to the pleasure of the Senate. Therefore
four months Truce was granted to him, according to his desire, and paying to
Quintius 400 Talents in ready money, and giving up Demetrius his Son, and
others for Hostages, he had leave to send to Rome about the conclusion; but
with this caution, that if the business should not succeed, he was to have the
Hostages and Money returned back unto him.

47. Both Senate and People admitted of peace, Idem excerpt. Legation. l. 7.
and 9.
though Marcellus the new Consul labored against it, out of desire to be sent
into Macedonia. Philip was enjoined, Procures peace.
besides the setting of all Greece at liberty, before the celebration of the
Isthmian Games; to restore all Captives and Renegadoes, to give up all his
covered Galleys except 5. and one with 16 Oars on a side, to pay 1000 Talents,
half at present, and the other half in the space of 10 years, at so many
payments. Into Greece were sent 10 men of the Chief, with whom Flamininus was
joined in Commission, to compose affairs, and restore liberty to the several
States thereof, which exceedingly affected all with joy, except the Aetolians,
who carped at the Decree, and affirmed that Greece had only changed it Lords;
seeing the Romans had Corinth, Demetrias, and Chalcis. When the Commissioners
came to sit, some controversy indeed arose about these Towns; for they having
it in express charge to set all others at liberty, these were left to their
discretion because of Antiochus, who, as all men thought, had intentions to
attempt something upon Europe: therefore Flamininus persuaded them to give up
Corinth into the hands of the Achaeans, and keep that Castle, Demetrias and
Chalcis in their own power. Then going to the solemnity of the Ishmian Games be
there pronounced liberty, in that great audience, unto all Greece, which so
affected the hearers, as with admiration of the thing they were scarce
themselves.

48. During the War between the Romans and Antiochus, Livius lib. 30.
which shortly after followed, Philip behaved himself suitably enough to the
expectation of the Conquerours: afterward considering, and comparing his
present condition with his former, he grew something impatient, and especially
amongst other things, this vexed him, that power of animadverting upon those
Macedonians who had revolted in the War, was taken from him; for after that
Antiochus was overcome, and the War with the Aetolians was now in hand, Acilius
the Consul taking Heraclea, and Philip besieging Lamia, when he was in a fair
way of taking of it, he was commanded to depart from it, that so it might be
surrendered to the other. His dissatisfaction after the War.
Acilius to pacify him, gave him leave to make War upon Athamania, and to
recover the Cities which the Aetolians had taken from the Thessalians; so that
he presently drove out Aminander from Athamania, recovered diverse Cities,
amongst which was Demetrias, and possessed himself of the Country of the
Magnetes, and some Cities in Thrace also. This pacified him for the present,
yet did he not let fall his indignation, but in time of peace made all
provision possible for another War, increasing his Revenues not only by
Customs, but by renewing the works of the Mines, and digging others, as also
taking care for increasing the number of his people now exhausted. Whilst he
thus employed himself, there wanted not an occasion to inflame his mind anew;
for the Thessalians and Athamanians sent to Rome to complain of him; Eumenes
also about the Cities of Thrace. The Senate not being willing to judge the
matter in his absence, sent three Commissioners into Greece, to hear and
determine it, who sitting, and hearing all parties as Arbitrators, were
something provoked by some words he uttered, affirming, that as yet the Sun of
all the days he had to live was not set; and all being heard, they Decreed he
should withdraw his Guards from all the Greek Cities, and that the Kingdom of
Macedonia should be terminated by its ancient limits. As for the Cities of
Thrace, much being alleged pro and con, betwixt him and Eumenes; they kept the
middle way, reserving the decision of that to the Senate, and ordered in the
mean time that his Garrison Soldiers should be drawn out of them. The Senate
resolved he should quit them, and all the Maritime Coasts of Thrace; so that
now being sufficiently incensed, he wanted but convenient Forces to make him
revolt.

49. Being commanded to quit Aenus and Maronea, with all the Sea Coasts of
Thrace, he procured the principal of the Maronites who were strongly bent
against him, to be murdered in the night, and then the Romans complaining of it
as an unworthy deed, he denied it, and when Onomastus and Cassander the
instruments of the fact were required to be sent to Rome, the later he gave way
for to go, but then (it is thought) procured him to be poisoned in the way, lest
he should tell tales; and as yet his affairs not being ripe for a revolt, he
sent Demetrius his younger son to Rome, to purge himself, and deprecate the
displeasure of the Senate. Underhand he solicited the inhabitants upon the
River Ister to break into Italy. Demetrius had got heretofore so much good will
at Rome, as coming to have audience in the Senate, though he was abashed at
that presence, and the heavy loads of imputations laid upon his Father by the
Ambassadors of his Enemies, Yet were his Father's faults passed over at this
time for his sake, He is displeased at the favor of the Romans toward his
younger son Demetrius
and so much signified to Philip by Q. Marcius, sent into Macedonia to see
whether he had done all that was enjoined him. Then did he quit all the Cities
of Thrace inhabited by the Greeks, and performed all other things which the
Romans required, that he might not give any suspicion, but get leisure to
provide for the intended War. With Demetrius his son he was not well pleased,
for that the Senate making no account of himself, had given him the credit of
deserving only favor; but especially Perseus his elder son conceived great
indignation and malice against him, not only for the credit he had at Rome,
but being jealous he might deprive him thereby of his Father's Kingdom. Indeed
the Macedonians looking upon Demetrius as one to whom they were obliged for
saving them harmless from the Romans, designed the succession to him, whom
also they held legitimate, but not Perseus, whose mother was no better than his
Father's Concubine.

50. Perseus growing more and more sensible of the favor his brother was in
both with the Romans and Macedonians, Which advantage Perseus his eldest son
improveth,
bent his mind to bring him into the jealousy and hatred of his Father, and
thereby to work his destruction. His visit in way of merriment and jollity to
him he represents as an opportunity taken to make him away, whereby the young
man is called for by his angry Father, and is forced with tears to make an
apology, to which credit is hardly enough given, suspicions and jeajousies
getting ground. At length Perseus accuses him of having dealt with them at
Rome underhand about the Kingdom and place of his Father, who sends two thither
to enquire of it, but such as were Perseus his creatures and partners in the
plot. Philip having a mind to go up to the top of the Mountain Haemus, for to
have a view and prospect of the Country round about, took with him his eldest,
and sends his youngest into Macedonia to look unto it, with whom he sent one
Didas Governor of Paeonia with a small guard. He being also one of Perseus his
Accomplices, he gave him in charge to insinuate into him, and thereby get out his
most inward intentions, which he easily did, the poor young man being resolved
to fly to the Romans for shelter, and desirous to use his help therein. This
is presently made known to Perseus, and by him with improvement to Philip, who
having wearied himself and Soldiers to little purpose, and being troubled with
this report, returns home, casts Herodorus, Demetrius his chiefest friend,
into prison, and causes him also to be narrowly looked to. Some months
remained the King thus exceedingly troubled and anxious in himself, till the
Ambassadors returning from Rome, put an end within a short time to his
resolutions.

51. These men being returned, feigned grievous accusations against Demetrius,
Livie lib. 40.
and amongst the rest brought counterfeited letters as from Quintius, And
compaseth his brothers death by false accusations.
wherein he begs pardon of the King, if the young man had dealt with him in any
kind out of his desire to the Kingdom, but promises he will do nothing against
any one that belongs to him, for that he would not be accounted for the time to
come the author of any evil purpose, Credit being given hereunto, Herodorus is
racked to death, confessing nothing, and Demetrius being again accused by his
brother of intended flight, is destined to die, though for fear of giving any
offense to the Romans, and discovering his intentions against them, it is
resolved to be done cunningly. Being sent to Aestraeum a Town of Paeonia, and
thence called to Heraclea, he is there first poisoned by Didas, A. M. 3824. Ol.
149. an. 4. V.C. 572. Seleuci Philop. 6. Ptolom. Epiph. 22.
crying out against the cruelty of his Father, the paricide of his brother, and
wickedness of Didas. Being tormented with the working of the Poison, two lusty
Ruffians were let into the room, who stifled him with the tapestry, and so the
innocent young man was murdered. His Father within a year or two fell into a
sad melancholy for the loss of him, which being perceived by one Antigonus the
son of Echecrates, and Nephew also to Antigonus who was Philip's Father, The
device is discovered,
he having been always a faithful friend to the King, labored to discover to
him the whole device, and brought to him one Xyetius, who was privy to the
whole design. He laid open the series of all things to him. Hereupon Philocles
one of the Ambassadors that were sent to Rome being present, was put to death;
Apelles the other, hearing the business was come out, fled into Italy, Perseus
only kept him out of sight, but his Father intending to frustrate his
expectations of the Kingdom, which he so wickedly sought after, declared
Antigonus his heir and successor, saying, he had rather his Kingdom should be
destroyed, than ever come into the hands of Perseus. Whereat Philip labors
to disinherit Perseus and dies of Melancholy.
Not long after being spent with extreme grief and melancholy, and having
commended Antigonus to the States of Macedonia, and uttered many a bitter curse
against Perseus, he died at Amphipolis, after he had reigned 44 years. A. M.
3826, the second of the 150 Olympiad, 146 years after the death of Alexander
the Great.

52. Had Philip lived a little longer, Antigonus had got possession of the
Kingdom by his means; but things being not now ripe, A. M. 3826. Ol. 150. an.
2. V. C. 575. Seleuci Philop. 9. Ptol. Philom. 2.
he lost it by the procurement of the Kings Physician, who when he saw there
was no hopes of life, sent and acquainted Perseus with it, and kept close his
death till his arrival, so that then having opportunity to oppress his Enemies
not once thinking of it, Yet Perseus gets the Kingdom, and resolves to
renew the War with the Romans.
he obtained the Kingdom. Being a little settled therein, he caused Antiochus to
be slain, and then sent to Rome to renew the League made with his Father, and
to desire that he might be owned as King, doing this only to secure himself
for the present, and intending as soon as his affairs would permit, to make use
of the preparation his Father had made for another War; as it afterward
proved. His Father a little before his death had prevailed with the Bastarnae,
who lived near the River Ister, to leave their ancient seat, and come and live
in the Country of the Dardanians, which he intended to give unto them, that
there leaving there wives and children, they might together with the Scordisci
(who being some of those Galls that invaded Thrace, had seated themselves at
the meeting of Danubius and Sabus, and so called themselves) invade Italy. They
re-entred Thrace again with quietness, but after Philip's death falling out
with the Inhabitants, and pursuing them to the Mountains, they were set upon
with such a tempest as seized on the Galls at Delphi, and being pressed also by
the Thracians, only 20000 got into Dardania, the rest of the multitude
returning back beyond Danubius. Livius lib. 41.
Those that arrived in Dardania now did Perseus stir up against the Inhabitants
as much as possible, which being distasteful to the Romans, their Ambassadors
also returning from Carthage, reported to the Senate that he held intelligence
with them there; for his Ambassadors had private audience of them by night, and
others were sent by them into Macedonia.

53. About this time some of the Dolopians refusing to obey him, and willing to
submit their cause to the Roman Senate, he went down, and by force brought all
their Country into his power; he labored then to curry favor with several
Cities of Achaia and Thessaly in his passage, and either sent or wrote to
several others in Greece, desiring them that an end might be put to the ancient
grudges betwixt his Father and them; the Achaeans especially. The Roman Senate
upon the report of the stirs in Dardania, sent three to see how matters went,
but he refused to see them; it being alleged sometimes that he was absent, and
otherwhiles that he was sick; but it clearly appeared to them that he was
providing for the War, and so much the more, for that the Aetolians were now so
seditious, as though their commissions gave them power to take up the
differences amongst them, yet could they not prevail by their authority. Indeed
now he was better provided to make War than the Romans to resist, having 30000
Foot, with 5000 Horse, in a readiness, and provisions too for ten years.
Thrace was at Peace with him, and though he was so infamous for his cruelty,
not only in respect of his brother's death, but also the killing of Apelles,
whom he used as an instaument in that business, and also for making away his
wife, and upon other accounts, yet either out of reverence to the Court of
Macedonia, or by reason of their emulation against the Romans, were both the
Greeks and Asiaticks generally more favorable to him than to Eumenes the King
of Pergamus, though of a clean contrary disposition. Eumenes himself came to
Rome to complain against him; to answer to whose accusations he sent
Ambassadors, His bad carriage toward Eumenes makes him the sooner be declared
an Enemy.
and with them the Rhodians, who inclined to his side, and as Eumenes returned
home, he most basely sent some to murder him, whom though that King escaped as
to his life, yet was he sore wounded in the straight passage to the Temple at
Delphi: This as it lost Perseus much with his friends, so it made him be the
sooner declared an Enemy by the Romans.

54. It was thought good that some forces should be raised to be in a
readiness, Idem lib. 42, 43, 44.
and that certain Commissioners should be sent into Greece to retain the States
in their fidelity, with Soldiers also to put into such places as wanted. He
perceiving their resolutions, began to repent himself, and procured a truce,
that he might send Ambassadors to Rome, He desires Peace which will not now be
granted.
the Commissioners giving way to it, for that they knew him in a good posture
for War, and themselves unprovided as yet; but the Senate for all this would
not grant him Peace, his faults being so aggravated against him, that the War
was denounced. P. Licinius Crassus the Cousul being sent against him, he had
the better of it in an engagement; but yet his heart failed him, so contrary to
his former humor, as that then he sent and desired Peace, offering to perform
all his Father was tied to; but had answer by the stout Romans, that on no
other terms could it be granted, except he absolutely refer himself and
Kingdom to the courtesy of the Senate, and cast all into their hands. After
this he sent to Genthius. King of the Illyrians, to draw him to his party,
having taken diverse Towns from him, and might have done himself good thereby,
had he not been besotted; for that Prince was inclinable enough to him, only
he said, he wanted money, which though he had enough by him, yet neglected he
to send. He labored also to draw into his aid Cotys King of Thrace, and
subdued again the Dardanians, but Quem vult Jupiter perdere, dementat prius. Q.
Marcius Philippus coming against him, His consternation of mind.
A. M. 3836 Ol. 152. an. 4 V. C. 585. Ant. Epipharis 8. Ptol. Philom. 12.
by reason of the difficulty of the ways, and want of provisions, might easily
have been utterly defeated; but he cried out he was conquered, without fighting
ran away, left the Straights open for his Enemy, sent to Thessalonica to burn
his ships, to Pella to cast his treasures into the Sea, and then being angry
with the messengers, the one for that he had not obeyed him, the other for that
he had, he put them both to death, and recovering most of his treasure, by
those that dived, out of the water, only satisfied himself for this madness,
by recovering Dius, which had been taken by the Enemy.

55. L. Paulus Aemilius the Consul was at length sent against him, Livius ibid.
who found some difficulty at first to come at him, having encamped himself
near the Sea under the mountain Olympus; Plutarch in Aemilio.
but Scipio Nasica getting over a Rock led the way, and then Perseus retired,
and pitched his tents near to Pydna. The Consul was wary of engaging with him
(who now had an Army of 39000 Foot, and 4000 Horse) his own men being tired,
but the night before the fight the Moon being eclypsed, so terrified the
Macedonians, that they accounted it to presage the ruin of their Kingdom, He
is overthrown,
which made the Romans (to whom it was foretold on purpose) more eagerly to
begin the fight. Cato son to M. Cato, and son in Law to the Consul, behaved
himself so stoutly, as this encouraged the rest, and thereby he was the means
to gain the victory. Of the Macedonians were slain 20000, and 6000 taken; of
the Conquerours but 100 lost their lives. Perseus fled to Amphipolis, and
finding there no relief, sailed to Samothrace, where hoping to be secure in
that sanctuary, Cn. Octavius the Admiral being sent after him, promised by the
voice of a Crier safety and freedom to all that would come in, whereby he was
forsaken of almost all his followers, and Ion of Thessalonica gave up hfs young
children into the hands of the Romans. He thought now of escaping to Crete;
but, being left thus, gave up himself, and eldest son to Octavius, when he had
reigned 11 years; and after being lead in Triumph by the Consul was cast into
prison at Alba, where for seven days he lay in a most sad condition, till
through the importunity of Aemilius it was changed into a better. Yields
himself, and dies in custody after two years.
Two years he thus continued, and then through desire of life and liberty,
encouraging himself in new and vain hopes, ended his days, some say through
the barbarousnesse of his Keepers, who would not suffer him to take any rest,
but others, by course of nature in free custody, having his funeral discharged
at the public cost. Thus ended this Macedonian Kingdom, being changed into a
free State through the seeming bounty of the Conquerours, A. M. 3837. the first
of the 153 Olympiad, 156 years after the death of Alexander the Great.

CHAP. V. The Asian and Syrian Kingdom.
From the death of Seleucus, to the reducing of Syria into the form of a Roman
Province by Pompey, containing the space of 220 years.
1. FOur or five years after the death of Cassander, Plutarch. in Demetrio.
Valerius Maximus lib. 5. cap. 7. Appianus in Syriacis.
it happened that Antiochus the eldest son of Seleucus fell in love with
Stratonice, daughter to Demetrius (which woman we said before that Seleucus
married, after her father was overthrown, and beaten out of Asia) and for that
he was ashamed to reveal his affection, pined away, and resolved to starve
himself, had not his disease been discovered by Erasistratus the Physician, by
the changing of his countenance when she came in or out, Antiochus the son of
Seleucus falling in love with his Father's wife has her granted to him.
and by other tokens. Seleucus, who was ready to redeem his sons life with his
own blood, presently gave him her to wife, though he had a Child by her; and
that the business might seem to proceed of himself, calling his Army together,
he declared it to be his pleasure to make them two King and Queen of all the
upper Countries, having married them together; and that he thought his son, who
had hitherto been obedient to him in all other things, would also herein be
ruled by him; but if his wife should distaste so unusual a thing, he desired
his friends to show and persuade her, that whatsoever the King should think
fit, and the affairs of State required, that she ought to account of as just,
and fitting. After this he took Demetrius her father, and imprisoned him in the
Chersonesus of Syria, where he died, after three years as was before said, and
within a year after his death fought his last (and the last of Alexander's
Companions) battle with Lysimachus, in which he being Conqueror, and his Enemy
slain, A. M. 3712. Ol. 121. ann. 4. V. C. 461. Seleuci 20. Ptol. Lagi 31.
left Asia wholly to his son, having a desire to go into Macedonia (where he had
never been since he came over with Alexander) and end his days in his Native
Country. But as he was journeying toward Lysimachia, he was traitorously
slain by Ptolomy Ceraunus whom he had lovingly entertained. A. M. 3722. 23
years after he had taken the title of King, being aged 73. and 42 after the
death of Alexander. From his Conquests he was called Nicanor and Nicator, and
is reported to have had the print of an Anchor on his Thigh, Vide J^stin. lib.
25.
and his posterity also after him, as a note of their Original.

2. Antiochus succeeded his father, Appian in Syriacis. Memnon excorpt. cap.
16. etc.
and was surnamed Soter from repelling the Gauls, which in his time at the
invitation of Mithridates. King of Bithynia had seized on part of Asia. Having
with many battles recovered (though not all) his fathers Kingdom from diverse,
which now begun severally to pluck the parts of so great a body, he sent over a
strong party under the Command of Patrocles beyond Taurus, who took to himself
Hermogenes for his Lieutenant. He intended amongst other places to fall upon
Heraclea a City of Pontus; but the Inhabitants coming out, and pacifying him,
he made a League with them, Succeeds his father.
and thence through Phrygia invaded Bithynia, A. M. 3723. Ol. 124. ann. 3. V.
C. 472. Ptol. Philad. 3.
where in an ambush laid for him he was cut off, though he fought stoutly with
his whole Army, after which Zipaetes the King built a City upon the Hill
Lyperus, which being called after his own name became famous, and not long
after he dying, His Wars.
left his Kingdom to Nicomedes his eldest son. Against him Antiochus being
about to undertake an Expedition, he craved help of those of Heraclea,
promising them to requite them with the like favor in their necessity, which
they took as an occasion to fall off again, and break the League made with
Hermogenes; and partly by force, and partly by purchase recovered diverse places
taken from them, and attempting to do so by Amestris, which one Eumenes held,
he chose rather, out of anger, to deliver up the Town to Ariobarzanes the son
of M^thridates, than to self it to them. Not long after Antiochus and Antigonus
Gonatas being at difference, and preparing for the War on both sides, Nicomedes
joined himself with Antigonus, against whom therefore the other thought first
to try his strength. Mithridates strengthening himself, procured 13 Galleys from
Heraclea, which adding to his own Fleet, he went against that of Antiochus, but
facing one another for some time, they departed at length without a fight.

Antigonus Gonatas makes a League with him.
3. Antigonus Gonatas being resolved to venture for Macedonia (where his father
Demetrius Poliorcetes once reigned) though he had once already been overthrown
by Ptolomy Ceraunus, who now held that Kingdom, made a League with Antiochus.
This Prince might be the more willing to embrace it, by reason that the Gauls
were now come into Asia, brought by Nicomedes of Bithynia to help him against
Zybaeas (or Zipatus) the younger, who held from him (whether his brother or no
is uncertain) the Maritime part of that Country. After they had helped him to
recover Bithynia, they harrased all the Countries far and wide, He repelleth
the Galls, and thence has the name of Soter.
and though they were but 20000. and of them but half fighting men, yet struck
they such a Terror into all Nations on this side Taurus, as most, though they
had never seen them, submitted unto them. But Antiochus, as we have it from
Appian, repelled them from his Territories, and thence, for saving the Country
harmless, had the name of Soter or Savior, Pausan. in Phocicis.
having before sent as aid into Greece 500 men against their Contrymen,
under the conduct of Telesarchus the Syrian. After this having married his
daughter Apame to Magas King of Cyrene, and brother to Ptolomy Philadelphus, he
was persuaded by his son-in-law to break the League which his father Seleucus
had made with Ptolomy, and invade Egypt; Idem in Atticis.
but as he was about to do this, and was gathering forces for it, Ptolomy sent
several parties of Soldiers into all the Countries over which he reigned,
whereof some acting the parts of Robbers, and others of Enemies, diverted him
from his purpose. The last engagement he was in that we read of, was with
Eumenes, the first King of Pergamus, near Sardis, Strabo lib. 13.
from whom he received an overthrow.

The Original of the Kingdom of Pergamus.
4. For there was one Philetaerus an Eunuch born at Tios in Paphlagonia, Strabo
ibid. and
and belonging to Lysimachus who made him Keeper of his Treasure placed at
Pergamus, which he built very strong upon the Hill. He continued very faithful
to him, Pausan. in Atticis.
till such time as Arsinoe caused him to murder Agathocles his eldest son, at
which he being troubled, and thereupon she accusing him to her husband, he
revolted from him, and sending to Seleucus offered himself, and the money to
him: then in the troubles betwixt them two so cunningly behaved himself, as he
kept possession, and always fawning upon, and obliging the next, and most
potent Prince, remained Master of the place and Treasure for twenty years; For
Seleucus being murdered by Ptolomy Ceraunus, he redeemed the body with a great
sum of Gold, and sent the ashes thereof to this Antiochus Soter his son. This
Philoterus had two brothers, Eumenes and Attalus, the former of which had a son
of his own name, who succeeded his deceased Uncle, and having in his possession
the places lying about Pergamus, overthrew Antiochus (who now it seems
counted him an incroaching neighbor) as we said before. Antiochus also built a
City in Syria, which he called by his wives name Apamea, and after that
another of the same name called after his mother, who was the daughter of
Artabazus; herein imitating his father. At length having killed one son,
Prolog. in Trogi Pomp. lib. 26.
and nominated another his Successor, he died, after he had reigned 19 years,
A. M. 3742. the second of the 129 Olympiad.

Antiochus Theos from whom the Parthians revolt,
5. Antiochus his son succeeded him, Appian in Syriacis.
surnamed Theos most profanely by the Milesians, because he rid them of
Timarchus their Tyrant. From him the Parthians first revolted, who being (as
Lib. 41.
Justin out of Trogus tells us) Exiles out of Scythia (in the language of which
Country Parthus signifies such an one) were very obscure under the Government
of the Medes and Persians, and being Conquered by Alexander, when none of his
Captains after his death would accept of the Sovereignty over them, fell to the
lot of Satagenor a stranger, but a friend to the Macedonians. They followed
first Eumenes in the Civil Wars; after his death Antigonus, and then submitted
themselves to Seleucus and his Successors, till now they took occasion to
revolt at the instigation of Arsaces. His brother Tiridates, Strabo lib. 11.5
Argathocles the Governor of these parts endeavoring filthily to abuse was
slain, and then the Macedonians were thence expelled. At the same time
Theodotus the Governor of the 1000 Bactrian Cities revolted also, which the
people of the East using for a pattern, And the Eastern Provinces.
in like manner fell off from Antiochus. He waged many Wars with Ptolomy
Philadelphus, till such time as both being weary they contracted an Alliance,
Ptolomy giving his daughter Berenice to the other, who had two sons already,
Seleucus and Antiochus, Cap. 11. verse. 6.
by Laodice his former wife. Herein that Prophecy of Daniel is taken to be
fulfilled, which says, that in the end of years they shall join themselves
together; for the Kings daughter of the South shall come to the King of the
North, to make an agreement. But, as it follows, she shall not retain the
power of the Arm, neither shall he stand nor his Arm, etc. For, Philadelphus
dying shortly after, Appian in Syriacis.
Antiochus took again his former wife Laodice, who being sensible of the
injury, and fearing her husbands inconstancy, poisoned him, after he had
reigned 15 years.

6. Laodice his wife kept his death close, Idem ibid. Justin lib. 27.
till such time as she had secured the Kingdom to Seleucus her eldest son,
surnamed for his victories (though of none but one we read) Callinicus,
Seleucus surnamed Callinicus and Pogon.
and from his beard Pogon. The next thing she went about was to make away
Berenice, who understanding that some were sent to kill her, shut up her self
in Daphne, a Town near Antioch, and when she was besieged, news flying about
the Cities of Asia, they commiserated her condition, and out of respect of her
Fathers and Grandfathers Dignity, sent men to her relief. But above all, A. M.
3759. Ol. 133. ann. 3. V.C. 508. Ptol. Euerget. 1.
her brother Ptolomy Euergetes being affrighted at her danger, hastened out of
his Kingdom with his whole power. Yet ere any relief could come she was taken
by treachery (promise of safety being made to her) and quickly slain; at which
base and unworthy act the Cities conceiving great indignation, Ptolomy
Euergetes revengeth the death of his sister Berenice.
provided a great Fleet, and to revenge her death, gave up themselves to
Ptolomy, who invading Syria slew Laodice, seized upon Caelesyria, with
Seleucia, got into his hands Syria, Cilicia, and the upper Provinces beyond
Euphrates, and almost all Asia, even as far as Bactria. Without doubt he had
Conquered all Seleucus his Kingdom, had he not been forced by a Domestic
Sedition to return, after whose departure Seleucus having prepared a great
Fleet for the reducing of those Cities which revolted from him, lost it in a
great Tempest, at the which they were so far from rejoicing, that pitying him
for this shipwreck, they voluntarily returned to obedience.

7. Rejoicing that he fared so well by his shipwreck, he now made War upon
Ptolomy, but being overthrown fled to Antioch in great fear, Idem ibid.
being as destitute as before, though he found not such relief. For, writing to
his younger brother Antiochus, He invadeth Ptolomy and thence is cast into
great straights.
he craved his help, offering him all Asia within the Mountain Taurus for a
reward, who (though he was but yet fourteen years old) being greedy of reigning
embraced this occasion, and then behaved not himself as an helper or brother,
but like a robber, intending to get the whole Kingdom. He showed incredible
boldness in invading and snatching, whence he had the Surname of Hierax or
Goshauck. Ptolomy hearing of his aiding his brother, lest he should have two to
deal with at once, made Peace with Seleucus for ten years; and then Antiochus
hiring the Gauls, with them made War upon his brother in the other's stead, in
which he had the better of it, Antiochus Hierax his brother rebeleth.
and they supposing Seleucus to be slain in the battle (that cutting off all
the Royal race they might be Lords of Asia) turned their force against him that
hired them; so that Antiochus was glad to purchase his freedom with Gold, and
enter into society with his Mercenaries. The two brothers being thus at odds,
and every one gaping after Asia, Eumenes of Bithinia puts in amongst the rest,
and overthrowing the Gauls, and after them Antiochus, got a great part of it
into his possession. Idem lib. 41.
Now also Arsaces hearing of the distress of Seleucus, perfected the revolt of
the Parthians; for, invading that Country with a band of robbers, he slew the
Governor Andragorus, and invaded the Principality, and not long after seizing
on the Kingdom of the Hyrcanians, Arsaces perfecting his revolt establishes
his Parthian Kingdom.
so strengthened himself thereby, that after some years he overthrew Seleucus,
and established his Kingdom. Hence the Parthians accounting ever after the day
of this Victory as the day of their liberty, constantly observed it, and
Arsaces being no less memorable to them than Cyrus to the Persians, Alexander
to the Macedonians, or Romulus to the Romans; out of honor to him they called
all their Kings by his name. This beginning of Arsaces fell out in the first of
the 135 Olympiad, of the City 510, the second of Seleucus, and the third of
Ptolomy Euergetes. A. M. 3761.

8. Idem lib. 27.
Now understanding that Eumenes had got the greatest part of Asia into his
power, and both the brothers had even lost their Principalicies, yet could they
not agree, but instead of opposing the foreign and common Enemies, sought the
destruction of each other, by renewing the War. In the next battle Antiochus
was overthrown, and flying many days, and not knowing how to bestow himself,
The two brothers renew the War and
at length being wearied, he went to Artamenes King of Cappadocia his Father in
Law, by whom at first being received very civilly, he afterward understood
there was a plot laid against him, and fled thence. Whereupon not knowing where
to be secure, he betook himself to Ptolomy, judging he might rather trust to
him than his brother, being (as well he might be) mindful of what he would have
done to him, or had deserved of him. Ptolomy commanded him to be narrowly
looked to, but by the help of a certain whore with whom he had been too
familiar, he deceived his Keepers and got away. Yet as he was flying he was
slain by thieves. Seleucus also almost at the same time, being outed of his
Kingdom, and thrown by an horse, ended his life, Dye.
after he had reigned about twenty years. A. M. 3779, the third of the 138
Olympiad, 98 years after the death of Alexander.

9. He left two sons, Seleucus and Antiochus, Seleucus Ceraunus.
of which the former succeeded according to his birthright, in the seventh year
of Antigonus Doson King of Macedonia, and was Surnamed Ceraunus. Eumenes King
of Pergamus, who had got so much of Asia into his power now being dead of
Drunkenness, Attalus his younger brother's son succeeded him, and had got all
on this side Taurus into his power, which being understood by Seleucus
Ceraunus, he thought it concernd him to look about him, Polybius lib. 4. Appian
in Syriacis.
and with Achaeus (whose Father Andromachus was brother to Laodice his wife)
passed over Taurus with an Army against him: but then was poisoned in Phrygia
by the treachery of Apaturius a Galatian, and Nicanor, after he had reigned
scarce three years. Achaeus to revenge his death presently slew the
conspirators, and then ordering the Army with great wisdom and courage,
recovered all on this side the Mountain Taurus, which had been lost; A. M.
3779. Ol. 138. an. 3. V.C. 528. Ptolom. Euergetae 21.
insomuch that the People admiring him would have accepted of him as King, if
he would have taken this opportunity; but he refused it, and kept the
Sovereignty for Antiochus brother to Seleucus, who afterward was called the
Great. He in his brothers time lived a private life in the upper Provinces,
Antiochus the Great.
and now was called from Babybon by the Army in Syria, to take upon him the
Government, being about fifteen years old; after which he entrusted Achaeus
with all that Region he had lately recovered, made Molon Governor of Media,
and his brother Alexander of the Country of Persis.

10. Folyb. lib. 5.
He fell into great troubles immediately upon his first entrance upon the
Kingdom; for Molon and his brother considering his youth, and hoping that
Achaeus would join with them in their enterprise, especially out of fear and
hatred of one Hermias, who now ruled all at Court, conspired together to
withdraw all the upper Provinces from their allegiance. This Hermias a Carian
by birth, had been left by Seleucus to look to his Kingdom when he took his
Expedition over Taurus, and then being set in so high a place, began to envy
the power of all others, grew proud and cruel, his malice above all others
being against Epigenes, who had been Seleucus his General; for that he saw him
to be a wise and prudent man, and the Army much at his devotion. A Council
being called to consult about the rebellion, Epigenes advised that the King
should go in person to suppress it; for thereby the rebels would either be
terrified and desist, or the Country at his presence would be moved to cross
their designs, Falls immediately into great troubles by the means of Hermias,
and deliver them up; but Hermias interrupting him, imputed this to a desire
that the King should miscarry, that thereby he might seize upon his estate, and
prevailed that two others should be sent against Molo, and the King go against
Ptolomy Philopator (who now thinking himself secure in the youth of Antiochus,
and Philip of Macedonia, had given himself up to all luxury) hoping thereby to
have an easy War of it, for that he was of a cowardly disposition, and hoped
by exposing the young King to dangers and hazards, to escape the punishment due
to him, and maintain that power he already enjoyed. Antiochus being very young,
was very earnest to get Caelesyria, and Hermias to prick him still forward,
framed a letter from Achaeus, wherein he tells he is desired by Ptolomy to take
the Diadem and assume the title of King to himself, promising to send him
ships, money, and all things necessary for that enterprise.

11. Having married first Laodice daughter of Mithridates King of Cappadocia,
Who procures him to march against Ptolomy, though Molon rebelled.
he prepared for his Expedition, when news came that Molon went on with his
design, and how the Captains sent against him, out of fear had secured
themselves in Garrisons. Hereupon he bent his mind to go himself, but Hermias
being tenacious of his purpose, again diverted him, telling him, it was fitter
for Subjects to fight against such, and Kings against their equals, and so
sending one Xinaetas an Achaean against Molon, again turned his mind now
obnoxcious to him for want of years. Then marched they to Laodicea, and thence
through the Desert to the Valley called Marsya, lying between the Mountains of
Libanus and Antilibanus, A. M. 3783. Ol. 139. an. 3. V. C. 532. Antioch. M. 2.
Ptol. Philom. 1.
where about the Straights he took in diverse Towns; but the principal Fort held
out and put him to a stand, which made him the more desirous to go now against
Molon; For Xinaetas, who was sent against him with full power, growing arrogant
and careless, had rashly ventured over the River Tigris, and then Molon making
as if he fled, came upon him in the night, and cut him off with most of his
men, and those that escaped the Sword taking the River, scarce any got to the
other side. After this, Molon pursuing his Victory took Seleucia, all the upper
Provinces, the Principality of Babylon, those parts lying upon the red Sea, all
about Tigris as far as Europus, and Mesopotamia as far as Dura; only the
Castle at Susa stood out, the Town being taken; Antiochus at this report called
a Council to consult what was to be done, where Epigenes expostulating that his
former advise was not followed, moved the same again; but was taken up as
before by Hermias, with foul language, who desired the King he would not think
of leaving Caelesyria; He is necessitated to go against Molon.
but all being for going against Molon, it was concluded, and he was glad to
comply for his own turn.

12. The Army before it stirred mutinied for pay, and then Hermias taking
advantage at the Kings necessity, offered to lay down money, on condition
Epigenes might be removed from his presence, which having obtained, he procured
the man to be murdered. The Army marched and came to Antioch in Mygdonia at the
Winter solstice, where staying 40 days till the extremity of the cold was
over, after 40 days it came to Liba, Molon then lying at hand about Babylon.
Here a Council of War being called to consult which way was to be taken, that
they might not fail of provisions; Hermias was for going along by Tigris, that
it, and two other Rivers, Lycus and Kapros, they might have for a defense; but
Zeuxis, though fearful to speak because of him, showed the danger of that
advice, because it would be a great compass, and after six days travel
through a Desert, they should come to place called The Kings Ditch, which if
the Enemy got before them, they should in no wise be able to pass, and be
reduced into great straights for want of Victuals; but on the contrary, if they
passed over Tigris, there was no doubt but the Inhabitants of the Country
called Apolloniatis would return to obedience, obeying Molon at present only
out of necessity; further, in that plentiful Country they should have plenty of
victuals, and (what was most considerable) Molon would be hindered from
retreating into Media, and thereby being straightned, after that the place
where he yet remained was emptied of provisions, would be forced to fight, or
if he durst not do that, then his Soldiers would revolt to the King. This
counsel being taken, all things fell out accordingly; for Molon fearing his
passage into Media might be stopped, little trusting those parts in which he
then was, determined to get if he could, to the hilly Country of Apolloniatis,
but it happened that the Scouts of both parties met there, and skirmishing for
some time, afterward retreated to their several Bodies, and so gave occasion
to a total engagement the day following.

13. Molon considering how dangerous it was to bring his Soldiers out in open
face against their King, thought it the best way to choose out the most strong
and valiant, and set upon his Camp in the night. Going about to do this, ten
young men went over to the King and told him the design of the rebels, so that
Molon was glad to return, and put his other Army left behind him into such an
Alarm, for that they were ignorant of the enterprise, that much ado he had to
quiet them. The King being provided to fight, drew out his men by break of day,
Molon and his Army destroyed.
and placed them in a batalia; Molon could but do it in great disorder and
confusion, by reason of that consternation which fell upon his men in the
night. In the fight which presently followed, the right wing of his Army stood
fast to him, and fought very earnestly, but the left as soon as it came in
sight all revolted, which he understanding, now compassed in with Enemies and
considering the torments he was likely to undergo if taken alive, killed
himself, and so did all his companions in the conspiracy, but his body being
found was nailed, for an example, to a cross in the highest parts of Media.
After this Victory Antiochus settled the affairs of these Countries, dealing
more mercifully with his Subjects than was desired by Hermias, and then
resolved to invade the Territories of the Barbarians lying upon his borders, to
terrify them from assisting his rebels for the time to come; which Hermias
disliked for the danger of the War, his mind still running upon Caelesyria, but
news being brought that a young son was born to the King, he was content he
should expose himself to this danger, hoping that in case he should miscary he
must be made Guardian and Protector of the infant, but he was ignorant that his
just reward hung over his head. For one Artabuzanes, his Country being invaded,
being unfit for resistance because of old age, made Peace with Antiochus,
submitting to what soever he demanded, and at the same time Apollophanes the
Physician to the King, and his great favorite, perceiving Hermias not able to
bear that high condition to which he was advanced, any longer, being
sollicitous for his Masters safety, and much more for his own, And Hermias put
to death.
so wrought the King (inclinable enough to it before) as being called to walk
abroad one morning more early than usual, before his return he was made away.

14. Antiochus his mind was now turned toward Achaeus, who, though at the
first he had born himself very modestly, being elevated with success, and
thinking that the King in his expedition against Artabazanes might possibly
miscarry, or if he did not, yet hoping that he being at so great a distance, he
might have opportunity enough to break into Syria, and have help to seize upon
the Kingdom, marched with his whole Army from Lydia, and coming to Laodicea in
Phrygia, Achaeus traitorously assumeth the Diadem, and Title of King.
then set the Diadem upon his head, and first took the Title of King upon him.
He continued his march till he drew near to Lycaonia; but there the Soldiers
mutined, refusing to fight against their natural King, so that seeing this, he
strove to persuade them that he had no intention to invade Syria, and diverted
his course to Pisidia, which harasing, and enriching the Army with booty
thereby, he returned home again. The King not being ignorant of any of this,
first expostulated it with him, and sending him threatening messages, put off
the rest for this time, and set himself with all his might to prepare for the
War against Ptolomy. Consulting then what way to invade Syria, he was persuaded
first of all to attempt Seleucia (held by the Ptolomies ever since the invasion
of Euergetes, Yet Antiochus makes War upon Ptolomy for Caelesyria,
to revenge the death of his sister Berenice) being the Chief Seat almost of
the whole Empire, from whence would arise much trouble being thus in the
Enemies hands, and very commodious by its situation for carrying on the War
both by Land and Sea. He first then corrupted some of the Officers of the
Garrison within, who promised, that if he could but take part of the Suburbs,
they would procure the whole Town to be yielded. And gets into Seleucia,
This being done, the Conspirators came to the Governor, and moved him to
yield, as from the necessity of the thing, who being struck at this
consternation, as it appeared, of the Soldiers, surrendered presently the Town
upon Composition.

15. Whilst he was employed about this Town, A. M. 3786. Ol. 140. ano. 2. V.
C. 535. Ant. M. 5. Ptol. Philopatris 4.
Letters came to him from one Theodotus, desiring him with all speed to come
into Syria, signifying that he would betray it all into his power; for he being
an Aetolian born, had done the Kings of Egypt special service, but was so well
requited for it as he was brought into danger of life, and therefore at what
time Antiochus went against Molon, looking upon Ptolomy as a despicable
Creature, and distrusting his Courtiers, he had seized upon Ptolomais and Tire,
and solicited him to come down. With several other places.
Now therefore Antiochus putting off the business of Achaeus till another
time, marched down to Marsyae, the same Valley and Straights as before, where
hearing Theodotus was besieged in Ptolemais, he went, and relieved him, and
then having that and Tire delivered up unto him, and beating the Enemy out of
the Straights, he had then determined to march toward Pelusium, but
understanding that Ptolomy's Army was come thither, and all opposition possible
making for hindering his passage, he went on in taking in the Towns
thereabouts, diverse whereof presently submitted, and others stood it out.
Ptolomy himself being given wholly up to sluggishnesse, though thus betrayed,
took no order about his affairs; All the burden of them lay upon Agathocles
and Sosibius, then the greatest Officers of State, who being able men, sent up
and down to raise Forces, and make all speedy preparations for the War, though
to divert Antiochus they sent Ambassadors to him to treat of peace (as desiring
only to go that way to work) and procured Embassies from the Rhodians,
Byzantians, Aetolians, and them of Cyzicus, to mediate betwixt them, during
which they gained time, and deceived the Enemy, carrying all things so close as
his Ambassadors could understand nothing of their Provisions. A Truce was
granted by Antiochus for four months, during which time he willed them to send
to him to Seleucia, giving hopes to make up the difference, Is by the practices
of Achaeus recalled.
but contrary to his intentions: though now he was in a manner constrained to
return into his own Kingdom, for that Achaeus plotted against him, and held
intelligence with Ptolomy.

A Treaty betwixt him and the King of Egypt.
16. The Commissioners coming to debate the particulars according to their
instructions, Antiochus labored to overcome them with his Arguments for the
justness of his cause, as well as with his Weapons, pleading he had done
Ptolomy no injury in making that invasion, for that he had but recovered his
right, alleging much the Conquests of those parts by Antigonus Cocies, and the
possession of them by Seleucus, and that Ptolomy the first waged not War with
Antigonus for his own particular, but to help Seleucus to the Sovereignty of
that Province, but above all he pressed the common agreement of all the Kings,
made at that time when Antigonus was overthrown, wherein by Lysimachus and
Cassander, all Syria was decreed to Seleucus. His Plea for Caelesyria.
On the contrary, Ptolomy's Commissioners aggravated the height of the injury
offered to him, by the unworthiness of closing with the treasonable practices
of Theodotus, and affirmed, that Ptolomy the son of Lagus intended the Dominion
of Syria to himself, and joined with Seleucus on no other terms, than that
indeed all Asia should be his, but Syria fall to his own share. Such like
objections and replies as these were made often to no purpose, but that which
put the greatest stop to the Treaty, was the comprehending of Achaeus in the
League, The answer of Ptolomy's Commissioners, and the Treaty ends without
effect.
which Ptolomy stickled hard for, and the other as impatiently heard, crying
out of the unworthiness of the thing, that he should protect, or make any
mention of Rebels. Winter being thus spun out with these discourses, and Spring
drawing on, Antiochus intending to set upon the Enemy both by Land Sea, drew
together his Forces, to the taking in of what remained unconquered of Syria;
and Nicolaus on the other part, as the Egyptian General, with Periger^^ the
Admiral, made all possible provision for resistance.

17. Antiochus going to Marathus, there entered into Confederacy with the
Aradians; then entering Syria through Theu-prosopos came to Berytus, in his
passage taking in Botris, Hostility thereupon in Spring is renewed, whereby
Antiochus gets much.
and burning Trieres and Calamus. The Mountain Libanus straightning much the
passage betwixt it and the Sea, and almost making it impassible, Nicolaus with
a party also placed himself in the straights, not doubting but to stop
Antiochus there; but he dividing his Forces, and having his Fleet constantly
near him, caused it first to engage with the Egyptian, in which fight both
sides came off on equal terms, but Theodotus beating back the Enemy upon the
Mountain, got over, and then cleared the passage below for the King. He after
this came near Sidon with his Army, but judging it to no purpose to set upon
the Town very strong with men, and full of Provisions, he gave order to
Diognetus his Admiral to go with the Fleet to Tire, and marched to Philoteria
situate upon the Sea of Tiberias, which he took, together with Called by
Josephus Bethsan in the Tribe of Manasses, through whose grounds Jordan flows.
Scythopolis. Now he conceived great hopes of the perfecting his work, being
come into a Country plentiful of Provisions, so that placing Garrisons in
these two Cities he took in Atabyrium by a Stratagem, making as if he fled
before the Inhabitants, but having men lying in wait who arose against them,
and then the whole Army with such violence, as put them into a great fear, and
they yielded up the place. After this, Karaeus, one of Ptolomies Chiefest of
Officers revolted to him. Hippolochus the Thessalian brought over with him 400
horse, and the Arabians moved by his success joined themselves to him. Shortly
after he took in Galatis and Gadara beyond expectation, because of the strength
thereof; but the Inhabitants terrified at his preparations yielded themselves:
then hearing that a great number of Enemies had met at Rabath-ben Amon, or
Rabatana, a City in Arabia, and thence made incursions into the Territories of
his friends, he marched thither, and striving by force in vain to be Master of
the place, at length he effected it by stopping the course of water, for want
of which it was then surrendered. Then leaving a strong Garrison here, and
sending Hippolochus and Karaeus to Govern the Coasts of Samaria, he went to
Ptolemais, and there took up his Winter quarters.

Ptolomy in the Spring following takes the field.
18. Ptolomy to give him a stop, prepared against the Spring a great Army, and
then marched from Alexandria with 70000 foot, 5000 horse, and 73 Elephants, and
came to Pelusium. Antiochus hearing this, gathered his Forces together,
amounting to 72000 foot, 6000 horse, and 102 Elephants. Ptolomy proceeding on
his journey came to Gaza, and thence near to Ruphia (the first City of Syria,
except Rhinocerus, as one comes from Egypt) and Antiochus passing by that
place shortly after pitched his Tents at first within ten furlongs of the
Enemy, and the next day, partly for the commodiousnesse of the ground, and
partly to embolden his Soldiers, approached within five furlongs of them. Being
so near, several skirmishes fell out amongst those which on both sides issued
forth for provisions, and Theodotus the Aetolian, after a most bold adventure
taking but two in his Company, for that he had been in Ptolomy's Court, and
knew his manner of life, went out in the dusk of the evening, and not being
known got into the Kings Tent where he used to give audience, and though he
missed of him being in a more obscure place, yet wounded he two which waited
there, and killing outright Andreas his principal Physician, escaped back in
safety to his own Camp; having only failed of his purpose for want of
informing himself when the King was wont to take his rest. For five days
continued these two Princes in this posture, and then both resolved to try the
matter in a set battle.

A pitched battle.
19. Ptolomy first drew out his men, and then presently Antiochus ranged his in
battle array against him. Each of the Armies had two wings, wherein the two
Kings met each other, guarded with Elephants, betwixt which the fight was
begun, after Antiochus had caused the charge to be sounded; their manner being
first with their Trunks to thrust each other, and strive for the ground, and
then after that for the one by force to remove the other's Trunk, and to fall
upon him like a Bull, The manner of the fighting of Elephants.
and gore his sides. Few of Ptolomies beasts would fight at all, for that being
Africans, they could neither endure the smell nor noise of those of India, so
that the ranks being disordered by them, his left Wing was quite broken by the
charge of the Enemy, and put to flight. Echecrates, who commanded in the right,
stayed first for the engagement of the former, then seeing that his Elephants
would not fight, gave order to Phinidas Commander of the Mercenary Greeks to
invade his opposites, and he himself also wheeling about to be out of the
danger of the beasts, fell upon the Flanks and Rear of the Enemie's horse; so
that both together they made them all being Arabians and Medes to give ground,
and put all the Wing to flight, thus being even with Antiochus. Then came the
bodies themselves to engage: Antiochus was busy in the pursuit of that Wing
wherein he fought; but Ptolomy coming to his Army much encouraged the Soldiers,
and disheartened his adversaries, who being charged by Andromachus and Sosibius,
the Syrians for some time maintained their ground, but the rest scarce fighting
one stroke shifted for themselves. Antiochus being yet unskilful and young,
was still following the chase, (thinking because he had the better of it in his
Wing, that therefore his whole Army overcame) till admonished by some one about
him, he returned, and seeing things so contrary to his expectation, endeavored
to break in with his Guard, to the place where his Army stood, but finding all
his men fled, Antiochus beaten.
retired also unto Raphia, being persuaded that he had done as became him,
however, A M. 3788. Ol. 140. ann. 4. V.C. 537. Antiochi Magni 7. Ptol. Philop.
6.
by reason of the Cowardlinesse of others the work had miscarried. On his part
were slain little less than 10000 Foot, about 300 Horse, and 4000 taken
prisoners; three of his Elephants were slain outright, and two afterward died
of their wounds. Ptolomy lost 1500 foot, and 700 horse, 16 Elephants were
killed, and the rest taken for the most part.

20. Antiochus had intended after the rallying of his men to have fortified
himself without Raphia; but most of them being got into the Town, he desired
leave to bury his dead, and then returned into his own Kingdom. Ptolomy
presently received all Coelesyria again into his power, the Inhabitants
accommodating themselves to his present condition (as indeed bearing always
great reverence to his family) and striving who should first yield themselves.
Antiochus coming to Antioch, presently disparched Antipater his brother's son,
and Theodotus Herviolius in an Embassage to him, fearing exceedingly he should
be prosecuted with War, Desires peace and easily obtains it.
distrusting his Subjects because of his adverse fortune, and suspecting
Achaeus might make use of this opportunity against him. But Ptolomy thought of
nothing less than molesting him, being overjoyed that he had above all
expectation recovered Coelesyria, and desiring exceedingly to be quiet, out of
his sluggish disposition, and other vices familiar to him; wherefore at first
receiving the Ambassadors with threatening language, and complaints of the
injuries received from their Master, he presently granted a Truce for a year,
and then sent Sosibius to confirm the League, wanting only courage and
resolution to spoil Antiochus of his Kingdom.

21. Antiochus spent all the Winter in preparations, Idem excerpt. lib. 7.
and in Spring marched over the Mountain Taurus against Achaeus, whom he
besieged in the City Sardis. Above a year he lay before it, having only some
times light skirmishes with the defendants, He besieges Achaeus in Sardis,
till Lagoras a Cretian, a man of great experience, observing that the
strongest Cities are many times taken at such places as are by reason of their
strength least looked to, and perceiving a piece of the wall, beyond which they
used to throw carrion and filth into a pit, to be destitute of any watch, by the
sitting of fouls upon it, which came to feed on the carkeises, he took unto him
Theodotus the Aetolian, and Dionysius, with some Soldiers, and they made a
shift to get over and open the gates; the King to divert the Enemy making as if
he would give the onset at another place, and so the Town was taken. Achaeus
and Aribazus the Governor got into the Castle, and then were straightly
besieged again, till such time as Sosibius the chief Minister of State in
Egypt, pitying the condition of the former, made means for his deliverance,
which by the treachery of the instrument wrought his destruction. For whose
safety Sosibius plotteth,
There was at that time in the Egyptian Court one Bolis a Cretian, second to
no one Captain, as he was reputed, Idem excerpt. lib. 8.
for prudence, extraordinary boldness, and Military skill; with him Sosibius
dealt, having obliged him by his favors, and assured him that nothing could he
perform more acceptable to the King his Master, than some way or other to work
the deliverance of Achaeus. He asking some time to consider of it, within two
or three days took the business upon him, which to effect he had as he said a
good opportunity, for that Cambylus the Commander of the Cretians serving under
Antiochus was not only known to him, but his kinsman, and had the charge of a
Fort behind the Castle, which, because it could not be fortified with works,
was kept by a continual Guard of Soldiers.

22. Being supplied with money largely by Sosibius, and loaded with promises,
away he sailed for Rhodes to Nicomachus, and thence for Ephesus to Melancoma,
his acquaintance, and friends of Achaeus, with whom dealing about his
business, he sent one Arianus to Cambylus to let him know that he was sent
from Alexandria to raise Forces, and that he must needs speak with him,
desiring he would appoint time and place for their meetings, without the
privity of any. Having obtained this, and bethinking with himself what to do,
he gave him a letter concerning which like Cretians they had a Cretian
conference, as Polybius terms it. For not respecting the safety of the
besieged, or their faith given to those that employed them, but agreeing to
divide the ten Talents already given in advance by Sosibius, they resolved to
acquaint Antiochus with the matter, and undertake upon promise of money in
hand, and a good reward afterward, to deliver Achaeus into his power. This
being with great earnestness promised, Bolis prevails with Nicomachus and
Melancoma, wholly ignorant of his treacherous intent, to write letters in
cipher to Achaeus, which he sent by Arianus, for whom passage was procured into
the Castle by means of Cambylus. Achaeus being earnestly advised by his two
friends to trust Bolis and Cambylus, and withal considering the difficulty for
him to escape; hoping if he got out to pass presently into Syria whilst
Antiochus was yet at Sardis, and then to get all the parts about Antioch into
his power, yielded to put himself into the hands of Bolis, who was sent
presently by Melancomas with great entreaties and promises if he could
accomplish the business. Bolis went to Cambylus at night, and staying with him
the next day to consult of the business how it should be managed, after he had
been with Antiochus, and was much encouraged by him, he went up for Achaeus
into the Castle.

23. Receiving Bolis with great respect, and after all his sifting of him
perceiving nothing disagreeable to seriousness, he much rejoiced; but
bethinking himself how weighty a thing it was, and what a hazard he was like to
run, he trembled again at the thought of it, and at first resolved to send some
before to Melancomas; but at length out he went of the Castle, and according to
former agreement, Bolis coming behind him by a whistle gave a sign to those in
ambush, But he is betrayed by the instrument into the hands of justice.
and held him by the clothes till he was taken. Being brought into Antiochus
his Tent, who sat late at night with a few attendants to see the issue of the
project; the King was amazed, and could not forbear weeping to see him, so
eminent a man, lie bound before him upon the ground in so sad a condition; but
a Council of War being called, after several ways of punishment proposed, at
last it was agreed, that he should have his outward members and limbs cut off,
after that his head, A. M. 3791. Ol. 141. an. 3. V.C. 540. Ant. Mag. 10. Ptol.
Philom. 9.
and that being sowed into an Asses bladder, his body should be nailed to a
cross, which was executed accordingly. This end had he who was son to
Andromachus the brother of Laodice wife to Saleucus, who had married Laodice
daughter to Mithridates, and had held all Asia on this side Taurus, having
recovered it by his own industry and valor; a man he was exceeding wise, and
of great experience, yet left (as Polybius observes for us) a double warning
to posterity, not to trust any rashly, and not to be puffed up with prosperity,
or be secure of any thing incident to mankind, to which we may add another,
viz. that none presume to rebel against their Sovereigns, for punishment will
overtake them. His death being known within, as they all first agreed in making
lamentations for him, so shortly after they fell at odds, being divided into
two factions, of which the one stuck to his wife, and the other to Ariobazus
the Governor; so that having suspicion of each other, both parties yielded
themselves and the place to Antiochus.

24. A year or two after, Polyb. lib. 10. excerpt. and Appian in Syriacis.
Antiochus undertook an Expedition into the East to reduce Media and Parthia
which had revolted, and he passing through both, thereupon caused Arsaces to
withdraw himself into Hyrcania, which he considering, and judging that he would
not have forsaken this Couctry if he had been able to have defended it,
resolved to follow him, so that with great difficulty he passed over the hills,
and entered also into that Region, where we find that he took some Towns;
Antiochus makes an Expedition into the East.
but what further he did against Arsaces, or upon what terms he returned, if
Polybius his history had been kept entire, we might have known. After this he
quieted the upper Asia, and coming into Bactria for a good while endeavored to
drive out thence Euthydemus the King thereof, whom he defeated, Polybius
excerpt. lib. 11.
and behaved himself most stoutly, whence he got great credit for his valor.
At length Euthydemus complaining that he was injurious in opposing him thus who
had not revolted from him, but cut off the posterity of those that had,
beseeching him also not to envy him the name of King, especially considering
that by this dissension neither of their affairs could be secure, for that a
number of the Scythian Nomades hovered at the borders, and were like to overrun
the Country, Antiochus, who being tired with the tediousness of the War, had
sought occasion to make a Peace, not unwillingly now heard the overtures of it,
especially after that Euthydemus sent his son Demetrius to him, with whom he
was so taken for his person and parts, as thinking him worthy of a Kingdom, he
first promised him one of his daughters, and then yielded that his Father
should take the title of King. Then the conditions of the league being written
down, and sworn to, and taking with him all the Elephants that Euthydemus had,
he marched over Caucasus, and renewed the confederacy with Sophagasenus the
Indian King; then taking with him more Elephants (of which he had now 150) and
leaving Androsthenes of Cyzicus to bring the treasure promised him, he came to
Arachosia, and so through Drangiana into Carmania, The fruits of it.
where he was forced to Winter, having received this fruit by this Expedition,
that besides the Countries recovered, and the maritime Cities and Dynasties on
this side Taurus added to his Dominions, he struck such an awe into his
Subjects, as kept them more in order, and he was thought to be esteemed as well
by the People of Europe as those of Asia, worthy to govern.

25. Not long after this, A. M. 3803. Ol. 144. an. 3. V.C. 552. Ant. Mag. 22.
Ptol. Epiph. 2.
Ptolomy Philopater dying and leaving a young son behind him but four years
old, Philip of Macedonia and he (as we before hinted) made a wicked League for
the outing him of his Kingdom, and dividing it amongst them, wherefore he
striking again at Coelesyria and Phoenicia, got Judaea into his power, which
Antiquit. l. 12. c. 3. Livius l. 33.
as Josephus tells us, was tossed betwixt these two Crowns as a ship with the
waves. For Scopas the Aetolian recovered it again out of his hands for young
Epiphanes, and yet again not long after lost it with Coelesyri^, being
overthrown by Antiochus (near the fountains or heads of Jordan) at the City
Panaeas, with whom the Jews then presently joined, He joyneth with Philip
against Ptolomy, gets Judaea, and presently loses it again.

Falling upon Attalus his Territories the Romans procure him to desist.


but the Inhabitants of Gaza standing still out for Ptolomy, their City was
taken and razed. In the mean time whilst Scopas was recovering the Cities of
Syria, Antiochus himself was busy in invading the Kingdom of Attalus, who then
being employed with the Romans in the Macedonian War against Philip, had left
it naked of defense both by Land and Sea, but upon his complaint to the Roman
Senate they sent to Antiochus to tell him, that seeing Attalus was employed by
them against Philip the common Enemy, he would do a thing very acceptable unto
them to abstain form his Territories, adding withal, A. M. 3807. Ol. 145. ann.
3. V. C. 556. Ant. M. 26. Ptol. Epiphanis 6.
that it was convenient for all the Kings which were the friends and allies of
the People of Rome to be at peace amongst themselves; with the authority of
which message he was so moved, as he drew out his Army again from the borders.
But this respect to the Romans continued not many years, he entering upon such
courses as gave them offense, and proceeding therein at length to an open War.

26. For having reduced all Coelesyria into his power, Idem ibid.
and wintered at Antioch, the next Spring sending before his two sons Ardyes
and Mithridates with the Army, and command to stay for him at Sardis, he
himself followed with the Fleet to attempt the several maritime Towns of
Cilicia and Caria, which were under Ptolomy, Yet he ministers occasion for a
War with them.
and also to help Philip both at Sea and Land, who now was busy in the War
with the Romans. Diverse places by fair and foul means together he took in; yet
Coracesium stood out, and whilst he lay before it came Ambassadors from the
Rhodians to denounce War against him, in case he came within Nephelis the
Promontory of Cilicia, not out of any hatred to him, as they said, but lest
joining with Philip he should hinder the Romans now active for the liberty of
Greece. Though he heard this with much disdain, yet thought he it wisdom to
give them good words for the present, and please them in this particular, but
they, after all danger was over from Philip (who this Summer was beaten at
Cynoscephalae) not tying themselves with him to the former condition, sent aid
to the Cities their associates, and preserved several in their liberty. He took
at length Coracesium, and after it several others, and amongst the rest
Ephesus, where wintering, he endeavored to reduce also the Cities of Asia,
under the obedience they paid to his Ancestors, and thinking it not difficult
to be done by any of them, except two, viz. Smyrna in Aeolis, and Lampsacus
upon the Hellespont, he sent Forces to besiege them both.

Antiochus the Great and the Romans grow jealous one of another.
27. Now the Romans, with all others, doubted not but his Army was for Europe,
after his affairs had succeeded in Asia, and they had the more cause to be
jealous of him, for that Hannibal their old and sworn Enemy had now been with
him; Livius l. 33.
therefore in the setting of the Greek Cities at liberty (after the overthrow
of Philip King of Macedonia) the Senate had left it to the Commissioners
appointed for that work, to deal as they should think fit with Chalcis,
Demetrias, and Corinth, the keys of the Country, and whether out of a desire
of the glory of setting all the Greeks at liberty, or to awe and affright him,
they decreed, that all such Cities, as well in Asia as Europe, should be freed.
Appian in Syriacis. Polybius Excerp. Legate. 9. and Lib. 17.
The ten Commissioners sitting now in Greece about these affairs; they of
Smyrna and Lampsacus (whom he had besieged) sent to them for relief, and
Antiochus himself thinking fit not to anticipate his opportunities, sent
thither also his Ambassadors, to whom the Commissioners laid open the pleasure
of the Senate, and in case he contain not himself and Forces in Asia, threaten
him with War: and withal promise that some of their number should come to him.
Yet he in the beginning of Spring comes over into Europe, got a great patt of
the Chersonesus into his power, and then marching to Lysimachia, there found
the Commissioners, who pressing him to the things formerly mentioned, he
demanded by what right the Romans questioned with him about Asia, seeing he
meddled with nothing done in Italy; and added, that the Greek Cities should
obtain their liberty, not by their commands, but his bounty. Now it was moved
that those of Smyrna and Lampsacus might be heard; which being obtained, and
the Delegates using their liberty of speech, he out of indignation, that he
should be forced to plead with them before those Judges, interrupted them,
saying, the Rhodians (and not the Romans) should have the hearing of the cause;
and so the Treaty ended without any conclusion or agreement at all.

28. A rumor was spread abroad, during this Treaty, Livius and Appian ut supra.
that Ptolomy the King of Egypt was dead, which much affected both parties,
yet strove they to hide it from each other: Lucius Cornelius one of the ten,
who was also ordered to endeavor the reconcilation of the two Kings, demanded
a little time to go into Egypt; and Antiochus being restless, out of an
itching desire to get that Country into his hands, Upon a false rumor of
Ptolomie's death he resolves to invade Egypt.
sailed with his Fleet back to Ephesus; whence sending again his Ambassadors to
treat with T. Flamininus chief of the Commissioners (on purpose to hold them a
little in hand till he could bring about his design) came to Patara, where he
heard that Ptolomy was alive. Now he changed his purpose of invading Egypt;
but withal resolved for Cyprus, to attempt that Island; but such a tempest
fell upon him, that he almost lost his whole Fleet. Not long after, Hannibal
being driven from home (by the malice of such as incensed the Romans against
him, whilst he only endeavored the Public good) returned to Antiochus, who
though before he did but fluctuate in his resolutions for the War, Hannibal's
advice to invade Italy.
yet was now confirmed by him so in his purpose, that henceforth he thought not
so much of it, as of the reward of the Victory. Hannibal denied that the Romans
could be overcome any where but in Italy, and desired but 100 Galleys, Livius
lib. 34. Appian ut prius.
16000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, with which he would first go to Carthage, hoping
to draw his Countrymen to revolt, and though that should not succeed, yet would
he seize upon some part of Italy. The King closing with his propositions at
this time, he went not himself, but sent a certain Tyrian to Carthage, who
under pretense of trading should break the ice; but he being suspected by
Hannibal's adversaries, was glad to shift for himself, and notice thereof was
presently given to the Romans. In the mean time Antiochus sent three
Ambassadors to Rome, who under color of procuring a right understanding,
should feel how the Senate stood affected. They expostulating the matter, that
their Master should be forced to quit the Cities of Asia, and forsake his
ancient right in Thrace, were referred to the Commissioners in Greece for
answer; to whom repairing, Flamininus and his Colleague, urged that the King
should either leave Europe, or the Romans have power to protect their friends
in As^^ and make as many more there as they could. The Ambassadors answer, they
neither can, nor will conclude any thing to the prejudice of their Master's
crown, and so the Peace was not nearer than before.

29. Antiochus his resolution being set therefore for the War, Livius lib.
35. Appian ibid.
that he might prevent any thing that would divert or call him back, he
resolved to make alliances with his neighbors. To Ptolomy he married his
Daughter Cleopatra (giving with her in portion all Coelesyria, which before he
had taken from him; Antiochus intending a war seeks Confederates.
) to Ariarathes King of Cappadocia another named Antiochis; and a third he
offered to Eumenes of Pergamus, but he being acquainted with his design to make
War upon the Romans, and by this affinity to oblige him to his party, A. M.
3813. Ol. 147. ann. 1. V. C. 562. Antioch. Mag. 32. Ptol. Epiphan. 12.
conceiving it also his interest rather to stick to them whom he had some
ground to think would prove victorious; he waved his offer. In Spring he set
upon the Pisidae, a people inhabiting about Selga, being desirous first to
bring all Asia to his beck, and at the same time came Ambassadors from Rome to
discover his designs and preparations, and either to take off the edge of
Hannibals hatred, or at least by their intercourse with him to render him
suspected to the King. Visiting Eumenes first, as they had it in charge, they
were egged on by him to the war. Sulpitius one of them falling sick, was forced
to stay at Pergamus, but Villius hearing how Antiochus was employed, went to
Ephesus where Hannibal then lay, and according to his instructions often met
and discoursed with him. Thence he traveled to Apamea, where the King met him;
but news coming that Antiochus his son (whom he had lately sent into Syria) was
dead, it broke off the Treaty; so that Villius loath to be unseasonable
returned to Pergamus, and the King breaking off the War, to Ephesus, where
holding secret consultation with one Minio, he gave way that the Ambassadors
should be called thither. When they had there arrived, they were referred to
Minio, and both sides arguing for themselves as formerly, came to the same
conclusion, and the Romans having scarcely obtained that they came for,
returned home.

30. The Ambassadors being departed, Livius and Appian ut prius.
Antiochus then fell into another serious debate about the War, to which
Hannibal being now suspected was not called, till acquainting him how, when a
Child, his father had made him swear at the Altar never to be a friend to the
people of Rome, all jealousies were removed. About the same time came Thoas,
and others from the Aetolians (who being falln out with the Romans about
plunder, after the overthrow of Philip at Cynoscephalae, had ever since greatly
grudged, and now stirred up the several Princes against them) offering him the
Command of their Forces, and exhorting him to pass over into Greece, where
things were ripe enough for the War, and not expect the coming down of his Army
from the Inland Countries. The Aetolians stir him up to the War, and he passes
over into Greece.
They having gotten Demetrias (a Town of prime note) into their hands by a
wile, in confidence of an opportunity thence arising, he came over with an Army
of 10000 foot, 500 horse, and six Elephants, after which going to the general
meeting, he was by a public Decree received as General, and then sending to
summon Chalcis, had the Gates opened to him and so easily became Master of all
Euboea. Livius lib. 36.
In the midst of Winter holding another Council, he thought fit the
Thessalonians should be, by all means, drawn in to join with them; A. M. 3814.
Ol. 147. ann. 2. V. V. 563. Antioch, Mag. 33. Ptol. Epiphan. 13.
but Hannibal pressed above all things that Philip and the Macedonians might be
dealt with; for then as he said, the Thessalians, and other Graecians (seeing
themselves invaded by the Romans) would easily return to their accustomed duty:
he advised further, that the Forces with all speed should be sent for out of
Asia; and this only was observed. Antiochus returning to Chalcis, fell in Love
with an obscure Girl, Marries an obscure Girl at Chalcis.
daughter to Cleoptolemus his Host, with whom prevailing at length to marry
her, he spent all the remaining of the Winter in feasting and jollity, his Army
for Company falling into idleness and all excess.

31. Hitherto the Romans had rather severally, every man by himself, designed
him an Enemy, than made any preparations against him. Italy was Decreed this
year to both the Consuls; only one of them, if need should require, was to be
in readiness to march to any other place, The preparations of the Romans
resolved on.
and Attilius Serranus one of the Praetors; was ordered with his Fleet to go
into Greece, and attend the affairs of the Confederates; and with him four
Commissioners, men picked out, who by their authority might persuade much.
Moreover Marcus Baebius was commanded to draw down the Legions toward Tarentum
and Brundusium, that thence, if need should be, they might pass over into
Macedonia. But upon Antiochus his crossing the Hellespont, Eumenes King of
Pergamus sent his brother Attalus to acquaint the Senate therewith, and that
the Aetolians were preparing to join with him; whereupon Baebius was then
ordered, with all his Forces, to pass over into Epirus, and hover about
Apollonia. Glabrio the Consul sent over.
The next year came over M. Acilius Glabrio the Consul, with 10000 foot, 2000
horse, and fifteen Elephants; who taking in diverse places held by Antiochus his
Garrisons, marched toward the Bay of Malea, took Thaumacha, and wasted the
Territories of Hypata. Antiochus something herewith awakened, sent to the
Aetolians to have all their Forces in readiness, and then came down with less
then 10000 foot, and 500 horse; but fewer of the Aetolians came together than
usual, and his own Army, expected out of Asia, loitered, so that wanting it,
and forsaken of his Confederates, he fortified himself in the Straights of
Theomopylae, and sent the Aetolians (whereof there were but 4000) to keep
Heraclea and Hypata. Upon the approach of the Consul, bethinking himself of the
Mountains, which he knew had been formerly passed by some of Xerxes his Army,
and fearing the Romans should come over upon his back, he procured some
Aetolians to secure the passages. But Glabrio hearing of it, sent M. Forcius
Cato (then a Colonel in the Army) and L. Valerius Flaccus to beat them off,
which being done by the former, Overthrows Antiochus at the Straights of
Thermopylae.
he got over, and approaching the Enemies Camp, they at the first sight
supposed them to be friends; but then again understanding their error, cast
away their Arms and fled. But being closely pursued 500 of them only escaped,
though but fifty of the Romans were missing.

32. Antiochus flying to Chalcis, passed thence with his new married wife unto
Ephesus, after whose departure the Gates of Chalcis were presently opened to
the Consul, who having taken in Phocis and Boeotia in his passage thither,
Antiochus his acts in Asia.
all Euboea presently returned to obedience. Then fell he upon the Aetolians,
whom (though not long before they had sent to the King for aid, yet) now he
forced to yield, and after he had used their Ambassadors something roughly, and
threatened to chastize them to purpose; through the intercession of T.
Flamininus, gave them liberty to send their Ambassadors to Rome. Antiochus now
lay at Ephesus altogether secure of the Romans; but Hannibal told him, he
rather wondered they were not there already, than doubted at all of their
coming, and procured the Forces to be sent for out of the upper Provinces; and
with those ships which were ready the King sailed into the Chersonesus of
Thrace, fortifying it, and placed stronger Garrisons in Sestus and Abydus,
where the Romans were to pass over the Hellespont into Asia. At this time
Livius Salinator being sent from Rome to succeed Attilius in the Government of
the Fleet, came with it to Delus, which Antiochus hearing, hasted from Thrace
to fight him before the Rhodes and Eumenes should join with him; He is defeated
at Sea.
but they coming in in good time, his Fleet was worsted, and chased as far as
Ephesus.

33. After this defeat he set himself with all his might to repair his Navy,
and left his son Seleucus in Aeolis to look to the Maritime Coasts. Livius lib.
37.
Livius the Roman Admiral coming into the Hellespont, took Sestus, and had done
the same by Abydus, had not Polyxenidas a Fugitive of Rhodes, destroyed by
Treachery all the Fleet belonging to that Island; whereupon he raised his siege
and departed. Seleucus fell upon the Territories of Pergamus, and then besieged
the City it self ( Attalus being unable to graple with him in the field) with
whom also at length Antiochus himself joined, till hearing that the Roman and
Rhodian Fleets were coming to relieve the place; and, worse than this, that
Lucius Scipio the Consul (together with his brother the African) was already in
his march as far as Macedonia, and preparing now to pass the Hellespont
against him, he sent to Aemylius Rhegillus who had succeeded Livius in the
Fleet, to treat of a peace. He calling Eumenes from Pergamus, and the Officers
of the Rhodians to consult, these were content to Treat, but Eumenes being
averse to it, and urging that nothing could be concluded of, before the coming
of the Consul, an answer to that effect was returned to the King, who leaving
his son still before Pergamus, harrased the Territories of the Roman
Confederates, and taking diverse places, returned to Sardis. Seleucus was
presently beaten off, and forced to raise his siege, by 1000 foot, and 100
horse, sent to relieve the place by the Achaeans, Hannibal worsted at Sea.
and Hannibal returning with ships from Syria, was met by the Rhodians, who put
him to flight, and caused him to be blocked up in Pamphilia.

34. Antiochus from Sardis sent to Prusias King of Bithinia, A. M. 3815. Ol.
147. ann. 3. V. C. 564. Ant. Mag. 34. Ptol. Epiphan. 14.
to join in Confederacy with him against the Romans; but he (though he formerly
hung in suspense, yet) of late was fully drawn to their party by the Letters of
the Scipio's, and an Embassage sent from Rome for the same purpose. Failing
therefore in this enterprise, he went to Ephesus to his Navy, where (concluding
that no other way could he hinder the Consul's passing the Hellespont than by
being strongest at Sea) he resolved to try another battle, and so set upon the
Maritime Town near to Ephesus, that the Romans coming in to succor their
friends, Polyxenidas his Admiral might have an opportunity to work some notable
feat. But he engaging with 90 Galleys against Eumenes and the Rhodians, who
made up a Fleet together of about 83. being overmatched both in the valor of
his men, and the nimblenesse of his Vessels, And Polycenidas defeated.
he lost 42 of his Navy (13 of which, together with the men, were taken) having
broken but two of the Romans, and by mere chance carried a Rhodian away with
him to Ephesus. The King now terrified at the message of this third overthrow,
madly drew out his Garrison from Lysimachia (which might have given a stop to
the passage of the Consul) lest it should be cut off; and raising his siege
from before Colophonia, departed to Sardis, whence he sent into Cappadocia, to
Ariarathes his son-in-law, for aid, and all over else where he could bethink
himself, he raised forces, neglecting in the mean time his true opportunities.
For, Polybius Legate. 23.
the Scipio's in the mean while came to Lysimachia, Antiochus his imprudence.
where they were received with such plenty of all things, as if Provision had
been made for the Roman Army, and thence marched through the Chersonesus of
Thrace to the Hellespont, where all things being in readiness through the care
of Eumenes, they passed over without any disturbance into Asia.

He sends to the Consul about a peace.
35. Antiochus being so besotted as to^ly still, and suffer the Consul quietly
to come over, was now exceedingly discouraged, and sent out of hand to him, and
his brother, to treat of peace; with order also to deal in private with the
African about it, whose authority he knew would sway his brother to either side
indifferently. The Ambassador being arrived at the Roman Camp, deferred the
delivering of his message till the African's coming, who was yet behind; but
after his arrival, and audience given, had these conditions set him: To pay all
the expenses of the War, of which Antiochus had been the cause, and not only
quit the Cities in Aeolis and Ionia, but all Asia on this side the Mountain
Taurus. Being no whit satisfied with the proposals, he made no further
overtures to the Consul; but, according to his instructions, offered to his
brother (in case he would procure a peace on the terms proposed by his Master)
the restitution of his son who had been taken prisoner, as much money as he
would ask, and more than that, to be partaker of what the Kingdom it self would
amount to. The African answered, that the discharging of his son would
exceedingly oblige him, and as for the rest, had he kept Lysimachia in his
hands, fortified the passage into the Chersonesus of Thrace; or at least had he
opposed them at the Hellespont, and then offered these conditions, much might
have been done for him. As things now stood, he advised to consider into what
estate he had brought himself, by all means to decline the War, and refuse no
conditions offered to him. But he thought no harsher terms could be imposed
upon one already Conquered, and therefore casting off all thoughts of peace,
Rejecting the terms,
made what Provision he could possible for a battle.

36. The Consul being desirous to do something before Winter (which now drew
on) resolved, He prepares for a battle.
if possible, to fight him, though, his brother the African falling sick, had
departed to Elea, to whom Antiochus now to comfort him, restored his son
without any ransom; which happening as a Cordial to him in that condition, he
advised him in way of requital (being able to do no more at present) that he
should not engage in fight with his brother, before his return to the Camp.
Being much moved with his authority, he declined an engagement to his utmost
endeavor, but the Consul still dogging him from place to place, and being
ready to storm his Camp, for fear of utterly discouraging his men, he was
forced to draw them out. Livius ut supra.
Some say he had 70000 Foot, and about 12000 Horse (though others Appian in
Syriacis.
mention but 70000 in all) with 54 Elephants. The Consul brought into the field
but 30000, whereof two, being Macedonians, were left to keep the baggage; and
sixteen African beasts placed in the rear for a reserve, lest (being worsted by
the Indians) they should break their ranks. The battle was fought near Magnesia
a Town situate at the Foot of the Hill Sipylus. It happened then that such a mist
fell as blinded so the Kings Army, that both the wings thereof could not be
seen to one standing still in the same place; and their weapons were also
spoiled with the wet. His chariots armed with fithes which he had placed in the
front, proved his ruin; for the Horses being gored with arrows (according to
the direction of Eumenes) brake down all behind them, and so disordered the
rancks, that the Auxiliaries fled; which occasion the Romans taking, pressed
hard upwards, and discomfited the whole left wing. In the right he had better
fortune; for he put both Horse and Foot to flight, and drove them to their
Camp; but M. Aemilius Lepidus who was left there for the security of it, met
them, and forced them to face about and to charge the pursuing Enemy, so that
he and Attalus (the brother of Eumenes, who came in in good time with 200
Horse) renewed the battle with such earnestness, that now the King (who ere
while gave the charge) betook himself to his heels. Wherein he is overthrown
The Roman Cavalrie, in the pursuit, did great execution, and the rather,
because of the multitude of Chariots, and Camels, which blocked up the way;
insomuch as 54000 were slain, and 1400 taken. Of the Romans fell but three
hundred forty nine.

37. Antiochus, with a few about him, fled to Sardis, and thence to Apamea,
making Zeno Governor of the former, and Timon of Lydia; but they were despised
by the Soldiers and Townsmen that held the Castle, who gave up the places to
the Consul; which was followed as an example by diverse Cities of Asia. The
Consul being once arrived at Sardis (with his brother now upon his recovery)
the King presently sent and desired safe conduct for some Commissioners to
treat of Peace. This being granted, Zeuxis who had formerly governed Lydia, and
Antipater the Kings brothers son, shortly after arrived, desiring their Master
might know upon what terms to purchase the friendship of the People of Rome.
Publius Scipio the African, in the name of the rest, answered, that the Romans
used not to insult over their conquered Enemies* Livius and Appian ut prius.
Polyb. Legate. 25.
and therefore nothing should be required of him more than formerly; save only
to pay 15000 Talents of Eubaea to defray the charges of the War, by certain
portions; 400 to Eumenes (together with such Corn as was due to him, by virtue
of an agreement made with his Father) to give up Hannibal, Tho as the Aetolian,
and other incendiaries, and lastly, to deliver for the performance of these
conditions twenty Hostages. These proposals being accepted of, And has well
nigh the same terms as formerly were set him.
Ambassadors were out of hand dispatched to Rome, to pray the confirmation of
the Peace, which accordingly was ratified both by Senate and People; and for
that Eumenes and the Ambassadors of Rhodes, differed about some Cities in Asia,
it was ordered by the Fathers, that the People inhabiting on this side Taurus,
which before obeyed Antiochus, should now be subject to Eumenes, except Caria
and Lydia, as far as Maeander; and these should be delivered up to the
Rhodians. As for the Greek Cities, they which were formerly tributaries to
Attalus, should so remain under Eumenes his Successor; but such as had been
under the jurisdiction of Antiochus, should be left to their own Laws: and ten
Commissioners were sent to compose all differences risen betwixt the several
Cities and States.

38. Antiochus, unwilling to give up Hannibal, gave him notice of what was
required, that he might shift for himself. Justin lib. 32. Valerius Maximus. l.
4. c. 1. Justin ibid. Strabo lib. 16. and Excerpt. Diodori.
The Province of Asia being taken from him, he said the Conquerours dealt
bountifully with him therein; for now seeing his Kingdom was contained within
moderate bounds, he was only discharged from too great a burden of
Government. Two or three years after, he got another Army together, and having
declared his son Seleucus his Successor, made a progress into the upper
Provinces; where (either for that he really wanted money to pay the Tribute
imposed on him, or took that occasion to pretend poverty) hearing the Temple of
Jupiter Belus in Elymais to be exceeding rich, he went with his Forces by night
and spoiled it of a vaste treasure, making a show as if War had been made upon
him by the Inhabitants thereabouts, who getting knowledge of it, came upon him,
and without the help of any other, destroyed him and his whole Army. This is
the and which, by the consent of Historians, happened to him; though one there be
Aurelius Victor de viris illustribus c. 4.
. that tells us, how after he was overcome and banished beyond the Mountain
Taurus, he was slain by his companions, whom he had beaten in a drunken fit. He
is slain in Elymais.
He died when he had reigned 36 years, A. M. 3818. in the second of the 148
Olympiad, 185 before the Era of Christ: M. Aemilius Lepidus, and C. Flaminius
being Consuls.

His son Seleucus surnamed Philopater succeeds him.
39. Seleucus his son succeeded him (whom he formerly declared his Successor as
was said) in the 35 year of Philip King of Macedonia. This Seleucus Surnamed
Philopater, was no stirring man, A. M. 3818. Ol. 148. ann. 2. V.C. 567.
Seleucidarum 126. Ptol. Epiphanis 17. Appian ibid. Excerpt. Diodor. per
Valesium. 2 Maccab. 3.
and might have an excuse for it, being so weakened by that blow his Father
received from the Romans. Once he got together a considerable force of men, and
prepared to pass over Taurus to the aid of Pharnaces King of Pontus (who now
waged War with Ariarathes of Cappadocia, and Eumenes of Pergamus) but
bethinking himself that it was not lawful to do it, by virtue of the League
which the People of Rome had made with his Father, he gave over his enterprise.
He reverenced much at first the Temple of Jerusalem, allowing out of his own
revenues the charges of the public Sacrifices; but afterward his bounty was
almost turned into rapacity by the means of Simon a Benjamite. This man being
Captain of the Temple, and in contention with Onias the High Priest, when he
could not have the better of him, told Apollonius Governor of Coelesyria and
Phoenicia, that in the treasury there were great sums of money, which the
Priests having no need of, it might well enough be taken out into the Kings
Coffers. Apollonius acquainting the King with this, he sent Heliodorus his
Treasurer to seize upon the money, The treachery of Simon a Benjamite against
his religion and Country.
to whom Onias declared that it belonged to widows and orphans, that the sum
of it amounted but to 400 talents of Silver, and 200 of Gold, and that such was
the holiness of the place, that it must not be violated. Heliodorus not being
persuaded by this, entered the Temple, and was smitten by an Angel dead for
the present, but being restored by the prayers of Onias, returned to the King,
declaring the holiness of the place, and power of God. Simon after this
calumniated Onias, as if he, who had well deserved of his Nation, had been the
cause of this evil, and being backed by Apollonius, in his fury proceeded to
slaughters, so that Onias was forced to go to Seleucus, and, as some have it,
got him banished, though it seems not incredible that the King was dead ere he
came to him, Seleucus is slain.
being slain by the treachery of Heliodorus after he had reigned twelve years.

40. He left a son behind him named Demetrius, whom he sent, being but young,
to Rome, an Hostage in the room of Antiochus his younger brother; for that he
was tied by the agreement made with his Father, to change the Hostages at the
pleasure of the Romans. But when he died Antiochus was in his way home come as
far as Athens. Eumenes therefore and Attalus, that they might bind him to them,
being now a little offended at, Appian in Syriacis. Excerpt. Diodor. Siculi per
Valesium.
and jealous of the Romans, drove out Heliodorus, who affected the Kingdom, and
placed him in possession of it. He was called by the Syrians Epiphanes or
Illustrious, because strangers usurping the Kingdom, he appeared the vindicator
of the Dominion of his Ancestors, though others accounted him rather Epimanes
or Mad, because of his fanatic practices, and by the Angel he was termed a
vile person. Antiochus his brother succeeds him, Surnamed Epiphanes.
Being possessed of the Kingdom, he would slip privately out, with two other in
his company, and wander about the City, keep company and drink with the meanest
persons, coming on a sudden upon them with his cup and music. Laying off his
robe he put on a gown, and according to the custom of the Roman Candidates
(who stood for Offices) took the People be the hand, A. M. 3829. Ol. 151. an.
1. V. C. 578. Ptolom. Philometoris 5.
desiring their voices for the Aedileship or Tribuneship of the People. Having
then obtained the Magistracy by the Suffrages of the People after the Roman
manner, he sat and gave Judgment out of an ivory chair with such diligence, as
the wisest wondered what he meant, some attributing it to simplicity, some to
imprudence, and others to madness it self.

41. Hieronym. in Dan. cap. 11. Appian ibid.
In Syria he was not acknowledged at first by those who favored Ptolomy; but
afterward obtained it by a counterfeit clemency, and then having entered into
League with Eumenes, settled himself strongly enough. In the beginning of his
reign Jason the brother of Onias the third, the High Priest of the Jews,
purchased the Priesthood of him for 360 Talents of Silver, and another rent of
80 Talents; 2 Maccab. 4.
and not satisfying himself with wronging his brother, promised 150 more for a
license to set up in Jerusalem a place of exercise for the training up of youth
after the fashion of the Heathen, whereby an inlet was made, Jason the Jew
having bought the High Priesthood out of his brother's hands, is served in the
same manner by Menelaus.
as unto idolatry, and profaneness, so unto that bloodshed and cruelty which
ensued from the wickedness of this Prince, his instruments and successors. For
three years only kept he this Office, being then served in his own kind. For,
sending Menelaus the brother of that Simon whom we before mentioned, to the
King, to carry the money promised, and solicit his affairs, he circumvented
him after the same manner he had done his brother, promising for the
Priesthood, over and above what he paid, 300 Talents; so that he had his
desire, and Jason was forced to fly into the Country of the Ammonites.
Antiochus being seized of Coelesyria, Ptolomy Philopater, who pretended it
belonged to him, being passed over to his father as his mothers portion, sought
to recover it out of his hands, whereupon he marched down to Egypt, which,
having overthrown his Enemies in battle betwixt Pelusium and the mountain
Casius, Antiochus seizes on Egypt
he easily got into his power, pretending friendship to the young King for all
this, and a provident care for his affairs. Menelaus taking occasion at his
absence, took diverse Golden Vessels out of the Temple at Jerusalem, some of
which he gave away, and others he sold to Tire, and other places, for which
being accused of Sacrilege by Onias the lawful High Priest, he procured him to
be murdered. Going on in such mischiefs he was accused to the King; but bribing
Ptolomy the son of Dorymenes, got off, and procured the death of his accusers.
2 Maccab. 5.
At this time Antiochus went down the second time with a great power into
Egypt, Again.
which he recovered again (the King thereof flying before him) and getting the
fortified Towns into his hands, there stayed, till the sons of the Jews
procured his return to their destruction.

42. A false rumor being spread abroad of his death, Jason having got 1000 men
at his heels, set upon Jerusalem, and getting the City into his hands, forced
Menelaus into the Castle, and then made slaughters, as if he had not been
amongst his Countrymen and kindred, but foreiners and Enemies, yet obtained he
not the Priesthood, Jason rages at Jerusalem against his Countrymen.
but was forced to betake himself back into the Country of the Ammonites, where
being accused to Aretas King of the Arabians, he fled from place to place like
a Vagabond, hated of all men as a forsaker of the Laws, and as the public
Enemy of his Country, and died at length at Lacedaemon. Antiochus hearing in
Egypt that they at Jerusalem rejoiced at the report of his death, and
suspecting because of these stirs of Jason, Antiochus his cruelty and
profaneness against Jews and Temple.
that Judaea was about to rebel, in a great rage departed thence, and came and
took the City by force, and giving no quarter for three days space, put 80000
to the Sword, and afterward sold as many. Yet not contenting himself with
this, he profanely entered the Temple, Menelaus that Traitor to his Country
being his guide, and rifling it of the holy Vessels, killed swine upon the
Altar, and with the broth of the flesh of them sprinkled the place; then
taking away with him 1800 Talents, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13.
he got him back to Antioch, leaving behind him to afflict still the People at
Jerusalem Philip a Phrygian, and Andronicus in Samaria; and besides them
Menelaus more grievous to, and despightful against, his fellow Citizens, than
the other. Two years also after this, he sent Apollonius a cruel man with an
Army of 22000, commanding him to kill all that were arrived at ripeness of
age, and sell the women and children for slaves. He coming to Jerusalem, kept
himself still until the Sabbath, and then taking the opportunity of the
solemnity of the day, set upon those employed therein, then running through the
City slew a great multitude, plundering it and setting it on fire, pulled down
the houses and walls round about, and led away many women and children into
captivity, whilst Antiochus his Master was busy again in his attempts upon
Egypt.

43. Excerpt. Diodori per Val.
For Ptolomy being stirred up by Aeulaius the Eunuch to attempt again the
recovery of Coelesyria, to prevent that, he went down into Egypt, where
putting him again to flight, he might have destroyed all his men, but riding to
and fro himself to forbid it, he thereby procured such love, as he presently
got into his hands Pelusium, He gets all Egypt into his hands except
Alexandria.
and not long after all Egypt, except Alexandria. Ptolomy after this sent his
Ambassadors to him, with those of the Achaeans, Athenians, and others, to
excuse the matter, and lay all the blame upon the Eunuch; but getting no good
thereby, after he had spent some time carelessly without any further provision
for his affairs, he departed to his younger brother to Alexandria, Justin lib.
24. Polybius Legate. 84. Livius l. 44, and 45.
whom the Citizens there had made King after his overthrow. The Alexandrians at
first received him, and made him partaker with his brother, but afterward for
some distaste banished him again, at which Antiochus took an opportunity, as
thinking it best to accomplish his designs, by pretending to protect and reduce
him into his Kingdom; wherefore he engaged at Pelusium with Ptolomy the younger
in a naval fight, and getting the better, on a sudden laid a bridge over the
Nile and besieged Alexandria. Ptolomy and Cleopatra his sister being in this
danger, A. M. 3835. Ol. 152. an. 3. V. C. 584. Antioch. Epiphan. 6. Ptolom.
Philomet. 10.
sent Ambassadors to Rome to crave aid; but he attempting once the walls, and
experiencing the strength of the places, having sent his Ambassadors also to
Rome after the other, raised his siege. About this time came the Ambassadors of
the Rhodians to him to intercede, whom he put off, saying, that his intent was
only to re-establish the elder Ptolomy, which if the Alexandrians would admit
of, all things with his consent might be composed. Presently after this,
leaving at Memphis Ptolomy the elder, for whose sake he pretended to wage this
War, and giving up the rest of Egypt to him, he only left a strong Garrison at
Pelusium, and so departed into Syria, concluding with himself, that keeping
this in his power, the key of the Country, he might safely suffer the two
brothers to try out the quarrel; Retreateth.
for the Conqueror being wearied beforehand, would easily be brought under by
him.

44. The Ambassadors of Ptolomy obtained their desire, Idem ibid. Polyb. Legate.
89.
the Romans being jealous of the increasing power of Antiochus. For, C.
Popillius Laenas, with two others, were sent with order first to go to
Antiochus, after that to Ptolomy, and to denounce unto them, that except they
gave over the War, him that was the hinderer of the Peace they would not
account as their friend or allie. Whilst they were on their way, Ptolomy the
elder bethinking himself what little cause he had to trust Antiochus, sent to
his brother, and through the mediation of Cleopatra was reconciled to him, and
reigned with him, the Alexandrians being willing to receive him, because their
City was much straightened for provisions, by reason of the War. Antiochus
hearing this, contrary to his former pretenses, was grievously fretted, and
then more eagerly than ever preparing for the War against them both, sent a
Fleet against Cyprus, where Ptolomie's Forces were worsted, and in the
beginning of Spring marched down for Egypt. In Coelesyria the Ambassadors of
Philometer met him, and gave him thanks in their Master's name, for that by his
means he had obtained the Kingdom, desiring he would continue his friend, He
returns into Egypt.
and protect what he had helped him to, and rather say what he would have done,
than by force to attempt it as an Enemy; but he replied, he would neither
withdraw his Fleet nor Army, except he had all Cyprus, Pelusium, and all the
ground lying upon that Mouth of the Nile given up unto him, and he set a day
whereon at furthest he would have an answer to these conditions. Livius ibid.
Polyb. Legate. 92. Valerius Maximus lib. 6. cap. 4. Appian ut prius.
Popillius and his Companions hearing of his design ( Perseus of Macedonia
being now overthrown) made haste to get to him before he reached Alexandria,
and staying some time at Rhodes, they came to him, when he was but four miles
off from the City, upon the sight of whom he reached out his hand to Popilius;
but he being a severe man, reached him the Tables, wherein was written the
Decree of the Senate, which commanded him to abstain from War, bidding him
first to read them. Having perused them, he said he would consider with his
friends what was to be done, and then give an answer, but Popilius after a
certain insolent fashion, made a Circle round about him with his rod, and
commanded him to answer before he went out of it; at which the King being
amazed, after a little pause, But is taken off by the Romans from further
attempts.
said he would do whatsoever the people of Rome commanded; and so within a
short time prefixed, grievously unwilling, and sorrowing, but judging it fit
for the present to yield to the time, he drew out his Forces from Egypt and
Cyprus.

45. After this he published an Edict, 1 Maccab. 1. and 2 Maccab. 6.
commanding all throughout his Dominions to observe one and the same religion,
and relinquishing their own and former Rites, to conform themselves to the
religion of the Greeks under pain of death, sending diverse Overseers who should
compel each people to the observation of his Order. Into Judaea he sent an old
man of Athens, with order to defile the Temple, and name it the Temple of
Jupiter Olympius, He persecuteth the Jews for their religion.
as that at Gerizim the Temple of Jupiter Hospitalis; he commanded the
sacrifices to be left off, the Sabbath he prohibited, he commanded them to
defile the Sanctuary, build up Altars, Groves, and Chapels to Idols, to
sacrifice Swine, and other unclean beasts, not to Circumcise their sons, but to
forget the Law: Moreover, an order was sent unto the Neighboring Cities, that
they should force the, Jews to partake of their sacrifices, and kill those
which would not come over to their Rites, so that many by fear obeyed, the
Temple was polluted by the dalliances of the Gentiles, the abomination of
desolation, viz. the abominable idol of Jupiter Olympius was set up therein,
the Scriptures burnt, and a Decree published, that with whomsoever they should
be found, or whosoever should approve them, should be put death. Many yet were
they that stood out, contemned the Kings Edict, and defiled not themselves, so
that being enraged he caused diverse to be brought before him to force them by
Torments, but they stood out courageously, and enduring the pains sealed the
truth with their blood; amongst whom are very notable the Mother and her seven
Sons, from the eldest of them called Maccabaeans. The rage of this persecution
coming to Modin, 1 Maccab. 2.
a Town situate near to Diospolis found some opposition; for there Mattathias a
Priest eminent in degree, especially for his five sons, not only refused to
sacrifize, but killed a Jew at the Altar that was so doing, and after that the
Kings Officer who was sent to compel the people. Then exhorting all that were
zealous for their Law to follow him, he fled with his sons into the Mountain.

Mattathias makes opposition.
46. Many went out after him, and lived with their Wives, Children, and Cattle,
in Dens and Caves, which coming to the knowledge of Philip the Governor of
Jerusalem, the Garrison Soldiers were presently drawn out to pursue them, so
that falling on them on the Sabbath, and they not at all resisting for the
observance thereof, they cast in fire, and burnt them to the number of 1000
persons. Mattathias, and they that were with him hearing this, resolved for the
time to come to repulse the Enemy on the Sabbath, and then the Asidaeans, a
sort of religious men joining with him, with such as daily fled out of the
Country, he made up a little Army, and therewith prosecuted the wicked ones,
and drove them to fly to the Nations about, pulled down the Altars, and
Circumcised such Children as they found in the Coasts of Israel; then after he
had been Captain of this wandering Company the space of a year, he died, leaving
his son Simon for a Counselor, and Judas surnamed Maccabaeus for a Captain to
them. 1 Maccab. 3.
This Mattathias was the son of John, and Grandson to Simeon, surnamed
Asmonaeus. Ad A. M. 8332.
Jacobus Cappellus thinks that this Simeon was Simon the second, son of Onias
the second, and Grandson to Simon the first, surnamed Just. But Schinserus
thinks this Simeon to have been the son of Hasmonaeus. From the (...).
words of Josephus it should seem that Mattathias was the Great-grand-son of
Asmonaeus, so called, or Hasmon, from whom his posterity were named
Hasmonaeans. Psalm. 68.32.
David uses the word Hasmanim to express Ambassadors, Princes, or Great-men.
It is also observed that the Jews in Italy call the Cardinals Hasmannim or
Hasmonaeans.

47. Judas being assisted by his brethren, and his fathers followers, fell upon
the Enemy, And Judas his son after him.
burnt diverse of their Towns, and seized upon the Commodious places, coming
usually upon them in the night, so as he forced many of them to quit the Land;
Apollonius the Governor of Samaria coming against him, he overthrew, and slew
him, and getting his sword ever after used it in the Wars, and after him he
overthrew also Seron, who governed Caele-Syria. Antiochus in this mean while
lying about Antioch, made there Magnificent Games and Shows, employing the
money he had got in Egypt, Polyb. Legate. 101. and 109.
and out of the Temples he had rifled, to that end and purpose, and
entertaining his Guests in a vile and servile kind of observance. This being
ended, an Ambassador from Rome arrived at his Court, sent on purpose to spy out
his designs. Whom he received with such courtesy, as over doing in that point,
he easily concealed the grudge he had conceived for his stop at Alexandria, and
the bent of his mind which was sufficiently alienated from the Romans. But
hearing of the success of Maccabaeus, Which inraging Antiochus.
and the loss of his Forces, he was exceedlingly enraged, mustered all his
Army, to which he gave a years pay, and commanded they should be ready at all
occasions.

48. He purposed to march against Maccabaeus, 1 Maccab. 3.
but seeing his Treasury exhausted by the pay of the Army (for that the Jews
now being revolted, he thereby lost his 300 Talents of annual Tribute, and much
also which he was wont to receive from other places, Who intending to go
against him, yet changes his mind and gives order to Lysias to destroy the
Jews.
which being unwilling to quit their own religions as well the other, were in
combustions) and fearing he should not have to satisfy for his gifts, wherein
he took a pride to exceed all his ancecestors, he resolved to make a progress
into Persia, and the upper Countries, to gather the Tributes thereof, and fill
his Coffers. But before his departure, making Lysias his Kinsman Governor of
the Regions betwixt Euphrates and Egypt, to whose care he also committed his
young son, he gave to him half his forces, and this in charge, to blot out the
Nation of the Jews utterly, and to give their Country to strangers to inhabit.
2 Maccab. 8.
Philip the Governor of Jerusalem seeing to what an height Maccabaeus was
grown, wrote to Ptolomy the son of Dorymenes the Governor of Coelesyria and
Cilicia, who presently dispatched Nicanor one of his chiefest friends, and the
son of Patroclus with 20000 men, He sends several Captains into Judaea.
joining Gorgias to him, a man of great experience; and not long after he
himself was sent by Lysias with more aid, so that all three together made an
Army of 40000 foot and 7000 horse. Antiochus at this time was behind hand in
his Tribute to the Romans 2000 Talents, therefore Nicanor resolved to raise
this money out of Jewish slaves, and sent about for Chapmen for them, promising
90 persons for a Talent; so that 1000 Merchants came together with ready money
into his Camp; more forces also from Syria and the Country of the Philistines
came in to him.

49. 1 Maccab. 4.
Judas having kept a fast at Morpah (because the Heathen now held Jerusalem,
and the Temple was defiled) for his good success against so great an Army,
having himself but 6. or 7000 men, gave all the fearful, those that had built
houses, married Wives, or planted Vineyards leave to depart, according to the
Law of Moses; then marched down to Emmaus where the Enemy was encamped. That
night Gorgias thinking to oppress the Jews, at unawares, came to their Tents
with a party of 5000 foot and 1000 horse; but Judas having notice thereof,
turned it to his own advantage, resolving to go and fall upon Nicanor in the
absence of the other, whom he knew to be the more experienced Captain. Gorgias
finding the Camp empty, thought the owners had fled for fear of him into the
Mountains, and sought for them there, but they being got to Nicanor engaged
with him in the morning, and routed his whole Army, laying above 9000 dead upon
the place; so that he and his men perceiving presently what was done by the
smoke of their Camp now set on fire, But they are defeated.
fled amain, and the Jews coming to plunder the field found great Treasure, of
which part being set aside for the infirm, Widows, and Orphans, the rest the
Soldiers divided amongst them. After this, Judas overthrew Timotheus and
Bachides, both of the Kings party, killing above 20000 men, so that then they
recovered many strong holds, at which Lysias was exceedingly troubled, things
falling out so contrary to his expectations, and the next year invaded Judaea
with an army of 60000 choice foot, and 5000 horse, And Lysias himself.
but being met by Judas with 10000 men, he was received with such resolution
that with the loss of 5000 he was glad to retreat to Antioch, intending
greater preparations for his next expedition. 2 Maccab. 10.
Judas returning to Jerusalem cleansed the Temple, and offered sacrifice upon
a new Altar, after the Heathen had held it just three years; then kept they a
feast for eight days, and ordered it to be observed to posterity, which in the
Gospel is called the Feast of the Dedication.

50. Antiochus in the mean while waged War against Artaxias King of Armenia,
and that with such success, as cutting off many of his men, Appian. in
Syriacis.
he took him prisoner. Antiochus in the mean time prospers in the upper
Countries.
Afterward hearing that the City Elymais in Persia was exceeding rich, and
therein a Temple (of Venus, or Diana, both being asserted) wherein were laid up
very rich Arms left by Alexander the Great, he being greedy of this prey,
attempted to rifle them both, but the Inhabitants taking Arms, repelled, and
caused him shamefully to retreat. Being come to Ecbatan^, he there heard of the
overthrow of Nicanor and Timotheus, and then journeying toward Babylon, in the
Borders of Persia, of the defeat given to that great Army of Lysias, the
throwing down the Idol of Jupiter Olympius, 2 Maccab. 9.
and the fortification of the Sanctuary, whereupon he fell into a great rage,
resolved to revenge himself upon the Jews for his shameful retreat, and
commanded his Chariot driver to make speed, And in his return hearing of the
miscarriage of Lysias, and the rest breathes revenge, but is presently struck
with a foul disease.
saying, he would make Jerusalem the common burying place of them when he
should come thither. Scarce had he made an end of threatening, when he was
suddenly struck with exceeding torment in his bowels, which yet reduced him not
to any good constitution of mind, he still breathing fury and revenge against
the Jews, and crying out to make haste, but the Chariot being driven very fast,
he was shaken out of it, and by the fall so sore bruised, that he was
constrained to betake himself to his Litter, and then Worms crawled out of his
body, the flesh whereof rotted, and fell from him yet alive. None could endure
to carry him for the stench thereof, which also offended his Army, wherefore
being forced to stay his journey for Oxbyton, he stayed at Taba, a Town in
Persia. Before his death he confessed this to have falln upon him for the
injuries offered to the Jews, acknowledged the Sovereignty of God, and his own
pride, A. M. 3841. Ol. 154. ann. 1. Seleucida 149. Ptol. Philomet. 17.
vowed if God would restore him, to grant immunities to his people, to adorn
his Temple, to turn Jew himself, and to travel through the habitable world to
declare his strength and power. And when he perceived his end to draw near, he
wrote most kind Letters to the Jews, desiring them to stand faithful to him,
and his son after him, then constituting Philip, who had been brought up with
him, the Protector and Guardian of his son, till he should come to age, And
dies.
he died, after he had reigned 12 years; A. M. 3841. after the beginning of
Seleucus the 149. the first of the 154 Olympiad.

51. Antiochus his son, a Child of nine years old succeeded him, Appian. in
Syriacis. Antiochus Eupator. 2 Maccab. 10.
surnamed Eupator by the Syrians for his fathers virtue. Him Lysias goverved,
who had brought him up; so that Philip his designed Guardian by his father fled
into Egypt, and Ptolomy the son of Dorymenes, for that being convinced how the
Jews were wronged, he went about to compose the difference with them, was
forced to drink poison. Demetrius the son of Seleucus Philopator, Polyb. Legate.
107.
whom we before said to have been sent Hostage to Rome, Demetrius the son of
Seleucus Philopator and the right heir, desires of the Romans to restore him;
but they out of policy refuse it.
hearing there of his Uncles death, desired of the Senate that he might be
restored to his Fathers Kingdom, so long unjustly detained from him, affirming
he esteemed of Rome as his own Country, in which he had been brought up; of the
sons of Senators as his brethren, and themselves as so many Fathers; but they
judging it more for their interest that the Kingdom of Syria should be under a
child than one of man's estate (such as he was, being now 23 years old) resolved
it should be secured to Antiochus, and presently ordered three Commissioners to
be sent thither to settle the affairs thereof, according to instructions
received from themselves, which might now be done easily enough, the King
himself being so young, and his Courtiers thinking they were well enough dealt
withal, so Demetrius was not restored; but especially they gave them in charge
to burn all the ships they should find there, not allowed to Antiochus by the
League, and hough the legs of all the Elephants, and diminish the Kings
strength as much as possible. These things being executed, provoked one
Leptines so far as he slew Cn. Octavius the chief Commissioner (and who first
brought the Consulship into his family, out of which Augustus Caesar issued)
whom Lysias, though he was suspected to incense the People against the Romans,
honorably buried, and dispatched quickly Ambassadors to Rome in the King's
name to disclaim any consciousnesse to the fact.

52. Gorgias being Governor of the parts about Judaea, 2 Maccab. 10.
fomented a continual War with the Jews, and with him joined the Idumaeans, who
received all runnagates, and gave them entettainment. Against those therefore,
Judas Maccabaeus marched, took diverse places, and put 20000 to the Sword, after
which turning upon the Ammonites, he overthrew them in diverse engagements,
Gorgias fomenteth a War with the Jews.
and taking Jazer with the Territories thereto belonging, returned again into
Judaea. Timotheus the General of the Ammonites hereat enraged, and gathering
many men out of Asia, came as if he would devour Judaea, but Judas with his
having humbled themselves, and called upon the name of God, gave him battle, in
which 20500 Foot, and 600 of his Horse being slain, he fled to Gazara, a strong
Garrison, kept by his brother, but that being taken, he was pulled out of a
cave where he had hid himself, and slain, together with the other. After this
the Nations about Galaad and Galile afflicting sore the Jews, Maccabaeus
divided his Army into three parts, 1 Maccab. 5.
one of which ( viz. 3000 men) he delivered to bis brother Simon to relieve
them of Galile, the second to Joseph the son of Zechariah, to defend Judaea,
giving it in charge not to sight with any Enemy till his return, with the other
he marched himself to the succor of them in Galaad. Simon fought many battles
with the Enemy, Judas is victorious.
and killed many of them, brought his Countrymen into Judaea with great
gladness, and Judas had the like success, taking many Towns, and putting many
thousands to the Sword; but those that were left at home desiring also upon the
report hereof to atchieve some military glory, marched to Jamnia, whence
Gorgias issuing out, put them to flight, and following the chase as far as the
borders of Judaea, killed about 2000 of them.

53. Lysias the King's Protector and chief Minister of State, was displeased at
the report of Judas's success, 2 Maccab. 11. and 12.
and taking 80000 Foot withal the Horse along with him, resolved to make
Jerusalem an habitation for the Greeks, the Temple to pay tribute, and the
Priesthood thereof to set to sale every year. He came and besieged Bethsura
nigh to Jerusalem; but Maccabaeus then meeting with him killed 11000 of his
Foot, with 1600 Horsemen, and forced him with the rest (many of them wounded
and disarmed) to shift for themselves. Lysias again defeated.
Considering this defeat, and that God fought for the Jews, he sent to them to
treat of Peace, and according to his promise brought the King to yield to such
reasonable conditions as were offered by Maccabaeus; but it was quickly broken
by Timotheus, and other Captains, that governed the places adjoining to Judaea,
at which time they of Joppe also drawing 200 Jews craftily on shipboard,
drowned them in the sea. Judas hearing this, went and burned all the Vessels in
the Haven at Joppe, and understanding that the inhabitants of Jamnia had also
intended such a thing against his Countrymen, he did as much for them; then
marching against Timotheus, the Arabian Nomades set upon him, being 5000 Foot,
and 500 Horse, but were so entertained, And the Scythian Nomades,
as yielding themselves, with a promise of giving up their Cattle, and being at
his beck for the time to come, they obtained Peace. After this he stormed the
City Caspis (wherein was such a slaughter made of the Inhabitants, that a Lake
thereto adjoining seemed to be full of blood) and then proceeding 750 furlongs
came to the Jews called Tubieni inhabiting the Land of Tob (concerning which
mention is made in the Book of Judges) whence Timotheus was departed, but had
left a strong Garrison, Chap. 11.
which being taken by Dositheus and Sosipater two of Judas his Officers, they
put to the sword above 10000 men.

54. Timotheus gathered together from the Nations round about him and the
Arabians 120000 Foot, and 2500 Horse, wherewith, 1 Maccab. 5. and 2 Maccab. 12.
putting up the women and children into a strong Fort called Carnion, he came
and pitched his Tents against Raphon beyond the brook; but his great multitude
was so surprised with fear upon the approaching of Judas, that every man
shifted for himself, and what by their running upon one another swords, and
the pursuit which Maccabaeus followed on with much earnestness, 30000 of them
were slain, As also Timomotheus
and he himself fell into the hands of Dositheus and Sosipater, from whom he
obtained his liberty, upon promise of dismissing such of their Countrymen as he
had taken. Judas then proceeding took Carnion, wherein 25000 were put to the
sword, after which he gathered all the Jews out of Galaad to bring them into
Judaea, and for that the City Ephron, through which they must needs pass,
denied them entrance, they took it by force, and destroying the Inhabitants,
went through and came up to Jerusalem to the Feast of Pentecost. The Feast
being ended, he taking 3000 Foot, and 400 Horse along with him, And Gorgias.
went and fought with Gorgias, whom one Dositheus of Bacenor his Company had
once taken, but holding him by the cloak, a certain Thracian came and cut off
his shoulder, so that the prisoner escaped. After the Victory the Jews coming
to strip and bury such of their own party as had fallen that day, found under
their coats certain things dedicated to the idols of Jamnia, so that it
appearing that this being forbidden them by the Law was the cause of their
death, they betook themselves by Prayer to God, entreating that it might not be
charged upon them all. After this Judas subdued the Edomites, and the
Philistines, their idols he burnt, and overthrew their altars, The Edomites and
Philistines subdued.
and then returning into Judaea, for that he found the King's Garrison Soldiers
which yet kept the Castle to straighten and infest the Israelites about the
Sanctuary, with all the People, he besieged them close, 1 Maccab. 6.
but some of them with certain Jewish fugitives getting out, went straight to
Antiochus, and persuaded him with all expedition to come and give a check to
the growing power of the Jews.

55. Antiochus gathering together all his friends and Captains, Ibid. and 2
Maccab. 1^.
and a great Army (concerning the number of which the two Books of Maccabees
differ) in a great rage marched thither, intending to deal worse with them than
his father had done before him, and to him Menelaus joined himself, hoping by
his means to regain the Priesthood. Antiochus besieges Bethsura,
Passing through Idumaea he came and sat down before Bethsura, where Judas by
night with a choice party fell upon his Camp, and piercing as far as his own
Tent slew 4000 men, and the prime Elephant, with those upon him, and giving an
Alarm to the whole Army at break of the day, safely retreated, whereupon the
King marched toward him the next day, and coming to an engagement lost 600 men
more; but the Jews seeing themselves overpowered, retreated. Then returned he
to the siege, Which being taken, he besieges Jerusalem,
which Judas sore molested, cutting off many of his men, and relieving the
besieged with provisions, who being not provided within themselves, because
this was the Sabbatical year, yielded up the Town upon composition. Antiochus
having herein placed a Garrison marched up to Jerusalem, and there made all
provision possible for gaining it, all manner of engines being raised for the
casting of fire and stones; which the besieged resisted as well as they might
by others of their own, but as for provisions, were in no better condition than
they of Bethsura had been, which gave opportunity enough to the King; but
before he could perfect his work, came news that Philip, whom his Father had
ordained to be his guardian, being returned out of Egypt, was coming with the
Forces which Epiphanes had left in Persia and Media to recover his right
usurped by Lysias. But is called away by the motions of Philip.
Hereupon both he and his Captains were presently persuaded by Lysias (because
their provisions began to fail, the place was strong, and the affairs of the
Kingdom required it) to make Peace with the besieged upon such terms as they
required.

56. Going to the Temple he offered sacrifice, and showed civility and respect
toward the place, but a little after considering the strength thereof, A. M.
3842. Ol. 154. an. 2. Seleucidarum 150. Antiochi Eupatoris 2. Ptolom. Philomet.
18. V. C. 591. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 15.
caused the wall round about to be demolished, contrary to his oath. Then
returning to Ptolemais, the Inhabitants being great Enemies to the Jews,
stickled hard to break the League, but Lysias by his defense quieted their
minds, and confirmed the Peace. The King hasting thence toward Antioch, Lysias
accused Menelaus the High Priest to him, as an incendiary, and he that had been
the cause of the War, so that being thrown into a Tower full of ashes, he there
miserably ended his life, and in his room was substituted one Alcimus of Aron's
line, but not of the family of the Priests, through Lysias his direction, which
Onias the son of the last Onias the Priest understanding, went into Egypt,
where insinuating himself into Ptolomy Philometor and Cleopatra, he obtained a
Temple like that at Jerusalem to be built in the Province of Heliopolis, and
himself to be made Priest thereof. Antiochus coming to Alexandria, A Temple
built to God at Heliopolis by the procurement of Onias
found Philip Master thereof, but setting upon it he took it by force, and
taking him therein put him to death, and so quickly quieted these stirs, being
reserved with his Guardian, though but a little time, for others more
dangerous. His Ambassadors now, which Lysias had sent about the death of
Octavius, had been at Rome, where laboring to clear him of the fact, they were
sent back without answer, whereat Demetrius the son of Seleucus being much
startled, began to cast again in his head how to obtain his freedom, and the
Kingdom, according to his title, which was so clear and evident.

57. Consulting with Polybius the Achaean and Historian, Polybius Legate. 114. 1
Maccab. 7. and 2 Maccab. 14.
whether he should not once more move the Senate in the business, he advised
him not to dash himself twice against the same Rock, but attempt something of
himself worthy of a Kingdom, hinting thereby what he would have him to do. But
he being ruled by one Apollonius his intimate friend, but a young unexperienced
man, requested the Fathers again, that at least he might not be constrained to
stay there as an Hostage, seeing they had secured the Kingdom of his Cousin
Antiochus. They yet remained of the same opinion, and resolved as formerly, so
that then he consulted how to escape, first with Diodorus a cunning man, who
was come from Syria, and had belonged to him, and then with Polybius, who
procured Menethyllus the Egyptian Ambassador to hire a Carthaginian ship just
then sailing for Tire; so that Diodorus being sent before to feel the People's
mind, and seek for advantages, he taking a few friends along with him supped at
a friends house, whither, for fear he should stay too long, Polybius sent him a
secret hint, not to let slip this opportunity; whereupon making as though he
was sick, he arose from the table, and came that night to Ostia upon the mouth
of Tyber. Menethyllus going before told the Master of the ship, that he had
received orders from his Prince to reside still at Rome; Demetrius the right
heir escapes from Rome.
but that he would send some young men of approved fidelity to him, A. M. 3843.
Ol. 154. an. 3. V. C. 592. Seleucidarum 151. Ptolom. Philomet. 19.
to acquaint him with the affairs of his negotiation: So Demetrius and his
followers going on shipboard, away they sailed by break of day. At Rome nothing
was known of his escape till the fourth day. On the fifth the Senate met about
it; yet did not make any provision for the pursuing of him, thinking it to be
too late; but a few days after, they sent three Commissioners into Greece, who
viewing the affairs there, were commanded thence to pass into Asia, and
amongst other things have an eye to what he should attempt.

58. Landing in Lycia, he thence wrote to the Senate, Zonarus ex Dione. Joseph.
lib. 12. cap. 16. Justin lib. 34. Lib. Maccab. ut supra.
that he had no intentions to disturb his Cousin Antiochus, but only revenge
upon Lysias the death of Octavius; then getting into his hands Tripolis, a Town
of Phoenicia, as sent by the Senate to possess the Kingdom, none gainsaid
him; so that he seized also upon Sparneae. Thence, having gotten some forces
together, he marched toward Antioch, out of which Antiochus, with Lysias his
Governor (for that they thought he was sent by the Romans, and therefore
feared to oppose him) coming out to meet him in a friendly manner, was
presently made away, after he had reigned about two years. Demetrius having
thus obtained the Kingdom, Gets the Kingdom, and kills Seleucus.
displaced Heraclides, whom Epiphanes his Uncle had made Treasurer at Babylon,
and his brother Timarchus, whom he had also placed Governor there; for that he
had badly behaved himself in his Office, whence from the Babylonians he got the
surname of Soter, the next after Antiochus the son of Seleucus Nicator, as In
Syriacis. Polybius Legate. 120 and 122.
Appian observes. The Roman Commissioners being now come to Ariarathes into
Cappadocia, he sent Menocharis thither to them, to deal with them about his
confirmation in the Kingdom; offered also to Ariarathes the Widow of Perseus of
Macedonia, and his sister to wife; but he refused her for fear of giving
offense to the Romans. After the return of Menocharis and his report, thinking
it his main interest to oblige these men, he cast off all other things, and
laboring to please them, He courteth the Commissioners of Rome that he may be
owned as King.
sent first to them into Pamphylia, then to Rhodes, offering to do any thing
whereby to purchase his being acknowledged King by the Romans, and Tiberius one
of the Commissioners stood him in great stead for the obtaining of this his
desire. He shortly after sent Menocharis, and others in Embassage to Rome, A.
M. 3844. Ol. 154. ann. 4. V.C. 593. Seleucid. 152. Demet. Soter. 2. Ptol.
Philom. 2^.
and with them Leptines the murderer of Octavius (who offered himself to be
sent) and a Crown of Gold in token of his thankfulness for his good usage all
the time of his being an Hostage. The Senate long deliberating upon the
business, resolved at length not to receive Leptines, lest they should seem to
be satisfied for the public affront; but rather lay the blame upon all Syria,
and reserve to themselves an occasion of revenge, when, and as often as they
should see convenient: as for Demetrius himself, they bestowed their friendship
upon him, with this condition, if he would give sufficient caution to be
thenceforth as much in their power as formerly.

59. Alcimus, who had procured from Eupator to be made High Priest, 1 Maccab.
7. 2 Mac. 14.
and now was not received nor owned by the people, because that in the days of
Epiphanes he had defiled himself, came to Demetrius with other Apostates, and
such like as himself, and accused his Contrymen, especially the Hasmonaeans
(i. e. Judas and his brethren) that they had cut off, and banished his friends;
Bachides sent by him against the Jews.
whereupon he sent one Bachides a trusty friend with great forces into Judaea,
confirming the Priesthood to Alcimus, whom he sent back with him. All their
design, being arrived there, was to get Judas into their hands; diverse Scribes
going out to them to solicit for peace, being confident because the Priest was
of the seed of Aaron, he most wickedly, and contrary to his Oath given, slew
sixty of them in one day; then Bachides going from Jerusalem, sent about, and
caused diverse that had fled from him, and many of the people whom being slain
he cast into a great pit, and so committing the Country to Alcimus (to the
defense of which he left him some forces) he returned unto his King. Leaves
Alcimus the High Priest with some forces.
After his departure, Alcimus striving to confirm himself in the Priesthood,
made great havoc of the people, to restrain which, Judas went throughout the
Country, and compelled his party to shut themselves up within their holds, and
growing stronger, he restrained their invasions, so that Alcimus being afraid
of him goes once more unto the King, carrying along with him a Crown of Gold, a
Palm, and of the boughs which were used solemnly in the Temple; and seeing he
could not have any more access to the holy Altar, taking a fit opportunity
when he was asked of the affairs of his Country, accused the Asidaeans, and
especially Judas, as seditious, of depriving him of the Priesthood (the honor
as he said of his Ancestors) and plainly affirmed that as long as Maccabaeus
lived the Kings affairs could not be secure. This being seconded by some
ill-willers to the Jews, Demetrius was inflamed, and sending for Nicanor one of
his chiefest Princes, Who accusing Judas, Nicanor is sent against him.
and a bitter Enemy to the Israelites, made him Captain over Judea, and sent
him forth with a Command to slay Judas, to scatter them that were with him, and
make Alcimus High Priest of the great Temple.

60. When he was come thither, and understood the courage and resolution of
Judas, his brethren and companions, for the defense of their Country, he
feared to try the chance of War, and sent to make peace with the people, who
having agreed unto the Covenants, the two Captains came together to consult
about the League. Nicanor was so taken with Judas as he continued with him,
loved him in his heart, and persuaded him to marry, and beget Children; and so
remained constant in his affection to him, till Alcimus perceiving it, Nicanor
at first much loves Maccabaeus.
and understanding the Covenants which were made betwixt them, took a third
journey to the King, told him that Nicanor had taken strange matters in hand,
and appointed Judas, a Traitor to the Realm, to be his Successor. Demetrius
being hereat displeased, by Letters checked him for these things, and commanded
him in all haste to send Maccabaeus bound unto Antioch, which grievously
troubled him, that he, who had done no hurt, should be thus used, but conceving
it necessary for him to comply with the pleasure of the King, he waited for a
convenient opportunity to accomplish it. Then complained of by Alcimus seeks
his destruction.
Behaving himself thenceforth more roughly to him, the other suspected
something by the great change of his carriage, and therefore gathering a few of
his men, withdrew himself from him, but he followed him with a strong power to
Jerusalem, and drawing him out to talk with him, had prepared some to seize on
him; yet he having notice hereof got away, and would see him no more. Seeing
his design to be discovered, he went and fought with him near Capharsalama, in
which he lost about 5000 of his men, and the rest fled into the City of David.
After this he came up to Mount Sion, and some of the Priests with the Elders of
the people went forth of the sanctuary to salute him peaceably, and show him
the burnt-offering that was offered for the King; but he jeering hereat,
demanded Judas to be delivered unto him, and they affirming with an Oath that
they knew not where he was, he stretching out his hand against the Temple,
swore that except Judas and his forces were delivered up, he would when he
should return in peace, set the sanctuary on fire, His blasphemous threats.
demolish the Altar, and build there a stately Temple to Bacchus. The Priests
hearing this went in, and standing before the Altar, with tears begged of God
that he would frustrate the man's intentions, and be avenged upon him and his
Host for his blasphemous words.

61. Hearing that Judas was gone from Jerusalem into Samaria, 1 Maccab. 7. and
2.15.
he went and pitched his Tents in Bethhoron, where new supplies from Syria came
to him, the Enemy being in Hadasa 30 furlongs off, with no more than 3000 men.
He would fain have fought on the Sabbath day, which the Jews, who were
constrained to follow, friendly dehorting him from, with great blaspemy uttered
against God, he refused to hear them, demanding if there were a living Lord in
heaven, who commanded that seventh day to be kept, and saying, he himself was
mighty upon earth to command them to Arm themselves, and to perform the Kings
business. He is slain in battle.
But coming to the engagement, he himself was slain first, which when his Army
saw, they cast away their Arms and fled, and the Israelites following the chase
slew 30000. so that not one of the Army was left remaining. Coming to the
plunder of the field they cut off Nicanor's head and hands, and carried them to
Jerusalem, where they were hung up before the Temple, his tongue being cut in
pieces, and cast unto the Fouls. The end of the second book of Maccabees.
Then they decreed, that the 13th day of the 12th month Adar (as the Syrians
call it) the day before Mardocheus his day, should be observed every year, as
the Author of the second book of Maccabees tells us, who with this story
finisheth his work, 1 Maccab. 8. and 9.
being the Epitome of the five books of Jason, a Jew of Cyrene. After Nicanor's
death, Judaea was quiet for some time, and then Judas hearing of the power of
the Romans, and their compassion of the distressed, and how much Demetrius
stood in awe of them, sent Eupolemus the son of John, and Jason the son of
Eleazer on an Embassage to the Senate, Bachides and Alcimus sent into Judaea
against Judas.
that entering into society with them, the People might be freed from the yoke
of Demetrius and the Greeks. But Demetrius hearing of the mischance of Nicanor
and his Forces, sent Bachides and Alcimus again into Judaea with the greater
part of his forces, who coming to Jerusalem to seek for Judas, marched thence
with 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse against him, who had but 3000 men in all. With
these few he setting upon Bachides, all of them forsook him but 800, with which
yet he so charged him, as fighting from morning till night, he put to flight
the right wing in which he stood, but they of the left perceiving this,
followed him behind as he gave the charge, and compassing him in, slew him, all
his men then shifting forthemselves. This happened A. M. 3844. Maccabaeus is
slain.
of the Greeks or Seleucidae the 152. in the second of Demetrius Soter, and
after he led the People, from his Fathers death, six years.

62. A great famine then raging, 1 Maccab. 9.
almost all the Country submitted to Bachides, that they might the more
commodiously get bread, and he made such wicked persons Governors, as bringing
to him the friends of Judas, he mocked them, and revenged himself upon them.
But such of them as remained, and could do it, assembled themselves together,
and chose Jonathan (Surnamed Apphus) their Captain in the room of Judas his
brother, which Bachides hearing sought to kill him, but he understanding
thereof, fled into the Desert Thecoa, having sent his brother John (Surnamed
Gaddis) with a party to the Nabathaean Arabs, Jonathan his brother chosen
Captain in his room.
to desire they might leave their baggage amongst them. He going down with it,
was met in the way by the children of Iambri from Medaba, who killing him and
those with him, seized upon the prey; but no great joy had they of their booty;
for Jonathan and his brother Simon hearing that they were about to make a great
marriage, and bring the bride from Medaba with great pomp, being the Daughter of
one of the noblest Princes of Canaan, they went, A. M. 3845. Ol. 155. an. 1. V.
C. 594. Seleucid. 153. Demetr. Sot. 3. Ptolom. Philomet. 21.
and hiding themselves under the covert of the Mountain, when the Bridgroom and
his friends came forth with Timbrels and instruments of Music, rose up out of
the ambush, slew many of them, and took the spoil; so having revenged the death
of their brother, they returned again unto Jordan. When Bachides heard this, he
marched down, and came thither with a great Army upon the Sabbath Day, and
Jonathan being beset behind and before with the Enemy, and on each side with
the River and Marshes, encouraged yet his men to fight, and lifting up his
hand struck at Bachides. But he declined the blow; then seeing himself too weak
for the Enemy he leaped into the River after he had slain 1000 of them, and
swom over with his men to the further side. Bachides would not adventure to
follow, but returning to Jerusalem, built up the strong Forts throughout the
Land, and placed therein strong Garrisons, that thence making excursions, he
might endammage the Jews. He fortified the Cities Bethsura and Gazara, with the
Castle at Jerusalem, where he placed Soldiers with provisions, and taking the
sons of the chief of the Country for Hostages, he secured them in the later.

63. 1 Maccab. 8.
The Ambassadors sent by Maccabaeus to the Romans were well received, and
entered into a League and society with the Romans, which being written in
Tables of brass, contained an engagement mutually to succor and relieve each
other. Demetrius is forbidden by the Romans to hurt the Jews.
The Senate also wrote to Demetrius, charging him no more to hurt or indammage
the Jews, being their confederates, under pain of being prosecuted with War
both at Land and Sea. Not long after Alcimus the High Priest commanded the wall
in the Temple, which severed the Court of the People from that of the Gentiles,
to be pulled down, which had been built by Zorobabel, and the Prophets, 1
Ma^cab. 9.
whose monuments he began to pull down and destroy; but at the same time he was
so smitten that he could not open his mouth, Alcimus his ill end.
being taken with a Palsy, so as he could not speak nor give order concerning
his house, and died with great torment. When Bachides saw that he was dead, he
returned unto the King. Two years then did the Land continue quiet, but at the
end thereof, certain wicked persons sent for Bachides to return, telling him he
might easily apprehend Jonathan and all his Company in one night, at which
message he arose with great haste, and sent letters privily to his adherents to
take them, but they having notice of it, took fifty of these men, which had
been the greatest sticklers, and slew them. Then Jonathan departing into the
Wilderness, built up the walls of Bethbusin, and fortified it, which Bachides
having notice of went down thither, and closely besieged it; but such was his
entertainment from the besieged (who getting out killed his men, and burnt his
engines,) that having lain before the place a long time to no purpose, and
seeing his journey to be frustrate, he eased his stomach against those that had
been the cause of his Expedition, and putting to death many of them, resolved
to retreat into his own Country. Jonathan having notice of this, sent to him to
treat of Peace, and exchange the prisoners, Bachides swears never more to
molest the Jews.
which he gladly accepted of, and made an oath never more to disturb him.
Returning then home he never brake it; so that the War being removed,
Jonathan dwelt at Machmas (or Michmash) in the Tribe of Benjamin, began to
govern the People, and destroy the ungodly out of Israel.

64. Aritrathes (the fifth of that name) King of Cappadocia, Excerpt. Diori
Siculi and Polyb.
married (as we said before) Antiochis the daughter of Antiochus the Great. She
having no children by him at the first, introduced two suppositions boys,
Ariarathes and Orophernes, he knowing nothing hereof; but a little after
growing fruitful, she brought forth two daughters, and a son called
Mithridates, and then acquainting her husband with what she had formerly done,
procured the two Counterfeits to be sent, the one to Rome, and the other into
Ionia, lest they should disturb the true one in his succession, who, being
named Ariarathes, and brought up in the fashions and customs of the Greeks,
obtained the Kingdom after his Fathers death. Orophernes afterward resolving
to venture for it, came to Demetrius, complaining he was injuriously deprived
of the Kingdom by his younger brother, Orophernes one of suppositions brood
gets Cappadocia by the help of Demetrius.
and craved his assistance for the recovery of it. He being offended at
Ariarathes for the refusing the marriage of his sister the widow of Perseus,
bargained with Orophernes for 1000 Talents, and expelled Ariarathes from
Cappadocia, though he was helped by Eumenes King of Pergamus. Orophernes having
thus invaded the Kingdom, behaved himself not like one who intended to secure
it to himself in the love of his People, but raging against them with pillages
and slaughters, and corrupting himself with the luxury of Ionia (where he had
been brought up) pulled upon him the hatred of all his Subjects, which he
perceiving, made only as an occasion further to prosecute his wicked and
unseasonable designs. Ariarathes went straight to Rome to crave aid; and the
Ambassadors both of Demetrius and the other, followed to excuse what was done,
and recriminate him, which those of Orophernes performed so dexterously, that
no body being present that could confute their lies, they seemed to gain
credit, and Ariarathes because he had been the confederate of the Romans, was
ordered to reign together with his brother. This was all he got at Rome; but
shortly after Attalus the brother and successor of Eumenes expelled Orophernes
and Demetrius quite out of Cappadocia, Artaphernes the true heir restored by
Attalus.
and restored him to the entire possession of his Kingdom.

65. Not long after, Excerpt. Polybii per Valesium.
Demetrius casting in his head how to enlarge his Dominions, offered Arch^as,
the Governor of Cyprus for Ptolomy Philometor, 500 Talents to betray the
Island into his hands; which the man consented to, but being discovered and
sentenced, prevented the execution by hanging himself. Being thus frustrated in
this design, he thenceforth giving himself up to idleness, having built a
Castle fortified with 4 Towers not far from Antioch, wherein he passes away
the time without any attendance of State affairs, out of the sight of his
Subjects. Hereby he contracted such hatred, that the Antiochians revolted from
him, and made choice of Orophernes, then living in exile at his Court, who so
badly required him for his former kindness, as to conspire with them to rob
him of his Kingdom and life. He getting knowledge of this, spared his life,
lest he should free Ariarathes from the fear of a competitor, and caused him to
be kept securely at Seleucia; but the Antiochians not at all terrified from
their attempt, went on in their rebellion, One Balas suborned by several
Princes for the son of Epiphanes,
to which Attalus of Asia, Ariarathes of Cappadocia, and Ptolomy lending their
helping hand, they suborned a young man of the basest condition (by one Justin.
lib. 35.
called Prompalus, by others Strabo lib. 16.
Balas, and Josephus lib. 13. c. 8.
Balls) giving him the name of Alexander, and reporting him to be son of
Antiochus Epiphanes, to recover as it, were his Fathers Kingdom by force. This
youth, together with Laodice Antiochus his daughter, did Polybius Legate. 140.
Heraclides (whom Demetrius cast out, as we said, of the Office of Treasurer at
Babylon) carry to Rome, where he brought him into the Senate, and caused him to
desire that he might be helped in the recovery of the Kingdom, at least that he
might not be hindered in his endeavor that way; then he seconding him inveighed
against Demetrius, and heaped up the praises and merits of Antiochus so far, as
though to all sober minded men his impudence was distasteful as well as his
person, yet he so bewitched the generality of the Fathers, that a Decree was
made, whereby power was given to them to return, and aid ordered them for the
recovery of the Kingdom (being the children of their late friend and allie) as
they had required.

66. Heraclides having obtained this act of the Senate, 1 Maccab. 10.
presently hired Soldiers, and getting many eminent men to join with him, went
to Ephesus, where he made all possible preparation for the War. Not long after
Alexander got Ptolemais a City of Phoenicia, being betrayed to him by the
Garrison Soldiers, which Demetrius hearing, gathered together his Forces to go
and fight with him, but considering the uncertainty of the chance of War,
Justin ut prius. Appian in Syriacis.
sent away his two sons Demetrius and Antiochus unto Cnidus to be out of the
danger, and be reserved to revenge his death or deprivation if need should
require. He sent also to Jonathan the Captain of the Jews, to renew Peace with
him, giving him power to raise forces against Alexander, and commanding the
Hostages kept in the Castle at Jerusalem to be restored to him, which he using
as a good opportunity, began to build Jerusalem anew, and repair the walls, but
Alexander having notice of Demetrius his message, and the promises made by him,
sent to him in like manner, and amongst many privileges and immunities granted
to the Nation, appointed him to be the High Priest, Contendeth for the Kingdom
of Syria
sending him Purple and a Crown of Gold. So, in the seventh month of the 160
year of the Seleucidae, Jonathan put on the holy robe, in the ninth after the
death of his brother Judas (the Priesthood having been vacant seven years from
the death of Aleimus) being the first of the Hasmonaeans that arrived at this
dignity, and of the priestly family, A. M. 3852. Ol. 156. an. 4. V. C. 601.
Seleucid. 160. Demet. Sot. 10. Ptol. Philom. 28.
but not of the Pontificial, to which Onias (who now was in Egypt) was next
heir. Demetrius hearing of the agreement his Enemy had made with the Jews, was
sore troubled thereat, and labored again by incredible promises to allure them
to his own party; but they having had experience formerly how his affections
stood toward them, refused to entertain his overtures. Balas gathering his
forces together, not only those that revolted to him in Syria, but his
Auxiliaries also sent from Jonathan, Ariarathes, Attalus, and especially from
Ptolomy Philometor, gave battle to Demetrius, whose left wing put those to
flight which fought against it, but the right having the contrary fortune was
forced to run, which yet he would not do, though in it, but fighting manfully,
light with his Horse into a bog, where he fought stoutly on his feet, And
Demetrius being slain in battle
till at last he was slain with wany wounds, after he had reigned twelve years.
A. M. 3854, the second of the 157 Olympiad, of the Seloucidae the 161.

67. Alexander Balas obtained the Kingdom, 1 Maccab. 10.
and shortly after his possession of it, remembering how much he was beholding
to Ptolomy Philometor for it, sent to him for his Daughter to wife, which he
willingly assenting to, brought her to Ptolemais, and married her to him with
royal magnificence. Thither came down Jonathan from Jerusalem, bringing
presents for both the Kings, Alexander Balas gets the Kingdom and marieth
Ptolomie's daughter.
but was followed by diverse naughty persons to accuse him; Yet Alexander was so
far from listening to any tales, that he caused him to be clothed in purple, to
fit near him, and by proclamation commanded all his accusers to forbear, at
which they being discouraged, went their ways. Joseph. lib. 13. cap. 8. and
Livius lib. 50. and Justin. l. 35.
After this Alexander giving up himself to idleness, and luxury, and minding
nothing else, the affairs of the State were wholly managed by one Ammonius,
who made slaughter of all his friends, and amongst the rest slew Laodice the
Daughter of Epiphanes. Which being heard by Demetrius the eldest Son of
Demetrius Soter, he hired Soldiers in Crete, and came into Cilicia, at which
the other being affrighted, hasted to Antioch to secure his estate before his
coming, where he made Hierax, and Diodotus (or Tryphon) governors. With
Demetrius joined Apollonius the Governor of Coelesyria, who being ordered to
fight against the Jews, who still stood true to Alexander, with great pride
provoked Jonathan to fight with him, Demetrius the son of Demetrius Soter
makes for the Kingdom.
and he accordingly marched from Jerusalem against him with 10000 men. In his
way he took Joppe, which Apollonius understanding marched to Ashdod, and left
an Ambush in the way to entrap him, but he getting clear of the Ambush, put all
his forces to flight, A. M. 3857. Ol. 158. an. 1. V. C. 606. Seleucid. 165.
Ptolom. Philomet. 33.
whereof many men fled into the Temple of the idol Dagon, which he set on fire,
and what by this means and by the sword perished about 8000 men. This coming to
the ears of Alexander, he honored Jonathan more than ever: he sent him a
button of Gold, wont to be given to the Kings kinsmen, and gave him Accaron a
City of the Phililstins with it is Territories as an inheritance.

68. Ptolomy Philometor with great forces both by Land and Sea, 1 Maccab. 11.
came out of Egypt, under pretense of aiding his son in Law, but indeed with
an intention to seize upon Syria, Joseph. and Justin ut supra.
and accordingly all the Cities being commanded to receive him honorably, he
placed therein Garrisons of his own. He got into his hands all the maritime
Cities as far as Seleucia upon Orontes, and then being clear out of conceit
with Alexander (for that he demanding Ammonius who had plotted his destruction,
he would not deliver him up) he sent and made an agreement with Demetrius,
promising him to take away his daughter from Balas and give her to him,
together with the recovery of his fathers Kingdom. Ptolomy assisteth him in
recovering his Fathers Kingdom.
The Antiochians slew Ammonius, and let Ptolomie into their City, who there put
two Diadems upon his head; but presently brought them to receive Demetrius,
promising them that this should make amends for the injury formerly offered his
Father, and then the Soldiers revolted also. Alexander being now in Cilicia
consulted with the Oracle of Apollo Sardonicus, from which he had answer, Diod.
Sicul. apud Photium. A. M. 3858. Seleucidarum 166.
that he should look to himself in that place which had brought forth a double
formed spectacle, which seemed to point out the City Abas in Arabia, where a
certain woman named Herais, being married to one Samias turned to a man; and
where he was slain not long after. For invading Syria with fire and sword,
Alexander slain,
Ptolomy with Demetrius his new son in Law met and overthrew him at the River
Oenopara, and then he flying to Abas, his head was cut off by Zabd the Prince
of the place, and sent to Ptolomy, who though he received it with much joy, yet
having in the fight received a great hurt in the head, And Ptolomy dies of his
wounds.
upon the searching of the wound he died also the third day after. Such end had
the strange fortune of this counterfeit Alexander, after he had reigned about
five years.

69. Demetrius then according to his right obtained his Father's Kingdom,
Appian in Syriacis. 1 Maccab. 11. Excerpt. Diod. Siculi.
and for that he had subdued this counterfeitor of his family had (the next
after Seleucus the founder of the race) the Syrname of Nicanor or Nicator.
About this time Jonathan besieged the Castle at Jerusalem, and did all he could
with his Engines to reduce it; but this being by some illwillers made known to
Demetrius, he wrote to him, in anger, to raise the siege, and appear before him
at Ptolemais, which he obeyed so far as to go to him; and partly by his
presents and otherwise so appeased him, as rejecting his accusers, he
confirmed to him the Priesthood, and upon promise of 300 Talents granted him
immunity from tribute, with the Principality of three other places. After this,
seeing his Realm to be quiet on every side, Demetrius disbanded all his old
Soldiers, retaining only some Cretians and other Islanders, which so enraged
them, being wont by the former Kings to be kept in pay, as an encouragement to
them for future service, that they thenceforth became his Enemies, and showed
it upon occasion which he also himself presented them, being wholly ruled by
one Lasthenes, who had helped him in the recovery of the Kingdom. By this man's
advice, thinking himself secure enough of his estate, he cruelly raged against
such as had been against him, and plunged himself into bad courses; which
(together with the alienation of the minds of the Soldiers) one Diodotus an
Apamean, and one of Alexander Balas his Captains, The Son of Balas set up
against Demetrius by Diodotus or Tryphon.
considering, went to Elmalchueles the Arabian, with whom Antiochus the young
son of that Alexander by Cleopatra was brought up, and acquainting him how
things stood, at length obtained to have the boy delivered to him, to be
restored to his Father's Kingdom. Demetrius seeing his soldiers alienated from
him, desired of Jonathan a supply, with great promises of respect and succor.
He sent him 3000 men, A. M. 3860. Ol. 158. an. 4. V. C. 609. Seleucid. 168.
Ptol. Physconis. 2. 1 Maccab. 11. Joseph. l. 13. c. 9.
which stood him in good stead, for he going about to disarm the Antiochians,
they flatly refused it, and rising, came many thousands to the Court to make an
end of him, but these Jews so repelled them, as slaying a great number they set
the City on fire, whereupon the inhabitants were glad to submit.

70. Diodotus, or Tryphon, took Antiochus the young son of Balas, brought him
out of Arabia into Syria, and there crowned him, giving him the surname of
Theus. Hereupon all the disbanded Soldiers came over to him, so that Tryphon
made open War against Demetrius, Appian ut supra.
and overthrowing him in battle forced him to fly to Seleucia. Then sent
Antiochus to Jonathan messengers with presents, and great promises, to draw him
to his party, which he easily did, because Demetrius had falsified his word,
and proved very ungrateful toward him, who now therefore gathering his men
together, reduced the Country beyond Jordan as far as Damascus, and overthrew a
party which there met him, killing to the number of 3000 men, 1 Maccab. 12, and
13.
after which he sent an Embassage to the Romans, to renew the alliance made
with them by Judas. Tryphon having brought his design thus far on, as to break
the power of Demetrius, and having to that end desired the friendship of
Jonathan, yet now desired his ruin above all things, as standing in his way
for the accomplishment of his intended treason. Tryphon intending to set up for
himself,
He resolved to seize upon the Kingdom himself; but fearing Jonathan might
stand fast to the interest of his young King, and oppose him, came down to
Bethsan to see if he could apprehend him. Thither came Jonathan down with 40000
men to meet him, who entertained him with exceeding great respect, and advised
him to dismiss all his Army, and with a few go along with him to Ptolemais,
which he promised to put into his hands. He consenting to this, sent all his
men back but 1000, which taking along with him, upon their entrance into the
Town they were all cut off, he himself being kept prisoner. Then Tryphon
invaded Iudaea with a great Army, which to oppose, Simon the brother of
Jonathan was chosen General in his stead by the People; so that he seeing the
Jews prepared for resistance, feigned as if Jonathan was only detained for 100
Talents of Silver which he was in arrear, which if they were sent, together
with his two sons for Hostages, he promised he should be released. Simon,
though he distrusted him, Circumventventeth and kills Jonathan.
yet lest it should be said that he neglected any thing for his brothers
safety, sent his nephews with the money, which having received, he nevertheless
slew Jonathan, and then returned into Syria.

71. He presently after made away young Antiochus, 1 Maccab. 13. Strabo lib.
16. Livius lib. 55.
for giving out he was troubled with the stone, under pretense of cutting him
for it, he caused the Physicians to kill him. Then kills Antiochus his new
made King. Seeks friends in vain.
Then after he had gotten the Kingdom, he labored to confirm himself therein
by the approbation of his most powerful Neighbors, sending to Rome an
Ambassador not empty-handed, but the Senate taking the present (a Golden image
of Victory of great value) instead of his name, ingraved that of his young King
whom he had murdered. For all this he proceeded with great resolution, coined
money with his own effigies and name, having taken that of Tryphon upon him.
Simon being disobliged, and accounting his acts to be but as Robberies, A. M.
3863. Ol. 159. ann. 3. V.C. 612. Seleucid. 171. Ptol. Physconis 5. Simonis 2.
sent a Crown of Gold to make his peace again with Demetrius, who considering
the respect the Romans had showed his Nation, promised to bury all things in
Oblivion, and confirmed the immunities formerly granted; so that the yoke of
the Gentiles now being removed, the people began to date their instruments
according to the years of their Highpriests. The year after he had the Castle
of Jerusalem surrendered to him, the Defendants being almost all consumed with
famine, which he cleansing and fortifying anew, together with the Hill of the
Temple, dwelt then in Jerusalem, and after he had been High Priest about three
years, by a public instrument of the Priests, Nobles, 1 Maccab. 14.
and the people (after a recapitulation of his merits and services to his
Nation, amongst which an Embassage lately sent to Rome, and there well
received, was a great inducement) he was made their Prince and High Priest
perpetually, The Jews choose Simon for their Prince.
till God should raise up the true Prophet, and all Ornaments and Prerogatives
of Majesty were given to him. This being made in brass, was fastened to the
Wall that compassed the sanctuary, in an open place, and a Copy thereof was
laid up in the Treasury, that Simon and his sons might have it.

72. But the Cities all over revolting from Demetrius, who, we said, Justin
lib. 36. Joseph. ut supra. 1 Maccab. 14. and 15. Excerpt. Diodori Siculi.
was driven to Seleucia, that he might shake off suspicion of laziness, he
resolved to make War upon the Parthian, who had extended his Empire from the
River Indus as far as Euphrates, and done no less things than Arsaces himself.
The Macedonians and Greeks not well bearing the pride of their new Masters, the
Parthians, sent to him often, with promise to revolt to him if he would but
come up. He being tickled at this Message, made haste thither, not fearing but
if he once were Master of these Provinces, with ease to drive Tryphon out of
Syria; and being received with great alacrity, and strengthened with the
Auxiliaries of the Persians, Bactrians, and Elymaeans, he overthrew the
Parthians in several battles, but at length being circumvented by the cunning
of one of their Princes (sent, Demetrius taken by the Parthian.
under color of treating of peace, to entrap him) having lost his Army, he
fell into their hands, and then being carried for a laughing stock up and down
the revolted Countries, was cast into prison. Arsaces having so soon recovered
all, raged not against the Revolters, but carried it toward his people with
humility and respect, and not long after sending Demetrius into Hyrcania, there
maintained him with royal equipage, and not only so, but gave him his daughter
in marriage, with promise also to restore him to his Kingdom. But whilst
Demetrius lived thus in exile, Joseph. lib. 13. cap. 12.
Tryphon's Soldiers being weary of his conditions revolted to Cleopatra his
wife, which then lived in Seleucia with her Children, and now taking it in
great disdain that he had married Rhodoguna the Parthian's daughter, sent to
his brother Antiochus (the second son of Demetrius Soter, whose surname he also
obtained from the Jews) offering him marriage, His brother Antiochus makes for
the Kingdom,
and the Kingdom. He willingly accepting of the offer, took the name of King
upon him, sent into Judaea to Simon, offering him great privileges to join with
him in Alliance, and returning into Syria presently married Cleopatra.

73. All the Army except a few revolted to Antiochus surnamed Sidetes, 1
Maccab. 15.
or Hunter, so that Tryphon seeing himself thus forsaken fled to Dora, a
Maritime Town of Phoenicia, whither he was straight pursued and blocked up both
by Sea and Land; And dispossesseth Tryphon.
yet got he out on shipboard, and betook himself to Orthosias, another Sea-Town
of the same Tract, and afterward to Apamea to his own Contrymen, where some
way or other (for it is uncertain how) he was slain. A. M. 3867. Ol. 160. ann.
3. V.C. 616. Seleucid. 175. Ptol. Physconis 9. Simonis 6.
Whilst Antiochus lay before Dora, Simon by virtue of their Alliance sent him
out of Judaea a party of 2000 choice men, with silver and gold, and much
furniture for the War; yet he would not receive them, but brake the League, and
sending Athenobius to him, complained of his holding Joppe, Gazara, and the
Castle at Jerusalem, his destroying the borders, and having the Government of
diverse places of his Kingdom, requiring him either to deliver up the Cities
with the Tributes of such places as were without the borders of Judaea, or else
to pay 500 Talents for the Cities, and the harm he had done, and for the
Tributes of the places other 500, upon pain of being prosecuted with War. To
these things Simon answered, that he held no Towns belonging to any other, but
had recovered his own by right of War; but as for Joppe and Gazara which had
done great harm to his people, he offered to pay him 100 Talents, at which the
King was so displeased, that following at that time Tryphon to Orthosias,
Cendebaeus sent by Antiochus against the Jews, is defeated by John the son of
Simon.
he left Cendebaeus to oversee the Seacoasts, with order to build up Cedron,
whence he might make War upon the Jews. He coming to Iamnia made inroads upon
Judaea, and built up that Town according to order, which John the son of Simon
then lying at Gazara understanding, gave notice thereof to his father, who now
being decrepit, committed the War to him and his brother Judas. He taking with
him 20000 foot, and a party of horse, marched straight down against Cendebaeus,
and then placing his horse in the midst of the foot, that it might protect, and
be protected against the Cavalry of the Enemy, which was exceeding strong, he
overthrew him, and putting the whole Army to the rout, some betook themselves
into the Fort newly built, and others flying away, he pursued them as far as
the Towers of Azotus, which having set on fire, and slain 2000 men, he
retreated safe into Judaea.

74. This success of John sufficiently moved Antiochus to punish Simon, but it
was done to his hand by one who of all others might least have done it. There
was one Ptolomy the son of Abubus, son-in-law to Simon, and by him set over the
Province of Jericho. He entertaining his father-in-law as he went his Circuit
about the Country, to take care for the Government thereof, slew him
treacherously after a feast, together with his two sons Mattathias and Judas,
Simon and his two sons murdered by his son-in-law.
when he had governed the people 8 years. His design was, being rich, to obtain
the Principality of that Country where he lived, and therefore he presently
certified Antiochus of his feat, desiring an Army of him, wherewith he might
subdue the Cities of Iudaea. He also sent certain cutthroats to murder John,
Simons son, wrote to the Colonels of the Army to draw them over to him, and
sent others to seize upon Jerusalem and the Temple; But John having timely
notice of his treachery, prevented his death by that of the Messengers, and was
made High Priest in the room of his father: and here the Author of the first
books of Maccabees concludes his work, having therein delivered the history of
40 years. Antiochus besieges Jerusalem.
Josephus Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 16.
Antiochus taking the opportunity of Simons death, came into Iudaea, which
wasting round about, he drove up John (surnamed Hyrcanus) into Jerusalem, to
which he laid close siege, his Army being divided into seven parts. The
besieged, being exceedingly helped from the strength of the Walls, stood out
manfully, so that he raised an hundred Turrets, from which he endeavored to
scale the Walls, and compassed in the Town with a double Trench, that none
might escape, but they still defending themselves, sometimes sallied out, and
did him harm. Hyrcanus seeing a great and useless multitude in the City,
which consumed the victuals, put out the more infirm out of the Walls, whence
being hindered from going any further by the siege, they wandered about the Walls
almost famished, till at the feast of Tabernacles, out of pity, they were again
admitted.

75. At this feast of Tabernacles, Hyrcanus sent out to Antiochus to desire a
Truce for seven days, because of the celebration thereof. He not only granted
this, but sent in also Bulls with gilded horns, golden, and silver Cups, with
all sorts of spices, and beasts for sacrifice, and made a feast to the Army, by
which the other taking notice of his great humanity (whence he was surnamed
Pius, as also, uncertain for what other reason, Sidetes) withal, considering
that the Sabbatical year being now at an end, and the people being hindered from
sowing, a famine was likely to ensue, he sent out to him, desiring that the
Jews might be suffered to live according to their own Laws. Many about the King
advised him utterly to destroy the City, to blot out the very name of the Jews
from under heaven, at least to dissolve their Laws, and change their course of
life, so diverse from, and disagreeable to other Nations; but he being moved by
a principle of magnanimity and bounty, rejected this counsel, and approving of
the piety of the Jews, commanded them to deliver up their Arms, But departs
upon good terms for the besieged.
pull down their Walls, pay Tribute for Joppe and other Towns without Judaea,
and receive a Garrison, A. M. 3870. Ol. 161. ann. 2. V.C. 619. Seleucid. 178.
Ptol. Physconis 12. Joh. Hyrcan. 1.
upon which conditions he offered them peace. They yielded to all but the last,
because they would not converse with the Gentiles, yet in Lieu of it chose to
give Hostages (amongst others Hyroanus his own brother) and pay 500 Talents,
whereof 300 at present, whereupon the siege was removed, and they were freed
from any further encumbrance. Hyrcanus opening the sepulcher of David, who had
been the richest of Kings, took out thence 3000 Talents, wherewith filling his
Coffers, he first listed strangers in his Militia, and entertained Antiochus
and his Army in Jerusalem very plentifully.

76. Antiochus Sidetes in the eighth year of his reign, Justin. lib. 38. Appian
in Syriacis and Livius lib. 59.
three years after his departure from Jerusalem, undertook an expedition
against Phraates the Parthian, to fetch back his brother Demetrius still kept
there in free custody, who had twice attempted an escape, but being retaken
still, was sent back to his wife and children, not so much out of any pity or
respect of alliance, as because that King having an itching desire of getting
Syria also into his power, preserved him to use against his brother, as time
and opportunity should serve. Antiochus with a great (but extraordinarily
effeminate) Army marched into Media, where many Eastern Princes met him, with
all their hearts giving up themselves and Countries to him, and cursing of the
pride of the Parthians, whereby he got such strength, as overthrowing the Enemy
in three several battles, he reduced him within the bounds of his own Country.
But what he thus suddenly got, he almost as quickly lost again; for upon the
approach of Winter, quartering his Soldiers abroad in the Country, the people
were so oppressed, what by the exaction of provisions, and their insolence,
that they again revolted to the Parthian, and upon agreement, at one and the
same time, set upon them as they were severally disposed of in their quarters.
Antiochus Sidetes is slain by the Parthians.
Antiochus hearing this, with that party which lay with him came in to relieve
the next to him, and there met with Phraates himself, against whom he fought
most courageously, till being forsaken of his men he was slain, or else killed
himself. Phraates had a little before this, to divert him from Parthia, A. M.
3877. Ol. 163. ann. 1. V. C. 626. Seleucid. 185. Ptol. Physc. 19. Hyrcani 8.
sent back his brother Demetrius with a Guard of Parthians to seize upon Syria;
but now repenting him of that, sent some to pursue him, and bring him back; but
he fearing such a thing, had by his speed prevented it. Phraates finding a
daughter of his, which her Uncle Antiochus had taken along with him in his
expedition, fell so in Love with her, as he married her out of hand.

77. Demetrius then recovered all the Kingdom of Syria, Justin. ibid.
though not long likely to hold it, by reason of that malice he contracted both
from Soldiers and People. Josephus Antiquit. lib. 13. cap. 17.
Hyrcanus the High Priest and chief Magistrate of the Jews taking this
occasion, leads down an Army to the Cities of Syria, supposing indeed as it
was, that he should find them unmanned, took Medeba in the sixth month, then
Samega and Sicima the Metropolis of the Samaritans, and so to no King after
Antiochus Sidetes were the Jews subject, but shook off the yoke of the Syrian
Kingdom. Justin lib. 42.
The Parthian King intended to make war upon him, but was hindered by the
Scythians, whom having sent for to aid him against Antiochus, because they came
something too late, he denied them their pay, for which they harrassed his
borders, and he opposing them with the Greeks, whom he had taken before in the
War, and cruelly used, was betrayed by them, and so slain with the rest of his
Army. Idem lib. 39. Josephus ut prius.
Demetrius being absent in Egypt, the Antiochians first, then other Cities
revolted, not enduring his pride as they pretended, which he had increased by
his durance in Parthia, so that he was forced to return; but they sent to
Ptolomy Physcon, desiring him to send them some one of the posterity of
Seleucus to reign over them. He sent them a young man, an Egyptian, the son of
one Protarchus a Merchant. A fable was invented of his being adopted by
Antiochus Balas, whereupon his name being Zabinas (or Zabinaus) he was surnamed
Alexander, Demetrius having recovered the Kingdom, is outed of it by his
rebellious Subjects, and Zabinas a counterfeit, and is slain at Tire.
and the Syrians being willing to have any rather than Demetrius, readily
received him. Being come into Syria, it happned that the relics of Antiochus
Sidetes were sent at the same time into Syria, which being received very
solemnly by all the Cities, he also counterfeited a true mourner, and got
himself thereby much favor from his new Subjects, not discovering his tears to
be feigned. Not long after he fought with Demetrius near to Damascus, and
overthrew him, who then fled to Cleopatra his wife to Ptolomais; but being
excluded by her and his sons, with a few servants he went to Tire, hoping to
save himself there by the religion of the Temple, and was slain by the
procurement of his wife, or Zabinas, after his return from Parthia, in the 189
year of the Seleucidae, A. M. 3881, the first of the 164. Olympiad.

78. Alexander Zabinas then a counterfeit succeeded Demetrius, Appian ut supra
and Josephus.
by the favor of the People, though he left two sons by Cleopatra, Seleucus
and Antiochus surnamed Grypus from his hooked nose. The former of these taking
a Diadem upon him, at the years end his mother slew him with a dart by her own
hands, because he did it without permission, fearing perhaps he might revenge
his Fathers death, or being carried out with that height of spirit wherewith she
ordered (and ruined) all things. Alexander entered into a League and alliance
with Hyrcanus of Judaea. Excerpt. Diori Siculi.
Three of his greatest Captains revolted from him, and seized upon Laodicea,
but he reduced and yet pardoned them, being of a mild and pleasing deportment,
Justin lib. 42.
whereby he got the affections of all men. But him he alienated from him whom
it most concernd him still to oblige, viz. Ptolomy, who of late had set him up.
He despised Ptolomy now, growing insolent, as being able to stand on his own
legs, which the other taking in great disdain, that a creature whom he had
raised out of the dust should so requite him, labored faster to pull him down
than ever he had done for his advancement. He reconciled himself to his sister
Cleopatra, and for that Antiochus whom she had by Demetrius was yet alive (unto
whom having bestowed the title of King she ruled all her self) he sent him
great aid, and his daughter Tryphaena for a wife, which the People seeing,
Antiochus Grypus son to Demetrius defeateth and kills Alexander Balas the
usurping counterfeit.
began to revolt apace from Alexander. At length they engaged in a battle, in
which Alexander was overthrown, who then fled to Antioch, where wanting money
to pay his Soldiers, he took out of the Temple of Jupiter an image of Victory
of massy Gold, jesting it out, that Jupiter had lent him Victory. But a little
after attempting to remove secretly and take away Jupiter's image it self of an
infinite weight, he was discovered, and forced to run away by the multitude,
after which being oppressed with a grievous Tempest, and forsaken by his
followers, he was taken by thieves, and by them brought to Antiochus Grypus was
killed (though some give other accounts of his death) after he had reigned four
years.

79. His mother was sore grieved at his Victory, Idem ibid. and Appian ut supra.
thinking her dignity was lessend by it, having an ambitious desire of reigning
her self, with which she was so far driven, as to offer him a cup of poison, as
he once came in from exercise, which he having knowledge of beforehand, refused
as it were in civility, desired her to do it her self, and then urging her to
it, at length producing witness of her wicked intent, told her there was no
way to clear her self but by drinking that which she had prepared for her son;
so that being forced to do it, her wickedness fell upon her own head. Being
thus rid of his unnatural mother, he reigned securely eight years, but then
Antiochus his half brother, the son of Antiochus Sidetes (begot on his mother,
and from Cyzicus the place where we was brought up under Craterus the Eunuch,
Is emulated by Antiochus Cyzicenus his half brother and cousin german.
called Cyzicenus) began to be his emulator for the Kingdom, whom he then going
about to poison, provoked him to a more speedy attempt of what he had but
before designed. At this time it happened that Cleopatra the sister and wife of
Ptolomy Lathurus, being divorced from him by the means of that notable woman
her mother, came into Syria, and married with this Cyzicenus, and for that she
would not seem utterly to come without a dowry, brought over to him the Army of
Cyprus, whereby thinking himself sufficiently strengthened against his brother,
he joined battle with him, but was forced to retire unto Antioch. Cleopatra
continuing here was besieged by Grypus and taken; and then Tryphaena his wife
and her sister required her to be delivered into her hands, that she might put
her to death as her enemy and emulator, and though he refused it utterly, as
being against the custom of Warriors to rage against the weaker Sex,
especially when allied in blood so near as she was, and protected by the
religion of the Temple to which she fled; yet she being more hereat enflamed,
as judging his answer to proceed from love rather than pity, sent some Soldiers
in, who murdered her embracing the image of the Goddess. And expelled out of
Syria.
This was not left long unrevenged, for Cyzicenus renewing the War, and giving
battle again to his brother, now by the turning of the chance of War overthrew
him, and taking Tryphaena, with her blood appeased the ghost of his wife, and
expelling Grypus out of Syria seized on the Kingdom.

80. Antiochus Grypus fled to Aspendium, Excerpt. Diodori Siculi. Josephus lib.
13. cap. 17, and 18.
whence he got the surname of Aspendius; but the next year returning, ordered
the matter so with his brother, The two brothers reign together.
that the Kingdom being divided, he made him be contented with Coelesyria. Both
of them after this gave up themselves to nothing but idleness and luxury,
only preying upon each other as their opportunities served them, which
difference of theirs mightily conduced to the setlement of the affairs of the
Jews. Cyzicenus getting of Ptolomy Lathurus 6000 men, went to relieve Samaria,
which Hyrcanus besieged, by wasting his territories, but to no purpose.
Afterward it happened that Lathurus being expelled Egypt by his mother, and she
fearing that by the help of Cyzicenus he might recover his Kingdom, she sent
great supplies to Grypus, Justin ut prius.
with Selenes for a wife (whom she had taken from her son before his expulsion)
to provoke him thereby against his brother, whence succeeded those civil Wars
betwixt them, concerning which we have only the title left unto us in the
Epitome of the 68 Book of Livie, who related the story. Grypus died first,
being slain by the treachery of one Haeracleon, after he had lived 45 years,
Joseph. ut supra cap. 21.
and reigned 26, whereof 15 were in conjunction with his brother. He left five
sons, whereof Seleucus his eldest and successor made War upon his uncle
Cyzicenus for the Kingdom, and overthrew him in battle, after which the Horse
of Cyzicenus ran away with him into his Camp, wherein, when he was about to be
taken, he killed himself, after he had reigned eighteen years. Porphyr. apud
Eusebium.
Seleucus after this, obtained Antioch, and the Kingdom, but against him arose
Antiochus surnamed Eusebes, Great stirs amongst their sons.
or Pius, the son of Cyzicenus, who having avoided his snares by the help of a
certain Courtizan that extremely loved him, went to Aradus, where taking a
Diadem, he gathered forces, and in one battle clearly overthrew him. Seleucus
then fled into Cilicia, where being received by the Mopsuestians (as they are
called) when he began to exact money of them, had fire set to the house wherein
he lay, and was burned quick with those about him.

81. Two twin brothers of Seleucus, Antiochus and Philip, Idem ibid.
carried down forces to Mopsuestia, which having taken, in revenge for their
brothers death, levelled it with the ground; Josephus ibid.
but Antiochus Pius coming presently upon them overthrew them in fight.
Antiochus taking the River Orontes in his flight was drowned. Philip escaping
carried the title of King, Appian in Syriacis.
and gathering again considerable forces, strugled hard with Antiochus for the
whole Realm, till such time as Ptolomy Lathurus calling from Cuidus his fourth
brother Demetrius, made himself King at Damascus, so that they joining their
forces together, they both opposed Antiochus, who though he manfully resisted,
yet was put to the worst, and glad at last to fly into Parthia; whence yet
returning after two years he re-obtained Syria. Philip being thus deprived of
that Kingdom, fell into contest with his other two brothers, Demetrius Eucaerus
and Antiochus surnamed Dionysus for the Kingdom of Damascus, and being driven
into Beraea, was there besieged by Demetrius. Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 13. cap.
22, and 23.
Straton the Governor of Beraea being Philip's friend calls in Zius the
Arabian Captain, and Mithridates Sinax, who coming with a great power overthrew
Demetrius, raised his siege, and taking him prisoner sent him into Parthia,
where he was honorably treated till his death, and Philip marching to Antioch
again, as it is said, obtained the Kingdom of Syria, or (as is most probable)
part of it. Antiochus Dionysus the younger brother getting Damascus into his
hands, made War against the Arabians, and was slain in a battle with their King
Aretas, who then was chosen King by the inhabitants of Damascus, and thereby
obtained the Kingdom of Coelesyria. The histories which only give us hints of
these things are so confounded, as no certain thing concerning the ends of
Antiochus Pius or Philip can be assigned; yet this we find, Justin lib. 40.
that the Syrians taking occasion at these dissentions and Wars of the
Seleucidae amongst themselves, began to think of foreign aides, and cast their
minds upon foreign Kings. At length they all agreed to make choice of Tigranes
King of Armenia, Tigranes gets Syria.
who being called in, held Syria for the space of 18 years, and by his dealing
with them, made them know they had had no reason to rebel against their natural
and rightful Princes.

82. Antiochus Pius being outed thus by Tigranes of all Syria, Appian in
Syriacis and Mithridaticis. Justin lib. 40. Joseph. lib. 13. cap. ult.
from Euphrates to the Sea, and also of part of Cilicia, lay hid in another
corner of it, which neither the Armenian nor Roman as yet touched; and his wife
Selene with her two sons reigned (as it is termed) in Phoenicia, with some part
of the lower Syria, till being besieged in Seleucia a City of Mesopotamia, or
Ptolomais, she was therein taken by Tigranes and killed, for that she
endeavored to recover Syria, as justly she might, out of his hands. For
fourteen years Tigranes governed the Country by one Magadates, till such time
as siding with his Father in Law Mithridates the Great of Pontus, Appian in
Syriacis.
against the Romans, and overthrown by them, he was forced to recall him with
his Army. Antiochus the son of Antiochus Pius, surnamed Asiaticus, taking this
opportunity, insinuated himself into the Principality, the Syrians being not
unwilling, Antiochus Asiaticus recovering it.
out of respect to the dignity of his family; and Lucullus the Roman General
(whose work it was to drive Tigranes out of his new acquired possessions)
envying him not the inheritance of his Ancestors. Four years he kept it, till
such time as Pompey the Great having finished the War against Tigranes, reduced
it into the form of a Roman Province, Appian in Mithridaticis and Justin ibid.
though he challenged it as his inheritance; But it being easy to deal with
him as he listed, who was utterly unarmed, he put it off, by affirming it to be
unreasonable, that after the Romans had been at all the cost and pains to
conquer Tigranes, the reward should fall unto another, and with saying that he
would not leave it to him, Is untimely spoiled of it by Pompey.
lest he being unable to protect it, it should be rendered obnoxious to the
depredations of the Jews and Arabians. Thus Antiochus having never ill deserved
of the Romans, was commanded to content himself within Comagena, whence his
posterity never stirred, and the Kingdom of Syria fell. A. M. 3942, the second
of the 179 Olympiad, A. M. 3942. Ol. 179. an. 2. V. C. 691. Seleucid. 250.
sixty one years before the Era of Christ, in the 250 of the Seleucidae, the
270 after the battle at Issus, after which it fell under the power of Alexander
the Great, M. Tullus Cicero, and C. Antonius Nepos being Consuls.

CHAP. VI. The Egyptian Kingdom.
From the death of Ptolomy the son of Lagus, to the death of Cleopatra, and the
reducing of Egypt into the form of a Roman Province, containing the space of
254 years.
PTolomy the son of Lagus had several sons by Eurydice his wife, the daughter
of Antipater, and by Berenice, Pausan. in Atticis. Justin lib. 16.
which woman was sent down by Antipater, only to accompany her, with whom yet
he fell so in Love, as marrying her, Ptolomy Philadelphus.
he passionately affected her always, and a year or two before his death made
one of her sons, called afterward Ptolomy Philadelphus, his Copartner in the
Kingdom, and more than that, served him sometimes as one of his attendants,
saying it was more excellent than a Kingdom to be the son of a King. His eldest
son by Eurydice seeing this, thought it was no staying for him in Egypt, but
fled to Seleucus, by whom being honorably entertained, with some hopes of
being settled in Egypt after his fathers death, he so badly requited him, as he
treacherously slew him, as we before showed, Philadelphus, after his fathers
death made away two of his brothers, the one as conspiring against his life,
and the other as suspected to raise a Rebellion in Cyprus. In power and riches
he surpassed his father. Being learned himself above the common raite of
Princes, he sought to promote knowledge, by rewarding the most eminent and
industrious (of which flourished many in his time) and founding that his famous
Library at Alexandria, consisting of 200000 Volumes. Demetrius Phalereus that
noble Philosopher, and sometime Prince of Athens, being he that was employed in
the Collection, persuaded him to send to Eleazar the High Priest of the Vide
circares Judaeorum Josephum contra Apionem lib. 2. Tertull. in Apolog. Josephus
Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 2. and Aristeas de 70 Inter.
Jews to desire their Law, and that he might be the easilier induced to send
it, by the Counsel of Aristeas (who wrote the story) he purchased the liberty
of all such Jews as were slaves in Egypt, to the number of about 100000. which
cost him more then 460 Talents. He sent also extraordinary rich gifts to the
Temple; and the High Priest choosing out 72 men most eminent for birth,
learning, and experience, dispatched them into Egypt with the Law to be
translated by them into Greek. The Translation of the Septuagint.
Being nobly entertained, and feasted by him for several days, they were set
to their work in the Island Pharos right over against Alexandria, which in 72
days with admirable agreement they are said to have finished, after which the
King having exceedingly admired the wisdom of the Lawgiver, and commanded the
book carefully to be kept, dismissed them with great Rewards to themselves, and
Presents to him that sent them.

2. He got the surname of Philadelphus, Pausan. in Atticis.
not for any love showed to his brothers (two of whom he put to death) but to
his sister Arsinoe, whom after an incestuous (though Egyptian) fashion he
married, having Children before by another Arsinoe daughter to Lysimachus; by
his sister he never had any, she dying before she was delivered. Demetrius
Phalereus labored to dissuade his father from leaving him his successor, and
counseled him to bestow the Kingdom on some of Eurydice's sons, for which he
was now cast out of favor, and died by the biting of an Asp, which he put to
his hand. He had a brother by his mothers side named Magas, Laertius in vita
Demetrii. Pausan. ibid.
whose father was one Philip a Macedonian, but of base Original. Him his mother
had procured to be made Governor of Cyrene, the Inhabitants of which he now
raised, and caused them to revolt from him, and marched with an Army toward
Egypt; and Ptolomy securing all the passages, went out to encounter him. But
news coming in the way that the Marmaridae, a people of the Lybian Nomades had
rebelled, Magas his brother obtains Cyrene.
Magas retreated in all haste back to Cyrene, and Ptolomy then intending to
follow him, was hindered by the Galls in his Army, whom he having hired amongst
others, he found to have plotted to seize upon Egypt; but he brought them all
to the number of 4000 through the Nile to a desert Island, where with famine,
and other ways, they were made away. Magas after this having married Apames
the daughter of Antiochus Soter, persuaded him to break the League betwixt him
and his brother, and invade Egypt, which he prepared to do; but Ptolomy sent
several parties abroad into Syria, and found him so much work at home, that he
could have no time to look abroad, Justin lib. 26.
and Magas before his death having a desire to be friends with his brother,
betrothed his daughter to his son. Betwixt this Ptolomy, and the next Antiochus
surnamed Theos were continual Wars, till both being weary thereof entered into
an Alliance, Ptolomy giving him in marriage his daughter Berenice, which proved
but an occasion of greater trouble, and the destruction of the Bride, though he
lived not to see it. For he, notwithstanding all his learning, gave himself up
to luxury, and fondly dreaming he should live always, and that by him alone
was found out immortality, presently died, after he had reigned 38 years alone,
Athenaeus lib. 12. cap. 17.
and one (with some odd months) together with his father, A. M. 3758. and the
2d of the 133th Olympiad.

3. Ptolomy his son by Arsinoe, the daughter of Lysimachus, Justin lib. 27.
succeeded him in the 16th year of Antiochus Theos, and was surnamed Euergetes.
As soon as he came to the Kingdom, he had work enough made him in Syria; for
there Antiochus, Appian in Syriacis.
who had put away his former wife (upon the marriage of Berenice his sister)
now overcome with Love, took her, and her Children, again into his Court,
whereupon she fearing yet his fickleness, and another disgrace, to prevent it,
procured him to be poisoned, Hieronym. in Daniel.
and conveyed his Kingdom to Seleucus Callinicus her eldest son. Berenice she
committed to two of the Chief of Antioch to be made away, but the Lady, when
she heard that some were sent to kill her, shut up her self in Daphna, where
being besieged, the Cities of Asia, Ptolomy Euergetes his Wars with Antiochus
Theos.
moved with the remembrance of the Dignity of her family, sent her aid, and
Ptolomy her brother marched in all haste possible to deliver her, but ere she
could be relieved she was circumvented by those that with an Oath promised her
security, and slain together with her young son. Out of disdain at this
unworthy act the Cities revolted to Ptolomy, who entering Syria killed Laodice,
passed to Babylon, Josephus contra Apion. lib. 2.
and got almost all Asia into his hands, at which time he visited Jerusalem
also, where he offered many sacrifices of praise to God, and dedicated gifts
suitable to so great a victory. The Kingdom of Syria had become a Province to
that of Egypt, in all probability at this time, had he not been recalled by
domestic troubles, which being very urgent, he left Cilicia to the Governance
of Antiochus his great favorite, to Xanthippus another of his Captains the
Provinces beyond Euphrates, and so plundring Seleucus his Kingdom of 40000
Talents of silver, he carried down also many costly Vessels and Images of Idols
to the number of 2500. amongst which were those which Cambyses had after his
overthrow of Amasis, and Psammiticus, conveyed out of Egypt: And therefore the
Egyptians, because after so many years he had restored to them their gods,
honored him with the surname of Euergetes.

4. Seleucus provided a Fleet for the recovery of the places revolted, Justin
ut prius.
but before he could come to use it, lost it all by a Tempest, which yet proved
the greatest gain; for the Cities out of commiseration of his estate, and as if
he had already sufficiently smarted for his paricide, returned again to their
obedience. Being exceedingly encouraged, and animated herewith (as richer by
his loss) he then made War upon Ptolomy; but as if he had been born for a
laughing stock to fortune, and not recovered the Kingdom for himself, he was
overthrown again in battle, and as destitute of followers, as after the
shipwreck, fled to Antioch, when applying a remedy worse than the disease, he
sent to his brother Antiochus (from his ravenous disposition surnamed Hierax)
for aid; and so Ptolomy fearing himself not to be able to graple with both, His
wife Berenice's hair gives name to a Constellation.
made a Truce with him for ten years. Whilst he was abroad in Asia, his wife
Berenice, daughter to his Uncle Magas, and betrothed to him, as we said before,
vowed to consecrate her hair to the gods, in case he returned safe, and
accordingly cutting it off, laid it up in a certain Chapel, whereupon Conon the
Mathematician, who flourished at this time, out of flattery to them both,
feigned it to be taken up into heaven, and invented that constellation which
yet is known by the name of it. In his time a Phoenix is reported the third
time after the days of Sesostris, and the next after them of Amasis to have
flown (being a bird sacred to the Sun) accompanied with a great number of other
birds, admiring her new face, to the City Heliopolis, as Tacitus tells us,
Annal. lib. 6.
who reports that the same thing happened afterward in the reign of Tiberius;
Paulus Fabius, and L. Vitellius being Consuls. To this Ptolomy fled Cleomenes
the King of Sparta after his overthrow received from Antigonus Doson of
Macedonia, and the Achaeans, Polyb. lib. 5. and Flutarch in vita Cleomen.
who honorably receiving him, and prizing him very much for his worth, was much
ashamed that he had suffered such a man to be defeated, and promised to
re-establish him; but he died before he could bring it about, after he had
reigned 24 years, in the 139th Olympiad, within which Polybius Sub fidem lib. 2.
observes both Antigonus Doson, and Seleucus Ceraunus, King of Macedonia, to
have left the World, and their Kingdoms to their Successors.

5. His son succeeded him, being surnamed Philopater, ironically, if we believe
Justin, Lib. 29. and 30.
who out of Trogus accuses him of making away both father and mother.
Certainly if we look at his general carriage and disposition, he was likely
enough to do it, giving up himself to all luxury and effeminatenesse, thereby
neglecting his affairs, whence he obtained the name of Tryphon. Ptolomy
Philopator.
A. M. 3783. Ol. 139. ann. 2. V.C. 532. Antioch. M. 2. Polybius lib. 5.
Finding his brother Magas by his mothers means to be very great with the Army,
he made them both away by the means of Sosibius, who was his greatest
Counselor, and manager of his public business. His laziness, and neglect,
encouraged Antiochus the Great to make War upon him for Coelesyria, in which,
though he got the better, yet can it not be ascribed to any thing of his, he
thinking of nothing less than preparation for resistance, and whereas he had
opportunity enough after the battle to have outed his Enemy of Syria, yet being
overjoyed that he had recovered Coelesyria only, he sent Sosibius to confirm
the peace. In his return out of Syria he went to Jerusalem, and would needs see
the inward holy places of the Temple, but was smitten so with a blind horror,
that he fell, and could scarcely be recovered to himself, but departing home
raged against the Jews at Alexandria. Then with great earnestness returning to
his a little intermitted jollities he doted so upon Agathoclea his Concubine,
that he killed his sister and wife Eurydice, and forgetting all credit and
Majesty, spent the nights in filthiness, and the days in feasting. These
things at first privately acted within the Court Walls, presently shamed nor at
the public view; the impudence of the Strumpet containing it self in no
bounds, being increased by the favor of her brother Agathocles, one of as
filthy a life as her self, and the Conjunction of her mother Euanthe, who spent
high, and presumed much on the score of her Children's great grace with the
King. Henceforth these women not contenting themselves with the King, possessed
the Kingdom also, and shamed not to appear in public in great equipage to be
reverenced. As for Agathocles, he reigned, and not Ptolomy, by the direction
and advice of his two Assistants, Mother and Sister, disposing of Offices and
Commands in the Army at his pleasure.

6. Yet, Polybius ibid. and Plutarch. in Cleomen.
had Ptolomy the strange fortune to overcome all difficulties he met with.
Cleomenes the Spartan entertained, as we said, lovingly by his father, with
promise to endeavor his restitution, now finding things to make for it at
home, by the death of Antigonus, and the Conjunction of the Aetolians with them
of Sparta against the Achaeans, earnestly desired to be dispatched away; but he
minding nothing but his pleasures, and buried in sottishness, regarded him not
at all. Sosibius indeed considered of the thing, and called his friends to
advise about it; but upon mature deliberation concluded it not wisdom to
dismiss him provided of men and arms, lest finding all clear abroad, his
Enemies being now dead, or quiet, he, who knew sufficiently the state and
condition of Egypt under such a Prince, Stirs about Cleomenes King of Sparta.
might attempt something rather beneficial for himself, than safe for it.
Hereupon its resolved he shall be retained still, and after some time an
occasion was found to confine him. For one Nicagoras a Messenian, who ought him
an injury, coming to Town, he not at all considering to whom he spoke, jeered
the King to him for his filthy manner of life; which he being glad of, as
having an opportunity against him, acquainted Sosibius with his words, and they
two plot together that Nicagoras at his departure should leave a Letter
directed to the other, wherein he should accuse Cleomenes of an intention to
make stirs in Egypt, except he were sent away according to the promise of
Euergetes. This being laid to his charge by Sosibius, and soundly aggravated to
the King, he was secured in free custody, having a large house, but kept with a
Guard, assigned to him; whereupon growing desperate, one day when Ptolomy was
gone out of Town, he made his Keepers drunk, and with his followers brake out
into the streets, and called the people to liberty. But none stirring, being
all astonished at the greatness of the Enterprise, they made for the Castle,
which finding to be strongly defended, he and all with him, after a Laconian
fashion, as Polybius terms it, killed themselves. This was the end of this
famous man, who being endued with a singular dexterity and promptness of wit,
had a genious suitable to great and weighty matters, and was fitted by gifts of
nature as well as experiences, for the Offices either of a great Commander, or
a Prince.

7. Though Cleomenes his sudden and unexpected attempt made no such impression
upon the City, as that any insurrections ensued thereupon; (and indeed the
luxury of the Court had infected it and the whole Land with the same
distemper) yet the minds of the People being something scowred by the Wars with
Antiochus from this rust, and elevated upon their success against him, after
the battle at Raphia, and the recovery of Coelesyria, Polyb. ut prius.
they began to slight their lawful King, and then arose to such an height, as
they clearly revolted, intending to set up against him a Captain of their own
making, which shortly after they did, and waged War with him; though in what
manner, or with what end, we know not, further than thus, that, as it seems,
he had the better of it, for he retained his dignity and power. About this time
60000 Jews are said to have been slain in Egypt, Eusebius in Chronico. 3.
Maccab. Usserius Annal. Vet. Test. page 510.
who seeing they amounted to such a number, we may have ground enough to think
that they took part with the People, and that his cruelty toward them ensued
as a revenge hereupon, though others there be that judge the contrary, and
deliver it as a thing not to be doubted of. This is certain, that about this
time he grievously persecuted those of that Nation which lived at Alexandria,
abusing them first with libels, and seeking to withdraw them from their
Religion. Those that refused to turn, were either put to death, or being
deprived of all dignity and liberty, were branded with the image of an Ivy leaf
as the badge of Bacchus; The Jews persecuted.
and because they were suspected to withdraw others from their obedience to the
King, all the Jews throughout the Land were in forty days space gathered
together, to be destroyed by 500 Elephants, A. M. 3789. Ol. 141. an. 1. V.C.
538. Ant. Mag. 8. ^ Ptol. Philop. 7.
to which was given wine mingled with much frankincence to inrage them. But in
the morning when Ptolomy should have come out to the sight, a sluggish fit is
said to have detained him until dinner, and on the next day such a
forgetfulness to have seized on him, as he thought them mad which mentioned the
thing to him; and then on the third, when the beasts were ready to be let
loose, two terrible Angels appeared, which struck King and People with
extraordinary horror, and drove the Elephants upon those who came to be
spectators of the cruelty. Hereupon ensued such a change of the Kings mind, as
he dismissed the Jews, after he had feasted them seven days, and giving them
leave to kill the Apostates, Ptolomy dies.
acknowledged God to be their protector. At length he died (leaving a child of
five years old, and begotten of his sister, behind him) after he had reigned
about eighteen years, A. M. 3801, in the first of the 144 Olympiad.

8. His son a child of five years succeeded him, Justin lib. 30
being declared King by him before his death, in the 20 year of Antiochus the
Great, King of Syria, and was surnamed afterward Epiphanes. Polyb. lib. 15
The death of Philopator was for a long time kept close, by Agathocles and his
party, till his mother and sister had rifled the Court, and he had found out
such a way as he thought most effectual for the establishment of himself in
that power he already enjoyed. Then brought he out the King to the Macedonians,
His son Ptolomy Epiphanes a child of five years succeeds him.
and with great expressions of sorrow for the death of his Father, tells them
the child was by him delivered into the arms of Agathoclea his sister,
inveighs bitterly against one Tlepolemus (who being a true Patriot was an
eyesore to him) as if he intended to seize upon the Kingdom, laboring to
impose upon the belief of the Soldiers, and secure himself by their strength;
but no man gave any credit to whatever he said, so entirely was he hated by
all. The remembrance of the former outrages committed by him and his, being
more freshly renewed by some other attempts of cruelty whilst things still hung
in this condition, so enraged the multitude, A. M. 3801. Ol. 144. an. 1. V. C.
550. Ant. Mag. 20.
that from all the quarters of the City flocking to the Court, they would not
be satisfied, till having the young King first delivered to them, they broke
open the doors, and getting him, his sister, mother, and other of his creatures
into their hands, they put them to death, mangling their bodies afterward; it
being natural to that People to be cruel if once in choler. After this, such as
had an hand in the murder of Euridice the Queen were knocked in the head by her
women. The infamy of the Nation being thus in some measure expiated by the
slaughter of these miscreants, Aristomenes an Acarnanian was made Protector of
the King, his Realms and Dominions, who though for his own interest he
beforetime temporized with Agathocles, yet now managed the affairs of his
Prince with much honesty and wisdom. And indeed such there was need he should
be at this time, when the King, being obnoxious by reason of his years to
injury and wrong, was struck at by two the greatest Princes then living, viz.
Antiochus King of Syria, Anthiochus and Philip gape after Egypt.
and Philip King of Macedonia, who pretending fair things to his Father, and
nothing toward him but kindness, now sought to devour him, and make a prey of
his Kingdom; Philip by laying hold upon Egypt and Caria; and Antiochus on
Coelesyria and Phoenicia. Idem lib. 3.
The only remedy was to send to Rome to complain, and desire aid; and an
Embassage was quickly dispatched away for that purpose.

9. The Embassage was no whit displeasing to the Romans, who sought an occasion
against Philip, for his entering into alliance with Hannibal, Justin lib. 30,
and 31.
and were seldom backward to meddle in the affairs of other Nations, especially
now fearing none of them after the overthrow of the Carthaginians. Ambassadors
were sent then to the Kings, to require them to abstain from Egypt, and M.
Lepidus thither to be Governor and Protector of the young King, whose Father,
at his death, left him to the tuition of the People of Rome; over and above
that it was now desired of his friends. Antiochus his Conquests.
But ere the Ambassadors could reach to him, Antiochus had got Phoenicia, and
other Cities belonging to Ptolomy into his power, and then despising their
errand, went on in his conquests. Josephus Antiq. lib. 12. c. 3. and Hieronymus
in Daniel.
Scopas the Aetolian a year or two after sent into Coelesyria with a great
Army, reduced many Cities thereof, with Judaea, to Ptolomie's obedience, but
again quickly lost all, being overthrown by Antiochus at the head of the River
Jordan near to Paneae, whence he fled to Tire, where the King besieged him with
10000 men; and though Aeropus and Menocles, two famous Captains were sent out
of Egypt to relieve him, yet was he forced for want of provision to yield the
Town, and march thence without his Arms. Appian in Syriacis.
Antiochus then in pursuit of this Victory, besides what he did in Coelesyria,
withdrew diverse places in Cilicia and Caria from Ptolomy, concerning whom also
a rumor being spread that he was dead, he made haste to seize upon Cyprus.
What Cities he had got in Asia, the Romans diverse times by Ambassadors demanded
to be put into their hands, which being refused by him, this, with his
ambition, and other things, ministered occasion of a War betwixt them (as is
showed before) and that turned to the commodity of Ptolomy. For he being
unwilling to have any Enemies at his back, sought to enter into affinity with
several Kings; and amongst the rest gave to him in marriage his daughter
Cleopatra, He marieth his daughter to Ptolomy.
and with her in dowy all Coelesyria and Judaea; having this also in his eye,
by means of her to get some footing in Egypt, though he was mistaken. For
Ptolomy his Officers understanding his cunning well enough, behaved themselves
more warily; and Cleopatra together with the man married his interest, and acted
accordingly.

10. Scopas the Aetolian, Ptolomie his General in Coelesyria, Polyb. lib. 17.
returning to Alexandria after this overthrow, fell into discontent, and thence
to plot against the King and State. Yet though he had many Soldiers at his
command, had he no heart to stir, and though having a sufficient opportunity in
the minority of the King, he still delayed to execute his designs, till he was
prevented. For Aristomenes having discovered what he was about, just when he
was plotting with his associates, sent for him to the Council, whither being
constrained to come, Scopas the Aetolian ploteth against the King and receives
his reward.
he was accused by the King first now sitting in Council, then by Polycrates
the Governor of Cyprus, and lastly by Aristomenes, who labored to prove him
guilty of what was alleged, for that he was found in consultation with his
friends, and refused to come unto the King when sent for; and he confirmed the
charge from the testimony of diverse eminent Graecians, and the Ambassadors of
the Aetolians, who were then sent about a Peace. His answers were no whit
satisfactory; so that being condemned not only by all the Council, but such
foreign ministers as were present, and being secured that night, was together
with his accomplices the next day taken away by poison, being a man so
extraordinarily covetous above all others, that having broke down the walls (as
Polybius terms it) of the Kingdom, he had exhausted it with rapines. With him
fell Dicaearchus one of his companions, who being tortured to death, thereby
(as the Historian tells us) made satisfaction to all Greece, against which he
was made Admiral of the Fleet by Philip of Macedonia, when he wickedly set upon
the Islands Cyclades, and also to the gods, into whom as well as men he thought
to strike a terror, for casting anchor in the Haven, he there erected two
altars, one to Impiety, and another to Iniquity, on which he sacrifized to them
as gods. This conspiracy being thus suppressed, such Aetolians as would, had
leave to depart with all they had, A. M. 3809. Ol. 146. ann. 1. V.C. 558. Ant.
Mag. 28. Ptolom. Epiphan. 8.
and then the Country betook themselves to prepare for the solemnity,
constantly observed when any one was saluted King, termed Anacleteria; for
though he was as yet something too young, yet they thought that when it was
known he was his own Master, and at his own disposal, his Kingdom would be more
quiet, and his affairs be more promoted.

11. He carried himself exceedingly well for some time, Excerp. Diodori Siculi.
and with great commendation, but afterward was undone by flatterers, and so
far corrupted, as he poisoned Aristomenes, whom he had before constantly
observed as a Father, and who had deserved well of him and the Commonwealth.
After this he degenerated more and more, whence he contracted such hatred of
his Subjects, as he well nigh had lost his Kingdom thereby. Toward his later
end, having some high designs in his head, Polybius Legate. 37, 40, and 57.
he sent Demetrius an Ambassador to the Achaeans, to renew friendship and
alliance with them, who gladly accepting of his offer, sent back to him
Lycortas Father to Polybius the Historian, Theodoridas and Rhositeles to
confirm it by oath on their part, and to receive the like assurance from him,
Ptolomy contracteth amity with the Achaeans.
which they obtained with a great present of money and arms. Some six years
after he sent other Ambassadors to them, now having well nigh fallen out with
the Romans, offering them ten ships of fifty oars, sufficiently manned and
furnished for War, which as of concernment, amounting almost to ten Talents,
they accepted of most gladly, and dispatched back to him Lycortas again with
Polybius his son (though he was too young by the Laws for such an employment)
with Aratus the son of famous Aratus the Sicyonian, to give him thanks for the
former present, and fetch the ships into Peloponnesus; but he was dead ere they
could get out of their own Country. For plotting now against Seleuous
Philopator, who had succeeded Antiochus his Father in the Kingdom of Syria, and
preparing an Army against him, Hieronym. in Danel.
when one of his Captains asked him where he would get money sufficient for
such an enterprise, he answered, that his friends were riches to him, which
being told abroad amongst the People, his Officers fearing he would fleece them
to supply himself, Is poisoned.
took him away by poison, after he had lived 27 years, and reigned 24 thereof.
A. M. 3825, and the first of the 150 Olympiad.

Ptolomy Philometor.
12. He left two sons and one daughter, all very young, A. M. 3825.
of which the eldest son succeeded him, being surnamed Philometor, in the
eighth year of Seleuous Philopator King of Syria. After his Anacleteria, Idem.
ibid.
his mother Cleopatra the daughter of Antiochus the Great being lately dead,
through the persuasion of Eulaius the Eunuch, and Lenaeus his principal
Counselors, he began to cast his thoughts upon Coelesyria, Prepares for
Soelesyria.
which being given to his mother as a portion, was unjustly kept from him as he
conceived, by his uncle Antiochus Epiphanes, who now had succeeded his elder
brother in the Kingdom of Syria. Antiochus hearing of their preparations for
the War at Alexadria, came down into Egypt to prevent them, and overthrew the
King several times as has been said, But his uncle Antiochus Epiphanes
preventeth him by getting all Egypt into his hands.
and got the whole Country, except that City, Polyb. Legate. 81, 82.
into his power; after which Ptolomy deliberating with Comanus and Cineas what
was to be done, it was resolved, that a Council of the most expert Captains
should be erected, by the advice whereof all things should be managed. The
first resolve of this Council was, that such Grecian Ambassadors as were
present, should be sent to Antiochus about an agreement, with whom Ptolomy
joined of his own two others. The first day after their arrival, they were
entertained very nobly, and on the next had audience, wherein they laid all the
blame upon Eulaius the Eunuch, and urging the youth and kindred of the King to
him, labored to pacify him. He after he had assented to them in these things,
and spoken more to the same purpose, labored with much earnestness to
demonstrate, that Coelesyria belonged to the Crown of Syria, alleging it to
have belonged to Antigonus the first founder of that Kingdom, and produced the
conveiances of it to Seleucus after the death of the other, from the Macedonian
Kings. Moreover calling to their remembrance, that Antiochus his Father had
lately obtained it again by right of conquest, he flatly denied that ever he
passed it over as a portion with his daughter, to the late King of Egypt, and
so having discoursed on this subject to the satisfaction of all his hearers, he
then departed to Naucratis, where friendly treating the Inhabitants, and giving
a largess to such Greeks as dwelt there, he thence departed for Alexandria,
deferring to give any answer to those that had been sent to him, till such time
as Aristides and Theris were returned, saying, he would have all the public
ministers of Greece to be conscious to, and witnesses of, all his intentions.

13. But no satisfactory answer (if any) was given, Porphyr. in Graecis Eusebius.
or any thing done for Philometor by Antiochus, so that being thus outed of his
Kingdom after 12 years reign, and giving up himself for all that to nothing but
sluggishnesse and luxury, the Alexandrians took upon them to make his younger
brother King, sirnaming him Euergetes, (though the badnesse of his manners made
them afterward change it into Cacergetes) being also called Physcon from his
extraordinary fat paunch. Athenaeus lib. 12. cap. 17.
Philometor was forced at length to betake himself to the Alexandrians too, who
receiving him, made him partaker with his brother in the Kingdom, Ptolomy
Physcon made King
but shortly after again expelled him; which thing Antiochus made use of, and
under pretense of restoring him continued the War, and overthrowing young
Ptolomy in a Sea Fight, besieged Alexandria; Polyb. Legate. 83, and 84.
but seeing that to be to no purpose, arose and departed into Syria, leaving
Philometor at Memphis, to whom he restored all Egypt, except Pelusium, which he
kept as the key of the Country in his own hands, not doubting but when one of
the brothers had ruined the other, to come, and with ease enough devour the
Conqueror. Livius l. 45.
But though his two Nephews were otherwise sottish enough, yet in this they
showed prudence, to disappoint him, A. M. 3837. Ol. 153. ann. 1. V.C. 586. Ant.
Epiphan. 9. Ptol. Philom. 13.
for the elder seriously considering how little he ought to trust him, sent to
Cleopatra his sister, who seconding him to her brother, both by advice and
entreaty, The two brothers agree, and are saved harmless from their Uncle by
the Romans.
procured a peace to be made with consent of both their friends, the Citizens
of Alexandria giving way the more readily, because of the dearth which troubled
them, by reason of the War as well when they were at liberty as besieged. This
drew off the Vizard from Antiochus, who, whereas he ought to have rejoiced, if
he really intended the restitution of Philometor, fretted exceedingly hereat,
and nothing would serve him, but needs he must come down again into Egypt, and
had laid siege to Alexandria the second time, had not the Roman Ambassadors
terrified him from his purpose (as we showed in its more proper place) and
forced him to quit both Egypt and Cyprus.

14. Idem ibid.
The Roman Ambassadors took some pains by their Authority to make them two
friends, not being thoroughly reconciled before, and so they continued for six
years peaceably together. Porphyrius ut prius.
But then differences betwixt them arose so high, thar the Senate at Rome wrote
to their Ambassadors, sent into Syria after the death of Antiochus Epiphanes,
by all means to reconcile them, of which mediation we yet hear of no fruit at
all, Polybius Legate. 107.
for presently the younger expelled his elder brother. Philometor being thus
spoiled of his Kingdom, with a very few attendants, and in a pitiful habit,
Valerius Max. Lib. 5. cap. 1. Exemp. 1.
came to Rome for help, making his Inn the house of an Alexandrian Painter;
which when the Senate understood, they sent for him, and made as formal an
excuse as possible, that they had neither sent a Quaestor to meet him (after
the fashion of the receiving persons of his quality) nor entertained him at the
public charge, which happened not by any neglect on their part, but by reason of
his sudden and secret arrival. Then was he conducted from the Court to the
public House of entertainment, and desired, that laying off his unseemly
habit, he would move for audience, and a Qaaestor was appointed to make him
presents every day. Philometor being expelled by his rebellious brother is
restored by the Romans, and Euergetes or Physcon complaining, they also give
him relief.
At length, according to his desire, Polybius Legate. 113.
Canuceius and Quintus were sent back with him to Alexandria, who restored him
to the Kingdom, and made the two brothers assent to a division of it, whereby
Philometor was to hold Egypt and Cyprus, and Euergetes possess Cyrene, the
Covenant being most solemnly confirmed. But Euergetes not being at all
satisfied in his part, hasted to Rome to reverse the agreement, alleging that
he gave not his consent freely at all, but out of necessity of yielding to the
times; wherefore he desired of the Senate that Cyprus might be also adjudged to
him, with the addition of which his part would yet be far inferior to his
brothers. Menethyllus being sent after him by Philometor, replied, that he
ought not only Cyrene, but his life also to his brother, so great hatred had
he contracted from their subjects, that with the wonder of all, and beyond his
hopes was that Kingdom bestowed on him, and urged the agreement most
religiously made and confirmed, with faith given on both sides. But Ptolomy
denying stiffly all this, the Senate, for that it seemed to them that the
parting of the Kingdom was not yet fully concluded, and especially thinking it
to be for their interest that the division should be equal, assented to his
request, and ordered T. Torquatus, and Cn. Merula to go with him, and put
Cyprus into his hands. For the Romans understanding now fully the strength of
Egypt, and considering what it might aspire to if united, wisely made use of
this difference, and gratified the two brothers one after the other in their
ambitious (but imprudent) desires.

15. Departing out of Italy into Greece, Polyb. Legate. 115.16.17.
he there hired a strong band of men, intending to sail with them for Cyprus;
but the Roman Commissioners calling to mind the Decree of the Senate, which
was, that they should reduce him without force, persuaded him again to dismiss
them, and pass over to Cyrene, and they in the mean time going to Alexandria,
would endeavor to persuade his brother to comply with the Senate, and bringing
him along with them meet him in the Confines of both Kingdoms. He accordingly
went to Crete, where hiring 9000 Soldiers, he passed over to Libyna, where he
expected to hear from Alexandria; but the Romans there treating with his
brother about a reconciliation, and the yielding of Cyprus up to him, something
he assented to, and put off others, on purpose drawing out the time in length.
Forty days with extraordinary entertainment he detained them at Alexandria,
during which time news came to Euergetes that the Cyrenians had revolted from
him, who understanding well the mind of his brother from his present carriage,
and seeing nothing suitable to royalty in Euergetes, acting all things after a
Tyrannical manner, could not bring themselves to submit any longer to his
Government. Hearing this, he sailed to Catabathmus, thence to make for Cyrene,
in which place he found the Straights kept against him, but sending some about
to come upon the Defendants on their backs, set upon them also himself, and so
cleared the passage, but coming to Cyrene, and engaging with the Natives, was
worsted by them. Whether he recruited himself again, and recovered his
Sovereignty here or no, we have nothing from History to speak expressly; but not
long after he was in a capacity to attempt Cyprus (being encouraged by the
Senates renouncing their friendship with his brother upon his account) where he
was also overthrown by his brother, and then besieged, and taken in the City
Lapithus. Yet did Philometor spare him, what for his innate clemency and
brotherly affection, and for fear of the Romans; and not only so, but made a
Covenant with him when Conquered, wherein he restored him Cyrene, and for
Cyprus certain Cities with a quantity of Corn yearly, and promised him his
daughter in marriage, worse than this being not accounted incest in that
Country.

16. Not long did they accord, for Euergetes, Polyb. Legate. 132.
some two or three years after, being encouraged by his former success, made
another journey to Rome, where in the Senate he made another loud complaint
against his brother, accusing him of plotting against his life, for a witness
of which design he showed skars upon his body, and aggravating the thing with
all his might, endeavored to move the minds of all to compassion. Two
Ambassadors were present from Philometor to answer to whatsoever he should
accuse him of, but all men's ears were so filled with the others accusation,
that no place would be found for their defense; so that they were instantly
commanded to be gone, and five Commissioners were appointed (furnished all with
Galleys) to go, and bring him into possession of Cyprus; their Associates also,
both in Greece and Asia, being written to, and leave given to as many as would
to assist him in the recovery of it. Josephus Antiquit. lib. 13. cap. 6.
What was done as to the recovery of it, through defect of History, we are
ignorant, though some grounds we have to think he did not obtain the Island,
and no more do we hear of him till his brothers death. Onias the Jew builds a
Temple in Egypt.
In the days of this Philometor, Onias the son of Onias the third, High Priest
of the Jews, seeing the Priesthood to be alienated from his family into that of
the Hasmonaeans, living in Egypt, and having well deserved of the King in his
Wars, that he might eternize his memory, petitioned him for leave to build a
Temple in the Province of Heliopolis, after the fashion of that at Jerusalem,
signifying that thereby would be better provided for the quiet of his Kingdom,
the Jews badly agreeing amongst themselves through the variety of their places
of worship in that Country, and misapplying the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chap. 19.
A. M. 3853. Ol. 157. ann. 1. V.C. 602. Demet. Soteris. 11. Ptol. Philom. 29.
concerning the spiritual Priesthood, and reign of Christ, to this his
ambitions and unlawful design. His Petition was granted, and in that Country
built he a Temple resembling the true, and lawful one, 180 furlongs distant
from Memphis; only he put therein no Candlestick, but hung up a Lamp in a
Golden string, which cast a light about like to the Sunbeams.

17. In the time of this Philometor, Josephus ibid.
the Jews and Samaritans inhabiting Alexandria fell out about their way of
Worship, they contending earnestly that the Temple of Jerusalem, Dissension
betwixt the Jews and Samaritans.
those that that at Gerizim was founded most according to the prescript of
Moses, and so earnest was the dispute, that both parties appealed to him and
his Council for a decision of the controversy, who being to judge according to
evidence produced out of the Law, was to put to death those pleaders which
could not make good their cause. For the Jews appeared Andronicus the son of
Messalani, for the Samaritans Sabbaeus, and Theodosius, who being heard by
Ptolomy in a full Assembly, all were so well satisfied in the proofs brought by
Andronicus, as the King gave sentence on his side, and condemned Sabbaeus and
Theodosius. Justin lib. 35.
Philometer about this time was deeply engaged in the affairs of Syria; for,
Demetrius Soter having molested him much with War, together with Attalus King
of Asia, and Ariarathes of Cappadocia, all these agreed to suborn a young man
of base condition, who counterfeiting himself the son of Antiochus Epiphanes,
spoiled Demetrius both of his Kingdom and life. This Alexander (as he is
called) being especially beholden to Ptolomy for this change of his condition,
desired of him his daughter in marriage; 1 Maccab. 10. and 11.
which he readily agreed to, and brought her (named Cleopatra) to him to
Ptolemais, where the nuptials were solemnized with great state. Afterward
Alexander giving up himself to cruelty and luxury, Demetrius, the son of
Demetrius Soter, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 8.
having hired Soldiers in Crete, attempted the recovery of his fathers Kingdom.
Ptolomy with great forces both by Land and Sea, came then into Syria, under
pretense of helping his son-in-law; but getting a great part of the Country
into his hands, as far as the River Orontes, and the City Seleucia, he had
other intentions, having conceived great prejudice in his mind against
Alexander, the special occasion of which was, that whereas one Ammonius, a
great Officer of his had conspired against his life at Ptolemais, Ptolomy
fighting against Alexander King of Syria, whom he had formerly set up, received
a wound and dies.
he refused to give him up to him upon his demand. Wherefore, though he went to
Antioch, and there set two Diadems on his head, the one for Syria, and the
other for Egypt, yet persuaded he the Antiochians to receive Demetrius for
their King, and taking away his daughter from Alexander, gave her to him;
Alexander was overthrown, after which he fled into Arabia (as we said) and
there was made away. A. M. 3859. Ol. 158. ann. 3. V. C. 608.
But in the fight it happened that his Horse being affrighted at the noise of an
Elephant, threw him, which the Enemies perceiving came upon him, and gave him
such a wound in his head, that for four days he lay senseless, and though
coming to himself, on the next, he was mightily pleased at the sight of the
head of Alexander Balas, which was sent him; yet proved it not such a Cordial,
but the third day after, Livius Epit. lib. 52.
as his Physicians were busy in dressing his own he died, after he had reigned
34 years, A. M. 3859. in the third of the 158 Olympiad.

18. After his death the order of succession was first changed in this Kingdom.
For whereas hitherto the son had continually followed his father, Justin lib.
38. Valerius Max. lib. 38. Valerius Max. lib. 9. cap. 1. Exter. Exemp. 5.
and now Cleopatra his wife with the help of the Princes, endeavored to have
it so, in his son and hers; yet his brother Euergetes the second, or Physcon,
then reigning in Cyrene, withstood her purpose, and forced her, for to put an
end to the controversy, to marry him. Coming to Alexandria, he first caused
the favorers of the Child to be slain, and then the boy himself in the arms of
his mother on their Wedding day, and amidst the solemnities; according to which
beginning he proceeded, being nothing milder toward those that had sent for
him. For, giving liberty to the outlandish Soldiers to kill, and rifle, he
filled all places with slaughters; Excerpt. Diodori Siculi.
many being accused, as though they had plotted against him, were made away
with cruel torments, others under some pretense or other banished, and their
goods confiscate. Ptolomy Physcon unjustly obtaining the Kingdom his cruelty.
Having a son born of this his sister, he named him Memphitis, after the place
of his birth, but whilst he was keeping his birthday, that he might also feed
his cruel humor, he put to death diverse Cyrenaeans, who brought him into
Egypt, for taxing him somewhat liberally for his too much familiarity with
Irene his Concubine. As his cruelty, so also his lust knew no bounds; for
ravishing first his wives daughter, and his own Niece, both by Father and
Mother, he put away his wife and married her; Val. Max. ibid.
whereat the Inhabitants of Alexandria being affrighted, for fear of death quit
their habitations, so that he being left alone as a King of houses, and not of
men, by Proclamation called, and gave leave to strangers to inhabit them. It
happened that at such time as they flocked thither came also P. Scipio Africanus
the younger, Sp. Mummius, and L. Metellus, Cicero in somnio Scipionis. A. M.
3875. Ol. 162. an. 3. V. C. 624. Ptol. Phys. 17. Joh. Hyrcani. 6.
sent from Rome to visit the Kingdoms and States of the East, and compose their
differences. Scipio being landed, and having his face covered, the People
flocked about him, and desired him to uncover himself, which he granting, they
out of the great pleasure conceived at the sight of such a person, gave a
shout. Physcon himself coming out to meet them, was exceedingly ridiculous to
them, being a man otherwise sufficiently deformed, of a low stature, and such
corpulence, as his belly resembled rather that of a beast than a man. He
provided magnificent entertainment, but they despising his dainties (as
corrupting the manners of men) ate very sparingly, Excerpt. Diodori.
only minded that they came about, and traveled into the Country, where
viewing the several places thereof, considering the populousness, strength,
and convenience of their situation, they concluded Egypt a convenient seat for
the greatest Empire, if it had but Lords that knew how to make use of it, and
so departed to Cyprus, and thence into Syria.

19. After some time he became so odious to the new inhabitants also for his
cruelty, that they set fire to his Palace, Justin ut prius. Livius Epit. lib.
59. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 2. exter. exempl. 5.
and he was driven with his wife and son to get away to Cyprus, after which
they restored the Kingdom to Cleopatra his sister, whom he had put away.
Hereupon he raised an Army, and made War upon her and them, and fearing that
they might send for his eldest son from Cyrene, and make him King, to prevent
that, he murdered him; which being known, they cast down his statues and
images. He taking this to be done as well in favor of his sister Cleopatra, as
in despite of himself, to be revenged sufficiently on her, A. M. 3876. Ol.
162. an. 4. V.C. 625. Ptol. Physcon. 18. Joh. Hyrcani 7.
commanded their son Memphites a comely and towardly child to be killed in his
presence, and then his head, hands, and feet to be cut off, and being sent to
Alexandria to be presented her, as she was feasting at the celebration of her
own birth day. This struck not only her but all the City into exceeding horror
and amazement, and the sad spectacle was showed to the People, to let them know
what they might expect from such a King. He notwithstanding all this, yet went
on in his own way; for considering how he was hated by his People, that he
might reign more securely, as he thought in their weakness, he caused a place
of public meeting full of youth to be set on fire, and destroyed all therein
either with fire or sword. Cleopatra having put an end to mourning for her son,
Justin Lib. 39. Vide Hegelochum apud Usserium. p. 118.
and seeing her self pressed with War by her brother, sent to Demetrius Nicator
King of Syria, and her son in Law, for aid, offering him the Kingdom for his
pains in securing it. He gladly accepting the offer, came down, and waged War
with Physcon for some time, but his People revolting from him at home, was
forced to return, so that she being then in a manner destitute, was glad to
follow him into Syria. Physcon then reentering, and being seized anew of the
Kingdom, the Antiochians knowing his prejudice against Demetrius, He suborneth
one against Demetrius Nicator.
sent to him for one of the posterity of Seleucus to reign over them, whereupon
he suborned a young man and son of a Merchant, to mend the matter giving out,
that Alexander Balas was his Father. The counterfeit by his help outed
Demetrius of his Kingdom; but then not being able to bear so high a condition,
for which he was never bred, grew proud, and despised him. Therefore to be
revenged on him, being now reconciled to his sister, Porphyr. apud Eusebius. A. M.
3888. Ol. 165. an. 4. V. C. 637.
he pulled him down again, Dies.
by sending aid, and his daughter for a wife to Antiochus Grypus the son of
Demetrius. Not long after Physcon died, after he had reigned (from his brothers
death) 29 years. A. M. 3888, and the last of the 165 Olympiad.

20. He left three sons and as many daughters behind him. Idem. and Pausan in
Atticis.
One of his sons being base born, and called Ptolomy Apion, he left King of
Cyrene by his will; as for Egypt he left that to his wife, and to either of her
sons which she should choose, judging that the State of Egypt would be better
settled than the Kingdom of Syria, He leaves Egypt to his wives disposal.
when the mother making choice of one son, should make the other her Enemy. She
thinking that her youngest named Alexander would be more pliable and observant
of her, labored with the People to accept of him for their King; but they not
at all yielding to this, she was forced to call home the elder, Lathurus (or
Lathyrus) from Cyprus, whither she had procured his father to banish him; but
before she gave him the Kingdom she took away his beloved wife Cleopatra, Who
first takes to her one son and then another.
and commanded him to mary his younger sifler Selene. Cleopatra being thus
divorced by her mother, rather than forsaken of her husband, married to
Antiochus Cyzicenus in Syria (as we before said) and carried away with her the
Army in Cyprus for a portion. The Queen mother, that she might be the more
awful to Lathurus her son, in the second year of their reign made Alexander
King of Cyprus, and sent him thither, and then at the end of other six, took
away from him, his wife Selene, though she had brought him two sons; and again
to complete her malice, stirred up the People against him. For taking such of
her Eunuchs as were most faithful to her, she brought them wounded into the
public, accusing him of having endeavored to make her away, and of so using
those that were true to their trust in her defense: at which the Alexandrians
being sore moved, came so upon him, as he narrowly escaped with his life, and
then sent they for Alexander from Cyprus, and made him King.

21. Lathurus made but an exchange with his brother, as it fell out, Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 13. c. 20, 21.
making himself Master of Cyprus, whither yet his mother followed him with het
hatred, and War the effect thereof. Here he lay not idle, for Alexander
Jannaeus at this time King of the Jews besieging Ptolemais, the inhabitants
thereof sent to him for aid, and though they repented them of the bargain made
with him, and sent to stop his journey, yet he came on, and at his approach the
siege was raised. Then invaded he Judaea, and overthrowing Jannaeus in a great
and bloody battle, Lathurus invadeth Judaea but his mother marches against and
spoileth all his projects.
harased the Country. Cleopatra his mother was sttartled at this his power and
prosperity, and resolved he was to be brought down, else her affairs were but
in a tottering condition; therefore sending a good part of her treasure with
her Nephews and testament to the Island Cous, She came her self into Phaeucia,
besieged Ptoelmais, and persecuted him into Coelesyria. He having some hopes to
get Egypt into his hands in her absence, marched in all haste down thither; but
being disappointed, and pursued by a party sent by her, he was forced to return
and winter at Gaza. She in the mean time took Ptolemais, whither Jannaeus came
to her, with whom a little after she renewed the League at Seythopolis, and
then he prospering much in Coelesyria, Lathurus was forced to return to Cyprus,
and his mother seeing that, departed also into Egypt. During these Wars betwixt
the mother and son, it happened, Justin ut pr^ and Porphyr. ibid.
that he was once taken by her General, but dismissed again, whereat she was so
enraged, as she put to death her Commander. Her son Alexander being afraid,
that at length her cruelty might extend to him also, withdrew himself from her,
preferring a secure though obscure estate, before a dangerous reign. She
notwithstanding went on in her way, not neglecting her affairs, and fearing
her elder son might be helped by Antiochus Cyzicenus, sent great supplies to
Grypus his half brother and rival, with Selene for a wife, taken formerly from
Lathurus, and by messengers prevailed with Alexander to return. She is killed
by Alexander her son.
Diverse years then they lived and reigned together, but at length she really
plotted his destruction, and being caught in the manner, was according to her
deserts (though perhaps not his duty) put to death, after she had domineered
over him, and expelled his brother eighteen years.

22. Alexander being known to the People to have killed his mother, Justin ibid.
such a Sedition was thence moved, as glad he was to fly for his life; and
thence they recalled his elder brother Lathurus from Cyprus, and restored him
his Kingdom for many years after his expulsion, Who being thereupon expelled
Lathurus is restored.
being now (if we may believe Justin) so satisfied with his present condition,
as of himself, he would never have made War upon his mother, nor thereby
sought to recover out of his brothers hands what he had formerly enjoyed. About
this time his base brother Apion of Cyrene died, and left the People of Rome
his heir, which thereupon left the Country to it is own freedom; but after ten
years was it sore shaken, and almost rent in pieces by Wars and Tyranny, Livius
Epitom. lib. 70.
which fell on it being destitute of a Royal Monarch. Lucullus going thither
composed the differences, and settled the Commonwealth as he thought, which
after other ten years came to be reduced out of necessity to a Roman Province.
From Cyrene Lucullus returned through Egypt, and in his passage being set upon
by Pirates, lost almost all his Vessels; Platarch in Lucullo.
yet escaped he safe to Alexandria, the Kings Fleet being sent out to meet him,
where Lathurus entertained him with great magnificence, lodged him in his own
Court (which favor had never before been bestowed on any stranger) and
presented him with gifts to the value of 80 Talents. He entertaineth Lucullus
the Roman.
But he only received what was necessary, and neither visiting Memphis, nor
seeing any of the rarities of Egypt, being called away by his occasions,
returned through Cyprus unto Sylla, whose Lieutenant then he was in the War
against Mithridates King of Pontus. After this the Inhabitants of Thebes
revolted from him, but in the third year he reduced them again to obedience,
Pausan, in Attiis.
which is not to be understood of Thebes in Boeotia, seeing he had nothing
there to do, but of the City so called in his own Country. Not long after he
died, 37 years (wanting some months) after the death of his Father Physcon, A.
M. 3925, and the first of the 175 Olympiad.

23. It Is difficult to assign certainly who succeeded him. Porphyr. in Graecis
Eusebius.
Some say Cleopatra his daughter, and wife to his brother Alexander; others,
Apian de bello civ. lib. 1.
that Alexander's son being received into familiarity with Sylla the Roman
Dictator, was by him placed in the Kingdom, then destitute of issue male. They
may be reconciled, by that which is further affirmed by the former, viz. that
he married Cleopatra then Queen. Apian says, that being seized on the Kingdom,
Alexander the second.
the Alexandrians not enduring his insolence, on the nineteenth day drew him
out of the Court and killed him; but Porphyrie reports him to have slain her
nineteen days after he had married her. Certainly though his reign be accounted
no longer, and that of Auletes to begin here, yet cannot be rejected that which
is produced to the contrary. For, Suetonius reports, In Julio c. 11.
that Julius Caesar in his younger days having ingratiated himself with the
People, attempted by their Tribunes that Egypt might be assigned him as a
Province, having gotten an opportunity of extraordinary command, for that the
Alexandrians had expelled their King, on whom the Senate had bestowed the title
of friend and allie. This can in no wise be meant of Auletes, for when he was
expelled and came to Rome, Caesar was then above such a condition, having spent
some years in the Wars of Gall. And that King of Egypt mentioned by Cicero to
have died at Tire, In Orat. 1a. and 2a Agraria.
and reported to have left the People of Rome his heir in his Consulship, can
be meant of none but of this Alexander the Second, who being expelled
rebelliously by his Subjects, lived and died there in exile; so that we must
necessarily assign him (counting from the death of Lathurus to the Consulship
of Cicero) about fifteen years; during which time of his life, he is to be
supposed to have reigned longer than only so many days, contrary to the
vulgar opinion.

25. Alexander being expelled by the Alexandrians, they immediately set up in
his room, Auletes succeeds Alexandor.
the son of Lathurus, surnamed Dionysius and Auletes, because he was too much
addicted to the rites of Bacchus, and dancing to the sound of Cymbals and
Pipes. He was base born, as appears by the Prologue to the 39 book of Trogus,
and so was also his brother the King of Cyprus, if that be true which Pausanias
speaks of his Fathers having no legitimate issue, except one daughter. After
some years, they that set him up pulled him down; for his brother of Cyprus
being most unjustly spoiled of his Kingdom by the Romans, through the malice of
Clodius Tribune of the People, they pressed him sore, either to demand Cyprus
of the Romans, or renounce their friendship. Being unwilling to do this, ^od.
lib. 39.
and by reason of his great exactions which he made for paying of his debts
(contracted by his purchase of the Roman alliance) he incurred their hatred,
Plutarch in Catone Minore.
and whereas he could neither quiet the tumults by fair means nor foul, was
glad to withdraw himself out of the way, and went to Rome. At Rhodes he met
with Cato, who was sent by Clodius out of the way, under color of doing him
honor, to reduce Cyprus into the form of a Roman Province, Is compelled by his
rebellious Subjects, and betaketh himself to Rome.
who advised him to return, and be reconciled to his subjects, rather than
leaving his former happy condition to expose himself to danger, and the avarice
of the Roman Officers, which Egypt it self could not be able to satisfy. Being
by the Counsel of his grave and wise man reduced as into his wits, he was
minded to follow his advice; but was presently again turned by his friends, A.
M. 3948. Ol. 180. ann. 1. V.C. 697. Hyrcani 7.
and hasted to the City, where he had time and cause enough to repent of his
despising the Oracle (as then he accounted it) of so great a man.

25. Being come to Rome, he created the Senate much trouble, Strabo lib. 17.
being commended to it by Pompey, whom some reported to have been the cause of
his leaving Egypt, more than any injury offered him by his subjects, Plutarch
in Pompeio. Dio ibid. Cicero Familiar. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1. Strabo and Dio
ut prius. Porphyrius in Graecis Eusebii.
that so he might afford matter for new Wars. He desired he might be reduced
into his Kingdom by Cornelius Lentulus the Consul, to whom Cilicia was decreed
for a Province; and upon the reporting of the matter, an order was made;
Lentulus to stop Pompey's mouth, procuring him to have the charge of Provisions
(in that time of dearth) throughout the Empire. The Alexandrians in the mean
while ignorant of his voyage into Italy, and thinking he had some ways
miscarried, set over the Kingdom Berenice his legitimate daughter, together
with Tryphaena her elder sister (called also Cleopatra the elder) and sent into
Syria to Antiochus Asiaticus to come and reign with the women, and afterward,
he dying, to Philip Euergetes the son of Antiochus Grypus by Tryphaena,
daughter to Lathurus late King of Egypt, but he was also hindered by Gabinius,
then late Roman President in Syria. But hearing at length how things went at
Rome, they sent 100 of their Contrymen thither, to make their defense, and
recriminate their lawful King, which he understanding, procured most of the
Messengers to be made away in their journey, and the rest coming to the City,
he either took away, or deterred, or else persuaded them to hold their peace.
The Senate hearing of this was grievously moved, and the rather, because that
diverse public Ministers of others their Confederates had been made away with
the rest; as also for that it appeared, that there was much corruption amongst
themselves. They sent therefore for Dion the Chief of the Embassy, but Ptolomy
his money had such influence upon him, that he appeared not, and not long after
was also dispatched out of the way. Pompey harbored the King all this time in
his own house, being yet desirous to restore him himself as Cicero signifies
to Lentulus then the Pro-consul of Cilicia, who still waited also for the
employment. At length Sibylla's books being consulted, were reported to forwarn
the people of Rome never to reduce him by force, and therefore to that purpose
another decree was made in the Senate. A great debate then ensued how the thing
should be done, some proposing one way, and some another, till at length
Auletes perceiving it was neither likely to be effected by Pompey nor Lentulus,
Where getting no relief he departs to Ephesus.
despaired of his return, and getting him into Asia, expected at Ephesus in the
Temple of Diana, a better advantage for the recovery of his right out of the
hands of the imperious Rebels.

26. And he had not been long there, Dio lib. 39.
when a convenient opportunity presented it self. For Gabinius the President of
Syria having grievously afflicted his Province by oppression, not thinking that
sufficient, Joseph. de bello Judaico lib. 1. cap. 6. Appian in Parthicis.
but hearing the Parthians to be exceeding rich, set his resolution strongly to
invade them. When he had passed the River Euphrates, Ptolomy came to him with
Letters from Pompey, and offered him 10000 Talents (besides a great sum of
money to the Soldiers, part whereof they should have in hand) to restore him.
Hireth Gabinans to restore him.
Most of the Officers were against the thing, and Gabinius himself something
stuck at it, but being stirred up to it by Antonius (who then Commanded the
horse under him) and especially bewitched by the money, notwithstanding it was
not lawful for a President to stir out of his Province, nor undertake Wars at
his pleasure, and the people at Rome out of respect to the Verses of Sibylla
had forbidden Auletes to be restored (at least such a way) yet he only made
the difficulty of the thing a means to inhance the price of it, and omitting
the Parthian War, undertook that against the Egyptians. Berenice had about this
time called one Seleucus out of Syria, Dio and Strabo ut supra.
who vaunted himself of the blood royal of that Nation, and made him partaker
of the Kingdom, marrying her self unto him; but finding him to be of a sordid,
and base condition, made him away after a little while. Then an husband of a
royal stock being enquired out for her, Archelaus the son of Archelaus (General
to Mithridates the great King of Pontus) and who had been made by Pompey Priest
of the Tomani, counterfeiting himself the son of the King, procured by his
friends to be received on the same terms with the other, and reigned with her
six months.

27. But Gabinius leaving Syria to the tuition of a Child, his son, Plutarch.
in Antonio. Dio and Strabo ut supra.
marched for Egypt through Palestine, and coming to the sandy desert, sent
Antonius before with the horse to secure the Straights at the entry of the
Country; which he not only bravely performed, but took also Pelusium, thereby
gaining entrance for the whole Army, A. M. 3950. Ol. 181. ann. 2. V. C. 699.
Hyrcani 9. Cn. Pompeio Mag. 2. M. Licinio Crasso 2. Coss.
which presently put to flight the Egyptians. Archelaus himself was now taken;
but Gabinius considering that perhaps Ptolomy would be unwilling to give him so
much money as he expected, if with so small ado he should complete the work;
being also soundly bribed by Archelaus, he dismissed him under pretense of an
escape. A little after, the Egyptians (more earnest always in rebellions than
Wars) were utterly discomfited, Archelaus was slain, and all Egypt recovered,
and restored to Auletes, who presently put to death his daughter, and the
richest of the Nobility, as they deserved, standing then in great need of
money. Gabinius leaving a Guard behind him for Ptolomy's security (which stayed
at Alexandria, married, and begot Children, giving up themselves to the luxury
of the place) went back into Syria, and thence to Rome, where his great gifts
meeting with the corruption of the times, only purchased him his life, being
fined for his bribery, and disobedient carriage. A. M. 3954. Ol. 182. ann. 2.
V. C. 703.
As for Auletes we hear no more of him, Dies.
since that he died 4 years after his restitution. In the year of the World
3954. and the 2d of the 182 Olympiad.

28. He left two sons, and as many daughters behind him, Caesar Comment. de
bello civili. lib. 3. Dio lib. 42. Eutropius lib. 6.
of which the eldest of either Sex he ordered should succeed him by his last
Will and Testament; which he conjured the people of Rome, (under whose tuition
he left his Children) by all the gods, and the Leagues he had made with them,
should be observed; and one of the Tables of which were brought to Rome to be
laid up in the Treasury; but this being hindered by public business, it was
left with Pompey, who was also appointed Guardian to the young King in this his
nonage. His eldest son and eldest daughter succeeding him, she is driven away.
After three years the boy, or rather Pothinus (not Photinus, as he is
corruptly called in Caesar's Commentaries) the Eunuch who managed his affairs,
expelled Cleopatra his sister, and fellow both in marriage and the Kingdom; so
that she was forced to withdraw into Syria, there to make provision for her
re-establishment by force. Appian de bello civili lib. 2. Caesar. lib. 3.
Plutarch. in Pompeio and Dio lib. 42.
Not long it was ere she returned, having furnished her self; which her brother
being aware of, went, and pitched his Tents near the Mountain Casius, at the
Pelusian mouth of the Nile; where lying encamped, Pompey being then beaten by
Caesar at the battle at Pharsalum, fled to him for defense and safeguard,
choosing rather to venture upon Egypt than any other place, both for its
nearness and strength, and hoping upon the account of his Guardianship to be
lovingly received. The King then a very boy (about 13 years old) gave no answer
to his message; Pompey flying to him for succor is slain.
but those most potent about him consulting of it, were persuaded by Theodotus
his Schoolmaster to receive him, but then, that they might curry favor with
Caesar, to make him away; A. M. 3957. Ol. 183. ann. 1. V. C. 706. Hyrcani 16.
C. Julio Caesare 2. P. Servilio Isaurio Coss.
so that being received with small civility into a little boat, he was slain
ere he got to the other side, as is more largely expressed in the Roman story.
His head was reserved as a present for Caesar, who coming to Alexandria, though
at the first he was very welcome, and got much respect for his frequenting the
public readings of Philosophers, yet exacting the debt owing by Auletes, and
not abstaining from the Treasure of the Temples for the payment of his Army, he
thereby incurred the great displeasure of the Townsmen, all things being made
worse by Pothinus, who to his utmost ability incensed the superstitious
multitude. Caesar also accounting it to belong to himself as Consul, and
shortly after, as Dictator, to compose the differences of the Confederates of
the people of Rome, took upon him to judge the cause of the King and his
sister, which bred such disturbance, as thereupon ensued a troublesome War.

29. There were secret plots laid for his life, which he being aware off,
Plutarch. in Caesare. Dio and Caesar ut prius.
was glad to spend whole nights in feasting to prevent them, and gave way to
Cleopatra to come to him, who knowing he was no hater of women, had sent to him
to complain, Caesar going about to reconcile brother and sister, a War is
^^^^ce raised by P^^hiaus the Eunuch.
and desire a conference. At the sight of her he became her very slave, and
turned from being her Judge to her Advocate, which thing so enraged the King,
perceiving her now to be got into the Palace, that he rushed out to the people,
crying he was betrayed, and pulling his Diadem from his head, cast it on the
ground. A great stir arising hereupon, he was caught by Caesar's Soldiers, and
brought back into the house, which the multitude thereat enraged now besieged,
and Caesar with promise to do whatsoever they would, scarce appeased the
tumult; his men being unprovided for resistance, having not expected any such
occasion from those they accounted their friends. Then taking Ptolomy and
Cleopatra along with him, A. M. 3958. Q. Fusto Caleno Publio Vatinio Coss.
he read over their fathers Will in public audience, which subjecting them to
the tuition of the people of Rome (whose Supreme and absolute Magistrate he
then was) in execution of the said Will he gave to them two as husband and wife
the Kingdom of Egypt, and to their younger brother and sister that of Cyprus,
not leaving any thing to himself, but willing rather to add something of his
own; such a fear at this time had seized on him. The people hereby was quieted
for a time, until Pothinus, fearing he might be called to account for what had
already passed, kindled a new flame to divert it. He first objected, as well he
might, what an unworthy thing it was that the King should be called to answer,
and then added, there was reason to suspect, that whatsoever Caesar might
pretend, yet at length he would put all into the hands of Cleopatra. He sent to
Achillas General of all the Forces then lying at Pelusium, alluring him by
great promises in the Kings name, to draw down the Army privily to Alexandria;
and he, being not backward to cloze with him, marched down with 20000 foot, and
2000 horse. Caesar had not strength enough to go out and meet him, and
therefore contained himself in the City, yet commanded his men to be in
readiness, and kept the King with him; whose name he knew to be of great force
amongst his people, and that thereby this undertaking might appear rather to be
the enterprise of a few dissolute, and factious persons, than any thing backed
by his consent, or Warrant.

The Alexandrian War.
30. Achillas Idem ibid.
despising the number of Caesar's Soldiers, after he had entered the City,
thought presently to have broken in upon him, but he prevented this by blocking
up the ways, and fortifying his house. Then followed a sharp contention at the
Haven, the Alexandrians endeavoring to become Masters of the Fleet, and
thereby to cut off all Provisions and supplies from coming to him; but he made
a shift to burn all the Galleys, from which the fire seizing upon the houses
adjoining, consumed to ashes that famous Plutarch. in Caesare. Orosius lib. 6.
cap. 15.
Library Collected by the care and diligence of the former Kings. After this
exploit so happily performed, he placed a Garrison in Caesar ut prius.
Pharus (an Island over against Alexandria (ennobled by a famous Tower of the
same name) but three quarters of a mile distant from the City) and after a few
skirmishes, sent about into Syria, Cilicia, and other places for aid. Arsinoe
the Kings younger sister got out to Achillas, and jointly with him managed the
War; yet with such contention for the Chief command, as proved only beneficial
to the Soldiers, whom both by gifts sought to oblige; for the contest at length
arrived at such Hirtius de bello Alexandrino.
height, that lying in wait for the life of each other, he was slain by the
help of one Ganymedes, who having helped her in her escape, was now preferred
to be their General. Pothinus all this while was not backward, Achillas the
General is slain, and Pothinus put to death by Caesar.
but out of the Court sent messengers to Achillas, to encourage him in his
work, which being discovered cost him his life, and caused the King to be more
nearly looked to. Ganymedes at his entrance upon the Generalship, stopped up
the channels, which brought fresh water into that part of the City where Caesar
lay, and with engines conveied salt from the Sea into the room of it, thinking
thereby to discourage the Enemy, and force him out of his hold; but Caesar
(though his Soldiers were at first daunted at it) prevented the design by
sinking of wells, which abundantly supplied their necessities, to the wonder of
the Egyptians, who had no such invention. By this time a legion shipped by
Domitius Calvinus, with provisions and arms from Syria, landed on the African
shore, a little above Alexandria; which Caesar understanding, went with his
Fleet unmanned to fetch them in, and the Enemy having notice of it, drew out
also against him. He receiving the men aboard, had no mind to engage, because
it grew toward night; but a Rhodian Gally, not keeping up with the rest of the
Fleet, Caesar defeateth the Alexandrians at sea.
was set upon, whereby he was constrained to go in to the rescue, and so carried
himself, that daylight only was wanting to his completing the Victory, by
utterly destroying the whole Navy of the Alexandrians.

31. They notwithstanding this defeat, in which, and other ways, of late, Idem
ibid.
they had lost no fewer than 110 Vessels (yet being encouraged thereto by
Ganimedes) set themselves to the rigging of another Fleet, which being in a
readiness, Caesar brought his about the Island Pharos, and set it in order
against them. Both sides being ready to engage, yet a narrow passage lying
betwixt them, each expected till the other should enter first, as then having a
better advantage, until the Rhodians desired of Caesar leave to enter the
Straight. This once granted and done, they were presently set upon, and then
relieved, till a total engagement ensued, in which the Egyptians were worsted
(not a ship of Caesar's receiving any hurt) and in their flight took in in
Pharos, Again
where they were received by their friends, and kept off the Romans for some
time, but a length were forced to quit the Island with great loss. This being
joined to the main by two bridges, one of them in like manner was forsaken by
the Townsmen; but the Romans attempting to gain the other, through the
rashness of some in their company, were beaten off, and forced tumultuously to
betake themselves to their ships. Appian de bello civili lib. 2.
Caesar himself in the hurry was glad to leap into the Sea, and the Enemy
following, to dive under water, He casts himself into danger.
and take breath now and then as he could; till (having swom almost a quarter
of a mile) he was taken up into a ship. He lost 400 of his Legionary Soldiers
in this skirmish, as many ship-men and rowers, yet neither he nor his Army were
discouraged at all, but were rather incited to redeem their loss by some other
exploit, which the Alexandrians taking notice of, sent to him, desiring he
would dismiss their King, whom now they professed they were ready to obey; and
if he should command them to be friends with him, they would presently yield.
He knew there was neither any trusting of him nor them; but considering that if
he dismissed him, they would be nothing the stronger, and if he should become
the head of their party, the War would be more honorable, he gravely
admonished him to act nothing contrary to the interest of his People, or his
confederacy with Rome, Lets the King go.
and then gave him leave to depart, though he pretended an unwillingnesse to
leave him, and notably counterfeited sincere friendship with feigned tears.

32. Though he being returned was very earnest for carrying on the War, Hirtius
ibid.
yet they seeing themselves nothing amended by the accession of his name or
presence (which the Romans despised) and that they profited nothing by any of
their attempts, were greatly discouraged, Josephus Antiquit. l. 14. cap. 14,
and 15. and de bello l. 1. cap. 7.
yet understanding that great supplies of men and provisions were coming to
Caesar, they resolved once more to take the Sea, and cut them off: And they did
much hurt to those that came by water, till he sent out his Fleet under the
command of Tiberius Nero, and restrained them. But by Land came Mithridates of
Pergamus from Syria, Aid sent to Caesar.
accompanied with Antipater the Governor of Judaea, and Father to Herod the
Great, bringing down with him a great power of men, and pierced as far as
Pelusium, which also was taken, with great pains and industry by assault.
Thence marching down for Alexandria he took in the Country in his way, the Jews
inhabiting those parts (though at first they made resistance, yet) being
brought over by Antipater upon the producing of the letters of Hyrcanus the
High Priest. When Ptolomy heard this, and that he had nigh already reached
Delta, a place not far distant from Alexandria; knowing he must needs pass the
River, he sent out a party to oppose him there, which he received prudently
after the Roman fashion, being entrenched in his Camp, and easily sustained
it is violence; till seeing them very disorderly, and with great boldness to
assail his fortifications, he issued out, and killing a great number, had
utterly defeated the rest, but that by their knowledge of the Country, and by
the Vessels which had transported them, they secured themselves. Whereupon
rallying again they once more charged him, and a fight ensued in that place
called The Camp of the Jews, in which engagement the wing commanded by
Mithridates himself, was sorely oppressed, Being opposed overcomes.
and had been totally overthrown; but that Antipater (who led the other) came
in in good time to the rescue, put to flight the Egyptians, and took their
Camp; which Mithridates confessed by letters to Caesar, acknowleging Antipater
to have been the author, both of his safety, and the Victory. But now by this
time was Ptolomy himself coming against Mithridates, and Caesar also to fetch
him off.

33. Both went by Sea, but Caesar first got to him, and took him in with his
victorious Army. Ptolomy and Caesar encamped then seven miles asunder, the
former in an high and most fortified place by nature, having a narrow River
with exceeding high and precipitous banks betwixt him and the Enemy, which
though the Alexandrians defended, yet Caesar's men got over (the Horse by
passing the Foard, and the Foot by laying over a bridge made of long trees) so
that Caesar sat down, not far from the Kings Camp. The next day he stormed a
Castle in a Village near adjoining, the defendants whereof flying a main to the
Camp, his men had well nigh entered with them; but coming to hand-strokes, were
beaten back, being severally laid at, both from the fortifications and the
ships. But Caesar espying a very high place, which by reason of it is natural
strength was little looked to by the Alexandrians, set certain Companies to get
up there; Caesar stormeth the Egyptian Camp.
which being performed, and a great cry raised on purpose round about, the
Romans brake in, in several places, and made great slaughter. Most of the
defendants fled upon the irruption, and in great heaps leaped down into the
trenches, wherein they first being overwhelmed, the rest with great ease got
over, amongst which was the King; but coming to take boat, so many pressed in
after him, A. M. 3598.
that the Vessel sunk, and he thereby was drowned, Orosius lib. 6. cap. 16.
after he had reigned well nigh four years. Together with him fell in this War
(though most after another fashion) 20000 men, Ptolomy is drowned.
12000 were taken with 70 long ships, and 500 of the Romans are said to have
been slain. Caesar in confidence and pursuit of this Victory, with the Horse
marched presently to the City, where he found now not any resistance, Caesar
takes Alexandria.
the Citizens entertaining him in a suppliant posture, whom he comforted and
forgave.

34. Having thus made an end of the War, Dio lib. 42.
he laid not Egypt to the Roman Empire, but gave it to Cleopatra, joining to
her in marriage (to color the business) her younger brother as yet but eleven
years old; Appian de bello civili l. 2.
but indeed subjecting all things to her will and power, with whom he was so
familiar, as, out of love to her, he stayed in Egypt nine months, and had done
it longer, Plutarch in Caesare.
or else had taken her with him to Rome, had he not been called thence by the
urgent affairs of Syria; and not long after she brought him a son, whom by his
permission she named Caesario. Sueton in Julio.
At his departure he removed Arsione out of the Kingdom, lest any disturbance
should arise upon her account, and left three Legions behind him for the
security of these two Princes, who being disrespected by their own People for
their respect to him, as yet were not confirmed in their seats.

35. As for the Government, Cleopartra reigned, and acted alone without the
control of any, permitting her brother to enjoy the title with his life as yet.
Not long after Caesar's departure, the eldest son of Pompey his Enemy coming to
Alexandria, she is Plutarch in Antonio.
reported to have been as familiar and common with him; yet upon Caesar's
invitation Sueton ut prius.
went with her brother to Rome, where they were admitted as friends and allies:
for her a lodging was provided in his own house, and having built a Temple to
Venus Genetrix (which he had vowed before the battle at Pharsalia) he therein
placed Appian ibid.
her effigies beside the Goddess. In the fourth year, her brother growing
toward a man, Cleopatra poysoneth her brother,
she Josephus. Antiquit. l. 15. cap. 4.
poisoned him, to be at her own liberty. After Julius Caesar was killed in the
Senate house, she stood ever firm to those that prosecuted the conspiratours:
to Appian de bello civili l. 3, and 4.
Dolobella, at his request of aid, she sent four Legions, and had a fleet ready
to put out had the weather served. To Cassius, who with menacing language
demanded supplies, she plainly refused to send any; for that he had an hand in
Caesar's death, his threats only inciting her to go and meet Octavius Caesar
and Antony, who were then making an Expedition against him and his fellow
Brutus, the heads of their faction. A. M. 3963. Ol. 184. an. 3. V. C. 712.
Hyrcani 22. M. Emilio Lepido 2. L. Munatio Planco Coss.
He getting knowledge of her intentions, sent a strong party with 60 ships to
hover for her about Peloponnesus; but such a tempest seized on her Fleet, that
her design was broken, and having received great loss, and now fallen sick,
she was forced to return into Egypt. Antony after the overthrow of Brutus and
Cassius, Comes to Antony in Asia who follows her into Egypt.
being left in Asia to settle the affairs thereof, thither she repaired to him
in a strange antic fashion, and he, who, when he formerly served under
Gabinius in Egypt, had cast a wanton eye upon her, Plutarch ut prius. Appian
lib. 5.
was now so smitten, (though 40 years old) that he also became enslaved to her
in his affections. She ruled him and all his affairs, and procured him out of
hand, to cause her sister Arsione to be made away; who being formerly led in
triumph by Julius Caesar after the Alexandrian War, with the pity of all men,
had for her brother and sisters sake been then dismissed.

36. Antony had no power but to follow her into Egypt, Plutarch and Appian ut
prius.
where they spent their time in nothing but extraordinary vanity and dalliance.
After his reconciliation to Caesar, and the making up of the breach betwixt
them, by his marying of Octavia, Dio lib. 49.
Cleopatra fearing that this new wife might draw his affections from her self,
pretended to be almost mad in love with him, practicing upon her body in such
sort, that being reduced into a Consumption, she seemed not to be able to live
in his absence; whereupon he gave over his intention of invading Parthia for
that time, and returned to Alexandria. Not long after she begged of him that
part of Judaea which bare Balm, A. M. 3968. Ol. 185. an. 4. V. C. 717. Herodis
3. M. Vepsanio Agrippa. L. Canidio Gallo. Cass. Josephus Antiq. l. 15. c. 5.
and many other places and Countries, which he bestowed upon her, to the great
distaste of the People of Rome, who took it in high disdain, as well that such
vast possessions should be given her, as that now he had diverse children by
her, two of which, being twins, were named Sun and Moon. Shortly after, she
accompanied him as far as Euphrates, then making an Expedition into Armenia,
and taking Judaea in her way homeward, that part thereof, which Antony had
given her, together with Arabia, she let out to farm unto Herod, whom also,
either out of her filthy affection to him (which she pretended) or for some
other end (having formerly wished for an advantage against him, to get his
Kingdom) she solicited to the breach of the chastity of them both; but he
instead of giving her satisfaction, consulted with his friends how to kill her,
and then being again terrified from that, to do her honor, waited on her home
as far as Pelusium. Antony having prospered in Armenia returned, and entered
Alexandria in triumph, leading with him Artavasdes the King with his wife and
children, Plutarch and Dio ut supra.
whom he earnestly labored with to make them fall down before her, as
suppliants, but to no purpose. Then spent they their time in feasting, he
divided almost half of the Roman Empire betwixt her and her children; she took
upon her the name of Isis, and he of Osiris, and Father Bacchus, having his
temples crowned with Ivy, and wearing buskins; Their loose practices.
being drawn in that garb, after the fashion of Bacchus, in a chariot through
the streets of the City.

37. Sueton in Octavio and Dio lib. 49, 50.
These foolish and loose practices brought great inconveniences upon them. For
Caesar Octavius and he fell presently of recriminating each other, and Anthony
not long after had the confidence to send to Rome, to desire from the Senate a
confirmation of his donations to her and her children; which gave such offense,
that his friends were forced to fly out of the City; Plutarch. in Antonio.
whereupon he sent thither again some to thrust Octavia (his wife, and Caesar's
sister) out of his house, and took upon him to make War upon both People and
Senate. Caesar hereat enraged, found out a way to incense the People against
him, by opening his will deposited in the hands of the Vestal Nuns, wherein he
had labored to make Caesario the lawful son of the Dictator, named for Heirs
his Children begotten on Cleopatra, and commanded that notwithstanding he might
die at Rome, yet his body should be sent to her to Alexandria. These things
found to be true, gained credit to others which were but reported; as that in
case he should get the better, he would bestow Rome it self upon the Queen, and
translate the Seat of the Empire into Egypt. War at Rome is decreed against it.
When Caesar then was ready for the War, it was decreed against her, and he was
deprived of all his Offices, which alone was thought enough at this time, lest
once declared an Enemy to the State, the other with him should have been
included in the same capacity, of whom diverse, being men of great influence,
might have been driven through desperation, to act more vigorously for him:
Hereby it was thought he would be sufficiently entangled, resolving not to
forsake her on any terms whatsoever, and vulgarly accounted to be bewitched by
her. And to little less could these things practiced by him amount to. He is
bewitched as it were by her.
He called her Queen, Lady, and Mistress, gave her Romans for her Guard (who
had her name engraven on their Targets.) He went abroad, celebrated Games, sat
in Judgment, and sometimes rode with her, and when she pleased to be drawn in
her Chariot, ran by her side amongst the Lackies. She was so confident she
should be Mistress at length of the Mistress of the World, that if she would
swear most religiously, it should be by that Law or Sentence, which she was
about to pronounce in the Capitol.

38. For all this ado, yet in the preparation for the War, Plinius Natural.
Histor. lib. 21. cap. 3.
Anthony mistrusted her, and that so far, as to have his meat tasted for fear
of poison. She taking notice of it, poisoned a Cup of drink, and giving him it,
when he was about to set it to his mouth, interposed her hand, convincing him
thereby how easy a matter it was for her to do that of which she was suspected
to have an intention, Yet suspecteth her.
and then sending for a Malefactor out of prison, and giving him the liquor,
he died immediately. This made him bold and confident of her, and further
enslaved his affections, insomuch that that she ruled him in the management of
the War. For Canidius, Plutarch. ut prius.
whom she had bribed to get leave for her to continue with him, changing
afterward his mind, She makes him engage at Actium,
or (at least his language) and advising him to send her back into Egypt, and
to go into Thrace or Macedonia, Dio lib. 50.
and there to decide the controversy in a pitched battle, she prevailed against
him not only to stay, but made Anthony engage at Actium in a Sea Fight, yet
providing rather for flight than victory. Where he his defeated.
Ere it could justly be discerned which party would carry it, she being
impatient of delay, A. M. 3974. Ol. 187. ann. 2. V.C. 723. Herodis 9. Octavio
Caesare 3. M. Valerio Messala Coss.
with her Golden Prow and Purple sayls, giving a sign to her Egyptians, betook
her self to flight, which Anthony seeing, made haste after her as fast as
possible, and being received on board, neither saw, nor was seen by her; but
sat him down in a sad and thoughtfull posture, holding his head betwixt his
hands; and for three or four days so continued, till arriving at Taenarus (a
Promontory of Laconia) the women there that were intimate with her brought them
together. He passing over into Africa, she returned into Egypt, counterfeiting
a triumph with her ship curiously adorned, and melodious singing, that she
might be received of her Subjects, the chiefest of which presently she put to
death, whom she knew formerly to have born no good will toward her, and now to
be elevated upon the report of the defeat received at Actium. Confiscating
their estates, and rifling religious houses, she heaped together a great Mass
of Treasure, raising forces therewith with all expedition, and that she might
draw into Confederacy the King of Media, she sent him the head of Artavasdes
(or Artabazus) the Armenian, his Aemulator. Then, attempting a matter of
greatest difficulty, she conveyed ships over the Isthmus, or Neck of Land
(which parting the Egyptian (or Mediterranean) from the Red Sea divides Asia
from Africa) into the Arabian Bay, She conveyeth ships into the Arabian Bay to
seek out her fortune, but is diverted by him.
intending to fly servitude, and seek out some foreign seat, wherein to spend
the remainder of her days. But Anthony returning to her, who as yet had heard
nothing of the loss of his Land-Army, they encouraged themselves, and she
changed her purpose. Her ships were burnt by the Inhabitants of Arabia Petraea,
at the procurement of Q. Didius the President of Syria.

39. But Anthony having notice that his Army had revolted to Caesar, Plutarch.
in Antonio and Dio lib. 51.
withdrew himself in a sad and Melancholic posture from the sight of all men
into the Island Pharos, and then again within a while, having disburthened
himself of grief, returned to the Court, where they indulged their genius more
than ever, Many willing to die give their names, and they spend their time in
jollity.
those that were willing to die with them giving in their names, and passing
away their time together in nothing but feasting and jollity. She gathered
together diverse sorts of poisons, which she tried upon Capital Offenders and
Brutes, approving above all the biting of an Asp, which she observed without
any convulsion to cast the party into an heavy stupefaction, with a moderate
sweat upon the face, and so to kill with an easy kind of languishment. Before
Caesar came down into Egypt against them, She yet labors to curry favor
with Caesar.
they sent several times to him. She asked the Kingdom for her Children, and
without Anthony his knowledge sent him a Scepter, a Crown of Gold, and a royal
Throne, giving up her Kingdom to him, as it were, with those, to gain respect.
He received them as a good Omen, and returned to her openly threatening
language; yet underhand promised her impunity, and the entire possession of her
Kingdom, if she would make away Anthony. And fearing lest she might be brought
to undertake some desperate design, he sent one Thyrseus his Freed-man, and a
cunning fellow to her, to make her believe he was in Love with her, hoping that
then, besides the saving of the Treasure, which she had threatened to burn, she
having a great ambition to be loved by all great persons, would not stick at
killing Anthony. She desiring indeed that it might be so, and remembering how
his Uncle, in time past, and since that Anthony had been bewitched by her,
easily fooled her self into a fond belief thereof, and promised her ambition,
not only pardon, and Egypt, but the Roman Empire it self. Anthony seeing her
kind to the Messenger above measure, suspected something, and soundly lashing
him, sent him back to his Master; and then she to wipe off his jealousy most
solemnly celebrated his birthday (though suitably to her present condition she
neglected her own) and sought all manner of ways how to humor him. She
betrayeth Pelusium, and causes the Fleet and Horse to revolt to him.
Yet did she betray Pelusium into Caesar's hands, and when he drew down toward
Alexandria secretly forbad the Townsmen to go out against him, though openly
she exhorted them to resistance. And when Anthony had provided a Fleet, she
caused it wholely to revolt, and in like manner the horse, which Anthony
plainly seeing, after the overthrow of his foot, returned into the City,
crying out that he was betrayed by her into their hands, against whom, for her
sake he had taken Arms.

40. She being afraid of him, went to her Monument, as intending to kill her
self, under pretense of being afraid of Caesar, and sent a Messenger to him to
tell him she was dead. He giving credit to it, desired Eros his servant to kill
him; but he preventing it with his own death, he wounded himself in the belly;
Anthony kills himself.
but the stroke not being such an one as could presently dispatch him, he
entreated his friends to do it, who refusing, and running out of the room, a
tumult ensued, and she perceiving what was done, sent for him up into her
Monument. He understanding she was alive, arose, thinking he might also
possibly live; but the blood issuing out in great abundance, he despaired of
it, and was born by his attendants to the door of the building, whence he was
drawn up with Cords in a lamentable plight, all in goar blood, helping himself
as it were, and stretching out his hands to her, and her women, who haled him
up thus to the top. When he was got up she laid him on a bed, tore her flesh,
wiped off his blood with her face, calling him Lord, Husband, and General,
after which he presently expired. Caesar now desired to get her into his power
by strong hand, having an extraordinary ambition to grace his Triumph with her,
and not willing to promise any thing, Caesar earnestly desires to lead her in
Triumph, and does all he can to deceive her.
and be counted a deceiver by falsifying his word. She continued still in the
Monument, hoping at least to purchase her Kingdom by the Treasure she had yet
in her power, and refused to come down, talking with the Messengers from above.
But presently some got in to her, removed all things out of the way wherewith
she might hurt her self, and then bringing her into the Palace, detracted
nothing from her former state, thereby to delude her with vain hope. Caesar now
without any trouble entered Alexandria with Arius the Philosopher on his right
hand, who formerly had read the Sciences to him; he permitted her to bury
Antony as she pleased, which after she had done, being spent with sorrow, and
her breast all exulcerated with strokes, she thereby contracted a Fever, and
glad of that pretense to abstain from all sustenance, and so end her days, she
consulted also with Olympus her Physician how to reduce her self into a
Consumption. But Caesar smelling it out, so terrified her about her Children,
that she was content to desist.

41. Shortly after, he coming to comfort her, Plutarch and Dio ut supra.
she cast her self down at his feet, endeavoring with all the art she had to
inveigle his affections, which though he perceived, yet fixing his eyes on the
ground, he only said, Be of good cheer Woman, thou shall have no harm, she
being sollicitous, Vide Suetonin Octavio. Florum lib. 4. cap. 11. Orosium lib.
6. cap. 19. Eutropium l. 7.
not for life, but love, and a Kingdom. Then gave she in an Inventory of her
Goods and Treasure, at which Seleucus one of her Officers was so Malapert, as
to accuse her of suppressing something, whereupon she flew in his face, and
soundly buffeted him, Caesar smiling, and gently reprehending her for it. But
she asked him whether it was not an hard case for her, whom he had deigned to
visit, to be accused by one of her own slaves, if she had reserved any thing,
not for her self, but wherewithal to present his wife and sister, that they
might render him the more favorable to her. Hereat he exceedingly rejoiced,
hoping she had a great desire to live, and promised her great matters, vainly
supposing he therein deceived her. But she having notice by Dolobella, a young
Gentleman amongst his followers, and one that bare her great good will, that
after three days, she and her Children were to go for Italy, first obtained
leave of him to celebrate the obsequies of Antony, which having performed with
lamentations, and great show of affection, she commanded a Bath to be prepared,
and sitting down to meat, sumptuously Dined. After Dinner she gave a Letter to
her Keeper to carry to Caesar (wherein she desired she might be buried by
Antony) sealed, that he thinking the contents to be of consequence, might the
more easily be removed out of the way. He being gone, with the help of her two
women, she made fast the doors, most gorgeously apparelled her self, as upon
some solemn day, with her royal Ornaments, and then put an Asp (which she had
procured to be brought in secretly amongst Figs, Grapes, and Flowers) to her
left Arm, with the biting of which, she fell presently as into a sleep, and so
died. But she having notice of his intentions dies by the biting of an Asp.
Caesar having read the Letter presently perceived what was done, and
endeavored with all speed to recall her to life, though in vain, grieving sore
that he was frustrated of a glorious Triumph, A. M. 3975. Ol. 187. ann. 3. V.
C. 724. Herodis 10. Octavio Caesare 4. M. Licinio Crasso Coss.
yet pitying and admiring the person, whom he caused to be royally interred
with Antony, according to her desire, and afterward dealt very nobly with
their Children. Adorned she was with all the endowments of nature above her
Sex. Being learned her self, she was a great Lover and Promoter of knowledge;
which she testified in erecting another Library, in the room of that which had
been burnt, supplied with books from Pergamus at the procurement of Antony. She
lived 39 years, reigned 22. (counted from her fathers death) fourteen whereof
she spent with Antony. And with her perished her Kingdom, now reduced into the
form of a Roman Province, and the Macedonian Empire was quite extinct, 300
years after the death of Darius, and the Monarchy of Alexander, by whom it
arose; 293 after Ptolomy the son of Lagus had obtained Egypt; in the third of
the 187 Olympiad, the year of the World 3975. and 28 before the birth of
Christ. Octavius Caesar the 4th time, and M. Licinius Crassus being Consuls.

Contemporaries with the Empire of the Macedonians.
CHAP. VII. The Judaean Kingdom or Principality of the Asmonaeans.
From the departure of Antiochus Sidetes from Jerusalem to the reign of Herod
an alien, being by birth an Idumaean, containing the space of 98 years.
1. AFter Antiochus had raised his siege and departed from Jerusalem, A. M.
3870.
as was said before, he undertook an Expedition against the Parthians, wherein
he was slain. John the son of Simon who then was chief both Priest and
Magistrate of the Jews accompanied him some way with a band of Auxiliaries, A.
M. 3877.
and got the surname of Hyrcanus from the overthrow of the Hyrcanians, as it is
thought, and returned with great credit into his own Country. After Antiochus
his death, John surnamed Hyrcanus his exploits.
he led down an Army into Syria, thinking, as indeed it fell out, that the
Cities were left without defense, whereof he took several, Medaba, Samaga,
Sicima, and Gerizim, A. M. 3878. Ol. 163. an. 2. V. C. 627. Seleucid. 186.
Ptol. Physcon. 20. Joh. Hyrcani 9.
where the Cuthaeans had built a Temple resembling that at Jerusalem. In this
Expedition he also subdued Idumaea, the Inhabitants whereof he put to their
choice, whether they would be circumcised or quit their habitations. They chose
the former, and now began to be reckoned amongst the Jews, submitting to all
their rites and ceremonies. After this he sent to Rome, desiring that the
confederacy made with the Senate might be renewed; that Joppa, Gazara, with
other Cities and places taken from the Jews by Antiochus, Her renews the
League with Rome.
contrary to their Decree, might be restored, that it might not be lawful for
the King of Syria to pass through their Country with his Armies, that
whatsoever Antiochus had attempted against them in War contrary to their will
might be made frustrate, and that the Senate would please to send their
Ambassadors to procure those things, and to cause satisfaction to be given for
the havoc made of the Country. The Fathers renewed the confederacy with them,
according to their desire, promised to take order they should be no more
wronged, and dismissed the Ambassadors with money to bear their charges, and
letters commendatory to those through whose Countries they should pass. The
many changes which then presently happened in the Syrian Kingdom so diverted the
several Princes from meddling with the Jews, that they were glad of their
friendship, and this proved a sufficient opportunity for Hyrcanus to establish
his affairs. For they destroying one another with War, he securely enjoyed the
revenues of the Country, Besieges Samaria.
and got together a great mass of money; so that despising them, he went and
besieged Samaria, Idem cap. 18.
the Inhabitants of which he was displeased with for their injury offered to
the Marisseni, though the King of Syria's Subjects, yet his friends and allies.

2. He cast a trench about it, Idem ibid. and de bello Judaico lib. 1. c. 2,
and 3.
and committed the siege to the care of his two sons Antigonus and Aristobulus,
who sorely oppressed the defendants, hindering all importation of Victuals, so
that they were constrained to beg aid of Antiochus Cyzicenus then reigning in
Syria. He came, but was overthrown by Aristobulus his Soldiers, and being
pursued by the brothers as far as Scythopolis, hardly escaped, and the siege
was renewed. The besieged reduced to their former necessities, sent once more
to Cyzicenus, who then obtaining about 6000 men of Ptolomy Lathurus (then
expelled his Kingdom by his mother) made an inroad into Hyrcanus his Dominions,
and made havoc of all things, thereby hoping to constrain him to raise the
siege. But having lost many of his men intercepted by the Enemy, he himself
went to Tripolis, and gave over the War to Callimander and Epicrates, two of
his Captains. Callimander being more venturous than wise was presently slain,
and his fellow was corrupted to betray Scythopolis and other Towns to Hyrcanus,
who then after a years lying before Samaria took it, Takes it.
razed it, and brought the watercourse through the Place, by the filth of
which all appearance of a Town was taken away. After this, inviting the
Pharisees on a time (whose Scholar he had been) to a feast, he labored to
approve his sincerity to them, and desired, if any of them knew any fault in
him, to tell him plainly of it. All approved of his manners but one Eleazarus a
seditious and bad man, who told him, that if would be accounted good, he must
divest himself of the Priesthood, and be content with the Principality, for
that he had heard say, that his mother was a captive in the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes. This being utterly false, Hyrcanus was grievously offended, and so
were the Pharisees; but Jonathan a Saducee of the contrary sect, and one in
great grace with him, Grudges betwixt him and the Pharisees.
took thence occasion to tell him, that this affront came from all the
Pharisees together, and that he should perceive it by the punishment they would
inflict upon him, if their opinion was demanded. They being mercifully
inclined, thought it sufficient he should be imprisoned and beaten for no
greater an offense: at which Hyrcanus was sore displeased, as then thinking
they had raised that scandal of him. Wherefore being more incensed by Jonathan,
he revolted to the Saducees, abrogated the constitutions of the Pharisees, and
punished their followers, whence it came to pass, that neither he nor his sons
were much beloved by the People. A sedition also arose hereupon, but he quieted
all, and having governed the People 31 years died, being honored with three
especial dignities, of the chief Government, High Priesthood, and also
Prophecy, as Jonathan tells us, who relates, that he foretold his two eldest
sons should neither of them long enjoy his Principality. A. M. 3899, the last
of the 160 Olympiad, about 104. years before the birth of Christ.

The original of the several Jewish Sects.
3. Mention being here made of Pharisees, it is requisite to speak something of
this sect and others amongst the Jews, according to the nature of this work,
Josephus first makes mention of them in the ninth Chapter of his thirteenth
Book of Antiquities, afterward more diligently and largely Lib. 18. c. 2. and
de bello lib. 2. c. 7.
handling them. There is no question but these sects sprang up after the return
of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity. It Is probable that the difference
amongst them arose after the building of the second Temple, about their worship
and offerings. Some thought they were only to live by the prescript of the
Law, neither above nor below it. Others believed they were not only to act
according to the bare letter of the Scriptures, but also according to such
senses and consequences as might be made out from it, and accordingly they
offered over and above what the Law required in the service of the Temple, even
what they conceived was due according to their riches or other respects.
Consule Josephum Scaligerum in Eleacho Trihaeresi Fullerum Miscellan. l. 1. c.
3.
Those that stood to the letter of the Law were called Karraim: Those that
besides the precepts of the Law did works of supererogation, and voluntary
service without any compulsion, were named Hasidim, that is Sancti or Holy, and
(after they grew into a body) Hasidaeans. As long as this voluntary and
supererogatory service was free and spontaneous, there was no such schism; but
when this doctrine of the Hasidaeans came to be digested into precepts, and the
precepts of supererogation into writings and Canons, many doubts, disputes, and
controversies, daily arose, whence two dogmatical Sects had their original.
Drusium lib. de tribus sectis Judaeorum. Jacobum Cappellum ad A. M. 3891. and
Simsonium and A. M. 3896.
One which only allowed of the Law it self, and Another that embraced also the
glosses and interpretations of it. From the lattet, being that of the
Hasidaeans, sprung up some who called themselves Peruschim or Separate, as
those, who by reason of their holiness were not only distinct and separated
from the vulgar, but also from other Hasidaeans, for that they taught that
those constitutions formerly accounted free, were to be observed out of
necessity. These Peruschim in Syriack Pheruschim, came by Greek writers to be
called Pharisaei. Now as out of the Hasidaeans arose the Pharisees, so from
amongst the Karraim the Saducees, so named from Sadoc. Antigonus the master of
this Sadoc, and scholar to Simeon the Just, amongst other heads of doctrine had
taught, that they ought not to be like servants, who served their Masters on
this condition to receive their wages, meaning that we ought to serve God out
of love, and not for our own gain or advantage. But Sadoc, or Saduc, and
Baithus interpreted this godly saying into a wicked sense, teaching, that there
was no reward after this life; and therefore denied the future state, and
framed their heresy. The third sect was that of the Essaei or Esseni, who as
it is probable sprang from the Pharisees, though when it began be uncertain.
Philo Judaeus thinks they were so called from their holiness (...), as
though (...), though more probable from Haesi the Syriack, whence the Greek
(...) may be derived. The Hebrew signifies such as live apart from noise,
which agrees much with those Esseni, who like the Pythagoraeans kept silence,
and lived in deserts or Villages by themselves, far from others. They had skill
in physic, and thence some would derive their name from the Hebrew Asa, which
signifies to heal. This Sect was later than that of the Pharisees, and some
think it arose at this time when Hyrcanus turned Saduce, and persecuted the
Sect of the Pharisees; for then might many of the Pharisees to shun persecution
depart into the Wilderness and desert places, and afterward be called Essaei
or Esseni, who were held more strict than the Pharisees themselves.

4. But, (to return to our matter) John surnamed Hyrcanus left five sons,
whereof Aristobulus the eldest (surnamed Philellen for his love to, and
familiarity with the Greeks) succeeded him, and first changed his Principality
into a Kingdom, setting a Diadem on his head, 481 years after the return of the
Jews from the captivity of Babylon. Aristobulus the son of Hyrcanus changes
the Principality into a Kingdom.
His second brother he loved exceedingly, so as he made him his partner in the
Kingdom; but shut up the rest in prison, and with them his mother, A. M. 3900.
Ol. 168. ann. 4. V. C. 649. Ptol. Lath. 13.
to whom his father had left the Principality, and proceeded so far in
unnatural cruelty, as to starve her to death. Not long after, he caused to be
made away also his beloved brother, though against his will he did it. For he (
Antigonus by name) returning victorious from the Wars, at the Feast of the
Tabernacles, marched up with his Soldiers to the Temple, as intending to offer
sacrifice for his brother then lying sick. This was presently interpreted to
Aristobulus as an effect of a bad intention toward him, His cruelty against
his mother and brethren.
and a sufficient sign of affecting the Kingdom, and it was represented to him,
as if Antigonus would presently come down and kill him, accounting it folly
when he might reign alone, to be content with a communicated honor. He having
rejected tales heretofore, did not easily give credit to them now, but to
provide for his own security, and yet shun suspicion, he commanded some of his
guard to stand in an obscure place where he was to come, and if he came armed,
then to kill him, but if not, then not to molest him, and he sent also to him
to come without any guard at all. But the Queen and the rest of the
conspirators, persuaded the messenger to deliver his errand on the clean
contrary way, so that Antigonus thinking nothing, but coming to see his
brother, was there murdered. After it was done, Aristobulus presently repented
of the deed, though knowing nothing concerning the message, which so increased
his disease, as he vomited blood for anguish of mind. This being carried out by
one of his attendants, chanced to be spilt in that place where Antigonus was
slain, which being judged by them that saw it, to be done of purpose, they
cried out against the thing, and made such a noise, that the King hearing it,
forced the matter out of them; after which his Agony increased so highly
(crying out, that his blood was required for that of his mothers and brothers
which he had spilt, and chiding as it were his body for retaining the Soul
required of him by their Ghosts) that in great torment of conscience he
presently breathed out his last, when he had scarce reigned a whole year. He
dies within a years time.
He profited much his Country by his Government, and making War upon Ituraea,
laid a great part of it to his own Dominions, and frighted the Inhabitants by
threatening banishment to them, into an imbracement of Circumcision, and the
other Jewish Rites.

5. He being dead, Josephus Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 20.
his wife Salome (called by the Greeks Alexandra) set his brothers at liberty,
of which Jannaeus (or Alexander) was made King, excelling his brothers, as in
age so also in modesty. His father is said to have hated him, and sent him out
of his sight to be educated in Galile presently after his birth, because being
sollicitous for his two eldest sons, and desiring of God to know his Successor,
his likeness was represented to him in his sleep. Jannaeus or Alexander his
brother succeeds him.
Being seized of the Kingdom, he put to death one of his brothers that
conspired against him, but the other who was contented with a private life he
much honored. Having settled his affairs at home, A. M. 3901.
he went and besieged Ptolemais, which with Gaza only of the Sea-Towns
remained unconquered, besides the Tower of Straton (since called Caesarea) and
Dora, which Zoilus the Tyrant had got into his hands. At this time the two
brothers Antiochus Grypus (called by Josephus Philometor) and Antiochus
Cyzicenus in Syria, attending nothing but the destruction of each other, the
Defendants had little hope of any succor from either of them, only Zoilus,
who gaped after the City himself, gave them a little relief. There remaining
no help to be hoped for, but either from Egypt, or Cyprus (whither Lathurus had
been expelled by his mother Cleopatra) they sent to him, desiring he would
rescue them out of the hands of Alexander, giving him hopes, that he should not
only have them, but the Inhabitants of Gaza also on his side, and that Zoilus,
the Sidonians and others would come and help him. He being puffed up with these
promises made what haste he could, but Demanetus one of their Citizens
persuaded them for reasons formerly recited to refuse his help, notwithstanding
which he came on, and pitching his Tents near the City, seeing he had no
Message from them, Besieging Ptolemais, the siege is raised by Ptolomy Lathurus.
began to be discouraged. But Zoilus and the Gazaeans came shortly to him, and
desired his help against Alexander, who wasted their Territories, whereupon the
siege was raised before Ptolemais, and Alexander departed home, where he
attempted to overturn by policy the design of Ptolomy. He sent privily to
Cleopatra, A. M. 3905. Ol. 170. ann. 1. V.C. 654. Seleucid. 213. Alexand. 5. C.
Mario 6. L. Valerio Flacco Coss.
exciting her against him, but openly counterfeiting himself his Friend and
Ally, promised him 300 Talents of silver to take off Zoilus the Tyrant, and lay
his Territories to his Dominions. At first he willingly embraced his friendship
and took Zoilus, but then finding he had sent underhand to his mother,
renounced it again, and went and besieged Ptolemais, which had shut the Gates
on him, where leaving part of his Army to continue the siege, he departed
thence to invade Judaea. Alexander also understanding his purpose, raised an
Army of 50000 (some say 80000) and went to meet him.

6. He took Asychis a Town in Galile, Idem Ibid. and cap. 21.
setting upon it at unawares on the Sabbath, and then attempted to do the like
by Sephoris, a place not far distant from the other; but was received with such
resolution, as he lost many of his men, Who invadeth Judaea, and overthrows
Alexander in battle.
and arose from thence to go to meet Alexander, whom having found to have
reached the River Jordan, he pitched his Tents on this side over against him.
Alexander suffered him quietly to pass the River, foolishly supposing that the
victory would be more easy if the Enemy had it on his back, and so could not
run away. For some time the victory was doubtful, or seemed to incline to
Alexanders party, till his Soldiers being beaten back by a reserve of fresh
men, and having none to succor them were put to flight, and the Enemy gave the
chase as long as he could hold a sword for weariness, so that 30000 (some have
affirmed 50000) were slain in this battle. Ptolomy ranging up and down the
Country, fell at length into some Villages, which seeing full of Women and
Children, he commanded his Soldiers to kill them promiscuously, and cutting off
their limbs to cast them into hot Caldrons, that a report going that his Army
ate man's flesh, the Enemy might thereby be discouraged. But is driven back by
his own mother.
But Cleopatra hearing that her son thus prospered in his undertakings, thought
her self concerned therein, especially he being so near her, and therefore she
came against him with Forces both by Land and Sea, over which she placed
Checeias and Ananias, both Jews. Her son thinking he had her at advantage,
being now out of Egypt, hasted thither, but she had left it so provided, as he
could not do any thing according to his purpose, and was beaten back to Gaza by
a party she sent after him. She having taken Ptolemais, Alexander thither came
to her, where he was received as a person distressed by her adversary, and one
who only had refuge in her self. Some advised her to seize his Country into
her hands, and not to suffer so many good Jews to be at the command and
pleasure of one man: but Ananias counting it wickedness for him to disposesse
a man received into friendship, Who enters into League with Alexander.
and his own Kinsman besides, of his estate, and withal thinking that thereby
he should lose himself with the Jews in all places, he persuaded her to the
contrary, and so she entered into a League with him at Scythopolis, a City of
Coelesyria.

7. Hereby he being freed from all danger, both from mother and son, Idem ibid.
he presently made another expedition into Caelesyria, took Gadara after he had
layen ten months before it, and Amathus a strong Castle upon the River Jordan,
where Theodorus the son of Zenon had laid up his Treasure, who falling suddenly
upon the Jews, cut off 10000 of them, and plundered the carriages. He again
invading Coelesyria,
Yet he was not at all terrified herewith from setting upon Raphia and Anthedon
(called afterward Agrippias by Herod) which he took, and perceiving Ptolomy to
be gone to Cyprus, and his mother into Egypt, being angry with them of Gaza,
for calling him in to help them against him, he set upon the City, and wasted
their grounds. In the mean time Apollodotus their General brake out into his
Camp by night with 12000 men, and as long as night lasted had the better of it,
but as soon as it was day the Jews Uniting themselves, and encouraged after
they saw Ptolomy was not come whom they expected, charged the Townsmen so
fiercely as they slew 1000 men. For all this they would not yield, expecting
the coming of Aretas the Arabian King; but the City was taken ere they could
see his face, by the treachery of Lysimachus the brother of Apollodotus, whom
he envying for being in so great grace with the people, murdered, and then
getting a party close about him delivered up the place. Has Gaza betrayed to
him.
A. M. 3909. Ol. 171. ann. 1. V.C. 658. Seleucid. 217. Alexand. 9. Cn. Domitio
Aenobarbo C. Cassio Longino Coss.
Alexander upon his entry did no harm to the Inhabitants, but not long after
gave Commission to his Soldiers to kill and slay all they would, who ranging up
and down with fury and sword, as many of them lost their lives as they slew,
the Defendants fighting courageously, and setting their houses on fire, lest
they should become a prey to them; and some killed their Wives and Children
with their own hands, rather than they should be led into Captivity. It happened
that at the same time that Alexander was let in, the Senate was met, which
consisting of 500 men, he put all to the sword, and then razing the City,
returned to Jerusalem a year after he first sat down before Gaza.

8. He was not at all affected by his Subjects, Idem ibid. and De bello lib. 1.
cap. 3.
which they clearly manifested when the feast of Tabernacles came. For then as
he was about to sacrifize they threw Orenges at him, and railed at him,
upbraiding him with Captivity (that I suppose of his Grandmother objected
before to his Father) and crying out that he was not worthy of so high an
Office as the high Priesthood. Being enraged hereat he slew about 6000 of
them; made up the place about the Altar with boards to defend himself for the
time to come from the violence of the multitude, and furnished himself with
Guards hired out of Pisidia and Cilicia. Then overthrew he the Arabians, and
imposed Tribute upon the Moabites and Galadites, and levelled Amathus with the
ground, Theoderus not once daring to engage. But making another expedition
against the Arabians, he was drawn into an ambush by Obeda their King, and
being thrust amongst the Craggy and precipitous Rocks by a multitude of Camels,
he hardly escaped himself by flight to Jerusalem, his whole Army being cut off.
He is defeated by the Arabians, and has Wars with his rebellious and saucy
Subjects.
Then were his Rebellious Subjects encouraged by this his overthrow to begin
fresh stirs, which continued six years, during which time they fought often,
but he had the better, and destroyed no less than fifty thousand of them. This
yet was no matter of joy to him thus to lose the strength of his own Kingdom;
therefore he endeavored to make up the breach, and by fair means to be
reconciled to them. But being asked by him wherewith he should appease them,
they answered, if he would kill himself, for scarce could they pardon him being
dead. Then sent they to Demetrius, Idem ibid. and Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 22.
surnamed A^aerus, inducing him with great promises to come and aid them, so
that joining with him they made up an Army of 3000 horse, and 40000 foot, their
King having 26200 men in his Army. Both at the first labored to draw their
Enemies men to revolt, Demetrius those Greeks that were in pay with Alexander,
and he the Jews which had called him in, but this succeeding on no part, they
both resolved to end the controversy with dint of sword. Demetrius had the
better of it (all Alexanders Auxiliaries being slain, though they behaved
themselves most gallantly) but he was no whit better, but much worse for his
victory. For the Jews taking pity of their King after this his defeat, about
6000 went over to him, which so discouraged Demetrius, that he thereupon
retreated into his own Country.

9. They thenceforth waged War with him by themselves, but still had the worst
of it, and many of them were slain. At length he forced the strongest up into a
Town called Bethoma, which reducing, he took them in it, and brought them up to
Jerusalem, A. M. 3920. Ol. 173. ann. 4. V. C. 669. Seleucid. 228. Alexand. 20.
where he caused 800 of them to be nailed to Crosses, and their Wives and
Children to be slain in their sight, yet living, he beholding the Spectacle
from an high place, banqueting, and dallying with his women. He was highly
provoked with that stubborn people, who not only brought him often into
extreme danger of life and estate, but not contenting themselves with what they
could do by their own power, without calling in of foreign aid, had reduced him
to that necessity, that he was glad to restore those places he had subdued in
the Country of Moab and Galaad to the Arabian; and for animadversion upon them
they nicknamed him Thracida. About 8000 men got away by night, and passed all
the time he lived, in Exile, and so ever after the Kingdom continued free from
seditions. Idem Antiquit. lib. 13. cap. 23. and De bello lib. 1. cap. 4.
Antiochus Dionysus King of Syria intending to make an invasion of Arabia
through his Kingdom, he getting knowledge of it, drew a Ditch from Caparsale
(afterward called Antipatris) as far as the Sea of Joppe, to hinder him,
strengthening it with a Bulwark, and Forts built here and there upon it where he
expected him. But he burning these up easily got over, and then invading
Arabia, was there slain in battle by Aretas the King, who was made King of
Coelesyria, and making an inroad into Judaea, overthrew Alexander at Adida, and
forcing him to subscribe to his own conditions, then departed. Afterward
Alexander gathering together his Forces, went and took diverse Towns with all
the Valley of Antiochus (as it was called) and the Castle Gamala, His Conquests
abroad.
and returned to Jerusalem at the end of three years, joyfully and honorably
received then by his people for his valor; and indeed at this time the Nation,
what by his own, and the diligence of his Predecessors, arrived at that height
for dominion and glory abroad, that they enjoyed many Cities in Syria, Idumaea,
Phoenicia, Antiquit. lib. 13. cap. 23.
and other Countries; whereof a Catalogue of most Josephus has left unto us,
and amongst which Polla a Town of Moab was destroyed, because the Inhabitants
refused to receive the Jewish Rites. Alexander toward his latter end fell to
drunkenness, whereby he contracted a Quartan Ague, which held him three years;
yet recovered he his ancient temper of mind, though not of body, and following
on his Wars laid siege to Ragola beyond Jordan, in the Country of the
Gerasens, where being spent with the force of the disease, he died before the
Walls of that place, His death.
in the 27th year of his reign, and of his age the 49. A. M. 3927. and the
third of the 173 Olympiad, some 76 years before the birth of Christ.

10. His wife Alexandra seeing his end approaching, A. M. 3927. Ol. 175. an. 3.
V. C. 676. Seleucid. 235.
bewailed much the condition of her self and children, being destitute of
succor, and about to enter upon the government of a People, likely enough to
be untoward toward them, which bore him so much ill will. He advised her, that
she might reign securely, first to keep close his death till that place should
be gained, then going victoriously to Jerusalem to send for the chief of the
Pharisees, His advice to his wife to gain the Pharisees.
whom both he and his Father had grievously offended, and thereby incurred the
hatred of the People, and to gain their favor to show them his body, and give
them power of disposing of it at their pleasure, either as to bestow burial
upon it, or cast it out without Sepulture, or otherwise to abuse it at their
pleasure; and withal, to promise them to do nothing without their counsel and
advice. The Castle being taken, she ordered her affairs according to his
direction, whereby she purchased the love of the Pharisees, who going out and
speaking to the People, Idem cap. 24. and de bello ut prius.
related the great things done by Alexander, signified to them the loss of a
just King, and so stirred up the multitude to mourning and lamentation, that
hereby she procured him (even as he foretold her) a more honorable burial than
else he could have had, and so sumptuous a funeral as any of his Predecessors
obtained. Alexander left two sons by this his wife, Which she follows and
reigns her self.
Hyrcanus and Aristobulus; but to her left the management of the Kingdom. The
elder of their sons was not at all made for government, but dull and heavy. She
being in great grace with the People, because she ever had pretended to dislike
the proceedings of her husband, made Hyrcanus the High Priest, not so much out
of respect to his birthright as his laziness, keeping the title of Queen and
Governesse, though indeed all things were ordered at the will and pleasure of
the Pharisees, whom the People were commanded to obey, and against whom all
such constitutious as were made by Hyrcanus were taken away. Yet she took care
for something her self, for she kept in pay a great number of foreiners, and so
increased her power, that she became formidable abroad, and such a terror to
the neighboring petty Governors, that she constrained them to give Hostages.

11. Yet no great matters were done abroad, but stirs sufficient happened within
the Kingdom; for the Pharisees knowing no moderation in the prosecution of
their own ambitious and envious desires, caused her to put to death those that
had counseled her husband to deal cruelly with the 800 before mentioned, and
they made away diverse of them; till such time as those of most power and esteem
being backed by Aristobulus (who complained of the too great power of his
mother) came to Court, and there laid before her how unworthy it was, that they
should suffer so much for their faithfulness to Alexander, and how joyful news
it would be to Aretas the Arabian and others, This raises stirs betwixt the
two factions.
to hear that the Kingdom was deprived of such men, who had done good service
against him. They besought her, that if their adversaries were not satisfied
with what blood they had spilt already, to give them leave to depart, and
provide for their own safety, or if that could not be granted, to distribute
them into several places of strength, that there they might live quietly and
meanly, with which condition they would be contented, seeing Fortune so frowned
upon the favorers of Alexander. They setting these things off with all
advantage possible to gain compassion, and calling on the ghost of Alexander,
Aristobulus also soundy reprehended his mother, but withal added, that they
were justly punished, for permitting the chief power to a woman, as if no
posterity had been left by his Father. She not knowing what to do, delivered
into their hands all her Castles, except three, A. M. 3934. Ol. 177. an. 2.
V.C. 683. Seleucid. 242. Alexandrae 8.
in which she had hoarded up her choicest goods, and shortly after sent her
younger son against Ptolomy Mennaeus, who troubled sorely Damascus; but he
returned without having done any thing. A report went at the same time, that
Tigranes the Armenian had invaded Syria with 50000 men, and would spedily come
into Judaea, which so terrified both Queen and People, that they sent
Ambassadors to him then lying before Ptolemais; for Celene or Cleopatra then
reigned in Syria, and had advised the Subjects to exclude him. He kindly
received the Ambassadors, because come so far to tender him respect, and gave
them encouraging words. And after he had taken Ptolemais, word being brought
him, that Lucullus in his pursuit of Mithridates the Great, King of Pontus, was
entered Armenia, and wasted the Country, he being son in Law to that King, and
therefore taking his part, departed home with all Expedition.

12. After this, Alexandra falling grievously sick, Aristobulus judged that now
or never was there a fit opportunity for him to do something, and lest the
Pharisees should get all into their hands, departed by night with one man in
his company, and got the Castles within a short time into his power, which she
had committed to their adversaries, even to the number of 22 within little more
than fifteen days. This being known, she and all the People were struck with
consternation, Aristobulus her younger son assumeth the state of King.
knowing that he would take the Supreme Power, and fearing they should dearly
pay for what they had done to his familiars. They thought good then to secure
his wife and children in the Castle adjoining to the Temple at Jerusalem. He
increased in followers and in power daily, taking the state of a King upon him,
and got an Army from the Mountain Libanus, Trachonitis, and the petty Princes
thereto adjoining. The chief of the Jews therefore with Hyrcanus came to the
Queen, beseeching her that some course might be entered into to prevent his
attempts, who now had gotten so many convenient places. She with shortness of
mind told them they might do whatsoever they thought meet and convenient for
the Commonwealth, that they had liberty and strength enough both as to
Soldiers, and money also the nervs of War; but as for her self, she could look
to nothing, her body being now spent; and shortly after she breathed her last,
She dies.
having reigned nine years, and lived 73. A woman of wisdom, courage, and
industry above her sex, A. M. 3936. Ol. 177. an. 4. V. C. 685. Seleucid. 244.
and who in the whole course of her government could not be drawn (for the
generality) from moderation, justice, and honesty. But whereas she looked more
at the present than future times, seemed to side with the Enemies of her house,
and to have made the Kingdom naked of fit Rulers, after her death the effects
of her mal-administration was felt by her family, which came into such
misfortunes, as it miscarried and fell from that power, wherein she had labored
and taken so much pains to establish it.

13. Josephus Antiq. l. 14. c. 1. and de bello ut supra etc. 5.
For Hyrcanus having entered upon the High Priesthood in the third year of the
177 Olympiad, Q. Hortensius, and Q. Metellus Creticus being Consuls, his
brother Aristobulus now presently made War upon him. A battle being fought
near Jericho, most of Hyrcanus his Soldiers revolted to the other, whereby he
was forced to betake himself into that Castle where Aristobulus his wife and
children were kept, and he now made his condititions to be suffered to live
quietly a private life, remitting to his brother the Kingdom and Principality,
changing estates with him, he removing into Aristobulus his private house, and
Aristobulus to the Court, which covenant was solemnly sworn to, Aristobulus by
a battle dispossesseth his brother Hyrcacus.
and confirmed in the Temple. But not long did this agreement hold, being
broken by the means of Antipater, who being Governor at that time of Idumaea,
feared the power of Aristobulus, and therefore endeavored his destruction,
both by stirring up Hyrcanus and the most powerful of the Jews against him. The
famousnesse of Herod son of this Antipater, causes his original to be more
enquired into. Nicolaus Damascenus to flatter the said Herod, derived his
pedigree from the chief of the Jews, which returned from Babylon; but Josephus
denies that, and reports him to have been an Idumaean born. Vide Eusebius. Eccl.
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Others have delivered, Lib. 14. c. 2.
that this Antipater, or Antipas, was the son of one Herod the Priest of
Apollo's Temple at Ascalon, which City being invaded by the Idumaean thieves,
he was taken with other spoils out of the Temple, and whereas his father was
not able to ransom him, was brought up after the manner of the Idumaeans, and
became very familiar with Hyrcanus the High Priest. Josephus says, that he was
constituted Governor of Idumaea by Alexander the King, and his wife, and then
minding his own interest, entered into society with the Arabians, Antipate^
stireth up Hyrcanus to recover his just right,
Gazaeans, and Ascalonites, having purchased their friendship with great gifts.
He professed to the Jews that it was unjust, that Aristobulus should be
suffered to enjoy his usurped power, from which he had cast down his elder
brother, and had deprived him of the prerogative of his age. The same things he
often incultated into Hyrcanus, adding withal, that his life was in danger,
except he would in good time save himself by flight, for that the friends of
his brother still consulted, how they might rid him out of the way, and
establish the Kingdom upon the other.

14. He being a plain and well-meaning man, gave no great credit to these
slanders; but the other ceased not for all that to invent fresh accusations of
Aristobulus, as if he laid in wait for his life, and at length hardly obtained
of him to fly to Aretas King of the Arabians, because his Country was nigh to
Judaea. Antipater went first to that King, to get a promise from him not to
betray his suppliant into the hands of his enemies, And procures him to fly
to Aretas King of Arabia.
which being obtained, he returned to Jerusalem, and thence not long after
taking Hyrcanus out by night, by great journeys came to Petra, where Aretas
kept his Court. Being very great with the Arabian, he labored to persuade him
to restore Hyrcanus, and with his importunity and gifts at length prevailed.
Hyrcanus also promising, if by his means he should recover the Kingdom, to
restore to him that Country with the twelve Towns, which his Father Alexander
had taken from him. Aretas being drawn in by these promises, undertook this
Expedition with 50000 men, and overthrew Aristobulus, Josephus ut prius cap. 3.
who being first forsaken of his followers, who now fled amain to his brother,
retired to Jerusalem, where the Arabian and Hyrcanus besieged him in the
Temple. The Feast of the Passover happening during the siege, Who besieges
Jerusalem,
the Priests who only remained with Aristobulus, that the Sacrifices might not
be omitted, bargained with the besiegers for beasts to be sold them for that
service, but when they had let down the money from the walls, were derided by
them. But this wickedness the Historian observes to have been punished with
great storms and tempests, which procured extraordinary scarcity of Corn. In
this mean while Pompey the Great being diverted by the War with Tygranes in
Armenia, sent Scaurus his Quaestor, as Appian calls him, into Syria, Idem cap.
4.
A. M. 3941. Ol. 179. an. 1. V. C. 690 Selencid. 249. Aristob. 6.
who coming straight to Damascus (taken then by Metellus and Lollius) hasted
without intermission into Judaea. To him both parties sent, to desire his
friendship and help, but though each promised as much as the other ( viz. 400
Talents) yet he closed with Aristobulus, being counted more free and rich, and
whose request was more easy to be fulfilled, in driving away the Nabathaeans,
than that of the other, to take the place which he held, being so strong both
of it self and by defense.

15. Taking the money of Aristobulus he easily raised the siege, denounceing to
Aretas that he should depart, except he would be declared an Enemy of the
People of Rome; But is beaten off by Scaurus.
and then returned to Damascus. Aristobulus having gotten this advantage
against his Enemies, followed them with a great Army, and joining battle
overthrew them at a place called Papyron, about 7000 of them being slain, and
amongst the rest Cephalio the brother of Antipater. But not long after Pompey
came to Damascus, and going about Coelesyria, thither were sent to him
Ambassadors from several parts. Idem cap. 5.
Aristobulus sent him an excellent present, being a golden Urn of the value of
500 Talents, which afterward was dedicated by him amongst other things in the
Capitol at Rome. Shortly after were sent some to him from both the brothers;
Antipater from Hyrcanus, Both brothers sent to Pompey to complain.
and one Nicodemus from the other, to whom he answered, that coming to Damascus
he would hear the cause. Thither was sent also an Embassage of the Jews
themselves, who declared they were unwilling to live under Kings, it being the
custom of their Country to yield obedience to the Priest of their God; and that
though these two were of that race of Priests, yet being desirous to change the
Government into another form, they thereby intended to enslave them. Hyrcanus
accused his brother of ambition and violence, in that he had gone about to
deprive him of his birthright, and the other excused himself by the necessity
of the thing, lest the Principality should have been transferred into another
family by his heavy dullness, which rendered him incapable of employment. To
Hyrcanus bare witness 1000 Jews which Antipater had brought for that purpose,
but to Aristobulus a Company of effeminate Gallants, ridiculous to all for
their fantastic bravery. Pompey having heard them, and disapproved of
Aristobulus his violence, dismissed them both kindly at present, promising he
would come to them as soon as he had inspected the affairs of the Nabathaeans,
Who sideth with Hyrcannus.
bidding them to be quiet in the mean time, and using Aristobulus civilly, lest
he should stop up the passages. But hereby he won nothing upon him, for not
expecting his promises, he went to Delium, and thence betook himself into
Judaea.

16. Pompey being offended with this carriage of Aristobulus, Idem cap. 6. and
de bello lib. 1. cap. 5.
took the Army which he had provided against the Nabathaeans, and with other
supplies out of Syria, and the Legions which were at his command followed him.
Coming into Judaea, and hearing he was in a Castle near Coreas, he sent to him
to come and speak him, which he obeyed, being advised by those about him to
take heed of Warring with the Romans. When he had disputed the case with his
brother, he returned to the Castle, and so he did diverse times, willing to
please Pompey, and pretending a willingness to obey him in all things, but
providing still for the War, fearing the Principality might be bestowed upon
Hyrcanus. And follows Aristobulus into Judaea.
Lib. 14. cap. 7.
Pompey in conclusion required him to deliver up into his hands the Garrisons,
and write to the Governors of them for that purpose; which he obeyed also, A.
M. 3942.
but then presently departed to Jerusalem there to prepare for War. He followed
him, and in the way heard how Mithridates of Pontus was killed by his son
Pharnaces. His first nights quarters he took up at Jericho, where the Trees
grew, that being cut distilled with the precious Balsamum; and the next day
marching toward Jerusalem, Aristobulus forethinking what he had done, came and
met him, offered him money, and referred himself to his pleasure, so that
omitting War he would order things in a peaceable manner. He pardoning him,
sent Gabinius to Jerusalem to fetch the money; but he being shut out by
Aristobulus his Soldiers, returned empty handed, which Pompey taking in great
disdain, committed Aristobulus to custody, and went himself to the City. There
were two factions disagreeing from each other, Cap. 8.
that of Aristobulus brake down the bridge, which went out of the City to the
Temple, and therein fortified themselves, whereupon the other let in the Romans
into the City and Palace. Then did Pompey besiege the Temple, filled up with
the great toil of his Soldiers the Ditch before it, and then with Engines
brought from Tire battered the Wall, taking occasion at the superstition of the
Jews, who thought it sinful to do any thing on the Sabbath-dayes, but defend
themselves. Besieges his party in the Temple, and takes it.
The greatest Tower being battered down, the Romans broke in ( Cornelius
Faustus the son of Sylla first entering the breach) and then made slaughter of
12000. the Priests even then (as they had done all the siege) not neglecting to
offer sacrifices, and amongst the rest Absalom the Uncle, and father-in-law of
Aristobulus was taken, being the youngest son of Hyrcanus. Pompey with many
followers entered into the Temple, and looked on those things, which it was
unlawful for any but the Priests to behold; yet touched nothing he saw, so
great was his abstinency. The Temple was taken as Josephus tells us, in the
third month, and the fast day, which was kept in memory of Jehoiak^m's burning
the Roll, in the 179 Olympiad, C. Antonius and M. Tullius Cicero being Consuls,
A. M. 3942. about 62 years before the birth of Christ.

17. Pompey restored the Priesthood to Hyrcanus, Idem ibid.
with the Government of the Country, Lib. 20. cap. 8.
(forbidding him the wearing of the Diadem) because amongst several other
services he had done him during the siege, he had also kept the Contrymen
from taking up Arms for Aristobulus. He restores the Priesthood to Hyrcanus
forbidding him the Diadem, and carries Aristobulus and his sons to Rome.
Then putting to death the Authors of the Sedition, he made the Jews
Tributaries to the people of Rome, the Cities they held in Coelesyria he took
away, and subjected them to a Governor of their own, and the whole Nation much
elevated then with success abroad, he contracted within its own bounds;
Aristobulus and his brother being the cause of all these troubles, of the
losing of the Countries liberty to the Romans, who within a short time exacted
above 10000 Talents of it. Idem lib. 14. cap. 10. and de bello lib. 1. cap. 6.
Pompey having left Syria to the Government of Scaurus, with two Legions hasted
to Rome, leading Aristobulus bound thither with him, with two sons, and as many
daughters. One of his sons escaped in the journey, and returned into Judaea,
where he got together a considerable power, and awed his Uncle Hyrcanus unable
to resist him, and who, when now he was about to repair the Walls of Jerusalem,
demolished by Pompey, was forbidden to do it by the Romans. But within a while
Gabinius was sent from Rome to Govern Syria. He undertook the War against him,
now having 10000 foot, and 1500 horse at his Command, but for all these he
overthrew him not far from Jerusalem, killing and taking 6000 of them, and then
besieged him in the Castle Alexandrium whither he had fled. Leaving here
sufficient strength for carrying on the siege, he went and visited the
Country, His son Aristobulus escapes, and is defeated by Gabinius, and he
himself also gets away from Rome.
causing diverse Cities to be re-edified, and then returning, and more
powerfully enforcing the siege, Alexander yielded himself, and the Castles,
which by his mothers advice to Gabinius were demolished, lest they should
nourish another War. Gabinius then went to Jerusalem, and established Hyrcanus
in the Priesthood, but cantonized the Country into five parts, which he
ordered to be governed by an Aristocratical way. One division was to be
governed by an Assembly at Jerusalem, another by one at Gada^a, a third at
Amathus, a fourth at Jericho, and a fifth by one sitting at Saphora a Town of
Samaria. The Jews very gladly embraced this Government. But Aristobulus not
long after escaped from Rome, and coming into Judaea ministered occasion of
further trouble.

18. Coming into his own Country, Idem ibid. and lib. 14. cap. 11.
he presently found some who out of desire of innovation sided with him,
amongst the which was Pitholaus the Governor of Jerusalem, who revolted to him
with 1000 men. A. M. 3949. Ol. 181. ann. 1. V. C. 698. Hyrcani 8.
He first seized upon Alexandrium, and went about to re-edifie the Walls
thereof, but knowing that Gabinius had sent against him three of his Officers,
he departed toward Machaerus, dismissing the unarmed multitude, and making a
choice of 8000 men. The Romans following he gave them battle, in which he
fought stoutly, till his men being overpowered, 5000 of them were slain upon
the place, almost 2000 fled to an Hill not far of, and a thousand with him,
breaking through the Enemy to Machaerus. There he thought to renew the War
having fortified the place, but being besieged, and holding it out two days,
he could no longer withstand, but was taken, and together with his son
Aristobulus, He is taken and sent back by Gabinius.
(who it seems got away with him) sent back to Rome, where he was more narrowly
looked to, but his sons, because Gabinius had so agreed with their mother, in
consideration of the delivering up of the Castles formerly mentioned, were sent
back by the Senate. Then prepared Gabinius an expedition against the Parthians,
but passing over Euphrates, was hired by Ptolomy Auletes to reduce him into his
Kingdom, as we said in the foregoing Chapter. In this voyage he used Hyrcanus,
and especially Antipater, who furnished him with supplies, both of men and
provisions, and prevailed with the Jews, inhabiting about Pelusium, to give him
passage. But during his absence Alexander the son of Aristobulus made work
enough for him after his return; for having gotten together a great multitude
of Jews, Alexander his son stirs, but is defeated.
he resolved to cut off all the Romans which inhabited those parts. Gabinius
sent Antipater before to see if he could persuade the people to be quiet, and
he effected it with many; but 30000 remaining still with Alexander, he came out
and gave battle to the Romans, near the Mountain Itabyrius, wherein he lost
10000 men. Gabinius victoriously thence marched to Jerusalem, where settling
things according to the pleasure of Antipater, he went against the Nabataeans
whom he overthrew in one battle, and dismissed Mithridates and Orsanes, two
noble Parthians who had fled unto him, pretending an escape. Then returning to
Rome, he left his Province to Crassus his Successor.

19. Crassus intending an expedition against the Parthians, Cap. 12.
came through that Country, and spoiled the Temple not only of those 2000
Talents which Pompey had spared, but of all the Gold found there besides, which
amounted to the sum of 8000 Talents more, Crassus his sacrilege and punishment.
though Eleazar the Treasurer had given him a beam of Gold weighing 900 pounds,
and he had taken an Oath therewith to be satisfied, and abstain from the money.
But going against the Parthians, he received the reward of his Sacrilege and
Perjury, being slain. Cassius flying into Syria defended it from the incursions
of the Enemy, and being come to Tire visited also Judaea, where at the first
onset he took Tarichaeas, and therein 30000 Captives, which he laid away, and
slew Pitholaus the favourer of Aristobulus at the desire of Antipater^, who now
grew very considerable, having entered into Confederacy and Alliance with diverse
Princes, and especially with the Arabian, out of whose Country he had married
a wife of noble extraction, by name Cypris, on whom he begot four sons,
Phasaelus, Herod, Joseph, and Pheroras, and a daughter named Salome, which sons
he also sent into Arabia, there to be kept whilst he was engaged in the War
with Aristobulus. Cap. 13. and de bello ut prius cap. 7.
When Pompey was driven beyond the Ionian Sea, and Caesar had got Rome into his
power, he set Aristobulus at liberty, and with two Legions sent him back into
Syria, hoping that all that Country, and round about Judaea, might be brought
under by him; but he was prevented in his journey, being poisoned by those of
Pompey's party, and lay in his own Country for some time unburied, being
Embalmed, till by Antony he was sent to be buried in the Sepulcher of his
Ancestors. Aristobulus poisoned by Pompey's party, and his son Alexander
beheaded.
This expedition proved fatal, not only to himself, but his son Alexander
also, who was beheaded by Scipio at Antioch by order from Pompey, being first
arraigned before the judgment seat for his offenses committed against the
Romans. His brother Antigonus with his sisters were sent for by Ptolomy, the
son of Minnaeus (who held Chalcis under the Mountain Libanus) and courteously
entained. For Philippio his son being his Messenger, A. M. 3957. Ol. 183. ann.
1. V. C. 706. Hyrcani 16.
fell in Love with one of the sisters, named Alexandra, and married her, but
his passion overcoming both reason and nature, he killed his son, and took the
Lady to himself. By this time Pompey was slain; and then Antipater betook
himself to Caesar, as his interest led him, and by his great industry purchased
his favor.

20. Caesar warring with young Ptolomy in Egypt, Idem ibid. and lib. 14. cap.
14.
after the death of Pompey, Antipater joined with Mithridates of Pergamus, who
went down thither with supplies; for whereas being hindered from coming to
Pelusium, he was forced to stay about Ascalon, he persuaded the Arabians to
help him, brought a supply of 3000 Jews himself, and procured diverse Princes in
Syria, Antipater his great services for Caesar.
as Ptolomy of Libarius, Jamblichus, and others, to send their men. Then at
Pelusium did he special service, being the first that broke down the wall and
entered; and whereas the Jews inhabiting the Country of Onias hindered them from
going any further, he prevailed with them not to oppose, and more than that to
furnish the Army with Provisions. Cap. 15.
At the battle at Delta he recovered the battle almost lost by Mithridates. A.
M. 3958. Ol. 183. ann. 2. V. C. 707. Hyrcani 17.
and afterward behaved himself very gallantly for Caesar, having received many
wounds as the tokens of his valor. Some have delivered that Hyrcanus himself
went down into Egypt, and there deserved well of Caesar, but whether it was so
or not he endeavored to requite them both. Who rewards both him and Hyrcanus.
For, Antigonus the son of Aristobulus coming with a great complaint to him
against them (whereas rather in policy he should have complained of the putting
to death his father and brother through the procurement of Pompey and his
faction) he declined his requests upon the reply of Antipater, De bello ut
prius cap. 8. and lib. 14. Capp. 16, 17.
confirmed Hyrcanus in the Priesthood, offered to Antipater what Government he
would desire, and made him Procurator of Judaea, gave him leave to rebuild the
Walls of the City thrown down by Pompey, and caused these grants to be
registered in the Capitol, and seconded them with diverse decrees, both of
himself and the Senate in favor of him and the Jews. Antipater then bringing
Caesar on his journey as far as the borders of Syria, returned and built up the
walls, and going about the Country, by threatenings and other policy, contained
the People in obedience, otherwise ready to rebel. And whereas he saw Hyrcanus
heavy and dull, and unfit to manage the affairs of Government, he made his son
Phasaelus (who also commanded the Army) Captain of Jerusalem, and the Country
adjacent, A. M. 3959. Ol. 183. an. 3. V. C. 708. Hyrcani 18.
and committed Galile to the custody of his second son Herod, being now extreme
young, as not exceeding fifteen years, as our Author tells us, except, as is
most probable, that number be mistaken for 25.

21. Herod even at the very first gave testimony of what spirit and height of
courage he would be, Herod the son of Antipater his notable forwardness.
finding out presently occasion for the exercise of it. For at that time there
being one Ezechias a notable Thief, who with a great company of followers used
to infest the Country of Syria, he took and slew him with many others of that
rout, which thing so endeared him to the Syrians, that his name was sung
throughout the Towns and Villages, Peace being by his means restored as it were
unto the Country, and the People unto their possessions; and thereby became he
known to Sextus Caesar the President, and kinsman to the Dictator. A. M. 3961.
Ol. 184. an. 1. V. C. 710. Hyrcani 20. C. Jul. Caesare 5. M. Antonio Coss.
Phasaelus his brother was hereby much stirred up to emulation, and most
courteously behaved himself to those of Jerusalem, so that their Father was
honored by the People like a King, and yet notwithstanding preserved his
fidelity entire to Hyrcanus. But diverse of the chief of the Jewish Nation,
understanding how he flourished both upon his own account and that of his sons,
inwardly fretted thereat, and the rather, because he made use of Hyrcanus for
his own ends, as they conceived, having contracted friendship with the great
ones, and Rome, and persuaded him to send them money, yet getting to himself
the credit and profit of the gift. But especially the forward and bold
disposition of Herod affrighted them, whom they looked upon as a young and
growing Tyrant, and therefore they grievously enveighed against Antipater to
Hyrcanus, as one who carried away all the profit of the Kingdom, an empty name
being only left to himself, and labored to bring him into suspicion, hinting,
that ere long the vizard would be taken off, and he would dearly pay for the
negligence of his own affairs. This they enforced by that bold act of Herod's
killing Ezechias, and the rest, in contempt of the Laws, which suffer no man,
how wicked soever, He is summoned to Jerusalem to answer for killing Ezechias a
thief.
to be put to death, till he first be cast by the sentence of his Judges.
Hyrcanus though slow enough to believe any thing, yet having these things often
sounding in his ears, together with the lamentations of the mothers of those
that were slain, grew something moved, and summoned Herod up to Jerusalem, to
give an account of his actions before the Judges.

22. Herod having settled the affairs of Galile, appeared, but with a guard,
Idem ibid. Ant. et de bello.
as his Father had written to him; yet with a moderate one, lest taking care
for his one safety, he should affright Hyrcanus. Sextus Caesar hearing of it,
threatningly wrote to Hyrcanus for to quit him, which he was inclinable enough
unto, loving him as his own son; and when he appeared to answer, no body durst
accuse him, He appears, but with a guard,
except one Sameas bolder than the rest, who inveighed against him for the
manner of his appearance, not suitable at all to humility or guilt. The meeting
being encouraged by his words, had certainly condemned him, had not Hyrcanus
foreseen it, and sent him out of the way on purpose, having put off the
determination to the next day. Herod retired therefore to Damascus, and
afterward visiting Sextus Caesar, and settling his affairs, plainly gave out,
that he would no more appear thought he were cited, at which they at Jerusalem
fretted, and sought to persuade Hyrcanus that all this tended to his ruin, and
indeed he was convinced of it, yet could he do nothing, for that innate
dullness which evermore accompanied him, though shortly after hearing that
Herod having purchased of that Caesar the Government of Coelesyria, he feared
he would employ his power against him. And indeed so it happened; for disdaining
now that he had been commanded to come and plead his cause, he matched toward
Jerusalem with an Army, and if his Father and Brother had not met him, and
showed him the uncertainty of the event of War, and that he was rather
beholding to Hyrcanus for discharging him, than had reason to be angry with
him, for being as it were forced by others to summon him up, he had made
mischief enough: And had done mischief but that his father and brother diverted
him.
But being prevailed with by them, he thought it was sufficient for him to have
made a show of his power, and so retreated. About this time Caecilius Bassus in
favor of Pompey made away Sexius Caesar, and got his Army to submit to him;
but diverse of Caesar's party came to revenge his kinsman's death, and a War
ensued about Apamea, whither Antipater, mindful of the benefits received from
Caesar, sent his sons with aid unto his Captains. The War being drawn out in
length, Marcus, (or rather L. Statius Murcus) was sent to succeed Sextus,
Appian de bell^ civili. lib. 3. Patere. lib. 2. cap. 69.
and in the mean time Julius Caesar was slain in the Senate house, which as it
bred disturbance and trouble to the whole Roman Empire, so neither did Judaea
escape without it is portion thereof.

23. A civil War ensuing, Josephus Antiquit. l. 14. c. 18, and 19. and de bello
l. 1. c. 9.
the chief Captains on both sides running up and down to provide themselves for
it, Cassius one of the conspirators came into Syria, where raising the siege at
Apamia, he drew both Murcus and Bassus to his own party, and then conquering
the Country, levied men, and exacted grievous contributions: But especially he
afflicted Judaea, laying a tax of above 700 Talents of Silver upon it.
Antipater committed the raising of the money to his two sons and others,
whereof Herod first of all raised that which was imposed upon Galile, and
brought it, thinking it good policy to purchase the favor of the Romans at the
cost of others. Diverse Cities with their Inhabitants were fold to make up the
sum, amongst which were principal, Gophna, Emaus, Lydia, and Thamna; and
Cassius having done this, was further so enraged, Grievous exactions by Cassius.
that he had slain Malichus also one of the Collectors, had not Hyrcanus by the
means of Antipater, stopped his mouth with 100 Talents of his own money. But
Antipater was badly rewarded by Malichus, for after the departure of Cassius he
laid in wait for his life, thinking, that he being removed out of the way, the
greater security would happen to the affairs of Hyrcanus. Antipater getting
knowledge of his intention, passed over Jordan, to provide himself to revenge
this treachery, but he being a most crafty dissembler, so denied the matter
with oaths to his two sons, that they reconciled him to their Father, who by
his intercession then saved him, when Marcus the President of Syria upon the
report of his attempting new matters, had resolved his death. But he preserved
him to his own destruction. For, A. M. 3962. Ol. 184. an. 2. V. C. 751 Hyrcani
21.
his son Herod for his good service being made Procurator of Syria by Cassius,
with promise also of the Kingdom of Judaea, if he got the better, Malichus then
so feared him, that he resolved to make him away, which within a short time he
effected, procuring him to be poisoned by Hyrcanus his brother, Antipater
poisoned by Malichus.
and getting a Company of Soldiers to him, invaded the Government of the City.
This was the end of Antipater, a right good man, a great Statesman, and one
who had preserved his fidelity to his Prince, and his care to his Country,
before his own private or ambitious purposes.

24. His sons having knowledge of his death, Idem ibid.
Herod would have revenged it out of hand, and by open force, but Phasaelus
thought good rather to circumvent the murderer by some way of his own, lest a
civil War should ensue, and therefore seemed to be satisfied with Malichus
his flat denial of the thing, and set himself about building of a monument for
his Father. Herod visiting Samaria, and seeing it much out of order, labored
what he might to cherish it, and sat in Judgment, deciding the controversies
of the People, and then presently came up to Jerusalem to the Feast with a
Company of Soldiers at his heels. Malichus being exceedingly afraid of his
coming, persuaded Hyrcanus not to permit him to enter, and he accordingly
forbad him to approach so holy a solemnity with a profane rout of strangers;
but he notwithstanding this, got in by night, and so affrighted Malichus that
he betook him to his old trade of dissembling, weeping to him bitterly for the
death of Antipater as his kind friend, yet in the mean time providing himself
of a guard, so that for a time it was thought fit by Herod's friends, nor to
envince his deceit, but for the shunning of suspicion to treat him fairly; yet
did he signify by letters his Father's death to Cassius, who willed him again
to revenge it, Antiq. ut prius, cap. 20.
and gave order to the Tribunes then lying at Tire to assist him in his just
endeavors. Cassius not long after having taken Laodicia, they went and carried
him crowns and money, and then Herod thought to be even with him; but he
suspecting something at Tire, out of desperation cast higher matters than ever
in his head. For his son being kept hostage in that City, he resolved to go in,
and carry him out by stealth into Judaea, and then, when Cassius should be
engaged in the War against Antony, to solicit that Country to revolt, and get
to himself the Principality, and cast out Hyrcanus. But the cunning of Herod
prevented him, who being aware of his project, invited him and Hyrcanus to
supper, and then sent to the Tribunes to come out to meet him, who remembering
the commands of Cassius, encountering him on the shore, slew him there.
Hyrcanus was so astonished with fear at the fact, that he was not himself, and
scarce recovering his sense, asked Herod who had slain Malichus; to whom one of
the Tribunes answered, His son Herod revengeth his death,
the command of Cassius, at which he replied, that Cassius had preserved both
him and his Country, by cutting off him that plotted the destruction of both.
Whether he spoke this seriously, or approved the thing out of fear, is
uncertain; but thus Herod revenged his Father's death upon Malichus.

25. Cassius being gone out of Syria, Idem ibid, and de bello lib. 1. c. 10.
there happened a great stir at Jerusalem by means of Foelix, who being left
there Commander, the Soldiers attempted violence upon Phasaelus, intending by
his death to revenge that of Malichus upon his brother Herod. It happened that at
that time Herod living at Damascus with Fabius the Roman Captain, was sick, and
unable to come and help his brother, Falls sick,
but he by himself was too hard for Foelix, and forced him into a Tower, whence
he let him go with his life, and then expostulated much with Hyrcanus,
objecting ingratitude to him for taking Foelix his part, and suffering the
brother of Malichus to seize upon diverse Castles; for now he held many, and
Massada amongst the rest, the strongest of all. But Herod after his recovery
regained them all from him, suffering him to depart quietly out of Massada upon
his desire. Antiquit. l. 14. cap. 21.
Antigonus the son of Aristobulus about this time so bribed Fabius, that he
suffered him to get himself an Army, and Ptolomy Minnaeus because of the former
affinity betwixt them, made him his son in Law, Marion also, who by Cassius his
means had subjected Tire, and diverse places of Syria, His acts after his
recovery.
came in to his help, having seized upon three Castles in Galile, but Herod
also going against them, had them all surrendered by the Tyrians, whom he
dismissed very graciously, out of respect to their City, and then marched
against Antigonus, whom being scarcely entered the Coasts of Judaea he
overthrew. Returning to Jerusalem he was received very honorably, not only by
the People, but Hyrcanus also, who had of late received him into his family,
contracting him to Mariamne the daughter of Alexander, the son of Aristobulus,
and his own niece by his daughter; by which wife he was made a father of three
sons and two daughters, having on a former wife (and his own Country-woman)
named Doris, begotten Antipater his eldest son. But now within a while Cassius
and Brutus were overthrown at Philippi by Caesar and Antony, of whom the former
returning into Italy, the other came over into Asia, which gave occasion to new
stirs in Judaea.

26. Antony being come into Bithynia, Cap. 22.
Ambassadors were sent to him thither from all Countries, Stirs in Judaea upon
the approach of Antony.
and amongst the rest came some from the chief of the Jews, to complain of
Phasaelus and Herod, who usurped, as they said, all the power, an empty title
being only left to Hyrcanus. Herod went to defend himself, and so prevailed
with his money, that his accusers were never heard. Antony having reached
Ephesus, an Ambassie was dispatched to him in the name of Hyrcanus, and the
whole Nation, desiring that all Captives which Cassius had carried away out of
Judaea, might be set at liberty by his Letters published throughout the
Province, Cap. 23.
which he readily granted out, and as he was traveling into Syria, Cleopatra
met him in Cilicia, to whose allurements wholly giving up himself, at the same
time came 100 of the most considerable of the Jews to complain again of the two
brothers, whom Messala defended, and Hyrcanus himself stood by to assist. Their
cause being heard at Daphne, Antony demanded of Hyrcanus whether part was
fitter to Govern, who answering in commendation of Herod, he, who formerly
loved the young men for their fathers sake with whom he had contracted
familiarity when he served in Egypt under Gabinius, constituted them both
Tetrarchs, and committed to them the Government of the Jews. To this purpose he
wrote Letters, and cast fifteen of their adversaries into prison, and had put
them to death, had not Herod's intercession prevailed for them; and yet were
they not discouraged so as to desist. For instead of 100. a thousand returned
in Embassage, and stayed for him at Tire, but his favor being further
purchased by the two brothers, he commanded the Magistrate of that place to
animadvert upon them, and assist Herod in obtaining the principality. Herod
going to them as they stood before the City on the shore, advised them to
withdraw themselves, and Hyrcanus also laid before them in how great danger
they were if they should go on in their purpose: Which end in the promotion of
Herod, and his brother Phasacl^^
But they contemning their advice were presently falln upon out of the Town by
their own Contrymen and the Inhabitants, and part of them being slain, and
some taken, the rest returned. And the people clamoring exceedingly against
Herod, Antony was so far incensed, as he caused those whom he had before
committed to custody to be slain.

27. A year or two after, Pacorus son to the King of Parthia, Idem de bello ut
prius cap. 11. and Antiquit. cap. 24.
and Barzapharnes, one of his great Officers, seized upon Syria, at such time
as Ptolomy Mennaeus dying, Lysanias his son succeeded him. Antigonus the son of
Aristobulus bargained with the Parthians for 1000 Talents, and 500 women, to
settle him in the Kingdom of Judaea, and kill Herod with his friends; and
though he could not perform the conditions, yet lead they down an Army to
re-establish him. Pacorus came down to the Seacoasts, where he was excluded by
the Tyrians; but they of Sidon and Ptolemais giving him entrance, he sent a
party of horse under the conduct of one Pacorus the Kings Butler into Judaea to
make discoveries, and if it could be, to help Antigonus, with whom the Jews
inhabiting Carmel joining, he hoped by this force to seize upon a part of the
Country called Drymae, and diverse still coming in pierced to Jerusalem. The
Parthians procured by Antigonus the son of Aristobulus invade Judaea.
The number still increasing, they attempted the Palace, but the two brothers
with their friends opposing themselves, beat them back into the Temple, and
then sent some Soldiers into certain houses near adjoining to defend them,
which the people taking notice of, set them on fire, and therein burnt them
alive, being unable to shift for themselves; which injury Herod a little after
revenged upon his adversaries, of whom he slew many upon a Sally. Daily
skirmishes thence insued, Antigonus his party staying for the feast of
Pentecoste, expecting then a great multitude of people to come up from all
parts, and accordingly at the day many thousands being assembled, what with
Arms, and what without, they overran all, except the Palace which still Herod
and his brother Phaselus kept with a few Soldiers, with whom also issuing out
into the Suburbs, having there fought most manfully, he put many thousands to
flight. Shortly after, Antigonus procured Pacorus the Parthian with a few
hors-men to enter Jerusalem, under pretense of composing the difference, but
indeed to establish him in the power, who being kindly met by Phasaelus, and
entertained, he persuaded him to go in embassage to Barzapharnes, thereby
intending to entrap him. He suspecting nothing, went contrary to the mind of
his brother, who advised him rather to destroy the perfidious Barbarians, and
with him went also Hyrcanus (an unheard of employment for the Prince himself)
under conduct of Pacorus.

28. As soon as they came into Galile, they were met by the Governors of the
Towns there, and Barzapharnes entertained them very civilly, and gave them
gifts, Hyrcanus and Phaselus going in embassage to Barzaphantes are
perfidiously captivated.
but presently sought how he might entrap them. Phaselus was lodged with his
Train near the Sea, where hearing that Antigonus had made such a bargain with
the Parthians, as is above related, began to suspect them, and then he had also
intelligence, that they would be laid in wait for by night, and be privately
secured; and certainly they had been taken ere now, but that there was great
expectation, that the Parthians which Pacorus had left at Jerusalem, should
take Herod, and thereupon the thing was deferred, left coming to his ears, he
should have notice of their Treachery, and thereby escape it. Shortly after, A.
M. 3965. Ol. 185. ann. 1. V. C. 714. Hyrcani 24. Ante Christum 38. Cn. Domitio
Calvino 2. C. Asinio Pollione Coss.
his fears were confirmed when he saw a Guard coming to secure him, whereupon
there were not wanting some that advised him to mount, and save himself by
flight, especially one Ofilius, who had the secret revealed to him by Saramalla
the most wealthy amongst the Syrians, who now also voluntarily offered him
ships to save himself. But he refused to forsake Hyrcanus and his brother, and
going to Ba^zapharnes, blamed him for harboring such designs, told him, if he
wanted money, he might have more from him than Antigonus, and how base a thing
it was to betray Ambassadors, innocent, and who had been drawn out upon the
score of his own faith. The Parthian swore there was no such matter, and that
he troubled himself with vain suspicions, and presently got him our to Pacorus;
but he being gone, straight way hands were laid on Hyrcanus, Cap. 25.
and Phaselus, in vain upbraiding the Barbarians with perjury; an Eunuch also
was dispatched to Jerusalem to get Herod by some means or other out of the
Walls, and apprehend him. Phaselus had sent to make known his condition to him,
but the Messengers were intercepted, which he having knowledge of, had a
conference with the Chief of the Parthians then at Jerusalem, Herod besieged at
Jerusalem gets forth.
who by all means labored to get him out of the Palace. But he suspecting
them, and giving no credit at all to their words, presently heard for certain
of his brother's Captivity, and seeing them in doubt what to do against him,
resolved to shift for himself, and taking the opportunity of the evening,
departed with his relations that night, unknown to the Enemy.

29. He traveled toward Idumaea, whither at length he came to Massada the
Castle; but as his departure was sad, so his journey was as dangerous, being
pursued by the Parthians, He goes through Idumaea to Petra in Arabia for aid.
whom following behind his Train he kept off, and was opposed also more
violently by the Jews, over whom yet he got a victory, and afterward in
memorial of it built a sumptuous Palace in the same place. Once his mothers
litter was overturned in the way, with which she being brought into danger of
death, and he fearing the Enemy might overtake them, he drew out his sword to
kill himself, and had done it, but that the next to him interposing themselves
hindered it, showing him how it was not the part of a valiant man to forsake
others, by setting himself at liberty, as they termed it. After he came to the
Borders of Judaea, his brother Joseph met him, and persuaded him to dismiss
the most of his followers, because the Castle could not harbor them, which he
did to the number of 9000 and above, giving them money to bear their charges,
and taking the ablest Soldiers, whom he had culled out from amongst the rest,
with his relations, to the number of 800. he marched on to Massada, and there
placed them, where no sort of Provisions was wanting; but he himself held on
for Petra in Arabia, hoping of that King, who was such a friend of his father,
to obtain help for the recovery of his brothers liberty. But the Parthians
after his departure from Jerusalem plundered the City and Palace, and wasted
the Country, in which they destroyed Marisa a wealthy Town, and so reducing
Antigonus into Judaea, delivered up Hyrcanus and Phaselus into his hands, who
was grievously troubled that the women had escaped, which he intended together
with the money to have given to the Parthians.

30. Then fearing that Hyrcanus by the favor of the people might again be
restored to the Kingdom, he either cut or bit off his ears, making him thereby
incapable of the Priesthood, which by the Law was not given, but to one of an
entire body. But Phaselus knowing he was destined to death, for that he could
not otherwise kill himself for his bonds dashed out his brains against a stone.
Antigonus having received Hyrcanus and Phaselus, depriveth the former of his
ears, and Phaselus dasheth out his own brains.
It was reported, that being grievously wounded in his head, Antigonus caused
poison to be put into it instead of salve; and that he hearing before his death
that his brother Herod had escaped, underwent it cheerfully, as leaving behind
him a revenger of it. And he certainly knowing nothing thereof, labored
exceedingly to prevent it, going to Malchus the Arabian, whom he knew to be
obliged to his family, hoping of him to get money, either upon free gift or
trust, and resolving to give 300 Talents for his brothers Ransom, whose son
also a Child of seven years old he carried with him to leave as a pledge. But
the Arabian being persuaded by his great ones to retain the money owing, with
the goods which Antipater had deposited with him, sent some to meet him, and
command him to depart from his borders, and after he was gone repented of what
he had done, and sent after him, but too late. For he was now almost got into
Egypt, hearing of his brothers death in the way, where Cleopatra kindly
entertained him, intending to use him in her Wars; but nothing could hinder him
from hasting to Rome, though in the Winter season, and though great stirs were
reported to be in Italy, whither also he came, though with great danger, for
the difficulty of Navigation.

Being rejected by the Arabian, he goes to Rome.
31. He came thither when not long before there had been an agreement made
betwixt Antony and Caesar the Triumvirs (the former having married Octavia
sister to the later) and another betwixt them two and young Pompey, who then
held Sicily, which was a time convenient enough for his affairs. He made his
application to Antony, of whose favor he had formerly tasted, recounting to
him the whole story of the Parthians overrunning Judaea, of his brothers death,
and the misery of his family now besieged in a Castle, and how through these
Tempests both at Sea and Land, he had ventured to come to him as his only
harbor and refuge; and withal was not sparing in the offering of money to
him, in case he could procure him to be declared King of Judaea. Cap. 26.
Pity wrought something with Antony (being backed with the memory of that
friendship which had passed betwixt Antipater and himself) the money more, and
to these being superadded an hatred of Antigonus, whom he accounted a turbulent
man, and one that bore a mind full of hatred toward the Romans, he much
inclined to favor him. Caesar also, partly for that Antipater had done good
service for his adoptive father in Egypt, and because he was willing to
gratify Antony, was ready to do him all good Offices, being also inclined to
favor him out of a particular fancy he had to the man for his courage. The
Senate therefore being called, first Messala, and then Atratonius commended him
to the fathers, relating his father's, and then his own merits toward the
Commonwealth; and withal they accused Antigonus, and inveighed against him as
an Enemy, for that he had not only born himself as such heretofore, but now of
late in the calling in of the Parthians. Herewith the Senate being offended,
Antony then declared to them that it would much conduce to the carrying on of
the Parthian War, which was now depending, if Herod should be King; so that
without any more to do, he was so declared by the unanimous consent of all,
Where to the wonder both of himself and others, he his declared King of Judaea.
and then being accompanied into the Capitol by Caesar and Antony on each hand,
the Consuls going before, there sacrifized, and according to the custom, laying
up the decree of the Senate, was feasted by Antony. Thus obtained he the
Kingdom with the wonder of himself as well as others, through the especial
friendship of Antony, having ever feared that the Romans would never consent he
should have that honor which was not wont to be bestowed, but upon a royal
race, and therefore he intended to have sued for it, not for himself but for
Alexander, brother to Mariamne his wife; and this increased the wonder, that
within seven days he should be dispatched and dismissed out of Italy. But thus
obtained he the Sovereignty of Judaea, A. M. 3965. A. M. 3965.
in the first of the 185 Olympiad, Domitius Calvinus the second time, and C.
Asinius Pollio being Consuls, some 37 years before the birth of Christ.

32. During his absence, Josephus de bello l. 1. c. 12.
Antigonus laid close siege to the Castle of Massada, where he left his
relations, abounding with all sorts of provisions; only water was wanting; so
that Joseph had thoughts of flying with 200 men into Arabia, the King whereof
he had now heard to have repented of the rejecting of his brother. But this was
prevented by a shower which fell by night, as if sent on purpose from Heaven
for their relief, whereupon they were so heartned, as to sally out upon the
besiegers, whereof they cut off many. In the mean while Ventidius the Roman
General being sent into Syria to expel the Parthians thence, after their
retreat, came into Judaea, pretending to help Joseph, but indeed with
intentions to fleece Antigonus of a round sum of money, which he did, pitching
his tents nigh to Jerusalem, which being done, he drew off the greater part of
his forces, and left Silo with a party behind him, lest the fraud should be
understood, whom Antigonus was also to pacify till such time as the Parthians
could come and help him. But in the mean time Herod landed at Ptolemais, and
having got together no mean company, hasted through Galile against him. Idem
Antiq. l. 14. c. 27. A. M. 3966.
To Silo and Ventidius Antony had sent express order by Gellius, to place him
in the Kingdom. Ventidius was then busy in composing differences amongst the
Cities, which the incursion of the Parthians had made: Silo was in Judaea, but
corrupted by Antigonus. Yet Herod's Forces increasing, he marched toward
Massada to relieve his friends, which he accomplished, having first taken Joppe
in his way, notwithstanding the lying in wait against him by Antigonus, after
which having taken in also the Castle Ressa, he went up to Jerusalem,
accompanied by Silo's Soldiers, and many Citizens affrighted at his power.
Laying siege to the City, both he and Antigonus labored to draw over the
contrary parties to themselves, He besieges Jerusalem.
and though Herod could not at all move the Townsmen, yet it appeared that Silo
was corrupted; for he suborned some of his Soldiers to begin a mutiny,
requiring to be led into a place more plentious of provisions, which Antigonus
had all cut off; but Herod took such care for the bringing in of new, that his
plot was frustrated, and taking out a party of ten Companies (half Jews and
half Romans) went and took Jericho, forsaken of its Inhabitants, which he left
to be rifled to the Romans. Then returning, he sent down the rest of their Army
into their Winter quarters, which he appointed in Idumaea, Galile, and Samaria.
Antigonus also obtained of Silo to have part of his men received into Lydda,
thereby endeavoring to curry favor with Antony; so that the Romans lay idle
all this season in places abounding with all necessaries.

33. Herod was not idle, but sending his brother Joseph into Idumaea with 1000
Foot and 400 Horse, went down into Galile to reduce some places there held by
Antigonus; and within a short while brought all the Country into obedience
except those men that lurked in caves, and then dividing to his Soldiers 150
drachmes a man, placed them also in their Winter quarters. Silo a little after
came to him, being cast off by Antigonus, who had ordered the Inhabitants to
take all necessaries with them, and fly into the mountains, that so the Romans
might be starved. Ventidius being now engaged in Syria against the Parthians,
sent to Silo to come to him when he had with Herod finished the War. But Herod
having no confidence in him, dismissed him beforehand, and went himself against
the Thieves, who dwelling in caves with their families in craggy and
inaccessible rocks, he was fain to invent certain cages, which being let down
to the sides of the rocks full of armed men, either slew them or tumbled them
down headlong out of their holes, or else burnt them within, and by this means
he subdued them all. Then setting Ptolomy over that Country, he marched into
Samaria, but was presently forced to return, for Ptolomy being set upon by
those who formerly had disturbed Galile, was slain, and then they betook
themselves into the fens and inacessible places, and thence making excursions,
robbed all the Coasts thereabouts; but he returning, punished them, pulled down
their places of strength, and fined the Cities 100 Talents. In the mean while
Ventidius having slain Pacorus, and put the Parthians to flight, by Antonius
his command sent Machaeras to help Herod, with two Legions, and 1000 Horse; but
he being corrupted also by Antigonus, would needs go to him as a spy against
Herod's will; Yet when he went could not be received, but was laid at with
darts, so that repenting he had not followed Herod's advice, he went and
secured himself in Emaus, killing all the Jews that came in his way, without
any difference of friend or enemy, out of madness for what had happened unto
him. Herod being hereat enraged, resolved to go and complain to Antony, but he
entreated him to stay, or if he went, however to leave Joseph with him to carry
on the War against Antigonus, which later he granted, yet charging his brother
not to venture all, nor contend with Machaeras. Then hasted he to S^mosata upon
the river Euphrates, before which Antony then lay, leading Auxiliaries with him
both Horse and Foot. At Antioch he met with many, that having a design to go
thither, durst not for the Barbarians, who lying in the ways, made great
slaughters of travelers, but he taking the conduct of them upon him, stoutly
defended them against the violence of the robbers, and with great credit for
his valor safely arrived at the Camp of Antony.

(...) to A^^^^^
34. Antony to do him honor, sent out an Army to meet him, A. M. 3967.
with great praises and embraces received him at the Camp, and gave him great
respect, as a King of his own setting up. Shortly after his arrival Antiochus
yielded up the place, and then Antony committing the Province to Sosius, Idem
de bello ut prius cap. 13.
and commending to him the affairs of Herod, went away back into Egypt. In the
mean while Joseph neglecting his brothers counsel, was slain in Judaea, and
great innovations followed in that place and in Galile; which Herod
understanding, being sent before by Sosius with two Legions, lying at Daphne
the Suburbs of Antioch, marched into Galile, where he worsted the Enemy, and
took the Castle they fled into, whence hasting to Jericho, he there feasted the
chief Inhabitants in a room, which upon his departure to his chamber presently
fell down, whereupon he was accounted to be especially owned by God, who had so
wonderfully preserved him. Not long after he got five Towns into his hands,
wherein he put to the sword 2000 of the Garrison Soldiers, and then went
against Pappus, whom Antigonus had sent into Samaria in a vain ostentation, as
able to wage War in both places. Pappus gave him battle very boldly, but he
overthrew him, and in revenge of his brothers death did great execution,
whereby Antigonus his interest was clearly broken, and he thought of quitting
the City, had the weather suffered the King to improve the Victory, and make an
end of the War. At night Herod being weary, he went to wash in a chamber, where
one boy only was with him, and therein chanced to be diverse armed men of the
Enemy, who though they might have easily dispatched him then naked, yet were
they so affrighted, as they gladly got out and saved themselves by flight. The
extremity of the weather being over, Idem Antiq ut prius. cap. 28.
he went up to Jerusalem and laid siege to it in the third year after he had
been declared King at Rome, intending to use the same manner of opposition as
Pompey had made formerly against the Temple. But during the siege he went to
Samaria, He besieges Jerusalem.
and there married Mariamne daughter to Alexander and niece of Aristobulus,
formerly contracted to him. The marriage being over he returned, A. M. 3968. Ol.
105. an. 4. V. C. 717. Herodis 3. Ante Christum 35.
and Sosius came also through Phoenicia up to Jerusalem, so that both carried
on the siege with an Army consisting of eleven Legions, Which after five
months is taken, and therein Antigonus, who being beheaded by Antony, here the
Principality of the Asmonaeans receives it is period.
and 6000 Horse. The defendants with great earnestness and courage made
resistance, concermining, and sometimes fighting with the Enemy in the ground,
though much straightened for provisions, it being the Sabatical year.

35. Force at length prevailed, joined with skill, in both which the Romans
excelled, so that after five months twenty of the stoutest Soldiers, and then
Sosius his Centurion got over, and the outward part of the Temple with the
lower side of the City were taken, and at length the other also, where all were
full of slaughters, the Romans being enraged by the tediousness of the War,
and the Jews out of malice and particular grudges seeking to destroy all of the
contrary Faction. Antigonus came and fell on his knees before Sosius, who
received him with reviling speeches, calling him Antigona. Herod had much ado
to keep the Soldiers from entering the secret places of the Temple, and to
restrain them from slaughters, demanding of Sosius if the Romans intended to
make him King of a desert, and adding, that he should think the price of all
that blood which was spilt to be very little, though the Dominion of all the
World should come into the bargain, and at length was fain to redeem the City
from further trouble by his own money, wherewith he dismissed the Romans
sufficiently enriched. This disaster befell Jerusalem in the Consulship of M.
Agrippa, and Canidius Gallius, and the last of the 185 Olympiad, the third
month, in the fast, and on the same day it had been taken by Pompey 27 years
before. Sosius consecrating a crown of gold to God, went away with Antigonus
unto Antony. Idem ibid. and l. 15. c. 1. Plutarch in Antonio, and Dio lib. 59.
But Herod fearing that Antony carrying him to Rome, he should there obtain
favor with the Senate, as being of the Royal race, and procure the Kingdom at
their hands, if not for himself, yet for his children, who never had ill
deserved of the People of Rome, he procured Antony to dispatch him out of the
way, who pretending at least the unquietness of the Jews for his sake, caused
him to be beheaded at Antioch. And so the Principality of the Asmonaeans
ceased, after it had endured free from the yoke of Syria 98 years; and Herod a
man of foreign and obscure birth was confirmed in the Sovereignty over Judaea by
the Romans, in the Empire of whom we shall hear further of him.

CHAP. VIII. The affairs of Sicilie Contemporary with the Empire of the
Macedonians.
From the death of Timoleon to the Sicilian or first Punick War, containing the
space of 73 years.
1. THe constitutions of Timoleon being Popular, and tending to the loose
liberty of the Vulgar, which was destitute of lawfully successive Princes,
Sicilie continued not in Peace many years, being of all other places, through
want of lawful Monarchs, most subject to the ambition and tyranny of those,
who, though private Citizens, through flattery and deceit enslaved their
neighbors. Amongst the rest Agathocles is most eminent; none that ever in any
time went before him, The Original of Agathocles.
coming up to him, or, reaching him by far in cunning and cruelty. He was the
son of one Carcinus a Potter, Diodorus Siculus lib. 19. ad Olymp. 115. ann. 4.
and brought up by his father in that trade of life, who being banished from
Rhegium in Italy his native soil, came into Sicilie, and placed himself at
Thermae at that time subject to the Carthaginians. Before he was born, and when
his mother was yet great with him, the Delphick Oracle foretold, that he should
be the author of great calamities to the Carthaginians, and also to all
Sicilie, and for that cause he was exposed by his father, but preserved by his
mother, and reserved to such a time unknown to him, as he repenting of what he
had done, gladly understood from her of his safety. Being then again received
by his father, he was brought up in the trade of a Potter, and was but young
when Timeleon overthrew the Carthaginians at the River Cremissus, and made all
free of Syracuse that would come thither. He was then with his father admitted
into that City, and not long after his father died, but one Damas a chief
Citizen being extraordinarily affected toward him for his comeliness, gave him
whereon sufficiently to live, and afterward being created the Captain of the
Agrigentines, bestowed on him the place of a Colonel in the Army, for that he
was wont formerly in musters to wear those arms which none else could bear for
their bigness. But now being advanced to this degree, He is made a Colonel.
he rendered himself more popular by his bold adventurers, and his making
speeches often to the people, and Damas dying, he married his Widow, whereby he
got abundance of wealth. A. M. 3688. Ol. 116. ann. 4. V.C. 437. Ptol. Lagi 7.
Afterward it happening that Crotone being besieged by the Brutii, they of
Syracuse sent relief thither, which amongst other Captains was conducted by his
brother Autander, and he himself by decree of the people had also the Office of
a Colonel. But the Chief command was committed to Heraclides and Sosistratus,
the later of which out of envy defrauded him of the rewards of his valor,
which he now abundantly showed, whereat he was so enraged, as to accuse him and
his Companions to the people of affecting the Tyranny, but they giving no
credit to his words, Sosistratus after his return seized on the Principality.
Lives in Italy.
Agathocles then for some time continued in Italy, and endeavoring to get
Crotone into his power, failed of his Enterprise, and withdrew himself to
Tarentum.

2. He was received into pay amongst the Mercenaries, but being suspected to
attempt new matters, was not long after again cashiered, after which getting
together a Company of Italian Fugitives, he relieved Rheginum, then set upon by
Sosistratus and Heraclides, and then Sosistratus being banished Syracuse,
together with his Authority, returned thither, where sometimes a private
person, otherwises an Officer, he valiantly behaved himself against the
Tyrant's faction, in which the Carthaginians, and a great number of the
chiefest Citizens were engaged. Having once broke into the City Gela, and
there being overmatched by Sosistratus and the Townsmen, so that he and his
party were all of them in danger to be cut off, Endangered at Gela.
he sent his Trumpetters round about to the Walls, commanding them to sound an
Allarm, whereby it came to pass (as he intended) that the Enemy thinking the
besiegers had broken in from all quarters, retired from him to repulse them,
and so he safely retreated this Sconce. This business of Sosistratus being
over, and Acestorides the Corinthian Created General of the Syracusians,
Agathocles was suspected because of his politic head, Suspected to affect the
Tyranny and banished.
to affect the Tyranny; yet Acestorides would not take him of publicly, for
raising new stirs, but commanding him to depart the City, sent some to ly in
wait, and kill him in the way; which he suspecting, sent out a young man very
like himself, with his Cloths, Horse, and Armor, and in a disguised habit
traveled through by-ways, so that he devolved the danger upon the head of
another, and escaped. Afterward the Exiles of Sosistratus his faction being
received, and a peace made with the Carthaginians, he lived as an outlaw within
the Country, but gathering together considerable forces, proved so formidable
to his own Citizens, and their new Allies, that they sought to him themselves
to return, and having brought him into the Temple of Ceres, there took an Oath
of him not to be against the popular Government. Recalled, and made General.
Making a show then of Patronizing Democracie, he so inveigled the people by
his fair speeches and cunning pretenses, that he was constituted General, and
keeper of the Peace, till such time as the differences then on foot, through
the restitution of the Exiles, should be composed; and then having obtained his
wished for opportunity, the Army being at his beck, and under pretense of
opposing some, who at Erbita had lately revolted, sufficient occasion being
taken to increase his strength, he marched out as against the Rebels, and
united unto him 3000 men, some whereof had formerly served him against the
Carthaginians, and were most addicted to himself, and adverse both to the
people in general, and the 600 who now had the power in their hands, after the
Aristocracie was taken away. With these, and certain Syracusians, who being
poor themselves envied the wealth of others, he strengthened himself, and
accusing the 600 to the Soldiers as having plotted against him, procured them
easily to be taken for Enemies, and causing an Allarm to be sounded, commanded
the Army to march to the City, and there to kill the Malignants, and take the
spoil of them and all their party.

3. The Army marching presently to the City, every part thereof was filled
with slaughters, there being no difference made betwixt friend and Enemy, but
according to the riches or poverty of the persons, and many running out into
the streets to know what the matter was, were slain as they asked the question:
Under a specious pretense he causes a Massacre to be made of the rich
Syracusians.
all the Gates were shut that none might escape, so that 4000 by this means in
one day perished. Many leaped down the Walls, of which some perished in the
fall, but others to the number of 6000 escaped, of which most fled to
Agrigentum, where they were courteously received, but sufficiently tormented in
this respect, that their Wives and Daughters at home were abused by the
Soldiers in revenge for their escape. Agathocles being glutted with a two days
slaughter, gathered together the multitude of his Captives, of which he only
dismissed Dinocrates for his former friendship, but the rest he presently put
to death or banished, and then calling the people together, grievously
inveighed against the 600. and at the Aristocratical Government, and then
mentioning what he had done to purchase the liberty of his Country, very
formally laid down his Office, knowing certainly he should be solicited to
take it up again. For, his Soldiers now made rich by other men's goods, would
not endure that he, or his authority, should forsake them, but cried out he
must take care of them, so that with much ado, as it seemed, he took upon him
the Office of Chief Captain, Takes the Office of Captain General without a
Colleague.
but without a Colleague, being unwilling, as he said, to be called to an
account for others breaking the Laws, when as he acted according to them; to
which the people consenting, A. M. 3688.
he was Created Captain General with full Authority by their suffrages.

4. He carried it with all sweetness and moderation toward all them at the
first, took great care for the Revenues, making of Arms, and increasing of the
Fleet, and got several of the Inland Towns into his power. Idem ad ann. 2.
Olymp. 116.
Having seized upon a Castle of the Messenians, he promised to restore it for
30 Talents, but after the receipt of the money, not only refused to surrender
it, but also endeavored to take Messene it self, part of the Wall being falln
down, and though he failed herein of his Enterprise, yet besieged he Mylae, and
had the place surrendered to him, but the Carthaginians sending their
Ambassadors, expostulated with him his breaking the League, and constrained him
to give the Castle up again into the hands of the Messenians. Ad ann. 3.
The year after, the Exiles that lived at Agrigentum exhorting their
entertainers not to suffer him thus to go on in his Conquests, and make a prey
of their Towns; for that it was better now to set upon him before he had
confirmed his Tyranny, than when he should be grown too strong for them, and to
be forced to War with him against their Wills. The Agrigentines provoked by the
Exiles, resolve to make War upon him.
This appearing to be but reason, the people decreed the War, and having entered
into a strict Alliance with them of Gela and Messena, sent some of the Exiles
to Lacedaemon, thence to procure a General, suspecting the fidelity and
moderation of their own Citizens, and calling to mind the worth of Timoleon. At
that time was there in that City one Acrotatus son to Cleomenes the King,
laboring under the envy of most of the youth, because the Lacedaemonians
having been overthrown by Antipater, who then Governed Macedonia (after the
death of Alexander the Great) when such as returned from the defeat were
acquitted by the people, he alone had opposed the decree. Being enraged hereat,
they beat him, and laid in wait for his life, whereupon now desirous of some
foreign command, he easily accepted of this employment, and without consent of
the Ephori, with a few ships sailed to Agrigentum, yet did he nothing worthy,
either of his family or Country, but proving more bloody and cruel than the
Tyrants themselves, incurred the displeasure of the people. Giving himself up
to all luxury, and therewith spending the public revenew, he murdered
Sosistratus the Chief of the Exiles having invited him to supper, for nothing
but out of emulation, whereupon he was deprived of his command, and had been
stoned, but that he withdrew himself into his own Country. After his departure
a composure was made by the interposition of Amilcar the Carthaginian, Amilcar
the Carthaginian makes a peace.
upon these terms, that of the Greek Cities Heraclea, Solinus, and Himera
should continue under the power of the Carthaginians; but the rest, over which
the Syracusanians had the Dominion, should be left to their own Laws.

5. The Island being hereby cleared of the Enemy's Forces, he securely laid
diverse Towns to his Dominions, and with the accession of many places to his
former strength, sufficiently confirmed himself, having over and above his
Syracusians, and Confederates, 10000 foot, and 3500 horse of Mercenaries in
constant pay, and making Provision of all sorts of Ammunition, for that he
foresaw, that the Carthaginians disapproving of the peace made by Amilcar,
would within a short while renew the War: Ad ann. 1. Olymp. 117.
The year after seeing himself sufficiently furnished, he resolved then not to
expect them, but begin himself; yet desiring first to clear his way, by
removing whatever might hinder him from the neighboring Cities, He breaks it.
he first attempted Messene whither the Exiles of Syracuse had fled; and he
first prevailed with them to expel these, and then to admit him into the Town,
where he killed 600 of the chiefest of them, and most adverse to his power.
Thence he went to Agrigentum, A. M. 3693. Ol. 117. ann. 1. V. C. 442. Seleuci
1. Ptol. Lagi 12.
thinking to make also a prey of it; but sixty ships of the Carthaginians with
Forces having lately come thither, he forbore to attempt any thing, and drew
his forces into the Territories of the Carthaginians, where he took in diverse
Castles. In the mean while Dinocrates the principal man amongst the Exiles sent
to Carthage, desiring aid before Agathocles should reduce all Sicily into his
power, and having gathered his Companions together, and raised a pretty Force,
sent Nymphodorus to the Town of the Centorippini held then by Agathocles, but
being promised to have it betrayed into his hands, under condition they should
be left to their own liberty, He got by the night into the Town, but the
Garrison having timely knowledge of it, cut him off, and all his followers
which had entered, and Agathocles punished the Conspirators. But Dinocrates
being called by the Inhabitants of Galaria, with 3000 foot, and 2000 horse
marched thither, where Agathocles his faction being cast out, he pitched his
Tents without the Town; but he sent two of his Captains against him with 5000
men, who at length put him, and his whole Army to flight, and recovering the
place, animadverted upon the Revolters. Agathocles being elevated with this
success, hearing the Carthaginians were seized on an Hill, marched thither,
intending to fight them with all the power he could make, but they declining an
engagement, in a Triumphant manner he returned unto Syracuse.

6. The year following, Ad ann. 2.
the Carthaginians shipped a great Army for Sicily under Conduct of Amilcar, a
man of high Nobility; but such a Tempest seized on the Fleet, that 260 Vessels
loaded with men and Provisions miscarried, which made them cover their Walls
with black, as it was the custom upon some great and public disaster. The
Carthaginians receive a great loss by shipwreck.
But Amilcar being an industrious man, gathering together the Relics of the
shipwreck, listed more men after his arrival, and made up a complete Army of
40000 foot, and well nigh 5000 horse. Agathocles perceiving himself too weak to
encounter the Enemy at present, took care how to secure his Towns and Castles
from revolting, and especially Gela, near to which the Enemy then lay. To send
in a great party at once, he thought might awaken the Townsmen too much, and
put them upon some attempt disadvantageous to himself, so that he got some
Soldiers in at several times, till they amounted to a number too strong for the
other, and then going thither, accused the Inhabitants of Treachery, and took
occasion to make a Massacre of 4000 of them, the goods of whom he seized, with
all the Silver and Gold of those that remained. Then pitched he his Tents
against the Carthaginians, encamped on an Hill where the Castle of Phalaris the
Tyrant of old time was reported to be, whence it got the name of Ecnomos, i. e.
wicked or unlawful. A River ran betwixt the two Camps, concerning which a
rumor having been of old time spread, that a great multitude of men should
perish near unto it, this hindered both the Armies from engaging, till such time
as excursions being made on both sides, the Africans broke out of their
Trenches to rescue the prey, which Agathocles foreseeing, had placed many men
in ambush upon the River, who falling upon the Carthaginians, as they pursued
their friends, drove them back, and with great slaughter gave the chase unto
their Camps. Agathocles judging this a fit season for an engagement, arose with
his whole Army, and fell upon them in their trenches, into which he brake, and
there maintained for sometime a hot dispute, till the Enemy repulsed him at
that place, by help especially of Slingers, natives of the Islands Baleares,
who being exercised after the fashion of that Country in slinging of stones,
forced back the Syracusians, by throwing at them those of a pound weight. Yet
he broke in in other places, and had almost done his work, when fresh supplies
to the Enemy arrived out of Africa, which falling on him in his rear, turned
the fate of the day clear against him, and put his men to flight, of which
great execution was done by 5000 Africans that gave the chase, Overthrew
Agathocles.
many also killing themselves by drinking over hastily, out of extremity of the
heat which then raged through the influence of the Dog Star. So that he lost no
fewer than 7000 men, 600 only of the Carthaginians being slain.

7. Agathocles getting together his straglers betook himself to Gela, having
given out, that he determined for Syracuse with all speed, so that 300 Africans
entering Gela, and fearing nothing, were all cut off by him. Then shut he
himself up there, that the Carthaginians laying siege to the place, the
Syracusians might have time enough to victual their City, and indeed Amilcar
thought first of all to besiege it, but afterward understanding what force was
in it, changed his purpose, and rook in several Towns and Castles, and behaved
himself so lovingly, as many within a short time revolted to him. Agathocles
then withdrew to Syracuse, which he furnished with all sorts of provisions for
the enduring of a siege, intending to leave a party for defense thereof, and
remove the War into Africa, by passing all his Army over thither. For,
considering that the Carthaginians had almost got all Sicilie, Ad ann. 3.
and his confederates generally revolted to them (who were most potent now both
at Sea and Land) he judged it (though the most venturous, yet) the safest way
to invade the Enemy in his own Territories, which being a sudden and most
unusual thing, he should daunt him therewith, and drive his Subjects into an
open revolt, and force him to call back the Army out of Sicilie. They having
almost got all Sicilie into their hands, he resolves to divert them by
invading Africa.
Communicating therefore this purpose to no man living, he left Syracuse to the
Government of his brother Antander, and severing all the relations of the City
one from another, that no mutiny or sedition might arise in his absence (taking
part of them along with him as hostages) he raised money by seizing the estates
of Orphans into his hands (which he promised to restore when they should come
to age) by borrowing money of Merchants, robbing of Temples; but especially by
calling the People together, and acquainting them, how he was most ready to
endure any hardship, but it pitied him for the People: therefore he advised all
that feated themselves and estates to depart, which when the richest and most
out of favor had done, he procured them to be cut off, and confiscated all
their goods. Then manumitting all slaves that were fit for the Wars, he shipped
his men in sixty Vessels, and getting out into the Main whilst the
Carthaginians knew not his design, escaped them by the darkness of the night,
and though they chased him all the way, yet arrived he in Africa with his Army
in safety.

8. Once arrived he burnt his ships, as well to take away from his Soldiers all
hope of escape (thereby to heighten their valor) as also having no great Army,
Being landed he burns his ships.
lest for the defense of the Navy, it should be divided. Then fell he upon two
Cities immediately, which he took (the Soldiers being encouraged at the sight
of so pleasant and rich a Country) but suffered none of his Army to lie there,
but destroyed the places, lest his men shoul rely upon them as a refuge. The
Carthaginians were wonderfully daunted at the first report of his landing, The
Carthaginians at first daunted,
concluding he durst not venture over, except he had first, by destroying their
Army, made all sure in Sicilie, but understanding the whole affairs from some
messengers sent from the Fleet, they gathered courage, blamed their
Sea-officers, who having the Sea in their power, had suffered the Enemy to
land, and made choice of two Captains, Hanno and Bomilcar, thinking that their
enmity toward each other which had been intailed upon them, would prove the
commodity of the Commonwealth; though indeed therein they were mistaken. These
two Generals thought not fit to stay for their associates, but muster as many
of their own Citizens as would make a shift, and so raising 40000 Foot, and
1000 Horse, with 2000 Chariots, they encounter the Enemy. Agathocles his men,
many of them, wanting Arms, he made them counterfeit ones, to be so esteemed a
far off, and perceiving them to be discouraged at the number of the
Carthaginian Horse, he procured many Owls to be let go in the Camp, which birds
being taken to bring always good luck with them, the Soldiers were therewith
so cheared, Are overthrown by him.
that they resolutely set upon the Enemy, and brake presently the body of
Horse. The Charets they drove for the most part back amongst the Foot, which
they charged also with such resolution, that the wing where Hanno commanded was
discomfited, and he himself slain. Bomilcar his Colleague understanding this,
having formerly wished for some good opportunity to invade the Tyranny (which
the most eminent men of Carthage were many times forced to do, for the avoiding
of those censures and punishments constantly inflicted upon them for the least
miscariage of fortune, by the heady rabble) thinking now an occasion to be
presented to him, as it were from Heaven, he resolved to take hold of it. And
for that he thought it most convenient for him, that the Enemy should not be
overthrown, but an awe continued upon his Citizens, he retreated by little and
little, suffering the Sicilians to prevail, and at length drew off his men to
an hill, whence they all fled as fast as they could to Carthage, having lost of
their number 1000 men, and killed of the Greeks but 200.

9. The Carthaginians now shut up in their City, and besieged by Agathocles
(though they had carried with them above 20000 pair of manicles in their
Chariots to bind the Greeks, over whom they promised themselves an easy
victory) very much discouraged, and laying the blame of the misfortune upon the
neglect of their superstition, sent great gifts to Hercules the god of the
Tyrians, from whom they were issued, and for that they had redeemed their own
children of late (by others gotten elsewhere) from being sacrifized to Saturn,
they presently offered up to him 200 boys of the chiefest amongst them for
Nobility, being put into the hand of the Statue, and thence falling down into
the hollow of it full of fire. They sent also to Amilcar into Sicilie for aid,
who receiving the news, caused it to be given out, that all the Sicilian Army
was cut off, and earnestly thereupon urged the besieged to a surrender of
Syracuse, showing them (to enforce the matter) the ironwork of the ships
wherein the Army had passed over, which indeed the Carthaginians had taken up
into their Vessels after the burning of the Fleet. But the chief men amongst
the besieged stayed the rest from yielding, though Antander the brother of
Agathocles was so faint-hearted, as to be for the delivering up the City, and
cast 8000 of the contrary faction, and the friends of the exiles, out of the
Town: But within a few days arrived a Gally from Agathocles, to give them
knowledge of his success, which being pursued by the Carthaginians, and the
People flocking to the Haven to gaze, the walls were so forsaken, that Amilcar
taking his opportunity, got some of his men over, Amilcar raises his siege
from Syracuse.
but an Alarm being given, they were either slain, or forced headlong down the
fortifications. Amilcar hereat discouraged, raised his siege, and sent a supply
of 5000 men over to Carthage.

10. Agathocles in this mean while took diverse places in Africa, and fortifying
his Camp before Tunis (wherein he also left a strong Garrison) marched further
and besieged Adrymis, and drew into society with him Elymas the King of the
Africans. The Carthaginians having notice of this, turned all their forces upon
Tunis, which they besieged, having first become Masters of his Camp; but he
hereupon leaving a great part of his Army still before the Town, Agathocles
prospers exceedingly in Africa.
went with the rest to an high hill, whence he might easily be seen by both the
Carthaginians that lay before Tunis, and also by the Inhabitants of Adrymis,
and there making abundance of fires, deceived them by this st^atagem at both
places. For the besiegers thought he was coming with a great Army to relieve
Tunis, and therefore raised their siege out of hand, and departed to Carthage,
the besieged of Adrymis out of a strong apprehension that new supplies were
coming to the Enemy, yielded the Town. Then took he Thaepsus by storm, and
diverse other places, and having now got into his hands about 200 Towns, went
higher up into Libya. The Carthaginians took another occasion at his absence to
besiege Tunis, but he thereupon returned as before, but overcame them by a
stratagem of a clean contrary Nature with the former; for he commanded that no
fires now should be made, and marching very fast fell upon them at unawares,
and cutting off 2000, took very many prisoners, and forced the other to betake
them to their heels, whereby he exceedingly advanced his affairs, giving the
Carthaginians such a blow (who now by reason of their supplies arrived out of
Sicilie, were thought superior to him) that improving the Victory he went
against Elymas, who had revolted from him, and killed him with a great number
of his Subjects.

11. The year following, Amilcar in Sicilie once more besieged Syracuse, Ad
ann. 4.
and presently made great haste for storming of it after his arrival, because
the Soothsayers had foretold him, that that day he should dine in the City. A
great number joining themselves to him out of hope of plunder, they so stopped
up the way with cariages, Amilcar besieging Syracuse again is taken and killed.
that they hindered one another, and such a tumult arose, that the Syracusians
having notice of it, sallied out upon them, and putting them to flight made
great slaughter of them, and taking Amilcar alive, delivered him to the friends
of those that had been slain, who most cruelly tortured him to death, having
been formerly it is probable, condemned by his ungrateful Citizens themselves,
though as then, Justin. l. 22.
he having the Army in his power, they durst not let it be known, but casting
all their votes (written as the manner was) into a vessel, they ordered it to
be covered, and the thing not to be looked into, until his return, and the
giving up of his command. But his Army which consisted of 120000 Foot, and 5000
Horse, being thus strangely defeated, was divided then into two factions. The
Exiles and Greeks chose them Dinocrates for their Captain, Whereupon his Army
is divided into two factions.
and the Carthaginians, him that had held the next place to Amilcar. The
affairs of Sicilie being thus in confusion, the Inhabitants of Agrigentum
thinking a fit opportunity for gaining the Principality of the whole Island to
be put into their hands, made Xenodocus their Captain, who went and took in
diverse Towns, many revolting to him (all which with the former he restored to
their liberty) and restrained the excursions of the Syracusians, who were in
great distress for want of provisions which had been cut off by the
Carthaginians, the constant Masters at Sea. By this time Amilcar's head was
sent over to Agathocles, who receiving it with joy, raised the contrary
affection in the Enemy, to whose Camp he brought it, together with the message,
that their forces were utterly cut off, whereupon they dispaired forthwith of
better fortune, adoring the head of their nominal King.

12. Agathocles was much puffed up at his prosperity, though he was not far
from the waining of his fortune, Agathocles being puffed up his fortune
changes by a grievous mutiny of his Soldiers,
a preludium unto which was made by Lyciscus one of his Officers, who in a
drunken fit exceedingly jeered him. He took it patiently, and made a jest of
it, because the man was very serviceable to him in his Wars, but Archagathus
his son taking it heinously, returned it to him in his own language with
threats, which further so enraged him, that he threw in his teeth (which was
generally reported) his incestuous having to do with his stepmother. The young
man hereat was so transported, as he ran him through and slew him outright,
which was followed by a mutiny of the whole Army, demanding justice against
him, which flew to that height, that the Soldiers chose themselves Captains,
seized on Tunis, and besieged Agathocles and his son, many of the Officers upon
promise of lager pay, revolted to the Carthaginians, who had not been wanting
to add fuel to this flame. Agathocles seeing the danger he was in, laid aside
his Purple, and made a pitiful Oration to the Soldiers, wherein he told them
he was willing to lay down his life if so they pleased, rather than end his
days by some ignominious death, and drew out his Sword as intending to kill
himself; but the Army hindered it, and compelling him to resume his Robes, were
thoroughly reconciled unto him, Yet he quieteth them now, and defeateth the
Carthaginians.
except some 200 which went over to the Enemy. He taking this opportunity
marched presently against the Carthaginians, who full little thought of a
battle, but expected presently a general revolt; so that taking them thus at
unawares, he easily overthrew them with great slaughter.

13. About this time the Numidians revolted from those of Carthage, who sent
out an Army the next Spring to reduce them to obedience. Diodorus Siculus ut
prius, Ad ann. 1. Olymp. 118.
Agathocles understanding that, left his son at Tunis, and marching after them
with all expedition, at length overtakes them, then overthrows them, though
with great difficulty, and loss to himself. The Numidians, whilst he was
employed in the battle, having been intent upon the event of the fight, fell
in, and plundered his Carriages, and getting away with the greatest part of the
goods, by reason of the darkness of the night, he was glad to divide the
plunder of the field equally amongst his Soldiers, in way of recompense for the
damage sustained by them. Agathocles obtains another victory against the
Carthaginians.
Such Greeks as he took prisoners, which had assisted the Carthaginians, he put
into a Castle, where they fearing to be put to death set upon the Garrison by
night, but being too weak, betook themselves thence to a certain fortified
place, which Agathocles hearing marched thither with his Army, and drawing them
out under promise of impunity, contrary to his faith given, killed them all to
the number of 1000. of which half were Syracusians. At this time there was one
Ophellas, who having been an Officer under Alexander the Great, had seized upon
Cyrene, and gaped still after larger Dominions. To him now sent Agathocles,
inviting him to come and join with him against the Carthaginians, offering him
all Africa for a reward, to which he pretended he was constrained to pass
over, assuring him he would content himself with Sicily, or else, if he thought
good, invade Italy more commodious for him than Africa by far. The man puffed
up with great expectations, Sends for Ophellas out of Greece,
sent to Athens (whence he had married a wife of the stock of famous Miltiades)
to join with him in the expedition, which not only diverse of that City
readily embraced, but others of Greece now much shattered by Wars within it
self, which were raised by Alexander his Successors. A. M. 3697. Ol. 118. ann.
1. V.C. 446. Seleuci 5. Ptol. Lag. 16. P. Decio Mure. 2. Q. Fabio Maximo 3.
Coss.
Ophellas then began his journey (with above 10000 foot, 600 horse, 100
Chariots, besides 10000 others, extraordinary, as they called them) of two
months long, through a desert infested with wild beasts and venomous Serpents,
wherewith his Army was sore distressed, as also by want of necessaries, till at
length they arrived at Agathocles his Camp. There they were received with all
manner of Provisions, but as the greatest part of them were gone out to gather
forage, he set upon the rest with their Captain, Whom he treacherously
murdereth.
who though he resisted, yet being overborn, was slain most treacherously, and
Agathocles then forcing them to lay down their Arms, got into his power the
whole Army, having aforehand stirred up his Soldiers against Ophellas, by
feigning that he lay in wait for his life.

Bomilcar seeks to invade the Tyranny at Carthage, and miscarrieth.
14. Whilst Agathocles was in hand with this treacherous design, Bomilcar
having long intended, but still out of fear deferred, the invasion of the
Tyranny, communicating his intention to 500 Citizens, and 1000 Mercenarie^,
broke out into open Rebellion against his Country. Having seized on the new
City, he thence invaded the old, which caused great consternation at first,
whilst every one feared they had been betrayed into the Enemies hands; but
understanding the matter, they presently made head against him, who going on in
his way made slaughters of all he met; but what with opposing him in the
streets, and throwing down stones from the houses, they drove him back again
into the new City through the narrow ways, and there besieged him. At length
upon promise of pardon for what had passed, an agreement was made, and his
followers by reason of the danger the City stood in, were all dismissed
without any punishment; but he, notwithstanding the faith given to him, was
most ignominiously, and with great Tortures put to death.

15. Idem ad ann. 2
The year after Agathocles hearing that the Captains of Alexander had taken the
Titles of Kings upon them; for that he thought himself neither inferior to
them in power, Agathocles takes the title of King.
Territories, or for valiant acts, he called himself King in like manner: yet
took he not the Diadem, being accustomed constantly to wear a Crown of Myrtles
heretofore, either for the Ceremony of some Priesthood, or as Aelian. Var.
Hist. lib. 11. cap. 4.
others have conceived, by reason of baldness, which rendered him exceedingly
uncomely about the head. Then to attempt something worthy of so great a Title,
he fell upon Utica, near which taking 300 of the Inhabitants, which upon his
coming had been shut out, when he could not persuade them to yield, he framed
an Engine, A. M. 3698. Ol 118. ann. 2. V. C. 447. Seleuci 6. Ptol. Lagi 17.
to which he tied many of them, and drawing it along to that place where he
intended to break into the Town, exposed them either to be shot to death by
their friends, or else if they within out of affection to them should forbear,
then could he easily enter. The Defendants yet preferring their Countries
safety before that of a few private men, when they could do no less, repulsed
the Enemy with all possible endeavor; but for all this, Agathocles broke in at
another place, and filled the City with slaughter, no regard being had to any
condition; and after he had overcome them also in a Sea Fight, placed a
Garrison there, and subdued all the Maritime Towns under his power. Though he
prospered thus in Africa, yet was he sollicitous for Sicily, where the
Agrigentines had made some progress in freeing the Cities; but now of late had
received so great a blow from his Captains, that broke in pieces their design.
Just after the fight was over he arrived, and making a progress about the
Island, recovered most of the Towns, only he was repulsed with great loss
from Centorippa, and upon the same terms gained Appollonia. Henceforth his
affairs began universally to decline. Returning into Sicily, his affairs go
down the wind, both there and in Africa.
In Sicily, Dinocrates got so great an Army of Exiles together, that he durst
not fight him, though continually dared, and dogged at the heels. In Africa his
son Arthagathus prospered very much at the first through the good fortune of
Eumachus, who subdued many places. But the Senate at Carthage dividing their
Army into three parties, whereof one was to march for the Maritime parts,
another for the Inland, and the last for the upper Countries, they thereby
attained their ends, viz. to lessen their number in the City (which made all
Provisions scarce, by sending out 30000 men) to contain their Allies in
fidelity, by giving them hopes of relief, and (which was the chiefest) to force
the Enemy also to divide his Army, and so draw him down from Carthage it self.

16. For Archagathus dividing his Army to oppose the Carthaginians in the
several quarters, lost almost the two parts thereof, which he sent out under
Conduct of two several Captains, to the number of about 19000 men; so that the
Carthaginians reduced almost all places back to obedience, all the Confederates
revolted except a few, and Archagathus being distressed for want of all things,
and the remainder of his Army in great terror, he sent to his father into
Sicily to acquaint him in what posture matters stood, and to desire speedy
relief. He seeing his affairs go down the wind in that Island was sollicitous
how to leave it, and 300 Vessels of the Carthaginians blocked up the mouth of
the Haven, so that he could not stir out. But 18 Vessels coming in from
Hetruria, he persuaded the Masters thereof being friends to put out, and then
when the Carthaginians (as he expected) gave them the chase, he fell in upon
their Rear, and beyond all hope got a victory over them, boarding five of their
Fleet, which he took together with the Defenders. Hereat encouraged, he sent
Leptines against Agrigentum, knowing Xenodocus their General then to be out of
favor with a great part of the Town, and he seeing himself unable to graple
with him stirred not out, but provoked by the Citizens, so that being worsted,
for fear of condemnation he fled to Gela. Agathocles now feasted the people for
joy, making himself common with all, and giving them wine to excess, so that
their wits being out, when that once was in, they might speak their minds, and
he thereby know their inclinations; for he feared that after his departure they
might call in Dinocrates and the Exiles, and restore again the popular
Government. Being to return into Africa, he makes a Massacre at Syracuse.
Having by this means got out who they were that distasted his power, he
feasted them again by themselves, with other 500 who bore the most noble minds,
and compassing them in with his Mercenaries, slew them every man.

17. Then sailed he over into Africa, where he found his Army in a low and
desolate condition for want of necessaries. Therefore resolved he to fight,
though far inferior to the Carthaginians, who sought rather to draw out the
time in length, knowing the condition of the Enemy; but he leading down his men
to their Trenches, forced them to come out and give battle, in which he
fighting valiantly, yet was vvorsted with the loss of 3000 men. After this a
sudden calamity seized upon both the Armies by reason of mistakes. For the
Carthaginians offering the most beautiful of their Captives, as a sacrifize to
their gods, it happened that the fire thence was driven to their Tents, which
being covered with Reed and Straw easily catched it, and as easily were
consumed, whence it came to pass that all things were in great confusion.
But the vvorst of it was, that the Africans which had fought with Agathocles
coming now over to them, the Scouts seeing them, gave an Allarm, A strange
accident which makes great disorder in both the Camps.
as if all the Greeks taking their advantage of the fire were coming against
them, so that flying in great confusion, they killed, and trod down one
another, mistaking one another for Enemies, and having thus dispatched 5000 of
their Company, all run away to Carthage, where they were received with great
trembling by their friends, lest that with them the Enemy should enter. The
Africans which were coming over, being affrighted at the burning of the Camp,
retreated, which being seen also by the Greeks, they gave notice to Agathocles
that the Carthaginians were coming against him, so that he drew out his men in
great fear and terror, who meeting the Africans, and they taking one another
for Enemies, they killed, and slew all they could during the night season, till
such time as 4000 being slain, the rest retreated to the Camp. Agathocles after
this, seeing himself too weak now to graple with the Carthaginians, Agathocles
despairing of his affairs in Africa, intends to fly away with his youngest
son.
and thereby his affairs to be desperate in Africa, resolved to return into
Sicily, and considering that the Enemy having the command at Sea, would not
suffer the Army to pass away quietly, he resolved with his younger son
Heraclides, and a few more, to pass over secretly, and leave Archagathus
behind him, whom he was jealous of, because of the report raised of him that he
had to do with his Stepmother.

18. But Archagathus having notice of his intention (which he took in
marvailous evil part) communicated it to several of the Officers, who raising a
mutiny presently in the Army, Agathocles was seized on, and made sure in
Fetters. The eldest hearing of it raises a mutiny, wherein Agathocles is bound
in Fetters, but being loosed escapes away, and both his sons are killed by his
Army, which makes its own terms
A little after it happened that an Allarm was made in the Camp, as if the Enemy
approached, which made all Arm themselves and run out, and amongst the rest the
Keepers of Agathocles, whom then the multitude seeing in such a condition,
cried out presently that he should be loosed; which being done, he forthwith
took Boat with a few attendants, leaving both his sons behind him. The Army
understanding this killed them both, and then agreed with the Carthaginians for
300 Talents to restore the Towns yet in their hands, and that such as would
should receive pay in their service. And such as did so had the terms
performed; but those that out of hope of succor from Agathocles held out the
places, being all forced to yield, their Captains were Crucified, and the
common Soldiers being bound in Fetters, were forced with their hard labor to
repair that Country, which formerly they had helped to depopulate.

19. Thus the Carthaginians obtained peace after four years; Divine vengeance
hurrying Agathocles to punishment, after that perfidious murder of Ophellas,
his two sons being slain on the same day, and by the hands of his Soldiers.
After his arrival in Sicily he went presently to Aegesta, a Town confederate
with him, whence wanting money he exacted much Treasure, but they grumbling,
and complaining thereof, all the poorer sort he brought forth, and slew at the
River Seamander, and then tortured the rest with all sorts of torments to make
them confess what they had. Some he broke upon the wheel, others he shot of
from Engines as stones. Some had their ancles cut off, His horrid cruelty
toward the Estians.
and endured other cruel torments. He invented a kind of punishment also,
something resembling Phalaris his Bull, being a bed of iron, wherein one being
put, was burnt or fried to death by fire put underneath. Rich women had their
ancles broken with iron tongs, others their breasts cut off. Some out of terror
burnt themselves in their houses, and others hanged themselves, so that the
whole flower of the People being absolutely destroyed, he sold the children to
the Brutii in Italy, and utterly to destroy the name of the City, called it
Dicaeopolis, and Peopled it with fugitives. Hearing then that his sons were
slain in Africa, to be revenged on the Soldiers, he sent commands to Antander
his brother, to kill all their friends and kinsfolks at Syracuse, which he
readily performing, no sex nor age was spared, but so horrid a massace
committed, that as well old and decrepit men as young infants were included in
the slaughter. Such as were thus murdered lying on the Sea shore, none durst
bury them, though never so nearly related, so that the Sea washing them away
was colored with the blood, carrying along with it a note of this cruelty to
other parts at a good distance. Diodorus ut supra. ad ann. 3.
Agathocles continued his progress up and down the Island, strengthening Towns,
and raising money; but Pasiphilus his Captain despising him now for the
lowness of his fortune, fled over to Dinocrates, and withdrew the Army also
from him. This cast him into such despair, that contrary to his former
boldness, he sent to Dinocrates, offering to quit the Tyranny, and restore the
Government to the People, so he might have but two Castles to maintain himself
on, Out of despair he offers to lay down his power, but Dinocrates intending
to obtain the Tyranny himself rejects it.
and earnestly pressed him to admit of the conditions. But he gaping after the
chief power himself, and unwilling to be reduced again to the estate of a
private Citizen (being now (though but accounted Captain of the Exciles) as a
King indeed, in regard of the great extent of his power and command) put him
off with one pretense or other still, till Agathocles smelling out his device,
sent some to accuse him to the Army, and sending to Carthage made Peace with
them on these terms; to restore all the places to them they formerly had in
Sicilie, and for this in way of requital, to receive 500 Talents of Gold, and a
great quantity of Corn.

20. Furnishing then himself with a small Army, Idem ad ann. 4.
he went against Dinocrates and his Exiles, who seeing the little number he
brought with him (being but about 5000 Foot, and 800 Horse) in comparison of
themselves, amounting to 25000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, gave him battle. The
dispute at first was very sharp; but shortly some 2000 of the Exciles revolting
to the Tyrant, so encouraged his men, and discouraged those they had forsaken
(who thought them to be more than indeed they were) that they were easily put
to flight, though so far exceeding in number. A. M. 3700. Ol. 118. ann. 4. V.C.
449. Seleucid. 8. Ptol. Lagi 19.
All the Horse got clean away, and some of the Foot; but the greatest part
settling upon an Hill, made Peace with Agathocles, who had sent to them,
inviting them now at length to lay down their enmity, and return home; but
after he had got them into his power, Whom he overthrows and yet receives
into favor.
contrary to his faith given (which he never observed) he slew some 7000 of
them. The relics of the Army being gathered up he received, and Dinocrates
himself, to whose command he committed part of his Soldiers, and contrary to
his own disposition, trusted him to the last. He betraying his companions, slew
Pasiphilus at Gela, and going about in subduing the Towns and Castles (in which
work he spent two years) delivered them all up to Agathocles.

21. Not long after, Cassander the King of Macedonia besieging Corcyra,
Agathocles went and raised the siege, burning all his ships in the Havens.
Diodorus in Excerpt. l. 21. A. M. 3704.
Returning to his Army, and understanding that certain Ligurians and
Tyrrhenians had joined with those that slew his son Archagathus, he got them
into his power to the number of 2000, and put them all to the sword. The Brutii
(a People which issuing from the Lucanians, were grown mighty high, and at the
very first fought against those from whom they had their original, Justin lib.
23.
and forced them to a Peace, on equal terms) being offended with him, he sailed
over into Italy against them, and determined to besiege a Town belonging to
them, but they setting upon him at unawares, forced him with the loss of 4000
men to return to Syracuse. Yet was he not discouraged from making another
Expedition against Crotone, which intending to besiege, he pretended he was
about to send his daughter to the King of Epirus with a Royal Fleet, Rages
against the Italians.
and beguiling them herewith, laid close siege both by Sea and Land to the
Town, when they full little thought it. Having undermined a great house, they
being terrified thereat, opened their gates and let him in, after which he
plundered the Town, and committed great slaughters. Then entered he into society
with the Japyges and Pacetii notable Pirates; whom furnishing with Vessels, he
was to have part of the booty; and leaving a Garrison in Crotone, he returned
to Syracuse.

22. Once more having prepared an Army of 30000 Foot, Diodorus ibid.
and 2000 Horse, he passed over into Italy, where being arrived, committing the
Navy to the care of Stilpo, he commanded him to make excursions into the
Territories of the Brutii, but he coasting along and wasting the maritime
parts, lost almost all his ships by a tempest. He himself took by storm the
City of the Hipponiatae, at the report whereof the Brutii were so affrighted,
that they sent to him to treat, and delivered up 600 Hostages. Yet after his
departure they broke their oath, and expelling his Garrison, returned again to
their own freedom. Agathocles being returned home, sent his son of his own name
to Demetrius Poliorcetes now King of Macedonia, Enters into society with
Demetrius Poliorcetes.
to enter into society with him, who taking the message in good part, rewarded
the Ambassador with royal gifts, and sent one back with him, who under color
of ratifying the League, might epsy out the condition of Sicilie. Having now
been a long time, as he thought, at Peace with the Carthrginians, he made all
provision possible again for shipping, intending to make another Expedition
into Africa, and hinder the exportation of Corn from Sicilie and Sardinia.

23. But whilst he busied himself with such thoughts, A. M. 3716. Ol. 122. an.
4. V. C. 465. Seleuci 24. Ptolom. Lag. 35.
he was prevented by one Maenon, who being born at Aegesta, had been taken
captive there, and for his beauty was preferred to his service. Whilst he
thinks of making another Expedition into Africa,
For a time he dissembled the displeasure he conceived from the calamity of his
Country, and his own ignominious and filthy condition, till he might have an
opportunity to be revenged upon the Tyrant. But now it happening, that Agathocles
commending Agathocles his son to the Syracusians as his Successor; and sending
him to succeed Archagathus (his nephew by Archagathus his son, and a man of
great courage) in the command of the Army then quartering about Aetna;
Archagathus seeing how things were likely to go, plotted the ruin of them
both, and sending to Maenon, desired him to make the old man away with poison,
whilst he in the mean time inviting the young one to a feast, made him drunk,
and then killed him. Maenon mindful of the message, whereas the King after meat
called for a tooth-pick to cleanse his teeth, dipped one in poison and gave him
it, which he using, began by little and little to wax ill, and then his teeth
putrefying in a horrid manner, this was succeeded by tormenting pains. Seeing
therefore himself near his end, he called the People together, and inveighing
bitterly against Archagathus, He is prevented by poison.
stirred them up to revenge him on him, and restored the Democracy to the
People. Afterward his voice failing him, he was put upon the funeral fire yet
breathing, by Oxythenius, A. M. 3718. Ol. 123. an. 2. V.C. 467. Seleuci 26.
Ptol. Lagi 37. Vide Diodorum in Excerpt. 12. lib. 21.
who had been sent to him by Demetrius, and burnt. Justin from Trogus (who in
the whole story of this Prince dissenteth from Diodorus) reports, that before
his end, he sent back his wife Theogene an Egyptian by birth, with her two
young children, and great wealth, into her own Country, to be out of that
danger which he foresaw must needs ensue. The story of his life is almost
beyond parallel; but he died after he had lived 72 years, and thereof reigned
28, as amongst other Historians cited by our Author, Antander his own brother
left recorded; A. M. 3718, and the second of the 123 Olympiad.

24. The Syracusians having again got the power into their own hands, put to
sale Agathocles his goods, pulled down and tare in pieees all his pictures.
Maenon in the mean while who had poisoned him being in the Camp with
Archagathus, and elevated with the thought of what he had done, made away also
Archagathus by treachery, and with good words drawing the Army to himself,
Maenon who poisoned him labored in vain to get the Tyranny.
resolved to make War upon the Syracusians, and seize on the Principality. The
Syracusians therefore having made Hicetas their Praetor, sent him out against
him, but the Carthaginians joining with Maenon, they were constrained to
deliver them 400 Hostages to let fall the War with them, and receive the
Exiles. Afterward the mercenary Soldiers being denied the right of Suffrage in
the election of Magistrates, a great sedition arose thereupon, and both they
and the People took arms, but the better sort interposed themselves, and
prevailed with both parties to agree, the Soldiers consenting to depart the
Island with their goods. These Mercenaries marching away, came to Messene, a
Sea-town standing over against Italy, Idem ibid. and Polybius lib. 1.
where being kindly entertained by the Inhabitants, they so well requited them,
that in the night they massacred them all, and marying their wives, seized upon
the Town, The mercenaries massacre the Messenians, and the Roman Soldiers those
of Rhegium.
which they called in their own Campanian language Mamertina; Mars in that
tongue being named Mamers. Over against this Town stood Rhegium upon the
promontory of Italy, Diodorus Excerpt. l. 22.
which being in danger now in the War betwixt the Romans and the Tarentines,
the Inhabitants desired of the Romans to have a Party sent them for their
defense, which being also Campanians, in imitation of what their Countrymen had
done at Messene, and by their help, they also killed or expelled the
Inhabitants, and seized upon their Town and territories. Decius their chief
Commander they banished for the unequal division of the prey, who going thence
to Messene, fell ill afterward of his eyes, and sent to Rhegium for an expert
Physician in this kind, who coming to him, in revenge of what he had done to
his Country, applied Cantharides to his eyes instead of salve, and utterly
blinded him. And when the Romans were once disintangled from the War, having
grievously resented the treachery of their Soldiers, they besieged them in the
Town, which taking, they brought 300 of them to Rome, and in the marketplace
first whipped and then beheaded them, after the custom of their Ancestors, to
vindicate their credit with their confederates.

25. In Sicilie were now many petty Tyrants: Hicetas at Syracuse, Phintias at
Agrigentum, and several others at other places. These two fell out and warred
with each other, insomuch that by reason of their mutual excursions and
depredations their ground lay untilled. Hicetas having still the upper hand of
the other, was so elevated, that he ventured to fight with the Carthaginians at
the River Teria, but it proved to the great loss of his men. Plutarch in Pyrrh.
Ever since the death of Agathocles, had the Syracusians labored with all
their might to reduce that whole Island into their power, and now at this time
rather doubling their diligence than at all slacking their endeavors, sent
over into Italy to Pyrrhus King of Epirus (who now was busy in War against the
Romans, being called thither by the Tarentines) desiring aid of him for the
expelling of the Africans, and to take upon him the protection of Sicilie.
Hicetas having held the Dominion of Syracuse nine years, Diodorus ibid.
was then ejected by Thynio, Pyrrhus King of Epirus called over into Sicily by
the Syracusians.
who together with Sostratus were so vexed with the Carthaginian War, that they
again called Pyrrhus into Sicilie. The Mamertines entered into League with the
Carthaginians, and resolved if possible to hinder his landing, the Romans were
also by reason of their enmity with him easily drawn into the confederacy, so
that the Straights of Sicily were narrowly watched. He delaying his coming till
the next year, the Carthaginians sent back thirty of their ships upon other
occasions, and besieged Syracuse. A. M. 3728. Ol. 125. an. 4. V. C. 477.
Antioc. Soteris 6. Ptol. Philadelph. 8.
But then he (having been in Italy now two years and four months, without
success) passed over without control, and came directly to Syracuse; where the
Carthaginians lying encamped with no less than 50000 men, having also 100
ships at anchor in the Haven, yet upon his approach raised their siege, not
daring to try the hazard of a battle.

26. Pyrrhus coming to the City, reconciled the Inhabitants to their
Governors, for which getting great favor, and receiving messages from diverse
Cities, which gave up themselves into his hands, he not only thought now of
gaining Sicily (which he intended to give to his son, Justin lib. 23.
begotten on Lanassa the daughter of Agathocles, as Italy to another) but of
laying Africa it self also to his Dominions. Making a journey through the
Island, Diodorus ut supra.
he received the Cities to protection, and within a short space subdued all the
places held by the Carthaginians, except Lilybaeum, a Town built upon the Sea
by their Ancestors, Prospers.
after that Dionysius had taken Motya. After he had been some time before it,
though a great supply had arrived, yet sent they also to him, offering him
money to raise his siege; and he was inclined to accept of the offer; but his
friends in Council persuaded him by all means to refuse it, and utterly expel
the Africans out of Sicily. Then did he with all his might attempt the taking
of the place by force, but it being strongly defended, he every time came off
with loss, and finally after he had continued the siege for two months, rose
up and departed. Plutarch ut prius.
After this he had thoughts of becoming master at Sea, and transporting his
Army into Africa; but behaving himself too Magisterially in the preparation for
this attempt he lost himself exceedingly, and then suspecting the fidelity of
Thaemo and Sostratus, the one he compelled by fear to revolt from him, and the
later he slew as guilty of the same intention. But by his cruelty loses
himself and departs.
This so provoked the Cities, that some revolted back to the Carthaginians, and
others to the Mamertines, so that perceiving a great defection, and a
conspiracy also hatched against him, being now solicited also by the Samnites
and Tarentines for more aid, he departed again into Italy, being opposed so in
his passage by the Carthaginians on the Sea, and that he lost most of his
ships, and so much after he had landed by the Mamertines (who had before wafted
over 1000 men) that with much ado he got safe to Tarentum.

27. After the departure of Pyrrhus, Polybius lib. 1.
the Soldiers which quartered in the Towns near to Syracuse, beyond all
example, created two Magistrates out of their own body, Artemidorus and Hiero,
to the great indignation of the people, Justin ut prius.
which took it in disdain that their privilege should be thus usurped by the
Army. The Syracusian Soldiers created two Magistrates, Artemidorus and Hiero.
Yet afterward did they confirm the honor unto Hiero for his great moderation
and high abilities, who being the son of Hierocles, had strange presages
whilst yet a Child concerning his future Dignity. He perceiving how in the
absence of the Praetor, the Syracusians were apt to be seditious, and attempt
new matters, entered into affinity with Leptines (by marrying his daughter) whom
he knew to be the most considerable man, and of great Authority amongst the
vulgar, that he might supply his place as it were in his absence, and contain
the people in obedience. After this marriage was over, A. M. 3730. Ol. 128.
ann. 2. V. C. 479. Antioch. Sot. 8. Ptol. Philad. 10. M. Curio Deatato 2. L.
Cornelio Lentulo Coss. Polybius and Diodorus ut supra.
taking notice of the loose Carriage of the old Mercenary Soldiers, and how
they were ever inclining to mutinies, he drew them out against the Mamertines,
who being Barbarians (as the Greeks always termed all besides themselves) had
seized upon Messene, and dividing them from the rest, which he kept with
himself, exposed them against the Enemy, and suffered them every man to be cut
off, so that being rid of them, he thenceforth Governed without any fear or
trouble. Three or four years after he set upon the Mamertines in good earnest,
who though they bare themselves high so long as their friends and associates
continued Masters of Rhegium (created much trouble to the Carthaginians, Hiero
being sole Magistrate falls upon the Mamertines.
and compelled diverse Towns to pay Tribute) yet now since the defeat of them,
and especially after that Hiero had got into his power two places near unto
them, they were exceedingly straightened.

28. Yet sent they out against him 8000 foot, and 1000 horse under the Conduct
of one Cios, who calling the Soothsayers to divine what the issue should be,
they answered, that he was to spend the next night in the Enemies Camp, at
which being much elevated, he set his men in order, and passed over the River.
Hiero sent 2000 choice Messenians, A. M. 3735.
and 500 others, to get about the Hill Thorax, and come upon their backs, he in
the mean time charging their front. Here was maintained a sharp dispute, till
the 700 fresh men coming upon the backs of the Mamertines, did great execution
upon them, so that being now compassed about, they betook themselves to flight.
Cios the General fighting most valiantly, received so many and great wounds
that he swooned with too great expense of blood, and being taken alive, was
brought into the Camp of the Syracusians, where all means possible were used
for his recovery. But it happening that diverse horses being brought out of the
field, he espied that on which his son rode amongst them; whereat taking an
apprehension of the young man's death, in great trouble of mind he untied his
wounds, and thereby caused his own end, as unwilling to outlive his son.

29. The Mamertines upon the news of this defeat were minded to give up
themselves, Hannibal the Carthaginian General deceitfully tampereth with them.
and their City, into the hands of Hiero. But it happening that Hannibal the
Carthaginian General, being at that time in the Island Lipara, heard of the
overthrow, and came over presently to congratulate Hiero, as he pretended, but
indeed to circumvent him with his General craft in which he was well skilled;
and Hiero was so wrought upon as to give credit to him, and ly still. Then went
he to the Mamertines, and finding them ready to surrender, turned them clearly
from it, and drew them to his own interest, by bringing them relief into the
City. Hiero returning to Syracuse, Polybius ibid.
was for a reward of his great service saluted King by the consent of all men,
which Title he held to his last, the space of 54 years. Hannibal cunningly
placed his Garrison in the Castle, and thereby awed the whole Town, so that the
Mamertines then suspected him as much as Hiero, and they hindering thus each
other from gaining the place, at length made an accord to carry on the War
against it in common. This Combination causing the other to bethink themselves
of some foreign aid, They send to the Romans for aid.
they sent to the Romans, desiring them to take the patronage of them, their
own Contrymen, as being Originally Campanians.

30. The Message found no good entertainment with the Senate, for that the
fathers accounted it an absurd thing for them, who had punished the
perfidiousnesse of those that had seized upon Rhegium so sharply, now to take
upon them to protect those that were guilty, and patterns of the same Crime;
and they could by no means be brought to consent unto it. But the people (who
alone could do it) being persuaded by the Praetor that it was high time to stop
the proceedings of the Carthaginians, A.M. 3739. Ol. 128. ann. 3. V. C. 488.
Antioch. Sot. 17. Ptol. Philad. 19.
who had almost swallowed up all Sicily, and would use that Island as a bridge
to pass over into Italy, and being also made to believe how profitable it
would be to their particular interests to undertake the War, having suffered
much by that late one with Pyrrhus, and the Tarentines, they decreed that aid
should be sent them. The next year was Appius Claudius accordingly sent over
with an Army, with which he put to the worst, both Hiero and Hannibal, and
thereupon constrained the other to join himself to him against the
Carthaginians. This is called the Sicilian, or the first Punick War, which for
that it falls into the History of the Romans more especially, under whom
thenceforth Sicilia was ever subject, it must necessarily be referred thither,
as to its proper place. It began A. M. 3741. the first of the 129 Olympiad, in
the 19th of the reign of Antiochus Soter, the second King of Syria, and the
21th of Ptolomy Philadelphus, the second also of Egypt, after the division of
the Empire of Alexander the Great; 22 years after the death of Agathocles, in
the 490th year after the building of Rome, Appius Claudius Caudex, and M.
Fulvius Flaccus, being Consuls.

SECT. 1.
CHAP. IX. The affairs of the Romans Contemporary with the Empire of the
Macedonians.
SECT. I. From the War of Privernum to the first Punick War, wherein the Romans
first set foot out of Italy, the space of 66 years.
1. IN the year after the taking of Privernum was War decreed against the
Pa^aepolitans. Livius lib. 8.
War decreed against the Palaepolitans.
Palaeopolis stood not far off from the place where Neapolis (now Napoli or
Naples) is seated, and, as some think, there where at this day, is seen il
borgo de Chiara. A. M. 3678. Ol. 113. ann. 2. V. C. 173. Alexand. 10.
The same people inhabited two Cities, being descended from Cumae, which was
also a Colony of Chapter lcis in Enboea, now called Negropont. For the Cumani
having a good fleet first passed to the Islands Menaria and Pathecusa, and
afterward ventured upon the Continent. The Palaepolitans trusting to their own
strength, and counting of the treachery of the Samnites, and the plague which
now had seized upon Rome, committed many Hostile actions against the Romans
that inhabited the Countries about Cumae and Falernus. When L. Cornelius
Lentulus, and Q. Publius Philo were both Consuls the second time, the Faeciales
were sent to demand restitution, who bringing from those Greeks (more valiant
in tongue, says Livy, than in deeds) a fiery and resolute answer, it was
resolved that War should be made upon them.

Alexandria in Egypt, when built.
2. Whilst this War depended, the year following was Alexandria in Egypt built,
as Livy writes, whereas the foundation of this City was laid, while Alexander
was in Africa, the year before the death of Darius, and the fifth before this,
wherein C. Paetilius and L. Papyrius Mugilanus were Consuls. This same year he
makes Alexander the King of Epirus to have been slain, who being Uncle by the
mothers side to Alexander the Great, is thought to have undertaken an
expedition into Italy, out of emulation toward his Nephew, that as the one was
now Conquering the East, so the other might endeavor to subdue the West,
having no less matter to work upon in Italy, Africa, and Sicily, than the
other found in Asia and Persia. He was deceived by the Oracle of Jupiter of
Dodona, which bidding him beware of Pandosia and Acheron, he knowing there was
a City of the former name in Epirus, and a River of the later, thought himself
so much the safer, as he could get farthest off from these. Being therefore
sent for by the Tarentines, he came into Italy, and made War with the Brutii
and Lucani, from whom he took many Towns, and 300 families, which he sent as
Hostages into Epirus. He entered into a League with the Metapontini and Romans.
But the Brutii and Lucani recruiting themselves by the supplies of their
neighbors, reinforced the War, and set upon him near Pandosia (a Town situate
a little above Consentia, the Metropolis of the Brutii) near to which ran a
River called Acheron. Alexander King of Epirus slain in Italy.
Taking this River with his horse, he was therein slain by a Lucanian, and his
dead body being carried down the stream into the Enemies quarters was mangled
into pieces. A certain woman whose husband and Children were taken prisoners by
the Epirots, got the pieces together, and in exchange for her relations sent
his bones to Metapontus, whence they were conveyed into Epirus unto Cleopatra
his wife, and Olympias his sister, whereof the one was sister, and the other
mother to Alexander the Great.

The Palaepolitans being conquered the Tarentines their allies proceed in the
War, and draw in the Samnites and Neapolitans.
2. The Palaepolitans though assisted by the Samnites and Tarentines, were
overmatched so, as glad they were to yield up their City, and the Samnites lost
three of their own Towns. The Tarentines yet proceeded, and drew both the
Samnites and Neapolitans (the other part of this Greek Colony) afresh into the
War, wherein also the Inhabitants of Vestinus, together with their allies
engaged themselves. Whilst this War was but beginning, great stirs happened in
the City. There, one L. Papyrius had given up himself to C. Publius as a slave,
to work out his fathers debt. Being a young man of a beautiful body, Publius
attempted filthily to abuse him, and when he would in no wise suffer this, most
grievously beat and tore his body with rods. In this plight Papyrius got away,
and running to the People, by declaring his condition, so affected them, that
they procured the Fathers to decree, that the Consuls should propose to them in
the Comitia these two Laws: the first, That no man should be detained in bonds,
New Laws in favor of Debtors.
except for some misdemeanor, till the time of his punishment: the second, that
the money and goods, not the body of the debtor should be responsible.
Whereupon all prisoners for debt were forthwith set at liberty. The year
following the Vestini were overthrown by Junius Brutus Scaeva the Consul, who
also took from them two Towns. His Colleague L. Furius Camillus being sick in
Samnium (or the Country of the Samnites) pronounced Dictator L. Papyrius
Cursor, the most famous Captain by far of those times, who named Q. Fabius
Rutilianus for his Master of Horsemen* Papyrius being in Camp against the
Samnites, was forced to return to Rome, L. Papyrius Cursor made Dictator.
for the renewing of his auspicia, and at his departure commanded his Master of
Horsemen not to stir out of the trenches to fight one stroke till he came
back; A. M. 3681. Ol. 114 an. 1. V. C. 430. Alexand, 13.
but Fabius understanding that a notable advantage of doing something of
consequence was presented from the Enemy, fell upon the Samnites, and made
great slaughter of them. The Dictator hearing of this, in a great rage returned
to the Camp, and had put him to death, but that he was rescued by the Army,
from which flying to the City, Papyrius followed him, and pressing sore to the
Senate the necessity of discipline and authority, Is hindered from punishing
Fabius Rutilianus his Master of the Horsemen.
would not at all give way to the entreaties of the Fathers. This forced M.
Fabius the father of the party to appeal to the People and their Tribunes, by
which he hardly was drawn to pardon him, though his authority was saved
together with the life of Fabius, through the entreaties of those who might
justly have Commanded it, as was confessed by himself.

3. This severity of the Dictator so alienated the hearts of the Soldiers from
him, that it had well nigh cost him the loss of a battle; which constrained
him to be more Popular; then afterward he overthrew the Samnites, and harrazed
their Country. The Samnites overthrown,
This made them desire Peace; but returning quickly again to their former
enmity, in the second year after, they received another great defeat from A.
Cornelius Aruina the Dictator. Herewith they were so struck, that they sent all
the prisoners they had home to Rome, with such plunder as they had taken, and
the dead body with the goods of him who had been the author of the revolt, and
who fearing to be given up had killed himself. Desire Peace which is denied
them.
The Senate only received the men, Livius lib. 9.
with such goods as any Citizen could challenge for his own, and denied them
Peace. At this C. Pontius a leading man amongst them took occasion grievously
to enveigh against the injustice of the Romans, and causing them to take arms,
led them presently near to a place called Caudium, whence having apparelled ten
Soldiers in the habit of Shepherds, he sent them to Calatia (where he heard the
Consuls lay at present) with a charge, that when they should be asked where the
Army of the Samnites was, they should answer in Apulia, besieging Luceria,
which it had already well nigh taken. A rumor being already spread abroad of
such a thing, now obtained greater credit, and the Romans accounted themselves
by all means bound to succor Luceria, and the rather, for fear lest all Apulia
should revolt. Two ways there were which led to Luceria: One by the Sea side
open and secure, another through the Straights of Caudinum called Furcae
Caudinae (at this day Caudino, and Forche Caudine, ten miles distant from
Benevento) a place encompassed about with high mountains, and into which one
could not enter, They entrap the Roman Army at Furcae Caudinae.
nor depart out of it, but through very difficult and straight passages. The
Consuls leading their Army through this, as the nearest way, were quickly
stopped up, so as they could neither proceed nor retire, because on all sides
Pontius had blocked up the passage. A. M. 3684. Ol. 114. an. 4. V. C. 433.
Ptolom. Lagi 3.


4. The Samnites having the Roman Armies at this advantage, sent to Herennius
the father of Pontius their General, and a very wise man, for his advice what
was to be done. He sent word, they should dismiss the Romans without any
injury at all, which answer not pleasing, they sent back for another, and then
he counseled them to cut them off, and not leave a man alive. These two
extremes being ascribed to dotage, he came to the Camp, and offered his
reasons. He said, he gave the first advice as such, which if followed, would by
a great courtesy have for ever obliged a most powerful People, and the second,
as tending so far to the weakening of their power, as they could not for a long
time either recruit themselves or renew the War, having lost two so
considerable Armies; as for any third expedient he found none. Being asked
concerning a middle way of dismissing the Romans in safety, but under the
obligation of some conditions, he answered, that this course would not procure
them friends, nor diminish their enemies; for such was the Roman Nation, that
being disgraced or defeated, it could not rest, but would still retain the
memory of what present necessity urged it to submit to; neither, says he, will
they suffer you to rest till punished abundantly. But this wise counsel would
not be heard; so that the Romans had these conditions set them: The Army was to
march away only with their clothes, having first in token of slavery passed
under the jugum: the Romans should quit wholly the Country of the Samnites, and
thence remove their Colonies: and both Roman and Samnite live under the same
terms of confederacy and alliance. The Armies were constrained to submit, Make
it disgracefully pass under the jugum and march away disarmed.
and in great shame and consternation marched away disarmed. This disaster
happened in the 433 year of the City, and the third after the death of Alexander
the Great, when T. Veturius Calvinus the first, and Sp. Posthumous the second
time were Consuls.

5. The City was most grievously afflicted with shame and anger at so
disgraceful and unusual a thing. Posthumous persuaded the Senate to deliver
himself and his Colleague into the hands of the Samnites, as being only obliged
to the conditions, and not the State, which was unacquainted therewith. This
being accordingly done, Pontius refused to receive them, exclaiming against the
perfidiousnesse of the Romans. The conditions are renounced at Rome, and the
Samnites often again defeated.
The Army then marching down again sufficiently revenged themselves, under
conduct of Papirius. Several Towns which had revolted were recovered, and
scarce could the Samnites obtain a Truce for two years. They brake this Truce
ere the time was out, and thereby drew the War again upon them, which enduring
for eleven years, they lost many thousands of men, with many Towns, which
humbled them so, that upon their submission the usual confederacy was granted
to them. Then were the Aequi chastized, who had helped them, and thereby were
other Nations affrighted into subjection. In the second year after, began
another War with the Hetruscans, wherein were fought diverse bloody battles; but
still the Romans had the better, who stormed diverse Towns, and wasted the
Country. Two years after, the Samnites rebelled again, and joined with the
Hetruscans, but with the same success as formerly, being grievously
slaughtered, especially under the conduct of Q. Fabius Maximus, and Decius Mus;
the later of whom, seeing his wing give ground, in a great and bloody battle
fought with the Samnites and Galls (for those now had joined with them)
solemnly devoted himself and the Enemy to the Dii Manes, Decius Mus as his
father before him, devoteth himself to the Dii Manes.
and rushing into the midst was killed, as his father had been 44 years before.
Still continued the miseries of the Samnites, and two years after their last
Army (for this time it must be understood) was cut in pieces by L. Papirius son
to the former, who also took many Towns, and for his service obtained a most
splendid Triumph. It is observed, that over the Samnites the Romans triumphed
thirty times: viz. Consuls 26 times, L. Papirius the Dictator twice, Publius
Philo once, who first of all others triumphed with Proconsular power, and once
Q. Fabius another Proconsul. The family of the Fabii obtained, of these thirty,
four Triumphs, and that of the Papirii five, as may be seen in the Capitoline
Tables. This War having begun in the 410 year of the City, ended in the 481,
and therefore continued 71 years, A summary account of the War with the
Samnites.
not fifty only, as Florus, according to his custom, falsely computeth;
neither 81 as Appian, nor 49 only, as Eutropius; nor yet only seventy, which
number Livie assigns with tolerable difference. All Writers agree, that the
Romans had no Enemy in Italy, who longer, or more pertinaciously, managed the
grand quarrel with them, than the Samnites.

6. During these successes abroad, the People having got of late so many
privileges, were reasonably quiet; yet their Tribunes having one occasion left
to create trouble to the Fathers, stomached much that all the Priests and
Augurs should be created out of the Nobility, The Priesthood and Augurship
communicated to the Commons.
and labored to make the Commons partakers of those Offices. The Senate made
no great resistance, as being now accustomed to yield, and that in things of
far greater moment, as the Consulship, Censorship, Dictatorship, and Triumphs.
So, whereas as yet there were but four chief Priests and as many Augurs, to
them were added four, and to those five out of the body of the Commons. And
this same year did M. Valerius the Consul prefer a Law of Appeal more
diligently enacted. The Law of Appeal renewed the third time.
Now was it the third time preferred since the banishment of the Kings, always
by the same family. The cause of renewing it, says Livie, I suppose was no
other, than that the power of a few prevailed above the liberty of the Commons.
Which cannot be, if we consider, how for a long time the will of the multitude
had got ground, and before this overturned the prerogative of the Patricians.
The Lex Porcia, says he, seems alone to be enacted for the backs of the
Citizens, because it inflicted an heavy punishment upon him that should beat
with rods or kill a Roman Citizen. The Lex Valeria having prohibited any to be
killed or beaten who had appealed, if any did contrary, added no more than it
was naughtily done, which (such was then the modesty of men) was I believe, a
sufficient obligation for the Law. Now scarcely can any one threaten a Slave in
that manner. Fabius Gurges after this, being Consul, Livii Epitom. lib. 11.
fought unprosperously with the Samnites, whereupon the Senate consulted about
removing him from the Army. Fabius Maximus his father deprecating this
ignominy, prevented it, by promising he would go to the War as Legatus or
Lieutenant to his son. A. M. 3713. Ol. 122. an. 1. V. C. 462. Seleuci 21. Ptol.
Lagi 32.
He performed it, and so assisted the young man, that he procured him Victory,
and a Triumph, wherein C. Pontius the Samnite being led was put to death. After
this, L. Posthumous a man of Consular dignity, being set over the Army, used
the help of the Soldiers in his own field, and for that was punished. The
Samnites desiring Peace, the League was renewed with them the fourth time. But
presently again, as it seems, they rebelled; for P. Cornelius Rufinus, War
with the Samnites.
and Manius Curious (surnamed Dentatus, because born with teeth, Eutropius lib.
2.
according to Pliny) overthrew them in several bloody battles, and took diverse
of their Towns. Livie in his eleventh Book (as appears from it is Epitome)
wrote, that Curious Dentatus the Consul, having overthrown the Samnites and
Sabines, who had rebelled, triumphed twice the same year. After this were
Colonies sent to Castrum, Sena, and Adria. The Triumviri for Capital matters
were now also first made. The Census being perfected, the Lustrum was made, and
273000 polls of Roman Citizens were cessed.

7. Livii Epitom. lib. 11. Plin. lib. 16. Xonaras.
Presently after happened the third separation of the Commons from the
Patricians. The third separation of the Commons.
The cause was the great debts which the porer sort had contracted. As a remedy
for this the Tribunes of the Commons, those incendiaries, proposed new tables
in way of defalcation, which the Consuls in favor of the creditors opposed.
The contest came to that height, that the Plebeians departed into the
Janiculum, for the reconciliation and reducement of whom, Q. Hortensius was
made Dictator. He appeased them with good words, and persuaded them to return,
by promising that for the time to come their Pleb scita should have the force
of Laws, A. M. 3719. Ol. 123. ann. 3. V. C. 468. Seleuc. 27. Ptol. Lagi 38.
and bind the whole politic body. The Lex Hortensia.
This accordingly, by a Law called Lex Hortensia, he enacted; though it
appears out of Livy, that the same in effect had been granted twice before,
viz. in the 305 year of the City, by L. Valerius, and M. Horatius the Consuls,
and again in the 416. by Q. Publius Philo the Dictator, 50 years before this
present, which having not been observed, might give the Commons as great
distaste as the matter of debts, if we may judge from that which pacified them.
Lib. 1. cap. 25.
Florus tells a story, that the business of Matrimony betwixt the Patricians
and Plebeians caused this third separation of the Commons into the Janiculum,
the tumult being raised by Canuleius the Tribune. But Students are to take
notice, that none but he speak any thing of this Sedition in this place, and by
the instigation of this person, for this cause of marriage. That great
Contentions were raised betwixt the two orders about the taking away the Law
made by the Decemviri, which forbad marriage betwixt them, The error of Florus.
is oftens arrested by Levy. But that the Commons departed into the Janiculum
for the burden of their debts, after great and long contentions in the 468th
year of the City, is by several Authors affirmed, and that thence they were
reduced by Hortensius the Dictator, who preferred a Law in the Esculeium, that
what the Commons commanded should bind all Quirites: neither do Writers mention
any other cause of the third Separation.

8. Hortensius died in the time of his Magistracy. Livius Epitom. l. 11. 12.
After this there was action with the Volsinienses and Lucani, against whom
assistance was given to the Thurini. Then the Roman Ambassadors being killed by
the Galls Senones, War was decreed against them, and L. Caecilius the Praetor
was cut off by them with the Legions. The Tarentines being jealous of the
growth of the Roman power, had hitherto privily favored the Samnites, though
openly they maintained a confederacy with the Romans. The Original of the
Tarentines, and a description of their City, Government, and conversation.
This people, being the offspring of the Partheniae, who were banished
Lacedaemon, for that being promiscuously begotten, they could not have any
inheritance, Lege Strabon. l. 6. p. 278. etc. Florum lib. 1. c. 18.
and therefore plotted against the State as was shown before, inhabited a City
called Tarentum, from Taras a certain Hero, the Metropolis once of Calabria,
Apulia, and all Lucania. It was situate in a Peninsula on the Bay of the
Adriatic Sea, famous for its bigness, Walls, and Haven especially, which lay
so convenient for sailing into the Roman Coasts, Istria, Illyricum, Epirus,
Achaia, Africa, and Sicily, that Florus accounts the situation admirable. The
Tarentines affecting, took Democratical Government, obtained great power in
those parts, having a more considerable Fleet than any of their neighbors,
30000 foot, 3000 horse, and 1000 persons fit to command them. They embraced the
Philosophy of Pythagoras, especially one Archytas, who governed the City a
long time. In after times luxury was produced by prosperity to such excess,
that if credit may be given to Strabo, the Tarentines had more public
Festivals yearly, than the year has days; by reason whereof, the State of the
Commonwealth under such a Government was rendered much worse. One of their bad
customs was (as he judges it) to use the Conduct of foreiners in their Wars;
for against the Messapii and Lucani they employed Alexander the Molossian, and
before that Archidamus the son of Agesilaus, as afterward Cleonymus and
Agathocles; and afterward Pyrrhus against the Romans. They contended with the
Messapii about Heraclea, and employed also against them the two Kings of the
Daunii and Peucetii. Neither would they obey the foreign Captains for whom they
had sent but fell to odds with them which procured no small inconvenience.

9. Near to the Haven, in the view of the Sea, was the Theater of the City,
which proved the cause of all its misery and calamities, says Florus. They
were therein beholding Games, when, L. Valerius the Duumvir (as he is called in
Livy's Epitome) or one of the Roman Admirals sailed thither as to a confederate
City. They taking the Romans for Enemies, says Florus; Orosius lib. 4. cap.
1. Xonaras.
(who adds what cannot be credited, that they scarce knew, who, or whence the
Romans were) or as others think, having both knowledge and malice sufficient,
set upon the Fleet, and either sunk, or at least rifled it, and slew the
Admiral. The Original of their War with the Romans.
The Senate sent L. Posthumous to complain of the injury, who delivering his
message boldly was dismissed with a very dissatisfactory answer, at his coming
in, having had Valor. Max. lib. 2. cap. 5. Exemp. 5.
Urine thrown upon him, or one of his companions. War therefore was decreed
against the Tarentines, and committed to the management of L. Aemilius the
Consul, who first endeavored by fair means to reclaim them, and when that
could not do it, wasted their Territories with fire and sword, revenging their
insolence with cruelty as Orosius writes, for which service he triumphed the
year after his Consulship, as appears out of an old inscription. The
Tarentines finding themselves too weak for the encounter, sent to Pyrrhus King
of Epirus for aid, whom they had formerly assisted against the Corcyraeans.
They send for Pyrrhus King of Epirus.
Plutarch in Pyrrho.
The multitude were of themselves rather inclined to peace; but a certain
company of men, by Greek Authors called Demagogi (from their leading of the
people) would not let them rest, till they had resolved upon the War; whereupon
they sent Ambassadors to Pyrrhus, who not only in their name, but of other
Italians also Presented him with gifts, and signified that they stood in need
of a General, Eminent both for abilities and reputation; Italy it self being
able to furnish them with forces out of the Countries of the Lucanians,
Messapians, and Samnites. The King being of a restless spirit, encouraging
himself in vain hopes (whereby he grasped as it were the Empire of all the
West) promised them to come over with an Army, A. M. 3725. Ol. 125. ann. 1.
V.C. 474. Seleucidarum 33. Antiochi Soceris 3. Ptol. Philadelph. 5.
and dispatched before him with 3000 men One Cineas a Thessalian, an excellent
Orator and Scholar of Demosthenes. He afterward took the Sea himself with
twenty Elephants, 3000 horse, and 22 foot, besides 500 Archers and Slingers;
but upon the Main was seized with such a Tempest, that his Fleet being severed,
many Vessels were lost, he was forced to leap out into the water, and with
great hazard got to Land, and only at present two Elephants, a very few
hors-men, and about 2000 foot could be recovered from the shipwreck by the
Messapians, upon the Coasts of whom they were cast.

10. Pyrrhus did nothing without the consent of the Tarentines, till his ships,
and the greater part of his Army arrived; Idem ibid.
then taking notice how they minded nothing but bathing and feasting, he shut
up the public meeting places, restrained them from walking (in which exercise
they were wont to discourse idly concerning War) and forbidding drinking, and
Games, called them to Arms, making Levies of the youth with some rigor and
severity. Valerius Laevinus the Consul hasting to give him battle ere the
assistance of the Confederates came, he drew out his Army to him; but before
they should join, sent to him, offering himself an Umpire betwixt the Romans,
and their adversaries, to which Valerius answered, that they neither cared for
him as an Umpire, nor feared him as an Enemy, and taking his Spies, he caused
them to be led throughout the Camp, and then bade them return, and tell him
what they had seen. Eutrop.
Pyrrhus pitched his Tents betwixt Pandosa and Heraclea, a Town situate betwixt
Tarentum and Metaponius, built by the Tarentines. The Romans beyond the River
Siris not Liris, a River of Campania, as Florus and Orosius write, who also
draw Heraclea out of that part of Magna Graecia, lying upon Siris and
Metapontus, into Campania. In the fight Pyrrhus had his horse killed under him,
by one Obsidius a Ferentane, who was slain in the place by his followers. This
made him change Armor with one near to him, who being made at for him and
struck down, his Armor was taken from off him, and being carried about by the
Romans in token of his death, struck such a terror into his Soldiers that it
had cost him the victory, but that he seasonably with some labor made himself
known. Whilst the victory seemed yet to be doubtful, or rather to incline
toward the Romans, the Elephants being brought into the battle decided the
controversy. Till the passing of Alexander into the East, this beast had been
talked of, but never seen by the Europaeans nor them of Asia, except the
Indians and their neighbors, as also the Southern Africans. Homer describes
the houses of rich men to have been adorned with Ivory, but as Exemp. vide in
Atticis p. 11. and Justin l. 18.
Pausanias notes, never mentions the beast. The Romans themselves were
amazed, not knowing what they were; Who defeateth Laevinus the Consul by the
help of his Elephants.
but the fault is laid upon their horses, which not enduring the smell nor
bigness of the Elephants broke their Ranks, which opportunity the King took,
and sending his horse in amongst the Romans thus disordered, put them to the
rout. He got but a bloody victory, he himself being wounded, and a great part
of his men slain, though of the numbers on either side Writers do not agree.

11. Having taken prisoners 1800 of the Romans, Eutrop. ut prius and Plutarch.
he used them with great civility, and buried their dead, whom observing to be
wounded all before, and to be with stern countenances, he lifted up his eyes,
and said: He could have been Master of all the world if he had had but such
Soldiers. Marches toward Rome.
After this having received the Auxiliaries of the Samnites, Lucani and Brutii,
he marched toward Rome as far as Praeneste, a Town 18 miles distant from the
City, wasting all with fire and sword in his passage. Hearing that the Romans
were busy in recruiting their Army, he considered it was most creditable for
him to make peace with them, being he had no hopes to subdue them, and for that
purpose sent Cineas to feel their minds, a man so powerful in the art of
Rhetoric, that the King acknowledged him to have stormed more Cities by his
tongue, Sends about a peace which Appius Claudius hinders.
than he had ever done by force of Arms. Cineas presented the principal
Citizens and their Wives with gifts from Pyrrhus; but they refused them. When
he had something wrought upon the Senate to make a peace, and admit Pyrrhus
into the City, Appius Claudius now blind came in, and by an Oration, recorded
by Plutarch, procured the contrary. The Ambassador at his return being asked
what he thought of Rome, answered, that the Senate seemed to him as a Council
of so many Kings. After Cineas his return the Romans sent to Pyrrhus about
redeeming of prisoners, amongst others C. Fabricius, a man of great note for
virtue and poverty. The King being informed by Cineas concerning his
disposition, offered him Gold, which when he refused with great resolution, to
try his gravity, the next day as they were talking together, he commanded the
greatest Elephant he had to be set behind the hanging, and then on a sudden the
Tapestry being removed, the beast held his proboscis over Fabricius his head,
Fabricius goes to him about redeeming of prisoners.
and roared exceedingly. But he not at all terrified, though he had never
before seen this kind of Creature, smiled, and told the King, that neither his
Gold the day before, nor his Elephant now did at all move him. Pyrrhus amazed
at his greatness of mind, released to him the prisoners, on this condition,
that if the Senate accepted not of peace they should return to him, which
accordingly they did, having saluted their friends, and solemnized the
Saturnalia, being commanded to do it by the Fathers upon pain of death.

12. P. Sulpicius Saverrio and P. Decius Mus, A. M. 3716. V.C. 475.
being Consuls for the following year, were sent against Pyrrhus. The Romans by
this time had learnt not to fear Elephants with such astonishment as formerly;
so that these beasts now were overcome and killed, Pyrrhus himself was wounded,
Lib. 13.
20000 of his men slain, and 5000 of the Romans, according to Eutropius, but
from Livies Epitome, if should appear that the issue of this battle was
doubtful, Tuscul.
and Cicero writes that Decius was slain. Florus relates, that first in
Apulia, and then at Asculum the Romans had better success, Curious and
Fabricius being Consuls; for now the terror of the Elephants was worn off, and
C. Minutius by cutting off the proboscis from one, Several engagements of the
Romans with him.
showed that the beasts could die. Darts were thrown so thick upon them, and
fire upon the Towers on their backs, that the Army was sorely distressed, in
which condition it remained till night relieved it, and the King being the last
that fled, having received a wound in his shoulder, was carried out by his
Guard in his Armor. But as Florus is to be read with great caution in every
place, so especially in this; for Curious and Fabricius were never Consuls
together, as the Tables show. This therefore is to be referred to the ensuing
year wherein C. Fabricius Luscinus, and Q. Aemylius Papus (both of them the
second time) were Consuls. Plutarch writes that two days together Pyrrhus and
the Consuls fought at Asculum; whereof, on the former, his Elephants could do
him no service, but on the later, choosing a more even ground, by the means of
the Elephants especially, he drove the Romans back into their Camp, having
slain of them 6000, and lost 3505 of his own men, as Hieronymus relates out of
the King's Records. But he adds, that Dionysius neither wrote any thing of
two battles fought at Asculum, neither, for certain, of Pyrrhus his Victory:
one fight he mentioned fought till Sunset, at the conclusion whereof Pyrrhus
was wounded in the Arm, which wound, with the Samnites rifling his baggage, put
an end to it; either party having lost above 15000 men. That this battle (or
those battles) fell out in the year aforesaid is clear from that which moved
Pyrrhus this way to attempt the ending of the controversy. For the Consuls,
Fabricius and Aemilius, receiving a letter from the King's De hac historia
aliter apud alios relatae Consule Livii Epit. l. 13. Val. Max. l. 6. c. 5.
Exem. 1. Tullii Offic. l. 3. Gellium l. 3. c. 8.
Physician, wherein he offered to poison him, upon condition to be well
requited, they wrote back to Pyrrhus to acquaint him with the treason, and in
theirs included the Physicians letter. To requite the Romans for this
courtesy, he sent back their prisoners gratis, and dispatched away Cineas
again to treat of Peace. The Romans would neither receive their Captives in way
of free gift, nor reward; but sent him so many of the Samnites and Tarentines:
as for Peace, they refused to admit of any, except he would return with his
forces into Epirus. He perceiving (says Plutarch) that he must try with them
another battle, marched unto Asculum. Moreover the Triumphal tables show, that
in the Consulship of Fabricius and Aemilius, the Romans fought with the Lucani,
Brutii, Tarentines, and Samnites, at Asculum, which as Lib. 5. p. 241. B.
Strabo writes, was a Town of the Piceni in the midland Country, most
fortified by nature, being encompassed, besides a wall, with mountains, over
which no Army could pass.

13. Pyrrhus after this action at Asculum, is reported to have answered one who
congratulated with him about his success, in this manner: If we overcome the
Romans another time we are utterly lost. For he had by this time lost a great
part of the Soldiers he had brought over, and almost all his friends and
Captains: Pyrrhus getting nothing by his very success,
he had no more to send for: he perceived his Italian Allies to loiter, and the
Romans to have a constant supply, whereby they presently recruited their Army,
and filled up their Legions, and he saw clearly that their courage was nothing
daunted by the loss of one battle, but rather their strength and resolution to
be the more increased. Being pressed with these difficulties, he had presently
a recourse to vain hopes, occasioned by such affairs as cast him necessarily
into an anxious deliberation. For at the same time, the Agrigentines,
Syracusians, and Leontines, out of Sicily, gave up themselves to him, desiring
his help in casting out the Carthaginians, and clearing the Island of Tyrants:
and out of Greece came intelligence, that Ptolomaeus Ceraunus was slain in
battle by the Galls, and therefore it was most convenient for him to come into
Macedonia, now without a King. Blaming Fortune much that had conjoined two such
great opportunities, whereof the one must necessarily be omitted, after a long
debate he resolved to apply himself to the matters of Sicily, as more
considerable than the other of Greece, Is sent for into Sicily and passes over
thither.
because of Africa. Having sent over Cineas beforehand to deal with the Cities
about the state of affairs, he put a Garrison upon the Tarentines, who took it
in ill part, requiring him either to prosecute the War against the Romans,
for which he had been called, or clearly quitting the Country of Tarentum, to
leave the City in that condition wherein he found it: But returning them no
pleasant answer, he bade them stay his time, and so departed, after he had
carried on the War in Italy two years and four months. For the following year,
P. Cornelius Rufinus, and C. Julius Brutus, Gellius l. 4. c. 8. A. M. 3728. V.
C. 477.
both the second time, were Consuls. Rufinus was a man very expert in War, but
extraordinarily covetous and scraping, insomuch that upon this account he was
much hated by Fabricius, formerly mentioned. Yet, when this year he stood for
the Consulship, for that it was a very dangerous time, and his competitors were
persons of no value, Fabricius labored earnestly to have him elected, and when
every one wondered at it; either to his friends, or, as * Cicero writes, to
Rufinus himself, giving him thanks, he answered: L. 2. de Oratore.
Malui compilari quam vaenire, I desired rather to be pilled than sold.

14. Pyrrhus having found things in Sicily according to his mind, proceeded in
his enterprise with as much satisfaction, till growing tyrannical, he incurred
the hatred of those that employed him, part of whom revolted to the
Carthaginians, and others betook themselves to the aid of the Mamertines.
Perceiving at length that he was involved in the deep hatred of all, and
nothing throughout the Island but revolts, new councils and a strong conspiracy
against him, he received letters from the Samnites and Tarentines, who being
shut up in their Towns, which they hardly maintained, desired his assistance.
He was glad of so specious a pretense, that he might not seem to be driven by
desperation out of Sicily, which indeed as a perishing Vessel in so great a
Tempest he was not able to govern, and so returned into Italy, after he had
been absent near as long as formerly he had there continued. Returns with
difficulty.
A. M. 3730. Ol. 126. an. 2. V. C. 479. Seleucid. 38. Antiochi Sot. 8. Ptol.
Philad. 10.
The Barbarians set upon him in his passage, and the Carthaginians so
distressed him the Straights, that he lost many of his ships. The Mamertines
having landed, to the number of 10000 men before him, would not adventure to
fight with him, but distressed his Army much in narrow and difficult places,
killing two Elephants and many Men in the rear. He himself fighting in the
front with a valiant and skilful Enemy, received a hurt in his head, whereupon
he withdrew himself a little. This so animated the Mamertines, that one of
them, great in bulck, and glittering with armor, came out far before the rest,
and in a threatening manner bade Pyrrhus come forth if he were alive. Pyrrhus
enraged with his guard, bloody as he was, and with a terrible countenance
rushed through the midst, and coming up to the Barbarian, struck him with such
fury upon the head, that the stroke through the swords metal and the strength
of the arm, pierced to the lower part of the body, so that in a moment it was
chined down in the middle, and the two parts fell down on either side. The
Barbarians astonished hereat, left off their attempts, and so without further
interruption he marched with 20000 Foot, and 3000 Horse to Tarentum, where
increasing his forces by new levies, he proceeded into Samnium against the
Romans, who there lay encamped.

15. Few of the Samnites joined now with him, because being so often overthrown
by the Romans, their courage was wholly broken, and for that they were
displeased with him for his going into Sicily. He divided his forces into two
parts, whereof one he sent against L. Cornelius Lentulus into Lucania to hinder
him from joining with his Colleague M. Curious Dentatus the other Consul,
against whom he marched, then lying in a fortified place near Beneventum.
Hasting to set upon him ere the other could come to his relief, with the most
valiant of his men, and fiercest of his Elephants picked out, he marched by
night toward his Camp, but passing through Woods his lights faild him, and
going out of his way he lost his time so much, that at break of day the Romans
discovered him upon the hills. Curious then in haste, as he could, drew out his
forces, and falling upon the vantguard of Pyrrhus put it to flight, killing
many men, and taking some Elephants. Animated by this success, he descended
into the Plain, and there joined battle with the whole Army. He is defeated by
Curious Dentatus the Consul.
In one wing he beat back the Enemy, in the other by the violence of the beasts
was born back to his Camp, whence calling forth those who kept the guard, they
from high places so plied the Elephants with darts, that they forced them back
upon their own friends, whom bearing down, and breaking their ranks, they
thereby procured Victory to the Romans. Florus and Orosius, contrary to what
Plutarch reports of Benevenium (concerning which place Learned men do much
doubt) make the battle to have been fought in Lucania in the Arusinian Plains.
Florus writes, that the cause of the Victory was a young Elephants being
wounded in the head, which turning back and roaring for the pain, the Dam
hearing him, ran as to his relief, and so both of them disordered the battle,
she overturning as Enemies all she met. Orosius says, that the beasts were
thus disordered by bundles of hemp besmeared with pitch, which having hooks in
them and set on fire, the Romans cast upon their backs, and the towers set
thereon. Frontinus makes the battle fought about Fatuentum, in the Arusinian
Plains. Eutrepius is silent concerning the place; but writes, that Curious
Dentatus beat Pyrrhus back to Tarentum, slew 23000 of his men, and led, the
first of all others, Elephants (four in number) in triumph to Rome; which
beasts the Romans called Lucae boves, because they were first brought out of
Lucania, where Pyrrhus was overthrown: This makes much against that place
which Plutarch assigns for the battle, the original of whose error seems a
mistaking of Beneventum for Fatuentum, or Statuentum, a City of Lucania.

16. This Victory, says Plutarch, made way for the establishment of the Roman
Empire: for the Romans got such courage and reputation by this success, that
being counted invincible, they presently obtained all Italy, and not long
after, Sicily also. As for Pyrrhus, he having spent six years, and fallen from
his hopes both in Italy and Sicily, returned into Epirus, yet with a mind
nothing daunted. He was thought the ablest Captain of all the Kings of that
time, both for military skill, and personal valor; but what he had already
obtained, he lost still by striving to grasp more. Therefore Antitigonus
compared him to a Gamester, who having lucky hits, knew not how to use them.
Pausan in Atticis.
Having sent to the Kings of Asia, and Antigonus especially, for men and money,
after he had received bare letters, he called the ^pirots and Tarentines
together, and told them, that presently assistance would come, which report
being carried unto the Roman Camp, the Consuls durst not stir, and so taking
this advantage, the night following, he passed over unmolested into Epirus.
Val. Max. l. 4. c. 3. exemp. 5.
Curious the Consul having taken his Camp, touched nothing of the plunder; And
withdraws himself into his own Kingdom.
and whereas the Senate gave seven Akers of ground a piece to the People, and
500 to him, he would not exceed the common proportion. This year, C. Fabricius
Luscinus and Q. Aemilius Papus, much Idem. l. 4. c. 4. exemp. 3.
commended for their poverty, being Censors, Livii Epit. l. 14. Val. Max. l. 2.
c. 9. exemp. 4. Agellius l. 17. c. 21.
removed P. Cornelius Rufinus, who had been twice Consul and once Dictator,
from the Senate, because they had found in his house of plate for the service
of his table ten pounds; this being against a Law, as In Sylca.
Plutarch hinteth. At this Lustrum were cessed 271224 polls of Roman Citizens,
as appears from the Epitome of the 14 Book of Livie's History.

17. The Roman name had begun to be famous before, but was terrible after the
overthrow of Pyrrhus. In the second year after his flight, Livii Ep. l. 14.
Eutrop. l. 2. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 3. ex. 9.
Ptolomy Philadelphus sent Ambassadors to congratulate with the Romans about
their success, and to enter into confederacy with them. They sent, to do him
honor, Ptolomy Philadelphus by an Embasie makes a confederacy with the Romans.
Ambassadors also to Alexandria, where he received them most courteously, and
sent them back loaded with gifts. At their return they brought the gifts,
though given to themselves in particular, into the Treasury; but the Senate
commanded them to be restored. In the third year after the departure of
Pyrrhus, the Orosius l. 4. c. 3. Xonaras. A. M. 3733. Ol. 127. an. 1. V. C.
482. Seleucid. 41. Antioch. Sot. 11. Ptol. Philad. 13.
Tarentines, being neither able to drive out the Garrison he had there left
under Milo, nor procure Peace of the Romans, desired aid of the Carthaginians,
wherewith giving the Romans battle, they were overthrown. Milo sensible how
badly he was able to resist, by leave from the Consul Papirius, departed with
his men, and left the Castle, which the Romans having got into their hands,
easily mastered the City, the walls whereof they demolished. Peace and liberty
was granted to the Citizens, and the two Consuls L. Papirius Cursor, The Castle
and Town of Tarentum taken most of Italy being now subdued.
and Sp. Cornelius Maximus (both Consuls the second time) triumphed, having
finished both the Tarentine War and that of the Samnites in the 481 (or 482)
year of the City, as the Capitoline tables do show. The greatest part of Italy
was now conquered, an accession being made not only of the Tarentines and
Samnites, but the Lucanians also, and a little before of the Etruscans. After
this, the Livii Epit. lib. 15. Val. Max. l. 6 c. 6. exemp. 5.
Campanian Legion, which without command had seized upon Rhegium was besieged,
and upon surrender was put to death. The inhabitants of Apollonia in Illyricum
sending Ambassadors to Rome, the two Ae^iles Q. Fabius and Cn. Apronius beat
them, and for that were delivered up to the Apolloniates. The Picentes were
overcome and had peace given them. SECT. 2.
Colonies were sent forth to Ariminum in the Country of the Piceni, and to
Beneventum (till now called Maleventum) in that of the Samnites. About the same
time was silver Coin first stamped at Rome, brass being used altogether till
now, the State having got much silver in a Castle of the Samnites, as Xonaras
writes, Silver money first stamped.
This happened five years before the first Punick War, as Lib. 33. c. 3.
Pliny computeth, C. Fabius Pictor, and Q. Ogulnius Gallus being Consuls, in
the fourteenth year of Antiochus Soter, and the sixteenth of Ptolomy
Philadelphus, A. M. 3736, 267 before the birth of Christ.

SECT. II. From the First Punick War, to that with Antiochus the Great, in
which the Romans first invaded Asia, the space of 37 years.
1. THe Umbri and Sallentini being newly subdued, and the number of Quaestors
being increased to eight, the Romans took occasion to transfer their Armies
over the Sea into Sicily, and begun that, which from the Island (that gave both
occasion to, and was the seat of, it) is by Greek Writers called the Sicilian
War. There had the Mamertines most perfidiously seized on Messana, The original
of the Sicilian or first Punick War.
as is already related, and thereupon were become Enemies to Hieron King of
Syracuse, who besieged them justly as thieves and murderers, and had taken the
City, but that Annibal the Carthaginian cunningly diverted him, with an
intention to get it into his own hands, as it came to pass; for pretending
fair things to the Mamertines, as before to Hiero, and sending them in
provisions, he possessed himself of the Castle. They being thus cheated by him,
and now straightned by both, who had joined together against them, betook
themselves to the Romans for relief. The Senate begun to be very sensible of
the power of the Carthaginians, who had now almost the whole Island in their
hands, and was jealous of their approach so near to Italy; so that a just
quarrel with them seemed very acceptable. But so bad was the cause of the
Mamertines, as they could not in conscience undertake the patronage of it, and
gave them a denial. A. M. 3740. Ol. 128. an. 4. V. C. 490. Seleucid. 49.
Antioch. S^t. 19. Ptolom. Philad. 21.
From the Senate the thing was brought to the People, which besides it is
ancient use to debate matters concerning War, had by the Hortensian Law
obtained power by it is Plebiscita to bind the whole State. The Praetors showed
what great profit would redound to the Commonwealth in general, and
particularly to private Citizens (who having suffered much by the late Italian
Wars, were desirous by a new one to recruit their fortunes) and therefore by a
Plebiscitum they decreed aid to be sent to the Mamertines, in the 489 year of
the City, Q. Fabius Maximus Gurges the third time, and L. Mamilius Vitulus
being Consuls.

2. In the year following, and the Consulship of Appius Claudius Caudex, and M.
Fulvius Flaccus, Appius was sent over with an Army to Messana, to execute the
commands of the People. He first defeated Hiero, then the Carthaginians, and so
raised the siege. The succeeding Consuls Manius Octacilius and M. Valerius
Maximus, were ordered both, and with all the Legions, Hiero King of Syracuse
being worsted makes his peace with the Romans.
to pass into Sicily, wherewith Hiero was affrighted into obedience,
perceiving that the Romans were most likely to remain Victors, and made his
Peace upon these terms, To restore all their prisoners without ransom, and pay
100 Talents of Silver. The Romans embraced his frienship the more readily, for
that the Carthaginians being masters at Sea, they could not well send over
provisions, which they hoped might be supplied by him in good measure. They
also by this alliance thought themselves eased of the burden of War, and
therefore the next year they sent over but two Legions. Valerius the Consul
from Messana had the surname of Messala, who also having taken Catana, carried
thence a new Sundial to Rome, Papirius Cursor having thirty years before set up
the first that ever was in that City. A Dial brought out of Sicily to Rome,
This though not perfect, the People used 99 years, till M. Philippus their
Censor set up a perfect one by it, and about the same time Scipio Nasica being
Censor, first divided the equal division of the day into hours, by water
dropping out of one vessel into another. And Barbers.
This Pliny relates out of Varro, who also reported, that out of Sicily the
first Barbers were brought to Rome by P. Ticinius Mena, about the 454 year of
the City, before which time the Romans never cut their hair. The first that was
shaven every day was Scipio Africanus, whom Augustus imitated therein, none
more using the Razor than he.

3. the next year was Agrigentum taken after a long siege; Hannibal who came to
raise it being overthrown by L. Posthumous and Q. Mamilius the Consuls.
Agrigentum taken.
The news whereof filled Rome with excessive joy, and the Citizens now elevated
in mind, would not acquiesce in former Councils. It seemed not sufficient to
them, that they had saved the Mamertines, nor enriched themselves with great
booty: but conceiving good hope that they might be able to cast the
Carthaginians out of Sicily, and much thereby promote their affairs, they
thitherto directed their thoughts and consultations. On Land indeed they seemed
sufficiently to prosper, A. M. 3743. Ol. 129. an. 3. V.C. 492. Antioch. They.
1. Ptol. Philad. 23.
for L. Valerius and T. Octacilius the succeeding Consuls, managed the War very
well; but the Carthaginians without controversy being Masters at Sea, thereby
procured the Maritime Towns to revolt to them, so that the War was poised
betwixt the two interests, now inclining to one side, and then presently to the
other. Moreover Italy was often molested by the Carthaginian Fleet; but Africa
out of all danger. Wherefore they concluded, there was necessity of betaking
themselves also to Sea matters. Having never as much as thought of the Sea
before, they now set upon building of 100 Quinqueremes and 20 Triremes, a thing
most difficult, The Romans now first apply themselves to sea matters.
because the Carpenters were utterly to seek how to make the former sort of
Galleys, their use being utterly unknown to the Italians. But before they had
made trial, when they first transported their forces to Messana, they ventured
to fight with the Carthaginians, who had received the Dominion of the Sea,
without any competition from their Ancestors; which boldness and confidence
Polybius esteems no less than miraculous. First of all Cn. Cornelius the
Consul and Admiral, going with seven Vessels to reduce a Town of the
Liparaeans, was taken in the Haven by one sent from Hannibal. But Duilius his
Colleague presently after gave the Carthaginians a great overthrow, the Soldiers
having provided iron hooks, by the help of which they could board them and
fight as on Land. The Romans hereby extraordinarily animated, relieved the
Aegestans, and took Macella a certain Town by storm. But Amilcar Captain of the
Carthaginian Landforces then lying at Panormus, understanding that in the
Roman Camp there was a mutiny, for that the Auxiliaries and Legions contended
who should have the first place in battle; Hannibal crucified by his Soldiers.
and that the former had separated themselves, he suddenly fell upon them in
their removal, and killed almost 4000 men. Hannibel after this loss at Sea
departed to Carthage, A. M. 3745. Val. Max. l. 7. c. 3. exter. exemp. 7.
where recruiting his Naval forces he went into Sardinia, and being blocked up
in a port by the Romans, lost many ships, and for that was crucified by the
Soldiers, who overlived the defeat. The punishment which he feared for the
former overthrow he craftily evaded; for, before the thing was heard at
Carthage, he sent one of his friends thither, who coming to the Court, told the
Senate that the Roman Admiral was come with a great Fleet, and therefore he was
come to ask their advice whether he should fight him. All the Senate answered,
there was no doubt but he ought, to which the messenger replied, he has fought
and is overthrown. By this means he hindered them from condemning that fact,
which before they had judged that it ought to be done.

4. Now had the Romans passed both into Sardina and Corsica; Divine Povidence
as Casaubon notes upon Polybius, so ordering it, that present success should
dispose their minds for such future undertakings, as made way for their decreed
Empire. Orosius l. 4. c. 7.
Hanno, the year following, being in Sardinia was slain, Hanno slain.
and his Army cut off by L. Cornelius Scipio the Consul. The next, many Towns
were lost and taken in Sicilie on both sides. But Front. Stratag. l. 1. c. 5.
Exemp. 15. and l. 4. c. 5. Exemp. 10. Gellius l. 3. c. 7. alii.
Calpurnius Flamma a Roman Tribune (or Leader of a Legion) gave a great
demonstration of his valor. For A. Attilius Calatinus the Consul, having
rashly brought the Army into such straights, out of which there was no
possibility to extricate himself, he with 300 men took an hill near adjoining,
and drew thereby the Carthaginians to himself, The valiant act of Calpurnius
Flamma.
till the Army could pass through without opposition. All the 300 were slain,
yet he sorely wounded and covered with dead bodies survived, being by Roman
Writes compared, for this act, to Leonidas the Spartan. This story is twice
told by Julius Frontinus, who acquainteth us with the uncertainty of the man's
name, some calling him Laberius, others Q. Caeditius, but most Calpurnius
Flamma. The following year, C. Attilius Regulus the Consul subdued the Islands
Lipara and Melita, whereof the later is ennobled by the shipwreck of St. Paul,
lying betwixt Sicily and Africa. Polybius writes, that first Regulus was
worsted at Sea, and then he defeated the Carthaginians. Now the Romans resolved
to change the seat of the War into Africa, and the next year sent a Fleet under
command of the Consuls M. Attilus Regulus (who was substituted in the place of
Caeditius) and L. Manlius, containing 330 long and covered ships. The Consuls
pass into Africa, and in their passage defeat the Carthaginians at Sea.
The Carthaginians sensible enough how concernd they were to keep the War from
their own doors, opposed them with 350 Vessels, and a threefold battle was
fought on the same day, in which the Romans remained Victors, having taken 64
ships with the defendants, and sunk 30, and of their own lost 24, but not with
the men; for the Carthaginians fearing their Corvi or iron hooks, were afraid
to come near them. Repairing then the ships they had taken, they passed over
into Africa, and had surrendered to them Clupea a City seated upon the
Promontory Hermaea. This done, they sent to the Senate for further orders,
employing themselves, til the return of the messengers, in wasting the Country,
which they did without interruption. At length they received the resolution of
the Senate, which was, that one of them should continue in Africa with a
convenient Army, and the other return to Rome with the remaining forces.

5. Polybius lib. 1.
M. Attillius Regulus remained in Africa with 40 ships, 15000 Foot, Regulus
makes War against a monstrous Serpent.
and 500 Horse. Pitching his Camp upon the River Bragada, or Bagrada, he was
forced to make Gellius l. 6. c. 3. Live. Epit. l. 18.
War with a Serpent of a miraculous bigness, which with the great trouble of
his whole Army, and use of Engines for battery, at length he slew, and sent
it is skin, 120 foot long, to Rome. The history hereof was curiously and
elegantly related by Livie, as Lib. 1. c. ult. Exemp. ult. Polybius ut supra.
Valerius tells us. After this, (d) the Consul gave the Carthaginians a
defeat, fighting in such a place where their Horse and Elephants could do them
no service, and then took Tunetum or Tunis. But not long after he was
overthrown himself, Defeateth the Carthaginians and not long after is defeated
and taken himself.
taken prisoner, and almost his whole Army lost; this Victory being got for the
Carthaginians by Xantippus, the Lacedemonian, A. M. 3749. Ol. 131. an. 1. V. C.
498. Ant. They. 7. Ptol. Philad. 29. M. Attilio Regulo 2. L. Manlio Vuls^ne
Coss.
whom afterward sending honorably home as they pretended, they commanded
those that carried him to drown him and his in the Sea, lest so great a Victory
should be ascribed to the Lacedaemonians, as Appian writes. Of 30000 but a few
escaped into the City Aspis (called also Clupea) where they were besieged, till
their Enemies perceiving they profited nothing, rose up and made provision for
resisting the succors which the Senate sent the following year, under command
of M. Aemilius Paulus and Ser. Fabius Nobilior, the Consuls. They taking the
Sea with 350 ships were opposed by the Carthaginians, whom they defeated, and
took 114 of their Vessels with the men in them, as Polybius writes, or took 30
and sank 104, as Eutropius and Orosius, the later whereof adds, that of the
Carthaginians were slain 35000, and that the Romans lost nine Galleys and 1100
men. The Consuls then went to Clupea, but, taking in the relics of the Army,
presently set sail again for Sicily. The Pilots told them they must take heed
of the outward part of that Island, which was full of shelves and very
dangerous, especially at that time betwixt the rising of Orion and the Dog. But
they gave no heed to the Seamen, out of a desire, by showing of their fresh
Victory and Plunder, to procure certain Towns upon the Coasts to yield. They
had safely passed the middle of the sea, and drew near to the Coasts of
Camarina, when such a tempest and so great calamities fell upon them, as cannot
be expressed, says Polybius, The Consuls in their return from Sicily perish by
a lamentable shipwreck. Agrigentum destroyed.
for the greatness therereof. For, of 464 ships, Idem ibid. Eutrop. l. 2.
Diod. Siculus l. 23. Eclog. 12. A. M. 3750.
80 scarcely were saved, and the rest were swallowed up, or cast upon rocks, so
that the shore was filled with dead bodies, and broken pieces of ships. Both
the Consuls perished. Those few that escaped Hiero kindly received, and
furnishing them with clothes and other necessaries, coveyed them safe to
Messana. Karthalo the Carthaginian taking advantage of this disaster, besieged,
conquered, and burnt Agrigentum, the walls whereof he also demolished.

6. The Romans nothing at all discouraged by the greatest loss that ever a
tempest procured, gave order for the making of 220 Galleys, which was
prosecuted with such alacrity, that in three months time they were both made
and lanched. Asdrubal the Carthaginian with all the old Army, new levies, and
140 Elephants, came into Sicily, and of old and new Vesses made up a Fleet of
200 sail. The Consuls A. Attilius and Cn. Cornelius being commanded to pass
into Sicily, therein, this year, took several Towns, and returned. Their
successors C. Servilius Caepio and C. Sempronius Blaeso, in the beginning of
the next Spring with all the Fleet passed into Sicily, and thence into Africa,
where coasting about they landed in many places, but did nothing memorable. At
length they came to the Island of the Lotophagi called Meninx, not far distant
from the lesser Syrtis. Here they fell upon some quicks in the low water, and
were in great danger, being utterly ignorant of the Coasts, but the tide
returning, when they had lightened the ships, cleared then off the shelves, and
they returned in a kind of flight to Panormus in Sicily. Another shipwreck of
the Consuls.
Then passing hence toward Rome through the Straights very unadvisedly, such a
tempest fell upon them, as above 150 ships were lost. Though the Senate and
People were marvailously pricked forward to all attempts by desire of glory,
yet so many and great were their losses at Sea, that they were constrained to
omit naval preparations, and place all their hope in the land forces. They sent
L. Cacilius Metellus and Cn. Furius Pacilus the Consuls into Sicily with the
Legions, and 60 ships only, for the conveying of necessaries to the Army. And
not only did they plainly yield the Dominion of the Sea to the Carthaginians,
but feared them also on Land, because of their Elephants, which had often times
done them great damage. Asdrubal the Punick General understanding their fears,
and how one of the Consuls was returned back into Italy with half of the Army,
in great confidence wasted the grounds about Panormus, and the more
carelessely, because Metellus kept himself within the walls. But the Consul
taking an opportunity, so placed his men in respect of the Elephants, that when
the Carthaginians came against the Town, he overthrew them, slew 20000, and
took 26 Elephants, according to Eutropius. But Orosius writes, that 26 were
slain, and 104 taken: and Livie related, as appears by the Epitome of his
nineteenth Book, Metellus the Consul defeateth the Carthaginians.
that 120 Elephants were led in triumph, with thirteen Captains of the Enemy.
Diodorus Siculus makes the occasion of the overthrow to have been given by the
Celtae, in Asdrubals Army, who meeting with wine brought thither by Merchants,
so ingurgitated themselves therein, that being not themselves, they broke the
ranks and turned all into disorder, which opportunity Metellus instantly
improved.

Which moves them to send about a Peace.
7 This defeat caused the Carthaginians to desire Peace, and offered to send to
the Senate about it. Amongst the Messengers was Attilius Regulus whom they had
overthrown, and taken prisoner, five years before, and now bound with an oath
to return to Carthage, in case neither Peace nor exchange of prisoners could be
procured. He when he came to Rome, according to what he thought of the
intererst of the Commonwealth, dissuaded the Senate from Peace; and yet to keep
his oath returned to Carthage, where he was cruelly tormented to death; and as
De Finib. l. 5. Sed consule (...) Gellium l* 6. c. 4.
Cicero writes, by hunger and watching, Regulus one of the Messengers
disswadeth it, and for that at his return is tormented to death.
having his eyelids cut off. The year following, because the Landforces were
very fearful of the Carthaginian Elephants, and very unchearfully went about
their work, the Romans provided another Fleet, and besieged Lilybaeum, a Town
standing upon the southern Promontory of Sicily, over against Africa, but
without success; within a while the Navy was brought to nothing, and Amilcar
Barcas being sent from Carthage troubled Italy with his inroads and
depredations. For seven years then did they abstain from the Sea; but being
sorely disturbed by Amilcar, they resolved once more to try their fortune that
way, and a Fleet was provided, and furnished out of their private purses, the
Treasury being now exhausted. With this they gave such a blow to the
Carthaginians near the Islands Aegates, under conduct of C. Lutatius Catulus
the Consul, Defeated again at the Islands Aegat^^, they desire,
as made them give commission to Amilcar to conclude a Peace, if he found it
requisite. Though he was, Polybius l. 3.
as to his own disposition, much averse to it, yet seeing it necessary for his
Countrie's welfare, he made an agreement with Lutatius upon these terms, if the
Romans would approve them; viz. That the Carthaginians should wholly quit
Sicily; make no War upon the Syracusians or their allies; release without
ransom all prisoners, and pay within the space of twenty years 2200 Talents of
Silver. This pleased not the People, and therefore ten men were sent into
Sicily, with full authority to conclude the Peace, And obtain Peace.
who shortened the time of payment, added 1000 talents to the former sum, and
further cautionated that the Carthaginians should not only quit Sicily, but
all the Islands also betwixt it and Italy. Thus ended the first Punick War,
after it had continued 24 years, Diodorus l. 24. A. M. 3764. Ol. 134 an. 4. V.
C. 513. Seleuci Callin. 6. Ptol. Euerg. 6.
and Lilybaeum had been besieged ten; in the 513 year of the City, the fourth
of the 134 Olympiad, the sixth of Seleucus Callinicus, and the sixth of Ptolomy
Euergetes, A. M. 3764, 239 before the birth of Christ, A. Manlius Torquatus the
second time, and Q. Lutatius Cerco being Consuls.

8. The Carthaginians submitted to the terms of this Peace, that they might
recruit themselves by a cessation; but the Peace procured them greater danger
than the War could well have done. For, Amilcar Barcas, after the ratification,
drew down the forces to Lilybaeum, and giving them up into the hands of Gesco
to be transported, laid down his Office. Lege Polybium l. 1.
Gesco wisely considering what danger there was of such a multitude of
Mercenaries it is falling into sedition (especially because they wanted their
pay, which the public Treasury already exhausted could not afford them)
conveyed them into Africa by small companies together. A lamentable mutiny of
the Carthaginian Mercenaries.
But his Superiors, either through inadvertency, or for want of money,
dismissed them not as they arrived; but stayed them till all should come
together, with intention to prevail for an abatement of their wages. The City
growing full, many outrages were committed by the Soldiers, which caused the
Townsmen to procure their Captains to lead them out to Sicca a Town not far
off, and when they left their baggage behind them, as intending shortly to
return to Carthage, they fearing their unwillingnesse to depart, or their
speedy return, because of their wives and children, in the cariages, forced
them to take all away. When they were come to Sicca, they fell into greater
licentiousness through want of employment, and demanded larger pay than
formerly they had pretended to, expecting also great rewards promised them by
their Captains in dangerous adventures. As soon as they were all come thither,
Hanno the Carthaginian Praetor was sent to them, who was so far from curing,
that he heighthened the distemper.

9. He not only brought none of those things with him which they expected,
Hanno sent to make up the breach inlargeth it.
but complaining of the emptiness of the Treasury, talked of abating something
of their constant wages. This put the multitude into a rage, into which having
once fallen, it was hard to be appeased, as upon other accounts, so through the
diversity of their speech, things being either misrepresented by unskilful
interpreters, or misunderstood by them who were willing enough to be mistaken.
Breathing nothing but fury and violence, they took Arms, and in despite of
Hanno and the other Officers marched toward Carthage, and encamped at Tunis,
fifteen miles from the City, to the number of 20000. The Carthaginians
affrighted at the multitude resolved to satisfy them; They march toward
Carthage.
but then the Mercenaries perceiving how they were feared, every day invented
what to add to their demands, requiring besides their pay the price of their
horses lost in the War; and, after this was granted, Provision for several
years, which they said was behind. Their late Masters not daring to deny them
any thing, prevailed that some one who had commanded them in Sicily should be
chosen as Moderator, and the whole matter left to him.

10. The Soldiers made choice of Gesco, as one who had best deserved of them.
And he labored to pacify them all he might, and was about to pay them their
Arrears. Spendius and Mathos hinder the agreement, and provoke the multitude.
But there being in the Army one Spendius, a Campanian of Italy by birth, but
by condition a Roman slave, who having ran away from his Master, wanted neither
strength nor courage; and one Mathos an African; the former fearing to be
tortured to death if his Master caught him, as the Roman manner was, and the
later though free, fearing to be called to account for his too great
forwardness in the late stirs, sought how to drive all things into extremity,
that they might procure a War, inveighing grievously against Gesco and the
Carthaginians, as having a design as soon as the rest were dispersed and gone
home, to spend their rage against the Africans. The multitude herewith were
strangely incensed, so that who ever attempted to speak, before they could be
heard what they would say, were all stoned to death except these two. Gesco yet
would not cease to do his duty, but went from one Nation to another, laboring
to pacify them; but when the Africans demanded allowance for their Provisions,
he bade them ask it of Mathos their Captain. This so transported them, that
they plundered the goods of the Carthaginians, with all the money he had
brought for the dischargement of the Army, and binding him and his followers in
a contumelious manner cast them into prison.

11. By the advice of Mathos they rebelled against the Carthagians, and so
began the War called Libycum and Africum, Whence arises the Libyan, or African
War.
as also (...). Their numbers being increased to 70000. Matho and Spendius now
created Generals, divided their forces, and besieged Utica and Hippacra. Hanno
was sent from Carthage to the relief of the Uticans, and at the first onset
drove away the besiegers; but entering the Town, and loitering there, they set
upon his Camp without, and killing many, took all his Engines, and other things
prepared for the War. His Superiors troubled hereat, created Captain Amilcar
Barcas, and sent him into the field with 70 Elephants, and 10000 men. There he
was encompassed by the Africans on his Front, the Numidians on his Rear, and
Spendius on his Flanck, where Naravasus a Numidian with 2000 of his followers
revolted to him. Amilcar Barcas defeateth the Mercenaries.
Encouraged by this addition he engaged with his Enemies, causing his men so to
face about as the Front became the Rear, whereby seeming to be in confusion,
the Mercenaries thought they ran, and breaking their Ranks to pursue them he
took this opportunity, and setting on them out of order obtained the victory,
having slain 10000, and taken 4000 prisoners.

12. He gave Arms to all such prisoners as would serve under him, and having
exhorted the rest to fight no more against the Carthaginians, dismissed them
freely. Spendius and Matho, together with Autaritus Captain of the Galls,
hearing this, doubted how far his clemency, especially the offer of indemnity,
might prevail with the Africans and others, and consulted how to obviate this
his design by setting the multitude at irreconcilable enmity with the
Carthaginians. To this purpose they feigned Letters to be sent out of Sardinia
from their friends, giving them to understand, that certain amongst them held
intelligence with the Enemy, and advising them to keep close Gesco, and the
other with him. Spendius taking hereat occasion, earnestly advised them not to
trust to the pretended clemency of Amilcar, Who are further provoked by their
Captains.
and by no meants to permit Gesco to escape; for thereby they should incur the
contempt of their Enemies, and by strengthening them through the assistance of
so great a Captain, not a little damnifie their own affairs. Whilst he yet
spoke another Carrier brought Letters as from Tunis of the same Contents with
the former; and then Autaritus openly protested, that whosoever had any regard
to the kindness of the Carthaginians could not be faithful, and therefore
such were to be heard as persuaded the most bitter things against Carthage; all
others being Traitors and Enemies. Then did he persuade them to Torture Gesco
to death, with such as were now with him, and all that hereafter should be
taken. There were many which spoke against this cruelty, especially as Gesco
was concerned in it; but for some time they were not understood, speaking in
their own languages, and when what they aimed at was fully known, some one
cried out strike them, which so provoked the multitude, that they fortwith
stoned them. After this, bringing forth Gesco, and the other Carthaginians to
the number of 700, they cruelly tormented them to death; and made a decree,
that whomsoever of them for the time to come they should take, he should be
used in the same manner, and if any of their Allies were taken, his hands being
cut off, he should be sent back to Carthage. This they very carefully
afterward observed, having also refused to deliver the dead bodies to the
Messengers that came for them, and threatened, if any more came, to deal with
them as they had used Gesco.

13. Amilcar seeing into what straights he was cast by this boldness of the
Mercenaries, sent for Hanno, judging that an end might sooner be put to the War
if the forces of the State were all United. Amilcar Uniteth the Carthaginian
forces.
Such of the Enemies as he took in the heat of the fight he killed, as he might
by the Law of War, or taking them alive, cast them to wild beasts. When he
thought that he had brought matters into a fair way of recovery, they presently
relapsed into a far worse condition than ever. For, the ships that brought
Provisions miscarried by force of Tempest; Sardinia at the same time revolted
from them, which was wont to supply them with large Provisions; and Hippacrita
and Utica which hitherto had remained faithful, now revolted without any
manifest cause. Mathos and Spendius herewith elevated, resolved to lay siege to
Carthage it self, Mathos and Spendius elevated by their success besiege
Carthage.
and shortly after performed it. The Carthaginians in this their distress
betook themselves to their neighbors, whereof the Romans, and Hiero King of
Syracuse in Sicily, being sensible of the sauciness of their Enemies, were
ready to do them all good Offices. Herewith better enabled, they held out, and
Amilcar lying abroad, so cut off all Provisions from the Mercenaries, that
being no other than besieged themselves, they were forced at length to rise up
and depart, resolving to observe Amilcar's motions, Amilcar forces them to
break up.
and ly in wait for him on the sides of the Mountains; for they would not
venture to take the plain, being afraid of his Elephants, and the horse of
Naravascus; and otherwise they were much inferior to the Carthaginians, who
far surpassed them in Military skill, though but equal to them in valor.

14. But Amilcar singling them out by parties, killed many of them, and when
they engaged with their whole force cut them off by stratagems: sometimes by
day, otherwhiles by night he would fall upon them on a sudden with great
terror; and such of them as he took he cast them to the beasts. At length he
compassed them about in such a place, as, though they were afraid to fight,
they could not escape, and being shut up within a Ditch and Rampire, they were
forced to devour one another. Though they now could expect no mercy, yet they
sent to desire a Parley, and having obtained leave, Autarolus, Zarxas,
Spendius, and other Captains were ordered to manage it. It was agreed that the
Carthaginians should pick out ten men whom they pleased, and the other be
dismissed in their Coats. The Covenants being finished, Amilcar declared that
he made choice of those who were present, and so got the most eminent Leaders
into his power. The Africans understanding that their Officers were seized,
took Arms in great haste, but Amilcar with his Elephants and his Army
compassing them in on every side, put them to the sword. For the improvement of
this success, he and Annibal went and besieged Mathos in Tunis, before the
Walls whereof he nailed Spendius to a Cross with the rest of the Captives.
Annibal pitching his Camp on that side of the Town toward Carthage, carelessly
demeaned himself, which Mathos considering, made a Sally, and killing many,
took much plunder, and amongst other prisoners Annibal himself, whom bringing
to Spendius his Cross, after he had taken down his Collegue's body, he nailed
him to it, and killed 30 more of the most noble Carthaginians.

15. It was long ere Amilcar knew of this disaster, and when he did, for the
distance of place, and difficulty of passage, he could give no relief. Marching
therefore from Tunis, he sat down by the mouth of the River Macaris, and his
Superiors at Carthage making new Levies joined Hanno in Commission with him.
These two, after several passages, at length agreed to fight one set battle
with the Enemy, who consenting, a bloody contest ensued, wherein at length the
Carthaginians had the better. A great part of the Africans were slain, and the
rest fled to a neighboring City, where not long after they yielded
themselves, Utterly defeateth them, and the War ends, after three years and
almost four months.
and Mathos was taken alive. The subjects of Carthage now turned to obedience
all, except they of Hippacrita and Utica, who being past hope of mercy from
their enraged Lords, seemed resolved to stand out; but Hanno and Amilcar
bringing their forces, constrained them to submit to such conditions as the
Carthaginians would lay upon them. Mathos, and those that were with him being
carried to the City, was used with all sorts of contumely and torment, and so
this Libyan War ended, having lasted three years, and almost four months,
being, says Polybius, the most cruel and wicked that ever we heard of. But it
gave the Carthaginians occasion to repent of two great errors, viz. Trusting so
great a multitude of Mercenaries together when they were idle; and the cruel,
and tyrannical usage of their subjects.

16. The Romans, (that we may return to them the History of whom is our proper
subject) though they observed the League during these troubles, and at length,
as was said, gave the Carthaginians also reason to like well of their
friendship, yet thought they had some cause to be angry with them. For such of
their subjects as sailed from Italy into Africa, they seized on, lest they
should carry Provisions to their Enemies, and had at Carthage almost 500 of
such kind of men in prison. Yet when Ambassadors were sent to complain hereof,
they kindly dismissed all those in custody, which so affected the Romans, that
they also sent them all their prisoners, gave them all they asked, and
permitted their Merchants to carry them necessaries, forbidding them to
Traffic with their Enemies: they also refused to hearken to such of the
Carthaginian Mercenaries as having betrayed their trust invited them into
Sardinia. But though Polybius tells us that this they did; yet it appears
from him also that this modesty continued but for a time. For, allured, as it
seems, by this invitation, they sailed thither, which much offended the
Carthaginians, who thought that the place by far more right belonged to them;
so that they prepared to send forces into the Island. The Romans took occasion
hereat to decree War against them, complaining that these forces were not
designed so much against the Sardinians as themselves, The Romans wrest
Sardinia from the Carthagians with more Tribute.
which forced the other, who found themselves in no good case to manage the War
with them, to give way to the time, and quit not only Sardinia, but pay
further to the Romans 1200 Talents. This, though submitted to at present, bred
such grudges and malice, as at length brake out into another War, a more
dangerous and bloody than the former, as will appear.

17. In the Cicero Tuscul. lib. 1. and in Bruto. Cassiodorus in Chronico.
year after the ending of the first Punick War, the 514 of the City, C.
Claudius Cento, and M. Sempronius Tuditanus being Consuls, the year preceding
the birth of Ennius, the first Comedies and Tragedies were made by Livius
Andronicus the Poet. This man being a Grecian born, was rightly called
Andronicus, Comedies and Tragedies first Rome, made by Livius Andronicus.
and surnamed Livius from his Master Livius Salinator, whose Children he
taught, and for his learning was manumitted by him. Lib. 17. cap. 21.
Gellius says, that he now first at Rome taught plays about 160 years after
the death of Sophocles and Euripides, and 52 after that of Menander. But
whereas he is said by Gellius first to have made or taught plays as Rome, it
is to be understood of these two sorts of Poetry now mentioned, Lib. 2. c. 4.
Valerius Maximus telling us, that he drew the minds of the spectators to those
shows from the use of Satires, which by little and little succeeded that most
ancient and plain Roman sport of the Histriones brought out of Etruria, (as we
showed before) for the stopping of the Pestilence, through the command of the
Oracle. The Ludi Senici.
These Ludi Scenici were first managed with rude gestures, Lege Livium l. 7.
and Casaub. de Satira Romana.
and incomposed Songs, called Versus Fescennini from Fescennium a City of
Hetruria. From these jocular speeches, which at random were wont to be uttered
at the Roman solemnities, came the Satire, as later in time so more elaborate,
and as for meter a perfect Poem containing ridiculous things digested into
Verse, which they were wont to utter amongst themselves, after the ancient
custom. The Satire.
It differed as much from that of the Greeks, as from the rest differs
Dramatick Poetry, whereof the Romans at this time knew not so much as the name.
A Satire being afterward variously handled by the Romans, at length was
reduced to two sorts, which Fabius only acknowledges. The former was found
out by Lucilius, and the later ennobled by Varro. Horace mentions two kinds
of most ancient Poetry; one whereof they used in the praise of their gods, as
when they appeased Tellus with a sow-pig, and Sylvanns with milk: the other,
when in jest and sport they jeered one another, being the same with the
Fescennine Verses, whence came the Satires, to which Livius Andronicus added
the plays of Comedies and Tragedies, as was observed.

18. Four years after, A. M. 3769. Ol. 136. an. 1. V. C. 518. Seleucid. 77.
Seleuci Callinici 11. Ptol. Euerget. 11.
were celebrated at Rome the third time the Saecular Games, concerning which it
is convenient to speak in this place, that beginners may know the differences
of Roman exercises. These were called Ludi Magni, The third Saecular or
Terentine Games.
as others were, (in opposition to the Scenici, and games made by private men)
and Ludi Terentini (not Tarentini, whereof Students are to beware) from
Terentus a place in the Campus Martius where they were celebrated. But there
were other games called also Terentini Ludi (which some not considering have
run into confusion) and that more properly than these Saecular ones were, and
therefore the rise of them all is to be related. There was one Valesius a man
of prime note, amongst the Sabines, who living near Eretus, and not far from
Tiber, in a great Plague, Vide Valerium Maxim. l. 2. c. 4.
had two sons and a daughter which fell dangerously sick. Amongst his prayers
for them, he heard a voice that they should recover, if carrying them to
Terentus, he would fetch them some warm water of Tiber from the altar of Pluto
and Proserpina. He thought the City Tarentum was meant, and doubted how he
should come by any Tiberine water in that remote part of Italy; but resolving
to be obedient, he sailed down the River toward Ostia, and late at night
arrived at the Campus Martius, where he understood there was a place called
Terentus. Landing here, he gave his children some warm water, wherewith
refreshed they fully recovered, The Original of the Terentine Games.
and told their father, how in a dream they had seen a certain god, who
commanded, that at the altar of Pluto and Proserpina black colored sacrifices
(furvae hostiae) should be offered, as also that Lectisternes (beds made for
the cause of sacrifice, as whereon to lie down after the Roman fashion at a
solemn feast) and night games should be made. Valesius seeing no altar in the
place, thought of making one, when, as his slaves were digging for that
purpose, they found one in the earth dedicated to Pluto and Proserpina. Here
then he sacrificed, and three nights together, because of the number of his
children, made Lactisterns and Games, being afterward from this thing named
Manius Valesius Terentinus. Zozimus writes, Trina Terentio celebrata
trinoctialudo. Anson.
that the Romans 100 years before being to fight with the Albans, were
admonished to build this altar in the earth, and that having sacrifized they
covered it. But this passage concerning Valesius happened about the twelfth year
of Servius Tullius, wherein he founded the Lustrum; in the 188 of the City, and
the same wherein the Panathenaea were instituted (or rather reduced to the
course of five years, being-formerly instituted by Theseus) at Athens, this
being the third year of the 53 Olympiad.

The Terentine and Saecular Games confounded,
19. This was the Original of Terentine Games, which some have confounded with
the Saecular. For, the next that were celebrated were made by Valerius
Poplicola in the year following the banishment of Tarquinius, which Zozimus
calls Games of Pluto and Proserpina, and Quem vide cap. 17. lib. de die
Natali.
Censorinus, from Antias the Historian, gives them the name of Saecular. This
confusion cast Censorinus into such a perplexity about the Saecular Games, that
he thus expresses the incertainty of the Roman intervals of times and ages.

Some think the Roman ages to be distinguished by the Saecular Games; which, if
it be so, Which much perplexed Censorinus.
the manner of the Roman age is uncertain. For, concerning the intervals of
times, wherein these Games ought to be celebrated, we are not only ignorant
how great they were formerly, but what they ought to be for the time to come.
For, Antias and other Historians, with Varro and Livy, have written, that they
ought to be made every hundredth year. But on the contrary, both the
Commentaries of the Quindecimviri (or 15 men) and the edicts of Augustus
testify, that they ought to be reiterated every hundred and tenth, as Certus
undenos decies per annos Orbis ut cantus, referatque ludos Ter die clara
totiensque grata Nocte frequentes.
Horatius Flaccus also says. Further, if we search the annals of ancient
times, we shall yet be in greater uncertainty by far. For, Valerius Antias
says, that the first Saecular Games were made after the banishment of the
Kings, 245 years after the building of Rome by Valerius Publicola: But the
commentaries of the 15 Men say, that 298 years M. Valetius and Sp. Virginius
being Consuls. The second Games Antias will have made in the 305 year of the
City, but its written in the Commentaries of the 15 Men, in the 408, M.
Valerius Corvinus the second time, and C. Paetilius being Consul: and so he
proceeds.

20. Hist Sacra and Exotica ad A. M. 3491.
Jacobus Cappellus dissolveth the difficulty in this manner. The cause of this
perplexity which troubles Censorinus is this. All Saecular Games are
Terentine, The difficulty resolved by Jacobus Cappellus.
but all Terentine Games are not Secular. For some were made upon some
occasion, as those which Valerius Publicola made this 245 year of the City, and
Valesius about the year 188. These were Terentine Games but not Saecular. Now,
the Saecular are of two sorts. The greater, Quindecim Diana preces virorum
curet. -- Horat. in carm. Saeculari.
which perhaps thou may not call amiss Vide Tacitum Annal. lib. 11.
Quindecimvirales, were celebrated at the distance of 110 years. Of this kind
the first were made by the command of the Quindecimviri, in the 298 year of the
City, 110 years, as it seems, after the first Terentine Games made by
Valesius. So, the Valesian shall fall in the 188 of the City. The first of the
Quindecimviri were made in the 298 year of the City, the Second in the 408, the
Third in the 518, and the Fourth in the 628. The lesser Saeculum, or Age,
consisted but of 100 years, instituted as it seems, by L. Valerius, after the
banishment of the Decemviri, that year being according to some the 300 of the
City. So the First Centenarie Games agree with the 305 Varronian year of the
City, the Second with the 405, the Third with the 505, the Fourth with the 605.

21. Though the Second of the Centenaries should have been celebrated in the
405 year, yet (whether it happened through the Gallick War or otherwise) they
were not till that following, wherein M. Popilius Laenas the fourth time, and
L. Cornelius Scipio were Consuls, as Zozimus writes. These Censorinus has
omitted and four more, Observations concerning the Centenaries.
if credit be given to the inscription of a certain stone mentioned by George
Herwart, from which it should appear, that before this year were celebrated
three Saecular Games, viz. in the 100, 200, and 300 years, according to the
account of Pictor, and the 105, 205, and 305, according to that of Varro. Two
Solemnities also at the distance of 110 years, as in the 188 and 298, after the
account of Varro, to which may be added those made by Poplicola extraordinarily
in the 245 year. So that the Games celebrated this year ( viz. in the 406) may
rightly be called the seventh Games. The Quindecimvirals (or those of 100
years) continued till Constantine's time, who forbad them to be celebrated in
the 1067 year of the City. His son Constantius also prohibited the Centenaries,
which in his time fell in the 1100 year of the City. Fifty seven years after,
the Heathen got leave of Honorius to celebrate the Terentine Games again in his
sixth Confulship (for which Claudian thanks him) 200 years after they had been
kept by Severus. But to return, these Third Saecular Games which gave occasion
to this discourse, and were celebrated in the 518 year of the City, and the
fifth after the first Punick War, P. Cornelius Lentulus and C. L^cinius Varus
being Consuls, were those of the Quindecimviri, or of the interval of 110
years; that we may note thus much for the information of Students.

22. In the sixth year afer the first Punick War Livius l 1. Eutropius l. 3.
Plutarch in Numa.
the Temple of Janus was shut at Rome now the second time, The Temple of Janus
shut the second time.

The first divorce.


all things being in quiet, and the Romans having no Wars any where after the
reducement of Sardinia by T. Man^ius Torquatus the Consul. In the following
year, being the 520 of the City, the first Val. Max. l. 2. c. 1. exemp. 4.
Agellius l. 17. c. 21. Dionys. Halicarn.
divorce was made by Sp. Carvilius Ruga, who, though he did it under a specious
pretense of his wives barrenness, was ever ill-willed for it by the People.
This same year was M. Porcius Cicero de Senectute.
born in the precincts of Tusculum, who had the name of Plutarch in Catone.
Cato for his wisdom; Catus in the Roman language (whence the diminutive
Catulus) signifying sagacious, acute, or ingenious. And this year did Cn.
Naevius the Poet Agellius ut supra.
publish plays to the People, C^. Naevius the Poet.
who wrote also the first Punick war, (wherein he served) in the most ancient
kind of Verse called Saturnii Versus, which were succeeded by the Fescennini,
some being with meter, and some without. He died in the 30 year after this, and
left a proud Idem l. 1. c. 24.
Epitaph of his own making, which he commanded should be engraven on his Tomb,
and Gellius has recorded together with those of Plautus and Pacuvius.

23. Five years the Temple of Janus continued shut, and in the sixth was opened
by a War with the Illyrians. For, Teuta Queen of that Nation, Polybius l. 2.
the widow of Agron (who for joy that he had prospered in his enterprises
against the Aetolians, drank so hard, that he fell into a Pleurisy, and
thereof died) elevated by her prosperity in Peace, gave out commissions to her
Subjects to rob all at Sea whomsoever they met with. The Illyrians then having
taken Phoenice a strong City of Epirus, struck a great terror into all the
maritime parts of Greece, and setting upon the Italian Merchants, some they
robbed, The Illyrians infest the Italians at sea,
others they killed, and not a few they carried away prisoners. The Romans
having hitherto neglected all complaints against them, when now many came
together, sent unto Illyricum Caius and Lucius Coruncani, to inform themselves
concerning these matters. Teuta answered, she would take care that no public
injury should be offered to the Romans, but it was not the custom to hinder any
from making what private commodity they could out of the Sea. But says Lucius,
the Romans have a good custom publicly to prosecute private injuries, and to
relieve the injured: therefore we will shortly endeavor, God willing, to
constrain thee to amend these customs. The Queen took this liberty of speech so
hainously, that her womanish impotency and anger prevailed against the Law of
Nations, to have some sent after the Ambassadors, who killed Lucius. For this,
War was decreed against her, Whence a War ensues.
and both the Consuls of the 525 year of the City, Cn. Fulvins Centumalus, and
L. Posthumous Albinus Consul the second time, were sent into Illyricum; Fulvius
with the Navy, and his Colleague with the Land-Army.

24. Fulvius received Corcyra, A. M. 3776. Ol. 137. an. 4. V.C. 525. Sell.
Callinici 18. Ptol. Euerg. 18. Idem and Justin.
given up into his hands by Demetrius Pharius; then took he Apollonia, and the
Armies joining, the Consuls freed Dyrrhachium besieged by the Illyrians. Then
most of the Illyrick Cities were either taken or delivered up, whereupon the
Queen retired with a few followers to Rhizon a strong Town, situate upon a
River of the same name, and the Spring following sent to Rome to desire Peace.
It was granted to her on these terms: Peace is granted to Teuta the Queen.
To pay a yearly tribute; to quit all Illyricum, except a very few places: and
Not to sail beyond the River Quissus with more than two Barks, and these
unarmed. For nine years the Illyrians continued in obedience, till the 535 year
of the City, wherein rebelling, they were again reduced by Aemilius Paulus and
M. Livius the Consuls. For, Demetrius Pharius then their King, forgetting the
great favors received from the People of Rome, wasted the Towns of Illyricum
subject to the Romans, and passed the bounds set by the League. Aemilius within
seven days took Dimalium, and followed him to Pharus, a Town of the Island
Phario, which he also took. Demarius being fled to Philip King of Macedonia, he
seized on the rest of Illyricum, which he ordered to pay a stipend to Pineus,
the son of Agron. But thus was begun, and finished the War with Teuta, which
Florus (according to his custom, breaking the order and series of time) falsely
places after the Gallicum Cisalpinum, or that with the Galls inhabiting within
the Alps.

25. For, the same year wherein the Peace was made with Teuta, A. M. 3777. V.C.
526.
the promulgating of the Agragrian Law by C. Flaminius, Tribune of the people,
brought this great, The Seditious attempts of Flaminius the Tribune,
and dangerous War upon the Commonwealth. There being a good quantity of ground
Conquered within the Country of these Galls, he preferred a Law for the
dividing of it to the people, man by man. Q. Fabius Maximus being now Consul
the second time stiffly opposed it, Sp. Carbilius his Colleague not stirring as
De Senect.
Cicero tells us; the Senate also labored to cross it, but when in the
Rostra Flaminius read the Law, his father laying hands on him he obeyed, and
went down, though he neither valued the Consul nor Senate, nor yet was
affrighted with the levying of an Army. Nay, the people about him was so
overawed by paternal right, that, Lib. 5. cap. 4. Exemp. 5.
as Valerius Maximus writes, though the Assembly was thus disappointed, not
the least muttering was heard. Whether the Law for division fully passed or not
(by reason of the interruption by old Flaminius) yet this thing gave occasion
to a new and great War, as Polybius writes, who mistaketh the time by four
years, for as much as these stirs about the Agrarian fell not out in the 522.
but the 526 of the City, wherewithal the second Consulship of Fabius Maximus,
and that of Sp. Carnilius Maximus is joined. Indeed the first of Fabius fell in
with the 521 year of the City, two years before Teuta killed the Ambassador,
and two more at least before the finishing of the Illyrian War, whence may be
conjectured, that as the mistake of Polybius might arise from want of
distinction, betwixt the first and second Confulships of Fabius; so the error
of Florus (or him, who ever wrote that System) in placing the Gallick War
before the Illyrian, might proceed from an (inconsiderate) trust to the
Authority of that excellent Author.

26. The report concerning this Law awakened the Galls, especially the Boii,
Occasioneth the War, called Bellum Gallicum Cisalpinum.
who were nearest neighbors. Concluding now that the Romans fought not so much
for glory and dominion, as out of a covetous design of enriching themselves,
they sent to the Insubres for aid, exhorting them to remember what their
Ancestors once did at Rome, and to tread in their steps. These joining together
sent over the Alps for other Galls, living near Rhodanus, and called Gossatae,
from their wages, says Polybius, or as others write, from Gessa a kind of
weapon they used. Their Kings, Congolitanus and Aneroestus being allured by
great promises, with a vast force passed over the Alps, and joining with the
Insubres and Boti, to the number of 50000 foot, and 20000 horse brake into
Etruria. When first the Romans heard of their passing the Alps, they commanded
Aemilius the Consul to go to Ariminum, to give them trouble in case they came
that way. They ordered one of the Praetors into Etruria; for, C. Attillius the
other of the Consuls was already sent into Sardinia. The whole City was sad
and grievously afflicted, fearing the Galls as fatal to it. All the Registers
of the Military age were inquired int, too feel what forces they, and what
their Associates, were able to set forth. The Italians prepared to fight, not
as for the Roman Empire, but their own safety; so that an Army was in a
readiness, consisting of 700000 foot, and 70000 horse, according to Polybius.
But Fabius Pictor wrote, as Eutropius relates, that 800000 men were prepared
for this War, wherein he himself was employed.

Preparations on the Roman side for this War.
27. The Tables of the Military age, as they were brought to the Senate,
contained of the Latins 80000 foot, and 5000 horse; of the Samniies 70000
foot, and 7000 horse; of the Iapyges and Messapians 50000 foot, and 16000
horse; of the Lucanians 30000 foot, and 3000 horse; of the Marsi, Marrucini,
Ferentani and Vestini 20000 foot, and 4000 horse. And of the Roman people gave
their names, together with those of Campania, 250000 foot, and 230000 horse.
The total sum 558000. There went out with the Consuls four Legions, whereof
each contained 5200 foot, and 300 horse, together with 30000 foot, and 3000
horse of the Associates: in all 50800 foot, and 3200 horse. There were in
readiness for necessary occasions, of the Etruscans and Sabines 50000 foot,
and 4000 horse, which the Praetor led into Etruria to oppose the Enemy on the
Borders. Of the Veneti and Cenomani were assembled 20000. and as many of the
Umbri and Sarsinates inhabiting the Appennine Mountains, who were placed on the
Borders of Gall, by invading the Territories of the Boti to draw them back, and
divide them from the rest. These were the forces placed on the Borders. At Rome
were in a readiness for the uncertain chances of War, as a supply 30000 foot,
and 1500 horse of Citizens, besides of the Associates 30000 foot, and 2000
horse. In Sicily, and about Tarentum were placed two Legions, whereof each
contained 4200 foot, and 200 horse. The sum of all these amounts to 210300 men.
So, says Polybius, the sum of the forces which guarded the City were 150000
foot, and about 6000 horse, but the whole number of the multitude fit for War
was 700000 foot, 70000 horse, which yet Hannibal durstoppose, and invade Italy
with scarce 20000. But this will appear further in what shall be hereafter said.

28. The Galls descending into Etruria wasted all with fire and sword, A. M.
3780. Ol. 138. ann. 4. V.C. 529. Sell. Cerauni 2. Ptol. Euerg. 22.
till they came to Clusium, a place three days journey distant from Rome.
There were they beset, the Praetor on their back, and the two Consuls before
blocking up all the passages, so that they were forced to fight two contrary
ways in two fronts, and that very disadvantagiously, both by reason of their
nakedness, The Galls overthrown beg peace.
and the unfitness of their Arms. But the vanity of the Gaesatae was most
hurtful to them, who casting off their Cloths would needs fight naked and
charge first; for, being easily discomfited, they discouraged their fellows.
Forty thousand were slain, and ten thousand taken, amongst whom was
Concolitanus; the other King Aneroestus having killed himself. This battle was
fought in the 529 year of the City, L. Aemilius Dapus, and C. Attilius Regulus
(who was therein slain) being Consuls. Afterward inroads being made into the
Territories of the Galls, they were several times overthrown, and so harrased,
Which the Consuls hinder.
that they sent Ambassadors to Rome to beg peace on any terms. The people being
inclining enough to it, M. Claudius Marcellus, and Cn. Cornelius Scipio the
Consuls of the 532 year stopped the thing.

29. The former especially, having a disposition suitable to his name ( Marcus
and Mamercus being thought to be derived of Mars, and therefore also the
diminutives Marculus and Marcellus) inflamed the multitude to the War;
Marcellus ends the War.
whereupon the Galls now desperate resolved to make the last trial, Vide
Polybium lib. 2. Plutarch. in Marcello. Florum l. 2. c. 4. Entrop. lib. 3.
Orosium lib. 4. cap. 13. Livii Epitom. lib. 20.
and using all endeavors, sent, and hired 30000 of the Gaesatae. The Consuls
invading the Country of the Insubres besieged Acerrae, which to relieve the
Galls laid siege to Clastidium, a Town associate with the Romans. Here was
fought a bloody battle, wherein the Galls were overthrown, Marcellus with his
own hand killed Virdomarus King of the Gaesaetae, and dedicated the third
Aspice ut insigais spoliis Marcellus opimis

Ingreditur, victorque viros supereminet omnes.

Hic rem Romanam magno turbante tumultu Sister eques sternel Paenos Gallumque
rebell^m

Tertiaque a^ma patri suspendet cauta Quiri^o. Virgil. Aen. 6.


Opima Spolia to Jupiter Feretrius, though Numa had commanded they should be
consecrated to Quirinus. Those that escaped fled to Mediolanum (now Millane)
the chief seat of the Insubres, which being shortly taken, the War was thereby
ended after six years, and Marcellus returned in Triumph. The title of the
Triumph in the Capitoline stories mentioned with the Galls Insubres, Germans
also to have been subdued, which Germans seem no other then the Gaesatae, thus
called by some mistake. As for the name of Caesa^ae, though Polybius thinks
it derived from their wages, and others from a kind of vveapon; yet Simpson in
Chronic. Catholic. ad A. M. 3780.
another renders a more probable derivation, which the condition of these
people being Mercenaries prompteth to. The Teutonick language (a dialect
whereof Joseph Scaliger and others prove the ancient Gallick to have been)
calls him Gaest, whom the English Saxon (a branch also of the Teutonick)
names Guest at this time, betokening a stranger. The word Gaesata might well
therefore be thence derived, being changed something by those that were
ignorant of the Language, from that whereby the Galls signified strangers, such
as these Mercenaries were.

30. The third year after the ending of the Gallick, began the second Punik, or
Carthaginian War. Amilcar the Carthaginian Captain had a great itching desire
to renew the quarrel with the Romans, as soon as the State could recover its
strength, and had done it betimes, but that the War with the Mercenaries
happened, which much distressing the Commonwealth, he passed over into Spain,
where having to do with such an Enemy as he could grow upon, The Acts of
Amilcar Barcas, after the ending of the first Punick War.
he there enlarged far and wide the Carthaginian Dominion, and died in great
honor, though he was drowned in a River, being put also to flight by Orisson
King of the Iberi, Diod. Sicul. lib. 25. Eclog.
who pretending to come to his assistance in the siege of Helice unexpectedly
fell upon him. As he had governed the Army in Spain nine years, Of Asdrubal his
son-in-law.
so his son-in-law Asdrubal succeeding him, commanded it almost as many, with a
mind as averse from the Romans as he; but he dissembled his hatred and designs,
that he might gain all Spain to the Carthaginian interest. After 8 years he was
slain by a Gall (says Polybius) or a slave to a certain Spaniard (says
Justin) who killed him in revenge for his Masters death. He also much bettered
the affairs of Carthage, not so much by Arms, Polyb. lib. 3. Livius l. 21.
Corn. Nepos in Hamilcar. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 3. Eater. Exemp. 3.
as his winning carriage upon the petty Princes. After his death Annibal the
son of Amilcar Barcas was chosen Captain by the Army, Annibal the son of
Amilcar Barcas created General by the Carthaginians
and presently confirmed at Carthage by the people, whom his father taking
along with him into Spain, being then nine years old, compelled to swear at the
Altar, his hand touching the sacrifice, that as soon as he could he would be an
Enemy to the people of Rome.

31. Annibal presently after his Creation fell upon the Olcades whom he
subdued, and besides them, within a years space, the Vaccaei and Carpentani,
and nothing remained beyond the River Iberus that was considerable, and
unsubdued, besides the Saguntines. They being confederate with Rome gave them
there intelligence how things went, who sent some into Spain to see how matters
stood, and what was intended by the Carthaginians. These Commissioners having
audience of Hannibal, religiously admonished him not to meddle with the
Saguntines, and (according to the League made with Asdrubal) not to pass over
the River Iberus. His answers did not conceal his inward hatred, which caused
the Romans to expect no better than a War; but they hoped to have Saguntus the
seat thereof, and endeavored to clear themselves of Illyricum ere it happened.
Annibal was not ignorant of what they designed, and therefore resolved by
taking that Town to cut off all hope of warring in Spain. He doubted not by
that example to terrify others, so as to reduce to obedience those that yet
stood out, and confirm therein such as he had already brought under; and this
especially he aimed at, by reducing this place, to leave no Enemy at his back,
by the plunder of which also he intended to gratify his Soldiers. With all his
force then he set upon it, and provoking his men by his own example to all
manner of diligence, He takes Saguntus a Town in Spain, confederate with Rome.
took it in the eighth month. The Inhabitants retained their fidelity unto the
Romans to the last, and when almost spent with hunger, Fire, Sword, and
Engines, they that remained, in a fire made in the Forum consumed themselves
with all their riches, as Florus writes, though Polybius speaks of much
money found in the Town, besides rich stuff, which Hannibal sent to Carthage.

32. When first the Romans heard that Saguntus was taken, they sent Ambassadors
to Carthage to require that Hannibal should be delivered up as the breaker of
the League, Satisfaction is demanded by the Romans.
or else to denounce War. Upon their arrival the Carthaginians deputed Hanno to
treat with them, who slighted the matter of the League made with Asdrubal,
pretending there was none; and if there was, it was made by his mere pleasure
without consent of the Senate. Besides, therein, he said, was no mention made
of the River Iberus; that a regard was to be had of the Allies of both the
States he confessed, but this nothing concerned the Saguntines, who at the time
of the ratification were not confederates with Rome. The Ambassadors perceiving
the Carthaginians backward to what they propounded, said no more; but the
Senior of them holding out the lap of his Gown to the Senate. Here, says he,
we bring you both War and Peace; whether you will have I shall bring forth. The
Carthaginian King bade them bring forth which they pleased; then the Roman,
saying, he would take out War, many of the Senators answered, that they
accepted of it. And none being given, War is denounced and accepted of.
This fell out in the Consulship of M. Livius, afterward called Salinator (from
his bringing up the Impost upon Salt) and L. Aemilius Paulus. In their time
foreign Ceremonies begun to be brought into Rome, which displeasing the more
sober sort of men, the Val. Max. l. 1. c. 3. exemp. 3.
Senate thought fit that the Chapels of Isis and Serapis should be pulled down.
When no Artificers would venture to touch them, Aemilius the Consul put off his
pratexta, or long Roab edged with purple silk, and taking an Hatchet struck it
into the door.

33. In the year following, being the 536 of the City, A. M. 3787. Ol. 140. an.
3. V. C. 536. Antiochi Mag. 6. Ptol. Philop. 5. Polyb. l. 3. Livius l. 21.
the sixth of Antiochus the Great, and the fifth of Ptolomy Philopator, in the
Consulship of Pub. Cornelius Scipio, and Tib. Sempronius Longus, three and
twenty years after the ending of the first Punick War, the Second began, which
we have described by Polybius, The second Punick or Carthaginian War begins.
and after him by T. Livius, who has transcribed the 21 Book of his History
almost word for word. Annibal now 26 years of age, in the Spring moved from his
winter quarters with 90000 Foot, and 12000 Horse, and passing over the River
Iberus, subdued all the Towns as far as the Pyrenaean hills. Annibal having
conquered all Spain as far as the Pyrenaean hills,
Then leaving Hanno with a sufficient force to keep the Country, and sending as
many of the Spanish Soldiers home, he marched with the the rest, in number
50000 Foot, and nigh 9000 Horse, over the Pyrenaean hills; and so through Gall
unto the Alps. Having marched 100 miles in ten days from the River Rhodanus,
he came to the foot of these mountains, which when he ascended, he encountered
with great difficulties, being opposed by the Allobroges (inhabiting the
Country now called Savoy) who possessed themselves of the places through which
he must necessarily pass. On the ninth day he came to the top, whence his
Soldiers had a prospect of Italy. Proceeding after a little rest, he lost as
many men here in the depth of the Snow, as formerly by the incursions of
Enemies, and at length came to a place which would affoard no passage for
Horse, or Elephants. The place of it self was precipitious, but lately by a
falling of earth it was become so, to the depth of 1000 foot. He labored then
to bring his men through other ways never before trodden, but at length the
Snow making them impassible, he was forced to betake himself to the levelling
of the Rock. They made a great fire, wherewith the Rock being heated, they
putrified it with Vinegar, then did they cleave it, and so diminished the
descent by moderate turnings, that not only the beasts of burden, but the
Elephants also might safely pass. Passes over the Alps into Italy.
Four days were spent about the Rock: and by this time almost all the beasts
were wasted; for on the top was little grass, and that covered with Snow.
Coming lower, certaing valleys afforded pasture, where the cattle were
refreshed, and rest was given to the weary Soldiers. Thence descended Annibal
into the Plain, in the fifth month after he had parted from new Carthage
(built by Asdrubal, and now called Cartagena) in Spain, having passed over the
Alps in fourteen days. In the passage he lost a great part of his Army,
bringing into the Country of the Insubres, but 10200 African Foot, 8000 of the
Spanish, and 6000 Horse.

34. Scipio the Consul having Spain for his Province, was by Sea going thither,
when he understood that Hannibal was near the River Rhodanus. There he intended
to have given him a stop; but missing of him, he returned on shipboard and
hasted to Italy, there to meet him, before his men had yet refreshed
themselves. Defeateth Scipio the Consul.
They met and joined battle, wherein the Consul had the worst, being wounded,
and preserved alive by the valor of his young son afterward named Africanus.
The Roman Senate, when first they received intelligence that Hannibal had
passed the Alps, sent for the other Consul Sempronius out of Sicily to the aid
of his Colleague. According to order he brought over his Army, and united it
with Scipio's at the River Trebia. Having had the better in some skirmishes
with certain parties of Annibal, he desired to make trial of a battle, that his
Colleague being sick, he might have all the glory of Victory, and though Scipio
alleged, that by delaying to fight the Galls might be farther drawn in, and
their own Soldiers better exercised, yet lest the battle should be deferred
till the coming of the next Consuls, he resolved to fight alone. Annibal feared
nothing more, than that they should refuse to fight, because as yet the Galls
continued his, and he knew the best of the Roman Captains to be unable to act,
and his own Army fresh and cheerful. In the battle, which shortly followed, the
Romans were overthrown, being drawn out by a party that Hannibal sent to
provoke them, ere they had armed their bodies against the extremity of the
mid-winter season, either by meat or other provision; so that engaging with
cold and hunger, And Sempronius his Colleague.
and beset with their enemies (whereof as in the former battle, the Numidians,
to their great terror fell upon their rear) they were defeated, though with
great slaughter of the Enemy, through whose ranks 10000 broke and escaped to
Placentia, the rest being either slain, taken, or drowned in the River. The
Carthaginians having pursued them to the River Trebia, returned to their Camp
so stupefied with cold, that they were scarce sensible of the Victory. For,
rain mixed with snow, and intolerable cold, killed many men, and almost all
the beasts and Elephants.

35. At this time things went better with the Romans in Spain and Sicily. In
the former Cnaeus Scipio (being sent thither by his brother the Consul upon his
return into Italy) overthrew Hanno the Carthaginian, and took in a good part of
the Country, wherein was also new Carthage. For the following year C. Flaminius
(who being Tribune had preferred the Agrarian Law) was the second time made
Consul, together with Cn. Servilius Geminus. He had a good gift in speaking,
but no skill in War, being yet heady and impatient of advice. Hannibal having
all this while made the Country of the Galls the seat of War, resolved to
change it, and after some consultation about his way into Etruria, resolved
upon that of the Fens, as short and unexpected to the Enemy, though more
troublesome to pass. Being forced to march three or four whole days through
water, this sorely distressed all his men, except the Galls, many of the beasts
were left in the mud, and the hoofs of the Horses came off. He himself riding
on an Elephant that was only left, escaped with his life, but was sorely
pained in his eyes, one whereof he lost utterly. Being arrived at dry ground,
he hoped by some means or other to entrap the Consul, understanding what his
disposition was: He passed by his Camp and went further into the Country, which
enraged Flaminius, who thought himself slighted by the Enemy. When amongst the
Romans some told him that he must not rashly pursue, but use great caution,
especially by reason of the Horse; but above all things stay for his Colleague,
and not hazard a battle without the conjunction of both Armies, he was so far
from following their advice, that he could not bear their words. Rising with
all his forces he had neither respect to time nor place, only seeking to
fight, as if nothing had been more certain than the Victory, with hope whereof
he he so elevated the vulgar, that a rabble followed the Camp greater in number
than the Army it self, and furnished with chains, bonds, and other things,
wherewith to keep fast those prisoners and booty, whereof they doubted not to
become Masters.

36. Annibal marching through Etruria, wasted it with fire and sword, Lege
praeter Polyb. and Live. Plutarch in vita Fabii. Co^n. Nepot. Annib. Appian in
Annibalicis. Florum l. 2. c. 6.
the more to inrage his Enemy, and at length came to the Lake called
Thrasymenus and Thrasymene, near to which are certain mountains, and betwixt
them and it a narrow way leading to a valley, beset with them, and a ridge of
hills. And Flaminius at the Lake Thrasymene.
These hills he made choice of, wherein to place his men, bestowing them round
about, so that Flaminius following him into the valley, was fallen upon round
about, and slain with many of his men ere (almost) they knew who hurt them, by
reason of a mist which then was risen from the Lake. Within the valley fell
15000, and near upon 6000 escaped to a Village, where they were forced to yield
themselves. Annibal gathering all his prisoners together, to the number of
15000, kept in custody the Romans, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 6. exemp. 6. Entrop.
Orosium.
but dismissed the Latins without ransom. The body of the Consul, says
Valerius Maximus, was sought for by Annibal to be buried; even his body, who,
as much as in him lay, had buried the Roman Empire. Cn. Servilius the other
Consul who kept Ariminum (a Country of Italy now called Rimini, lying upon the
River Rubicon) hearing of Annibal's coming into Etruria, purposed to go and
join with his Colleague, but finding that difficult, chose out 4000 men whom he
sent to his aid, under conduct of C. Centenius (by some called Centronius) whom
he commanded, if possible, to reach him before the fight. Hannibal hearing of
this supply, after the battle, sent out Maharbal with a party, which cutting
off one half, forced the other to an hill, where they also yielded themselves.

37. The Romans struck with consternation at these losses, upon mature
deliberation resolved there was need of a General with absolute authority. But
the Consul (who alone had power, and that in the Roman Dominions, to name a
Dictator) being absent, and encompassed with the Carthaginian Forces, so that
no message could conveniently be sent to him, and the People having no power to
create a Dictator, they created as a Prodictator, or Vice Dictator, Q. Fabius
Maximus Verrucosus, whose Master of the Horsemen was M. Minutius Rufus.
Whereupon Fabius Maximus is made Vice Dictator, who by delaying breaks
Annibal's success.
Fabius matched Annibal in policy, breaking his success by delaying to fight,
which others had increased by their temerity, so that he obtained the name of
Unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. Ennius.
Cunctator. Hannibal was hereof very sensible, being by him put to his shifts,
wanting provisions exceedingly, and lying in an Enemies Country. But the Master
of Horsemen being something hot and rash, in Fabius his absence, got the
better in certain skirmishes, and hereby procured so much favor from the
multitude, which now accounted the worthy Dictator lazy and fearful, that
beyond all example his power was made equal to that of his. Minutius puffed up
herewith, sought to improve his authority by further rashness, so as to engage
with the Enemy, in which action he and his party had been overthrown, but that
Fabius in good time came in and saved him. This so convinced him of his former
folly, that he confessed his fault to the Dictator, whom he called his Father,
and renouncing his new power again, subjected his office to the Dictatorship.

38. Fabius, when his six months were out, laid down his Office, and was badly
requited, the Tribunes and others calumniating him with the Nobility, as
wilfully lengthening the War, which procured Terentius Varro a rash, hot, and
inconsiderable man, for the next year to be created Consul. He, though joined
with a prudent person L. Aemilius Paulus, so far prevailed, as to join battle
with Annibal at the place of Cannae an ignoble Village of Apulia, which the
year before had been destroyed, and only the Castle remained, on which Annibal
had lately seized. The Romans brought into the field 80000 Foot, and about 6000
Horse; the Carthaginians not much above 40000 Foot, and 10000 Horse. Florus
writes, that for the destruction of the unhappy Army, both General, Earth,
Heaven, the day, and the whole nature of things conspired. For Annibal not
content with the sending of those who counterfeiting a revolt, fell upon the
backs of the Romans, observing the nature of the place, so chose out his
ground, that besides his Army they must needs fight with wind, dust, and Sun.
But from others it appears, that the Romans fighting with their faces toward
the South, and the Carthaginians toward the North, the Sunbeams offended
neither. However, the abilities of the Punick General were seen so far in this,
as in other battles, that he overmatched them in skill, who exceeded him in
numbers, making such slaughter of them, that at length wearied, he commanded
his Soldiers to forbear, as Florus tells us. Of the Romans were slain 50000
men say Plutarch and Appian; 70000 says Polybius, and Livy has 40000 Foot,
and 2600 Horse. Amongst these was Aemilius the Consul (who unwilling to survive
the defeat refused to fly) 2 Quaestors, Who yet gives the Romans a most
grievous overthrow at Cannae.
21. Tribunes, 80 of Senatorian degree, diverse of Consular dignity, and so many
Equites or Knights, that, as Pliny writes, A. M. 3789. Ol. 141. ann. 1. V.C.
538. Ant. Mag. 8. Ptol. Philop. 7. Belli Punici 3.
Hannibal sent three bushels of gold rings to Rome, which were the Ensigns of
that order, though Pliny from this number endeavors to prove that the use of
them at this time was promiscuous, else a vast number must there have been of
them: but Livy writes, that more likely report held there were but one bushel.
Hannibal lost 5700 of his men. Varro the Consul fled to Venusia with 70 Horse,
whither also escaped 4000 Foot and Horse, which leading to Cannusium, where
were already 10000 men, he made up a show of a Consular Army, which by the help
of walls, though not of arms, seemed able to defend it self.

39. Had Hannibal taken his opportunity and marched to Rome, in all probability
he might have made an end of the War, And enervateth his Army by wintring at
Capua.
and of the Roman Empire both together; but this great Soldier knew (as
Maharbal Captain of his Horse truly told him) how to get, but not how to use
and improve a Victory. For, he loitered all this Summer, Livius lib. 23.
and having Capua a wealthy and luxurious City given up into his hands by the
Townsmen, there he took up his Winter quarters, and Capua became a Cannae to
his Soldiers. For, hereby he utterly spoiled an excellent Army, which now was
so enervated by the pleasures and effeminatenesse of the place, as ever after
it became impatient of labor, and its ancient Military Discipline, so that
before this it was harder for the Romans not to be overcome by Hannibal, than
afterward to overcome him. His fortune presently began to change. He was
worsted at Nola by Marcellus the Praetor, and repulsed at Casilinum, a very
small Castle, for a good space. At this time, though there was a Dictator in
the Camp ( M. Junius Pera, whose Master of the Hors-men was Tib. Sempronius)
yet the Senate being exhausted by the War, Two Dictators at the same time.
M. Fabius Buleo was named Dictator by Terentius the Consul, for filling it up,
without a Master of Hors-men. He coming into the Rostra, said, he did not
approve that there should be two Dictators at one time (which never before had
been known) nor that he was created without a Master of Hors-men; neither that
the power of Censorship should twice be permitted to one man; nor that power
for six months should be given to any Dictator, except for the War. What
extreme necessity had procured, he said he would moderate. For he would not
remove any Senator which C. Flaminius, and L. Aemilius the late Censors had
chosen, only transcribe, and cause them to be read over, lest the credit, and
esteem of Senators should be in the power of one man; and so he would supply
the places of the dead, that this man before that, and not one order should
seem preferred above another. The Senate filled.
The old Senate then being called over, he chose into vacant places, first such
as since the last Censorship had born Curule Offices, as each one had been
first created; then such as had been Aediles, Tribunes of the Commons, or
Quaestors, and lastly, such had any spoils hung up at home, which they
themselves had taken from the Enemy, or had received a Civick Crown. So 177
being thus chosen with universal approbation, he presently laid down his Office.

40. The Romans, though the defeat at Cannae threatened them with no less than
ruin, The Romans quickly recovered their courage.
quickly recovered their courage. When Varro (being sent for to name a
Dictator) was near the City, all Ranks went forth to meet him, and though he
was the cause of the overthrow, gave him thanks that he had not despaired
concerning the Commonwealth. Philip King of Macedonia having expected the
fortune of both parties, after the battle of Cannae joined in affiancy with
Hannibal; and this being discovered through the intercepting of his
Ambassadors, for to prevent his coming into Italy, the Romans took order for
the invasion of his own Territories. Annibal and his party goes down the wind
in Italy, and Spain.
At this time Hannibal was beaten at Cuma, and constrained to raise his siege;
and from Nola the second time by the same hand; Hanno having the same fortune
at Grumentum. In Spain the Scipioes so managed the War that they got ground,
being continually Superiors. Asdrubal was ordered by the Senate at Carthage to
pass into Italy, but upon his departure they defeated him in battle, and by
this success not only overthrew the design of joining with Hannibal, but drew
most of the Spaniards to their party, still improving the victory.

41. In Sicilie and Sardinia, though several attempts were made by the
Carthaginians, and some revolts happened, yet things proceeded in a good
condition. And in Sardinia.
In one battle in Sardinia 12000 were slain, and many taken prisoners, amongst
whom were Asdrubal, Hanno, and Mago, all noble Carthaginians. Livius lib. 24.
A year or two after the death of Hieron King of Syracuse (who having been a
fast friend to the Romans died at 90 years of age or more) altered much the
face of affairs. For Hieronymus his Grandson succeeding him, was for his wicked
disposition quickly made away, and then the City breaking into diverse
factions; that which was most contrary to the Roman interest prevailed, by the
means of two inconsiderable men made Praetors. Marcellus the Consul besieged
Syracuse both by Sea and Land, but was hindered from storming it by the skill
and invention of that excellent Mathematican Archimedes. In Sicily Marcellus
besieges Syracuse.
He framed such Engines, Lege Plutarch in Marcello. Livium lib. 25. Val. Max.
lib. 8. cap. 7. Extern. Exempl. 7. Ciceron. Tuscul. lib. 1. and 5. and De
Finibus l. 5.
as therewith to cast huge stones upon the Romans, and great beams upon their
ships. He would set the ships upon one end, overturn them, and hoizing them up
into the air, after all the men, and other things were falln out of them, let
them fall upon the Walls, or return down into the Sea. Such was the exactness
of his skill, both near at hand, and afar of, that neither by Sea nor by Land
could they attempt a storm, their Engines of battery being also dismounted by
the force of his.

42. Marcellus hereupon departed from the siege, jeering his own Engineers,
Archimedes forces him to depart.
and calling Archimedes by the name of Briarens. He destroyed Megara, one of
the most ancient Cities of the Island, and falling upon the Army of
Hippocrates, as it was incamping it self, killed above 8000 men. After this he
made incursions, and drew several Towns from the Carthaginians. He took
Damippus the Spartan as he sailed from Syracuse, about the redemption of whom
coming often near the Walls of that City, he observed a Tower negligently
kept, and convenient for receiving of men, because the Wall there might be
easily mounted. Taking the opportunity of Diana's feast, wherein the
Syracusians gave up themselves to Wine and sports, he seized on this Tower, and
through it bestowing his men about the Walls, easily became Master of the
City, Yet he surprizeth the City, but cannot preserve Archimedes.
after three years spent in the siege. He wept when he beheld the goodlinesse
of it, which notwithstanding his Commands for moderation (in which he was
eminent) he knew would suffer much. But more than the rest, the death of
Archimedes troubled him, whom he most labored to preserve. Some wrote that
this famous Artist busied in his Geometrical speculations minded not what was
doing in the City; but a Soldier coming to him, and bidding him follow him to
Marcellus, he would not go till he had finished his problem, and demonstrated
it, whereupon the Soldier killed him. Others reported that a Soldier rushing in
upon him, A. M. 3793. Ol. 142. ann. 1. V.C. 542. Ant. M. 12. Ptol. Philop. 11.
Belli Punici 7.
he desired respite from death till he had finished his contemplation; but the
Soldier not at all regarding him slew him presently. A third report went, that
as he was carrying his Mathematical instruments to Marcellus, certain Soldiers
came upon him, who supposing it to be Gold he carried in the Vessel, instantly
slew him. One of these ways perished Archimedes, who excelling all men in this
noble skill, deserves as much of blame as he had of knowledge, in that
esteeming sordid and base the making of Engines, and what served necessary uses,
he only seriously studied the Science abstracted from Mechanic works, The
Scipios having Conquered almost all Spain, are destroyed by dividing their
forces, and their death is revenged by Marcius.
and through this kind of greatness of mind, refused to write any thing
concerning those works, which procured him his deserved fame and estimation.

43. At this time the Scipioes in Spain having well nigh done their work, and
intending suddenly to make an end of the War, unfortunately divided their
forces, and through the treachery of the Celtiberians were both cut off with
almost their whole Armies. The Roman interest hereby had been destroyed in that
Country, had not the remainders of the forces been kept together, and
preserved by L. Marcius a Tribune, who revenged the death of the two Generals
and his other Contrymen, by falling on the Carthaginians, divided into two
several Camps, Secure, and without any watch, and suffering none to escape from
one to give notice to the other, slew 37000. and took 1830 with great plunder.
In Italy, Hannibal had Tarentum betrayed to him by the Inhabitants, the Castle
still holding out; Livius lib. 26.
and the Romans laid siege to Capua. The Romans besiege Capua.
Hither was Annibal called for aid; but he made no great haste, out of desire
he had to take the Castle of Tarentum. Bethinking himself how great scandal he
should give to all his confederates, in case he did not relieve that City, he
marched thither, and set upon the Roman Camp, which was so well defended, that
he was repelled, though assisted by the Inhabitants, and his own Garrison he
there had left. Perceiving then that the Enemy would not be drawn out of his
Trenches, Hannibal having got Tarentum besieges the Castle in vain, and
and that he could not break through his Camp, lest the new Consuls should
intercept his Provisions, he resolved to be gone. Considering much whither he
should go, he resolved for Rome it self, the head of the War, designing at
least by this Enterprise to raise the siege of Capua.

44. His coming being heard of at Rome, they were there variously inclined as
to resistance. Marches for Rome.
Some thought that all the Armies in Italy were to be sent for; but Fabius
Maximus would by no means hear of leaving Capua: Therefore a middle way was
taken, to send for one of the Captains from the siege to the defense of the
City. Q. Fulvius then the Proconsul choosing out 15000 foot, and 1000 horse out
of the three Armies, marched for Rome, which he entered at the Gate Capena (when
Hannibal now lay encamped eight miles off) the Senate, lest his power should be
diminished, having decreed, that if he came into the City he should have equal
authority with the Consuls. Annibal removing to the River Aniene, three miles
from the City, with two thousand horse thence went to take a view of it.
Flaccus stomaching he should take this liberty and do it with ease, sent out a
party of horse, which falling on made him retreat. The day after, and that
following, Hannibal on one side, and Flaccus with the Consuls on the other,
drew out their forces for a battle, when on both days fell such storms of hail
and rain, as the Armies could not join, but when they had retreated into their
Camps, Is hindered from fighting by Tempests, and departs toward Rhegium.
a wonderful serenity appeared. This struck the Carthaginians with a religious
awe, and caused Hannibal to say, that sometimes a Will, and otherwiles fortune
were wanting to him for the taking of the City. Removing back then his Camp to
the River Turia, thence he proceeded to the Lake of Feronia, which Goddess had
then a rich Temple there. This he robbed, and so marched through the Countries
of the Lucani and Brutii toward Rhegium and the Straights, A. M. 3794. V. C.
543.
where he well nigh had destroyed the Inhabitants unawares by the suddenness
of his coming. Flaccus returned to the siege of Capua, whither that Hannibal
returned not was much admired. The Campanians therefore despairing of any
assistance from him, Capua yielded.
Capua was yielded up. The heads of the Rebellion (53 in number) were put death
(28 having before poisoned themselves) at the command of Fulvius, contrary to
the Will of his Colleague Appius Claudius, who would have had the matter
determined by the Senate at Rome. The common sort was sold, and the City,
because situate in so good a soil, reserved for a receptacle of all sorts of
Plow-men, Laborers, and Artificers, without any show of government of its own,
after it had stood about 260 years. Paterculus lib. 1.
These things happened in the eighth year of the War, being the 543 of the City,
the 1^th of Antiochus the Great, and the 12 of Ptolomy Philopator, P. Sulpicius
Galba, and Cn. Falvius Centumalus being Consuls.

45. This year was sent into Spain Claudius Nero, who having got Asdrubal the
Carthaginian into a straight so as he might have cut off him and his Army, Nero
deluded by Asdrubal.
Livius lib. 27.
Asdrubal promised he would draw all his Soldiers out of the Country, but drew
out the time in length by the interposition of his Punick faith, till by little
and he withdrew all his men out of the danger. The Senate and People hearing
this, took it ill that Nero would thus suffer himself to be abused, yet know
they not whom to send to succeed him, and when the Comitia were held for the
creation of a Proconsul, none appeared to stand for the Office. A great
sadness hereupon seized on the multitude, When Publiu Scipio son to Publius
Cornelius Scipio slain in Spain (whom as we said he defended in battle) a young
man but of 24 years of age, stood up in a place where he might be seen, and
professed himself candidate, having the year before been made Aedilis, though
under age, by the great favor and confidence of the People. With great joy he
was created by the suffrages of all, but when they considered what they had
done, and especially thought of his age, they were again much perplexed, which
he apprehending, called them together, and with such spirit and resolution
promised them good success, Publius Scipio takes upon him the government of
Spain and exceedingly prospers.
that they departed well satisfied, judging many things to be in him which
surpassed humane admiration; for having good parts, he could set them off to
purpose. Passing into Spain then this year, the summer following he took new
Carthage by storm, a place of great consequence both for riches and situation,
by the same of which exploit, together with his loving demeanor toward the
natives, he well improved the Victory.

46. Hannibal at this time indulging his cruel disposition in wasting such
Countries as he could not keep, lost his credit; and the Romans in Italy gained
thereby. This year M. Valerius Laevinus, who had done good service against
Philip of Macedonia, was the second time, in his absence, created Consul,
together with Marcellus the fourth time. Laevinus went into Sicily, where
taking the City Agrigentum, he thereby brought the whole Island under the Roman
jurisdiction. The year following being the tenth of the War, Tarentum was
betrayed into the hands of Fabius Maximus, Laevinus recovereth all Sicily.
now Consul the fifth time, with Q. Fulvius Flaccus, who the fourth time bore
this Office. Marcellus for this year sometimes winning and sometimes losing
with Annibal, for that following being created Consul (though he scarcely
seems rightly created according to the Roman superstition) though other
whiles wary enough, was cut off in an ambush, A. M. 3797. Ol. 143. an. 1. V. C.
546. Ant. M. 16. Ptol. Philop. 15. Belli 11.
whilst with his Colleague T. Quintius Crispinus, Marcellus slain.
accompanied only with 220 Horse, he went to view a place where he had a great
desire to fight Hannibal. Crispinus also received a wound whereof he died,
after he had named a Dictator for creation of the next Consuls.

47. The year following, Asdrubal was ordered to go out of Spain into Italy,
Asdrubal ordered to march out of Spain into Italy,
to the assistance of his brother Annibal. This caused great carfulness in
Rome, by reason they knew not well whom to oppose against him. At length M.
Claudius Nero and M. Livius Salinator (who lately had returned to the City,
after that being publicly disgraced he had absented himself for several years)
were created Consuls, having been at great ods, and now reconciled through the
interposition of the Senate. Livius was ordered to meet Asdrubal, and Nero
appointed to attend the motions of Annibal. But the later having some success
against his Enemy, picked out of the flower of his Army 6000 Foot, and 1000
Horse, and with great secrecy, and as much speed, marched toward his Colleague,
that he might reach him ere he joined with Asdrubal. Being joined, they
encompassed him, who was by a deceitful guide led into a dangerous place, and
cut him with his whole Army in pieces: then marched Nero back to his own Army,
and ere Hannibal knew of his departure, cast his brothers head into his Camp,
whereby to his grief he knew of the defeat. Is cut off with his whole Army by
Livius and Nero the Consuls.
The year following did P. Scipio after many Victories obtained, finish the War
in Spain; all the Carthaginian Captains being either taken or driven away. This
happened five years after his undertaking the charge, and thirteen after the
beginning of the War.

48. Scipio coming to Rome, and being made Consul, Livius lib. 29.
greatly desired to be sent into Africa, Scipio having subdued Spain is made
Consul.
urging it to the Senate as necessary for finishing the War, and undertaking so
to manage his affairs, as to force the Carthaginians to recall Hannibal for
the defense of his own Country. Fabius Maximus most earnesty, and with some
heat opposed this, and a considerable difference hereupon arose; but at length
Sicily was granted him for his Province, and leave given him to pass over into
Africa, if he saw it convenient for the Commonwealth. All this year he spent in
the Island; A. M. 3800. Ol. 143. an. 4. V. C. 549. Seleucidarum 108. Ant. Mag.
19. Ptol. Philop. 18. Belli Punici. 14.
in providing necessaries for his Expedition, and the next, with a brave Fleet
landed in Africa, where Masanissa King of Numidia (who in Spain had joined with
him) came in to his aid. Within a while he killed Hanno with 3000 men, and
besieged Utica; The year following passes into Africa.
but Syphax King of Numidia, the enemy and competitor of Masanissa (who
formerly had entered into league with Scipio, but again upon a marriage with
Annibal's niece revolted) coming with the Carthaginians to raise the siege, he
having attempted in vain to storm the Town, rose up and departed to his winter
quarters.

49. In Winter he was not idle, but again besieged Utica, Idem lib. 30. Polyb.
l. 14, and 15
and entered into a Treaty with Syphax and Asdrubal about a Peace, in the mean
time sending his ablest Soldiers in the habit of slaves with his Commissioners,
to view the Enemie's Camps. This being sufficiently done, he brake off the
Treaty, and set fire upon the Camps, which the other not suspecting, but
thinking it came by accident, were cut in pieces when they were busied in
quenching the fire, to the number of 40000 men, and 6000 were taken Prisoners.
Not long after he gave them another great overthrow, which so affected the
Carthaginians with fear, that they called home Hannibal. Presently after they
sent a Fleet to relieve Utica, Where he so distresseth the Cathaginians,
which worsted the Roman Navy; and they might have done more than this had not
fear made them loiter. But shortly after this, Scipio again routed Syphax, who
had got together an unexperienced company of strangers, and taking him
prisoner, gave his Kingdom to Masanissa. In Italy about this time Mago was
overthrown, and wounded in an engagement with Quintilius Varus the Praetor, and
M. Cornelius the Proconsul: he also was recalled as well as his brother
Annibal, and died on the Sea of his wounds. The Carthaginians sent an Embassage
to Rome, with a design to obtain a cessation till Hannibal could arrive out of
Italy. But their aim being sufficiently understood, the message was slighted;
and to witness their perfidiousnesse, they brake the Law of Nations, by
offering to violate Messengers sent from Scipio.

That they recall Hannibal,
50. Annibal being recalled by his superiors, with very much reluctance quitted
Italy, after he had therein spent sixteen years. He complained much of the
Senate and of himself. Of the Senate, because fighting so long a time in an
Enemie's Country, they had so little supplied him with money and other things
necessary for War. Of himself, for that having so often overthrown and put to
flight the Roman Legions, he had still delayed and given them time to breath.
It Is reported also, that ere he took ship, he built an arch near the Temple of
Juno Lacinia, wherein, in Punick and Greek letters, he wrote the sum of his
great achievements. Taking the Sea, A. M. 3802. V. C. 551.
he landed in a few days at Leptis, whence he marched to Adrumentum, and
thence to Zama. Considering now the weak estate of his Country, he desired a
meeting with Scipio to treat of Peace, which being granted, the two greatest
Captains in the World came to an interview betwixt their Armies, but receiving
mutually no satisfaction, they returned to decide the controversy by the
sword. Hannibal in the battle behaved himself most gallantly, and like so
expert a Warrior amongst his Soldiers, consisting of so many Nations and
languages. But providence ordained the Victory to Scipio, who slew 20000, and
took as many prisoners, yet not without great loss of his own men, whereof
2000 fell. After this, Annibal persuaded his Countrymen to ask Peace, Whom he
also overthrows,
and Ambassadors were dispatched away accordingly.

51. Scipio was not averse to a closure, as loath to part with the glory of
concluding the War, which the year before was in danger of being taken from him
by Tib. Claudius Nero the Consul, and now by C. Cornelius Lentulus, who both
had procured Africa for their Province, and to be joined in aequal authority
with him. The power of concluding the Peace was by the People decreed to
Scipio, with ten others, which was at length agreed to on these terms. That
the Carthaginians being free, should enjoy all their territories in Africa; but
the Romans hold Spain with all the Islands of the Mediterranean any time in
question betwixt the two States. That all rebels and fugitives should be given
up to the Romans. Whereupon Peace is desired and obtained.
That the Carthaginians should deliver up all their beaked ships, except ten
Triremes, with all their tamed Elephants, and tame no more. It was made
unlawful for them to make War in Africa or elsewhere, without license from the
People of Rome. They were to restore all to Masanissa, and enter into
confederacy with him. To give money and corn to the Roman Auxiliaries, till the
Ambassadors should be returned. A. M. 3804. Ol. 144. an. 4. V. C. 553. Ant.
Mag. 23. Ptol. Epiphan. 3. Belli Punici 18.
To pay 10000 talents of Silver in the space of fifty years, and give 100
Hostages for performance of these things. Thus ended the second Punick War, in
the eighteenth year, and Scipio obtained the honorable surname of Africanus,
being the first General (if Livy observes rightly) who was ennobled by the
name of a Country he had overcome.

52. The Romans had little or no rest after this War; for immediately begun, or
rather went on the Macedonian, or that with Philip, the occasion being given,
as was said, ten years before, upon his entrance into confederacy with Annibal.
The Aetolians being also invaded by him, Livius lib. 31.
aid was sent them, The Macedonian War.
by which he was worsted, and after seven years a Peace was made. But now the
Romans having nothing to do, and being not without provocation, as well by his
breaking of his faith with the Aetolians and others of their friends in those
parts, as by his supply of men and money not long before sent to Hannibal, and
at the earnest request of the Athenians (the territories of whom he had wasted)
they decreed War anew against him, being also complained of by Attalus King of
Pergamus, and the Rhodians, for molesting the Cities in Asia. Ser. Sulpitius
Galba the Consul obtaining Macedonia for his Province, Galba the Consul
prospers against Philip.
by himself and his Lieutenant, put him to the worst diverse times, and, had
almost taken him. Together with Attalus and the Rhodians he caused him to raise
his siege from Athens, whereupon the Aetolians before backward enough, by
reason of their Magistrate, A. M. 3805. Ol. 145. an. 1. V. C. 554. Seleucidarum
113. Ant. M. 24. Ptol. Epiph. 4.
and the Athamanians now encouraged invaded his Dominions, but being idle and
carelelesse were easily repelled by him. This year, did M. Furius the Praetor
get a great Victory over the Galls, which besieged Cremona in Italy, killing
30000, and with them Amilcar the Carthaginian Captain. For this, after much
dispute in the Senate, he triumphed, though against the custom, and without
president, for any one to receive this honor, that had obtained Victory with
the Army of another, as he had done with the Soldiers of C. Aurelius Cotta the
Consul in his absence, who took it most hainously. The year following, C.
Bebius the Praetor entering unadvisedly into the territories of the Galls
Insubres, was encompassed and lost above 6600 men.

53. Nothing considerable was this year done in Macedonia by P. Villius
Tappulus the Consul; but his successor T. Quintius Apud Livium l. 32.
Flamininus (not Flaminius as Plutarch now has him; for the Flaminini
Patritians must not be confounded with the Flaminii who were Plebeians) using
great expedition beat Philip out of the Straights, wherein securely he had
encamped, and by Sea his brother Lucius (with Attalus) took several towns of
his confederates, And so does Flaminius.
and besieged Corinth, though in vain. The time coming for the election of new
Consuls, and it being usual for them to take the Provinces from their
predecessors, One good thing done by the Tribunes of the People (...). Philip
overthrown by Flamininus at Cynoscephale, desires, and obtains peace.
the Tribunes rightly objected, that this course hindered the progress of the
Wars, and procured Quintius his Government to be continued to him, who being
about taking of the Castle of Opus, Messengers came from Philip about a Treaty.
Several times they met (which before they had also done at the Straights) and
the Ambassadors of Attalus, the Rhodians, and Achaeans were present; but the
effect was nothing, and Philip gave up Argos into the hands of Nabis Tyrant of
Lacedaemon, who used the Inhabitants with great cruelty and incredible
exaction. A. M. 3809. Ol. 146. an. 1. V.C. 558. Ant. M. 28. Ptol. Epiph. 8.
But Quintius following Philip into Thessaly, gave him such a blow at
Cynoscephale, as forced him to ask Peace, which was granted upon terms moderate
enough. All the Cities of Greece which he had got in his hands, were hereby,
beyond all expectation, and to the wonder of themselves and others, set at
liberty, and left to their own Laws. The year preceding this conclusion, did
the Galls receive a great overthrow from Cornelius the Consul. But in Spain, C.
Sempronius Tuditanus was totally defeated. The same year wherein the Macedonian
War ended, the slaves in Tuscany made a dangerous Rebellion, but were
chastized, and quieted, by Attilius the Praetor. And about the same time was
another victory obtained over the Galls.

54. The year after the ratification of the peace, A. M. 3810. V.C. 559.
some bickering there was in the City about the women. For, twenty years
before, there had been a Law preferred by Oppius, Tribune of the People,
presently after the defeat at Cannae, forbidding women the wearing of Gold or
Purple, and the use of any other kind of Pomp. This now did two of the present
Tribunes labor to abrogate, the face of things being changed, and the occasion
removed. M. Porcius Cato the Consul stood stiffly for preserving the Law,
inveighing much against the Females; but partly through the apposite reply of
L. Valerius the Tribune unto the Consul, out of his own book, called Origenes,
and especially through the importunity of the women themselves (who with
liberty of behavior sufficient filled the streets, and came to the Assembly,
and constrained two of the Tribunes to let fall their interposition) it was
abrogated. Cato then betook himself into Spain his Province, The Oppian Law
against the women repealed.
where using severity toward himself as well as his Soldiers, he restored the
Roman interest by good Discipline. Having led his Army upon the back of the
Spaniards, and thereby necessitated them to fight, he overthrew them in a great
battle, and took their Camp; after which, notwithstanding the fickleness of
the Natives, he reduced the Province to obedience. The same Summer did L.
Valerius Flaccus his Colleague give another overthrow to the Galls in Italy.

55. In Greece, Nabis the Tyrant of Sparta, still held it, and Argos, in
slavery; wherefore the freedom of them still was wanting to the universal
liberty of Greece, resolved to be vindicated from the oppression of the
Macedonian party. Quintius, upon Nabis his refusal to quit Argos, besieged them
both, and took in Gytheum a Port Town, which drove Nabis to ask peace. Motions
in Greece.
Quintius was not against it, urging to the Grecian Allies the length, which
was likely to be of the siege of Sparta, the unseasonablenesse of the Winter
season, and the War that threatened from Antiochus King of Asia; but indeed
fearing lest one of the new Consuls taking Macedonia for his Province, might
rob him of the glory of fending the whole controversy in these parts. Yet the
Greeks being earnest for suppressing the Tyrant, he seemed to yield to it, and
afterward put them off by demanding such supplies as they could not furnish
him with. Notwithstanding this, the peace could not be made; for, Nabis
accepted not of the terms, especially of parting with his ships. Hereupon
Sparta was set upon round about, and had been taken, but that Pythagoras
son-in-law to the Tyrant set the outhouses on fire, which drove away the
Inhabitants. Though the onset succeeded not, yet the danger put Nabis into such
a fright, that he now accepted of the former conditions, and had peace granted
him; the Argives having ere this taken heart at the absence of Pythagoras their
Governor, and freed themselves. The following year T. Sempronius the Consul
killed many of the Galls who had set upon his Camp, but with great loss of his
own men. Several times had the Romans now the better against these people, and
the Ligurians. The Romans fight prosperously against the Galls.
Then came they flatly to fall out with Antiochus the Great, King of Syria, and
began a War with him five years after the ending of the Macedonian, in the 563
year of the City, the second of the 147 Olympiad, the 33th of Antiochus, and
the 13th of Ptolomy Epiphanes, A. M. 3814. P. Corn. Scipio Nasica, and Manius
Acilius Glabrio being Consuls.

SECT. 3.
SECT. III. From the War with Antiochus, and the invasion of Asia, to the
destruction of Carthage, after which the Romans degenerated through security,
the space of 45 years.
1. ANtiochus had invaded the Territories of Attalus; but being then the friend
of the Romans, The occasions of the War with Antiochus.
gave over his Enterprise at their desire. After this, having an hungry desire
after Egypt; upon application of the Egyptians to Rome, he was commanded to
desist, which breeding in him discontent, it was heightened by reason of his
setting upon several Cities in Greece. He said that they once had belonged
(though not of a long time) to his Predecessors; but the Romaens being
ambitious to set all Greece at liberty, plainly told him that these Towns must
not be excepted. When he was thus enough incensed, and by Hannibal (who had
fled to him) spurred on, the Aetolians importuned him to join with them against
their late friends and befactors. This they did, being an inconstant people,
and very covetous, having taken offense at the small quantity of booty, as they
accounted it, allotted to them in the War against Philip, by T. Quintius.

Things introductive to it.
2. The Aetolians first of all attempted to get into their hands Lacedaemon, and
other Towns, before held as cautionary by Quintius; but missed of their design,
though they brake into the former, and killed Nabis the Tyrant; for, they were
afterward cut in pieces by the Inhabitants themselves. Antiochus having
through the cunning insinuations of Thoas the Aetolian, changed his purpose of
sending Annibal into Africa, and thence into Italy, landed in Greece, with an
intention to make it the Seat of War. He brought an inconsiderable Army with
him; but seemed to have made a good beginning, having got Chalcis into his
hands, and by that means easily brought under the whole Island of Euboea. After
this, he sent, and buried the dead bodies of the Macedonians slain at
Cynoscephale, thinking thereby to oblige Philip, who taking it as tending to
his reproach, because he had not done it before, it proved but an effectual
means to make him his Enemy, the Thessalians being no better affected, because
he had taken some of their Towns. Then vvintring at Chalcis, he fell in Love
with, and married an obscure maid; his Army which before was indifferently
good, falling with him into all idleness and excess.

M. Acilius the Consul defeateth Antiochus at Thermopylae.
3. M. Acilius the Consul, to whom Greece fell by lot, easily recovered the
places of Thessaly, A. M. 3814. Ol. 147. ann. 2. V. C. 563. Seleucidarum 122.
Ant. Mag. 33. Ptol. Epiphan. 13.
and afterward beat Antiochus out of the Straights of Thermopylae, whither,
being deserted by his confederates, he had retired, as is shown in the History
of his Kingdom. Then the Consul received the Boeotians, chiding them only for
their ingratitude, and the Gates of Chalcis being set open to him, he presently
recovered Euboen. This done, he went against the Aetolians, from whom after he
had taken one or two Towns they offered to submit, but being offended with the
hard conditions he propounded, and for that large things were promised by
Antiochus, they flew back. Hereupon he besieged Naupactus (now Lepanto) and had
utterly ruined them, but for the intercession of T. Quintius. For he having
then received the Island of Zacynthas from the Athenians, came to the Camp, and
though they had ill deserved at his bands by detracting from his worth, yet
thinking it dishonorable for him, being the deliverer of Greece, that any one
people should perish, he proposed to the Consul to be considered, whether to
counterpoise the power of Philip, who now had got by his leave Athamania,
Perrhebia, Aperantia, and Dolonio into his hands, it would not be good policy
to preserve the Aetolians. For this respect, and at their humble suit he gave
them Truce, that they might send to the Senate at Rome, and broke up his siege.
Whilst Acilius did these things in Greece, his Colleague Scipio Nasica got a
notable victory over the B^ii in Italy, which utterly broke their power in
pieces.

4. Lucius Cornelius Scipio, and C. Laelius Nepos, being Consuls for the
following year, L. Cornelius Scipio the Consul obtains Greece for his
Province with leave to pass into Asia.
came, according to the custom, to divide the Provinces by lot. Both were
extremely desirous to have Greece, and Laelius being a man in great favor,
offered that the thing might be left to the discretion of the Senate. Scipio at
first knew not what to do, but his brother Africanus persuaded him by all means
to assent to it. The thing was new, and the Senate expected many words on both
sides, when Africanus standing up, told the Fathers, that if they would decree
Greece to his brother, he would go his Legatus or Lieutenant, whereupon there
was no need any more should be said; for it was presently voted with universal
consent, and power given to the Consul to pass into Asia, if he saw it
convenient. Coming into Greece he found Acilius falln upon the Aetolians again,
because the Senate had given them no positive answer, either as to peace or
War; only two things were proposed: To cast themselves wholely upon the
Senate, or pay down 1000 Talents, and have the same friends and enemies with
the Romans. When they desired an exposition of the former, no answer would be
given, but a command to their Ambassadors to depart: The Consul prosecuted what
his Predecessor had begun, and with much ado, through the intercession of the
Athenians by Africanus, another Truce was granted that they might have time
once more to send to Rome. There their Ambassadors instead of confessing their
faults, and asking pardon, boasted what friends and assistants they had been to
the Roman State, which gave such offense, that they were commanded out of the
City, as before.

5. Antiochus having with his son Seleucus besieged Pergamus the Chief City of
Enmenes, the friend of the Romans, was forced to raise his siege. He sent to
Aemilius the Roman Admiral now on those Coasts about peace, who disowned any
power of concluding it without the Consul. Then did the Rhodians at Sea defeat
his Admiral, which was Hannibal, a man out of his proper Element, and afterward
in a battle fought with Aemilius, Eumenes, and the Rhodians, Antiochus
affrighted at his bad success at Sea makes offers.
he fully lost the command of the Sea. Affrighted herear, he foolishly left
Lysimachia, which this year might have kept the Consul in action, and adding
one folly to another suffered Scipio to pass the Hellespont without
interruption. Now he offered to quit all places in Europe, and such in Asia as
were the friends of Rome; to discharge half of the costs sustained by the
Romans in the War, and rather than not be quiet, he was content to part with a
portion of his own Kingdom. These seemed but small things to the Consul, who
thought it just that he, who had been the cause of the War, Which are rejected.
should bear all the charges of it, and not only quit Ionia and Aeolis, but
leave all the Greek Cities to their liberty, which could not be, except he
parted with all Asia on this side the Mountain Taurus. The Ambassor had in
charge to procure the favor of Africanus, to whom was offered the restitution
of his son taken prisoner, and all that could be expected on this side the
title of King, if he would live with him. But all private Offices of kindness
only would Africanus promise, desiring him by all means to procure peace, and,
when he had received his son, not to fight till he should (being now sick)
return to the Camp. This caused Antiochus to delay fighting, but the Consul
followed, and provoked him to give battle, wherein his own Chariots Armed with
Scithes, being driven back upon his own men, procured his overthrow. He is
overthrown, and has peace granted upon former demands.
After this, peace was granted on the same terms as it had been offered to him
before the battle. And thus this War ended in a short time, and less trouble
than was expected, the second Consul putting a period to it, who in imitation
of his brother took on him the surname of Asiaticus.

6. The year following, wherein M. Fulvius Nobilior, and Cn. Manlius were
Consuls, the former going into Greeco fell upon the Aetolians, who now had
taken from Philip Dolopia, and Amphilochia with Athamania; Livius lib. 38.
and besieging Ambracia, drove them once more to sue for peace. They were
referred by the Consul to Rome, where the Ambassadors of Philip made great
complaints against them upon the former account. But the Rhodians and Athenians
interceding once more for them, their suit was granted, on condition to pay 500
Euboean Talents at several paiments, Peace granted to the Aetolians.
to restore all prisoners, and have the same Friends and Enemies with the
People of Rome.

7. Cn. Manlius the other Consul was now in Asia, where of that part taken from
Antiochus, much he conferred upon Eumenes, and the Rhodians, according to the
result of the Senate. This done, he undertook an Expedition against the
Gallograecians, or Galatians, Justin. lib. 3.
a People which having followed Brennus into Greece, Manlius subdueth the
Galatians.
after his death, had 90 years before passed into Asia, where they were so
terrible, as none denied them tribute before Attalus King of Pergamus. They
inhabited vast and high mountains, and in that respect were with difficulty to
be come at; but the Consul by throwing darts, especially at their huge bodies,
made great slaughter and subdued them. Returning home through Thrace, he had
well nigh lost his booty by the inhabitants that lay in wait for it in the
woody passages, and hardly got leave to triumph, because he had undertaken the
War on his own head. It is observed, that luxury and idleness were first
brought to Rome by his Army, out of Asia, through the provocations to
effeminatenesse there found, Luxury first brought to Rome by his Army.
and his loose and neglected Government.

8. In the third year after the ending of the War with Antiochus, and the same
wherein he died, envy procured the fall of those by whom the Victory was
obtained. For, Scipio Africanus was accused of having defrauded the Treasury of
the booty taken in the War, Lege Livium lib. 28. Val. Max. l. 3. c. 7. exemp.
1. Gellium Noct. Attic. l. 4. c. 18.
and had a day set him by the Tribunes to answer it before the People. It is
not certain who was his accuser, some mentioning M. Naevius, and others the two
Patilii Tribunes, set on, as some delivered, by M. Porcius Cato the Enemy of
Scipio. The day of hearing being come, Scipio Africanus called to account by
the Tribunes.
and the Tribunes having taken their places in the Rostra, the party entered the
Assembly with a great train of Friends and Clients. Silence being made, he put
on his triumphal crown, and told the People, how as that day he had overthrown
Hannibal and the Carthaginians; wherefore thinking it convenient for that time
not to meddle with any brawling business, he would go and salute the gods in
the Capitol, A. M. 3818. Ol. 148. an. 2. V. C. 567. Seleuci Philop. 1. Ptol.
Epiphan. 17.
and give them thanks, that as well that day, as at other times, they had given
him both will and power to do eminent service for his Country. Then he wished
that such of them there present as thought it convenient, would accompany him,
and pray that they might have such principal Officers (Principes) as he had
been.

9. Going up to the Capitol, the whole Assembly followed him, as also to all
the temples in the City, insomuch that the very Viators and Clerks left the
Tribunes alone, who also followed, and from accusers turned admirers, (as
appears from Valerius Maximus) out of very shame. The Tribunes accused him
also grievously in the Senate, and desired he might be brought to his answer.
He rising up, produced the Books of accounts, wherein was punctually set down
all the particulars, but he tore it in pieces before them all, disdaining to
give account for so small a matter in comparison of those vast sums he himself
had brought into the Treasury. His great spirit.
The next day of appearance he absented himself, and his brother pretending his
indisposition, he was excused, and another day appointed, before which he
withdrew himself to Linternum (or Liternum) a Sea Town of Campania. For he
clearly perceived under what envy he labored, He departs to Linternum and is
not condemned through the procurement of Gracchus.
it being also objected against him, that he had spent in idleness all that
Summer he lay in Sicily, and his power with Antiochus, who having discharged
his son without ransom, honored him above all others, which he willingly took
upon him, as one, who alone sat at the helm, and could steer matters
concerning Rome according to his pleasure. In his absence the Tribunes were
very fierce against him, yet through the interposition of Tiberius Gracchus
(formerly accounted his Enemy) he was not condemned.

10. Lucius Scipio Asiaticus his brother was also called to an account, and
escaped not condemnation, the money supposed to be retained to his own use,
being charged upon his estate; and he was kept from imprisonment merely by the
power of Gracchus. Livius lib. 39. Val. Max. l. 6. cap. 3. exemp. 7. Augustine
de Civitate Dei l. 18. c. 13.
The following year was discovered the abominable practice of certain women at
the feasts of Bacchus, Asiaticus his brother is fined.
which being kept in the night, all manner of filthiness and continual murders
were committed. At first these festivals were observed but three days in a
year; but now five in every month, and men were admitted, whereas they were
begun by women. All who being present and drawn in, would not consent to such
abominations, were sacrificed as beasts, A. M. 3819. V.C. 568.
a vast number being bewitched with this folly. The abominable practices at
the Bacchanalia discovered.
The matter being revealed to Sp. Posthumous Albinus the Consul, he acquainted
the Senate with it, by which, order was taken for apprehending the persons,
imprisoning some, and putting others to death, as well in other parts of Italy,
as in the City; the contagion having infected many other places, but especially
Capua. It was brought to Rome out of Hetruria.

11. In the second or third year after this discovery, and the fourth of his
exile, Africanus dies,
died P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, whether at Linternum, or Rome, is unknown,
the place of his burial being also uncertain. A. M. 3822. Ol. 159. ann. 2. V.
C. 571. Seleuci Philop. 5. Ptol. Epiph. 21.
That he died this year, Livy gathers, because having been Prince or chief of
the Senate at the former Lustrum, this year he was left our, (which none used
to be as long as he lived) by L. Valerius Flaccus, and M. Porcius Cato the
Censors, the former whereof was chosen into the place. Valerius Maximus tells
us, that he commanded this to be engraven on his Tomb, Ingrata Patria ne ossa
quidem mea habes, which shows that he was not buried at Rome. He had that hap
which usually accompanies the best men, to find their Country ungrateful,
being of excellent parts, and of a kingly spirit, which he ascribed to himself
in Spain, when the natives saluted him by, and would have had him take upon
him, the title it self. And upon this account he might be hated by Cato, who
though a virtuous man, was morose and sour. Livy joyneth with his (in the same
year) the death of Philopoemen, and of Hannibal; And Philopoemen General of the
Achaeans,
so that the three great Captains of the World at that time, left it desolate
as it were by agreement. Philopoemen Captain of the Achaeans was through the
fall off his Horse, taken in an engagement with the Messenians, and compelled
to drink poison, having done great service for his Country. Hannibal having
notice that the Romans would demand him from Antiochus, fled into Crete to the
Gortynians. Having great treasure with him, and knowing himself to be in much
danger, because of the Avarice of the Cretans, he filled many barrels with
Lead, which covering on the top with Gold, he deposited in the Temple of Diana,
trusting the Gortynians with his wealth. Then put he his money into brazen
Statues, Lege Livium ut supra. Corn. Nepot. in Hannibale. Justin l. 32.
Auctorem lib. de viris illustrib.
which he was wont to carry about with him, and cast them before the gate. They
then watching the Temple diligently from none so much as him, he got away
secretly, and went to Prusias King of Bithynia, who used him in the War
against Eumenes. But T. Quintius being sent to Prusias, whether by the Senate
on purpose, or upon other occasions, demanded him as the grand enemy of Rome,
to be delivered into his hands. He had provided in his house several places for
issuing out upon such an occasion; And Hannibal, all three in one year.
but being beset, and no way left to escape, he took poison, which it is said he
carried about him in his ring. So this renowned Captain ended his life in his 70
year; for which thing Quintius was by many hardly thought of, and got the
esteem of an importune and cruel man, as Plutarch writes.

12. After these things, Livius l. 40, 41.
the Ligurians were often defeated by the Consuls and other Commanders; many a
thousand of them being slain, as also of the Celtiberians and other Nations in
Spain who were continually rebelling. The Istrians beat the Romans out of their
camp, and put them to the rout; Manlius the Consul in vain opposing it; Several
Nations subued.
but shortly after they were discomfited by the said Manlius, and afterward
fully subdued by Claudius the Consul, who quelled also the Ligurians, as his
Colleague Tib. Sempronius Gracchus did the rebellion of Sardinia, with the loss
of 1500 of the revolters. About this time Corsica also was subdued. The year
following, Cornelius one of the Consuls died at the bath at Cumae, into whose
place C. Valerius Laevinus was elected. Petilius Spurinus the other Consul
fighting against the Ligurians, labored to take a certain Mountain called
Letus, concerning which in his speech to his Soldiers he saying, that that day
he would take Letus (Hodie ego Letum utique capiam) by rash fighting confirmed
what he had said in another sense ( viz. wherein Lethum signifies death) than
he had meant it. These actions abroad were shortly after followed by the second
Macedonian War, or that with Perseus, in the 583 year of the City, 24 after the
Peace made with his Father, and seventeen after the conclusion with Antiochus.

13. Perseus in a manner succeeded to this War as well as the Kingdom, his
Father having intended and made great preparations for it. The War with Perseus.
Puffed up by these preparations, he sought to draw away the Allies of the
Romans from their friendship, and abused several of their friends. Their
Ambassadors he slighted, refusing to give them audience, which made the Senate
resolve upon the War; but it was to be committed to one of the following
Consuls; only for the present, Cn. Sicinius the Praetor of the City was
commanded to raise men, and transport them into Epirus, there to seize on the
Sea-towns, that the Consul might more freely land his Army. Some were sent also
into Greece to confirm the States in their friendship and alliance, who also
demanding audience of Perseus, after long waiting, he renounced the league made
with the Romans, as entered into at the beginning of his reign merely for
security. Hereupon the Ambassadors renounced also the confederacy made with
him, and after that the Consuls P. Licinius Crassus and C. Cassius Longinus had
assumed their Office, the War was propounded to, and decreed by, the People.

14. Quintus Martius and others being sent into Greece to establish the
confederates in theit fidelity, Perseus began to bethink himself, and was
affrighted, hearing of the motions of the Eneny. He applied himself to Martius
about a Treaty for Peace, trusting to that friendship which had passed betwixt
their two families. The Ambassadors were glad of this address, and to divert
him granted him Truce, that he might send to Rome, for he had all things in a
readiness, Peace is denied him by the Senate.
and might have begun the War, as with great advantage to himself, so too
speedily to the Romans, who as yet had neither Army nor Leader arrived. Peace
was denied him by the Senate, and A. Attilius was sent to seize upon Larissa
the chief City of Thessaly. Whereupon he drew together his Forces, having got a
greater Army than any of his predecessors were Masters of since Alexander the
Great. He took in some Towns upon his borders, and Licinius the Consul led so
raw and unexperienced an Army into Macedonia, and through such difficult and
almost unpassable places, as had Perseus taken his opportunity, he might easily
have destroyed it, as also if he had not too soon retreated in a battle fought
shortly after. A. M. 3834. Ol. 152 an. 2. V. C. 583. Seleucid. 142. Ant. Epiph.
6. Ptol. Philom. 1 10.
After this he sent to Licinius, offering to embrace the conditions submitted
to by his Father, in paying the tribute, and leaving the Cities to their
liberty; which yet would not be granted. Then were Thebes and Aliartus taken in
by Lucretius the Praetor; Thebes and Aliartus taken.
and the Consul having had the better in another skirmish, received some Towns,
and took up his winter quarters; whilst Appius Claudius in Illyricum lost many
men.

15. The year following C. Hostilius the Consul did nothing of moment; yet this
he did in reference to the Army; he reduced the Soldiers to that ancient
discipline which his predecessor had let fall. Q. Marcius Philippus succeeding
him, at his first entrance into his Province might easily have been defeated,
Perseus besotted with fear neglects his opportunities.
had he met with a prudent enemy, the ways being so difficult and dangerous,
that the Soldiers could scarcely for weariness hold their weapons. And after
he had got into the plains he might easily have been shut up on every side, and
famished, but that Perseus besotted with fear ran away to Pydna, and left the
Straights open to him. Yet Martius did nothing of consequence, leaving all to
be performed by his Successor L. Aemilius Paulus, who had been Consul 17 years
before. He caused the Eclypse of the Moon to be foretold to his Soldiers, lest
they should be discouraged by it, which brought great terror to the Enemy,
that knew nothing of the natural cause. Livius l. 45. Plutarch in Aemylio.
He kept them from fighting when they were weary, though the Officers much
desired to engage. But the Armies lying encamped on each side of the River
Enipeus, it happened that a beast passing over from the Roman side, was seized
on, and being rescued by degrees drew both the Armies into an engagement,
wherein Perseus lost the day, and with it his Kingdom. Flying into the Isle of
Crete, when all forsook him, he delivered up himself into the hands of Cn.
Octavius. Is overthrown by Aemilius the Consul, and yields himself.
Aemilius severely chastized the Epirots, who had joined with Perseus,
plundering and demolishing about 70 of their Towns, whereby so much booty was
got, as each footman had 200 Denarii, and every hors-man as much more. But the
Soldiers having got little or no plunder in Macedonia, nor any of the King's
Treasure, denied their General a Triumph, which yet he obtained, and that very
splendid. Of his four sons, the two eldest he granted to be adopted to Fabius
Maximus, and Publius Scipio the son of Africanus, and of his two youngest, the
one died five days before his Triumph, and the other three days after, which
loss he sustained with great courage. Before his Triumphal Chariot was led
Perseus with his two sons, and this same year Triumphed Cn. Octavius the
Praetor at Sea, besides; L. Anicius, before whose Chariot was led Gentius King
of the Illyrians, whom being the Confederate of Perseus he had subdued, and
forced to yield himself. This happened to Macedonia and Illyricum, in the 586
year of the City, the said Aemilius, and L. Licinius Crassus being Consuls.

16. In the late War, Eumenes King of Pergamus, and the Rhodians, Livii Epitom.
lib. 46.
being wrought upon by Perseus, stood Neuters, whereupon Eumenes coming toward
Rome, the Senate being unwilling either to declare him friend or foe, made a
decree in General, Eumenes and the Rhodians having stood Neuters, are
accordingly respected by the Senate.
that no King should come into the City: the Rhodians with much ado, and after
much seeking, were hardly received as friends and confederates. The same year
that Perseus was overthrown, Antiochus Epiphanes besieging Ptolomy in
Alexandria, upon the desire of the besieged. C. Popillius Laenas an austere
man, with C. Decimus, Velleius Paterculus l. 1. c. 10.
were sent from the Senate to command him to desist, which he obeyed. After
this the Romans fought in Liguria and Corsica with various fortune, the
Dalmatians who had wasted the Borders of Illyricum and had overcome, and were
overcome by C. Marcius, were subdued by Scipio Nasica. But in Spain things went
so badly, and such losses were received, that the City was abashed, none being
found who would either go Lieutenant to the Consul, or take place of a Tribune
upon him, Things go ill in Spain.
till Scipio Aemilianus (the son of Paulus Aemilius, but adopted by Scipio the
son of the African) standing up offered himself, and by his example drew on
others. He went Lieutenant to Lucullus the Consul, and behaving himself most
gallantly in the War, killed an Enemy in a Duel which had challenged out any
one in the Army, and first mounted the Walls of Intercatia.

17. Lucullus subdued several Nations in Spain, though Sulpicius Galba
unfortunately fought against the Lusitanians. About the same time one
Andriscus, an obscure man in Macedonia, but something resembling Philip, Florus
lib. 2. c. 12. Velleius lib. 1. cap. 11. Orosius lib. 4. cap. 22.
counterfeited himself the base son of Perseus. Andriscus a counterfeit son of
Perseus
He was once sent to Rome by Demetrius the King of Syria, but making thence an
escape returned, and renewed his claim to Macedonia, which partly by fair
means, and partly by constraint, he got into his hands. Juventius the Praetor
was first sent against him; but he having strengthened himself with the
Thracians, cut him off and all his Army, and invaded Thessaly, whence he was
ejected by the help of the Achaeans. After this, A. M. 3857. Ol. 158. ann. 1.
V.C. 606. Ptol. Philom. 33.
Q. Metellus the Praetor sufficiently revenged the Commonwealth upon him, for
he overthrew him in a great battle, whence he fled to Byzus, a petty King of
Thrace, who delivering him up, he led him in Triumph. Is taken.
Metellus (accounted most fortunate) reduced Macedonia in this third Macedonian
War into the form of Province, which shortly after also happened to Africa. For,
even now was prosecuting with all earnestness the third and last Punick or
Carthaginian War, and the ruin of the City Carthage it self.

18. Their opinion is not faulty, who profess not to be able to find any
Meritorious cause of this War in the Carthaginians, and theirs, who affirm that
Carthage was more hated for its competition of Empire, than for any fault it
had committed in those times. The pretenses for the third Punick War.
But there wanted not pretenses. For, Lege Polyb. Excerpt. lib. 33. Appian. in
Punicis. Livii Epitom. Lib. 49. etc. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 15. Eutrop. lib. 4.
Orosium lib. 4. cap. 22.
diverse times had Masanissa King of Numidia, and the Carthaginians, quarrelled
about grounds upon the Borders, and often had the Romans sent to take up the
quarrel, but especially of late not with indifferency had they judged, for that
the fault lay in Masanissa, who being a great friend of theirs, presumed too
much upon their affection to himself, and the jealousy wherewith he knew them
prejudiced against the other. The Ambassadors also that were sent to Carthage,
finding the City full, and flourishing, from that peace they had now enjoyed
about fifty years, and provided also for War as well as peace, spoke much of
the danger which threatened Rome from it; especially Cato, who never came into
the Senate, but after that he had spoken his mind to any business, added, This
I think, and that Carthage is to be destroyed. He was earnestly contradicted by
Scipio Nasica, who feared, that this rival for Empire once being removed,
security would breed the destruction of the Commonwealth, as it too truly
proved, this security being strengthened by luxury and avarice, which the
Asiatick Triumphs had brought in. But Cato's reasons drawn from present danger,
so, in the apprehension of the Senate, overruled Scipio's forecast, that they
resolved upon a War, and kept the resolution close till they could catch at a
convenient opportunity and pretense.

19. There being at this time three factions in Carthage, one affected toward
the Romans, another standing for the true interest of the State it self, and
the third for Masanissa, this later was expelled by the second, and a Law made
that they should never be again received. Those men flying to Masanissa, he
sent Gulussa his son to intercede for them, who being laid in wait for by
Amilcar Samnis, although he escaped, yet thereupon the King besieged Horoscopa,
a Town he much desired; which act was expressly against the articles of the
League. Asdrubal went with a great Army to raise the siege, and a bloody battle
was fought, wherein the Carthaginians were overthrown; but more died of the
Plague, being encompassed near a Lake, which by its noisome vapors corrupted
the air. Hereby the remnant were forced to yield, and consent to a great
Tribute, with the receiving back of their Exiles, and yet were they almost all
slain by a party of horse sent against them, out of revenge by Gulussa. The
Carthaginians therefore had now had an Army in the field, and that against a
confederate of Rome, which was against the tenor of the last League. This
advantage the Romans took, and ordered the Consuls to undertake the War, though
the other condemned those that had broken the League, and most humbly offered
any reasonable satisfaction. M. Manilius Nepos, and L. Marcius Censorinus being
now on their journey, it was answered, that they should enjoy all as formerly,
if within 30 days they would send 300 hostages, (all sons of Senators, or the
principal Citizens) to Lilybaeum, and do what the Consuls should further
command them. The Carthaginians desirous to give satisfaction within the time
limited sent the Children, and when now the Consuls were landed at Utica (which
being a Sea-Town convenient for their purpose had been seized on beforehand)
thither they sent their Commissioners to wait on them, and know their pleasure.
Censorinus the Senior Consul commending their diligence, demanded all their
Arms, The Carthaginians being commanded to leave their City, refuse to obey.
which without any deceit were delivered up. Now with tears imploring mercy
they desired to know their last doom, and were commanded to leave their City
(which the Consuls had order to level with the ground) and build another any
where in their own Territories, so it were but ten miles from the Sea. This
they received with great horror and rage, and all resolved rather to die than
forsake, or give way to the ruin of, their ancient seat and habitation.

20. The Consuls delayed to begin the War, as not doubting in the least but to
take the City thus disarmed and naked at their pleasure. But they found it not
so; for the Inhabitants acted by indignation and fury, though at first scarce
themselves, settled their minds to resistance, men and women working night and
day in making of Arms. Where iron and brass were wanting, they made use of
Gold and Silver; and the women gave the hair of their heads to supply the
defect of Tow, or Flax. They made also Asdrubal (whom before for fear of the
Romans they had condemned) their General in the field, where he had already a
good Army. When the Consuls came against the City, they found such resistance
that they were discouraged, and the resolution of the besieged increased
hereby. And the War begins.
They engaged several times to their disadvantage, and might have suffered
much, had not the Army been secured and brought off, through the great wisdom
and courage of Scipio Aemilianus, who drew off also Pharneas, the Master of the
Carthaginian hors-men, to his own party; which things procured him an exceeding
great name. This year died Masanissa 90 years old, leaving a son but of four
years behind him; and trusting his Kingdom with Scipio, to be at his discretion
disposed of to his Children. This same year also died Cato, being about 85
years of age, Masanissa and Cato die.
and lived not to see the too much desired ruin of Carthage.

21. The year following, Calpurnius Piso the Consul, and Mancinus the Admiral
did no great matters, besieging Clupea, and Hippo (a Town situate betwixt
Carthage and Utica) to no purpose. Within Carthage, Asdrubal Grandson to
Masanissa by his daughter, being joined in commission with the other Asdrubal
without, was accused by him as intending to betray the City to his Uncle
Gulussa, and having nothing to say for himself, or being too slow in it, was
knocked on the head by a form in the Council-house. Now at Rome were all men's
eyes upon Scipio Aemilianus, looking on him as destined to end the War; and
whereas he sought but the Aedileship, and it was against the Law for him to be
chosen Consul so young (being but 36. whereas the Law required 43) it was
dispensed with for this time, Scipio Aemilianus made Consul, though under the
Consular age.
and then was he made Consul, who so ordered the matter, though not wholly
during his Consulship, as he demonstrated the people not to have conceived vain
hopes concerning him.

22. For, restoring Discipline which had gone much to wreck through the neglect
of Piso, he soon after took that part of Carthage, called Megara, and drove the
Inhabitants into the Citadel or Byrsa. Then securing the Isthmus leading to the
City, he cut off all Provisions from out of the Country, and blocked up the
Haven; but the Citizens with incredible industry cut out another passage into
the Sea, whereby at certain times they could receive necessaries from the Army
without. Scipio therefore in the beginning of Winter set upon their forces
lying abroad, whereof he slew 70000. and took 10000. Takes Carthage.
so that now no relief could be obtained from without. In the beginning of
Spring, he first took the Wall leading to the Haven Citho, and then the Forum,
where was a most lamentable spectacle, some being killed by the sword, and
other ways, others half killed by the fall of houses, or by fire, or half
buried in the earth; or having one Limb torn from another. Six days the siege
of the Citadel continued. On the seventh it was desired by some that all who
would come forth should have their lives, which being granted to all but
revolters, some 50000 yielded, A. M. 3859. Ol. 158. ann. 3. V.C. 608. Ptol.
Physconis 1.
and afterward Asdrubal himself, who was reviled for it by the revolters (who
set fire to the Temple, and therewith burnt themselves) as also by his wife,
which threw her self with her two Children into the flames.

23. Then was the City destroyed, being 22 miles in compass, and so big, that
the burning of it continued 17 days. The Senate at Rome receiving the news
joyfully, sent ten of their own Rank whom they joined with Scipio for disposing
of the Country. They ordered none of Carthage to be left, and that it should
never be rebuilt, Which is razed.
laying heavy curses on those that should do it. All the Cities which assisted
it in the War were to be razed, and the grounds given to the friends of the
People of Rome: SECT. 4.
the rest of the Towns were to be tributaries, and governed yearly by a
Praetor. All the Captives were sold, except some of the chief. And such was the
destruction of this renowned City, so famous once for command and Empire, and
rival to Rome it self, after it had stood about 700 years, in the fourth after
the beginning of the War, the 608 of Rome, the third of the 158 Olympiad, and
the fifth of Ptolomy Physcon. A. M. 3859, Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and L. Mummius
Nepos being Consuls.

SECT. IV. From the destruction of Carthage to the War with Mithridates King of
Pontus, which afforded the occasion to the first Civil War, the space of 58
years.
1. THis year was fatal, not only to the greatest City of Africa, but of
Greece also; Corinth that famous Mart-town being levelled with the ground. The
Achaean war, and the destruction of Corinth.
The occasion was given by the Achaeans themselves, Lege Velleium Patercul. l.
1. c. 12. Florum l. 2. c. 16. Livii Epitom. lib. 6. c. 51, 52. Pausan. in
Achaicis, and de aere Corinthio Plinium l. 34.
who violated the Roman Ambassadors (though whether by word or deed is
uncertain) who were sent to dissolve their Communality, and leave the Cities to
their own peculiar Laws, which because of this union and fellowship had been
too formidable. They had also in conjunction with the Boeotians and those of
Chalcis, made War against the Lacedaemonians the friends and allies of Rome,
because they would not be subject to them. Upon these grounds the Senate
decreed the War, which Metellus as yet in Macedonia first undertook; who
drawing down his Army through Thessaly into Boeotia, there overthrew Critolaus,
then took Thebes, with Megara, and coming to the Isthmus was there treating of
Peace, when L. Mummius the Consul came into this his Province. He overthrew
Diaeus the Achaean General, after which he entered Corinth and razed it, because
there the Ambassadors had been abused. The men were slain, and the women and
children sold, A. M. 3859. Ol. 158. an. 3. V.C. 608. Seleucid. 167. Ptol.
Physcon. 1.
with all such slaves as the Achaeans had manumitted for the Wars. As Scipio,
who destroyed Carthage (as his Grandfather before him for conquering it) had
the surname of Africanus, and Metellus for his reducing Macedonia, that of
Macedonicus; so this year Mummius for this success obtained the Surname of
Achaicus, Mummius thence surnamed Achaicus.
and according to the custom, having others joined with him, reduced those
parts and all Greece with Epirus into the form of a Province, called afterward
Achaia, not Greece, because the Greeks were subdued when the Achaeans had the
chief command, as Pausanias writes.

2. Now was it 74 years since the Romans, in the second year of the second
Punick War, entered Spain in an hostile manner, and since that time, especially
since the departure of Scipio Africanus the elder, many had the risings and
struglings of that People been, of all others most impatient of the yoke. Now
was Viriaetus up in arms, who of a shepherd became a robber, and of a robber a
General over suchlike as himself, Viriatus up in Spain,
and made the Romans work sufficient for the space of 14 years, in which time
he defeated many Armies. Q. Fabius Maximus Semilianus (or rather Aemilianus,
being brother to Scipio Aemilius, and adopted by Fabius Maximus) after some
success was yet by him brought to such straights, Vide Appianum in Ibericis.
Florum l. 2. c. 18.
as glad he was to ask Peace upon equal terms, which Caepio the Consul of the
following year refusing to stand to, received orders from the Senate
accordingly to prosecute the War. Caepio attempted at unawares to destroy him;
Is destroyed by Caepio.
but he escaped, and sending Ambassadors to treat of Peace, Caepio so wrought
on them, that returning they murdered him, to their own shame, and the Consul's
small credit, in his bed.

3. But, a more dangerous War than this threatened from Numantia a town of no
great bigness, yet peopled with most valiant, though but few, Inhabitants.
Before Viriatus his death they had foiled Q. Pompeius the Consul several times,
and forced him to condescend to a dishonorable Peace, Orosium l. 5. c. 7.
Patercul. l. 2. c. 4.
which though he denied, was sufficiently proved, and by favor only he
escaped that punishment which fell on Mancinus, who being constrained to accept
of the same terms, was delivered up to the Enemy; but (as the Samnites formerly
did by another after the defeat at Caudinum) they refused to receive him. After
this Brutus defeated many thousands of the Lusitanians, and overthrew the
Gallaecians; but Lepidus the Proconsul set upon the Vaccaei an harmless People
of the hithermost Spain, or Hispania Terraconensis (for in the 559 year of the
City, Bad sucesse in Spain
Spain was divided into Citerior or Terraconensis, and Ulterior or Betiea, and
Lusitania, two Praetors being yearly sent thither, the number of which Officers
was therefore upon this occasion increased to six) by whom he was utterly
defeated. Causes Scipio Aemilianus to be created Consul the second time.
These things so affrighted the Roman Soldier, that he almost quaked at the
sight of a Spaniard, and at Rome men were seized with great fear and shame.
Therefore Scipio Aemilianus Africanus must be created Consul the second time,
as the only refuge and hope of his Country.

4. At the first he restored discipline, the want of which had spoiled all, but
then coming to engage, found the courage of the Enemy such, that he resolved to
fight no more, but lay close siege to Numantia, and govern himself according to
the comportment of affairs. At length the besiged greatly straightned offered
to yield upon reasonable conditions, He besieges Numantia and takes it.
or fight if they might have battle given them, which being denied, having
drunk strong drink on purpose, they assailed the besiegers so fiercely, that
the Romans had run, but that Scipio was the General. At last they fired the
City over their own heads, and scarcely one of them remained to be led in
triumph. This famous City was seated in the hithermost Spain, in the head of
Gallaecia, and the confines of the Coltiberians. It had with 4000 men, for the
space of fourteen years, says Florus, or twenty according to Strabo, born the
brunt of 40000 Romans, and many times put them to shameful flight with great
slaughter. Scipio destroyed it, after he had for a year and three months
continued the siege, fourteen years after he had so dealt with Carthage, in the
621 of the City, A. M. 3871, P. Mutius Scaevola and L. Calpurnius Piso Fruges
(both learned men) being Consuls. At this time a servile War was raised in
Sicily by one Ennus a Syrian of Apamea, A servile war in Sicily.
the slave of Antigenes of Enna. Excerpt. Died. Siculi. lib. 34. Orosius l. 5.
c. 9
It was followed by Calpurnius Piso the Consul, and finished by P. Rupilius
Nepos his Successor. Twenty thousand slaves were by him slain in battle: Ennus
being cast in prison died (it is said, of the lousy disease) at Morgantia.

5. Ever since the beginning of the Tarentine War to this time, for the space
of almost 150 years was there much modesty, abstinence, selfdenial, valor and
virtue amongst the Romans in general, of which yet especially the Fabii,
Fabritii, Marcelli, Curii, Metelli, the Scipio's and Aemilii have left examples
admirable to be commended to all posterity, such were their cautious and
politic yet just and noble carriage both at home and abroad. But now the Asian
Expeditions and Triumphs having brought in excess and riot, and the ruin of
Carthage having taken away fear, idleness with security by degrees stole in
upon them, and the infirmity of the Government (after that fear, which hitherto
had preserved it safe, was removed) again effectually showed it self. For
though after this time many a People was subdued and brought under, and much
glory gotten abroad, yet was it stained by emulations, jealousies, and
contentions at home, and even by shedding the blood of one another in an open
though civil feud, which first came to pass while the former things were
performed in Spain by Scipio.

6. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus son to one of the same name (who had been
twice Consul and once Censor) by Cornelia an excellent woman, Orosius l. 5. c.
8, 9. Florus l. 3. c. 14.
daughter of Africanus the elder, Tiberius Gracchus raises a sedition about
the Agrarian.
being Quaestor to Mancinus the Consul in Spain, had an hand in the
dishonorable Peace made by him, for which being reflected on by the Senate, or
or at least thinking himself so to be, acted now by shame and fear, in distaste
of the Nobility, as it is said, he cast in his head how to become gracious and
popular with the commons. Procuring himself to be chosen Tribune, he preferred
a Law, forbidding any man to possess above 500 acres of the public grounds,
and ordering the overplus to be divided to the poor. For, Joh. Stadius Com. in
Flor. l. 3. c. 14.
such grounds as the People of Rome took from their Enemies, they were wont, if
tilled, to divide to their own Citizens; if not arable, they then let them out
to farm by the Censors to Italians, or the ordinary sort of Romans, on
condition, that if they plowed them, they should pay the tenth part of the
Corn, and the fifth of other fruits: and if they bred up Cattle, they were
charged with a certain rent. But it came to pass, that by incredible impudence
and licentiousness of the rich, the Husbandmen were outed of their ancient
possessions, which by purchasing and other ways they got wholly into their
hands, so that the Public was defrauded of it is revenue, and the poor of their
livelyhoods. For restraining the avarice of the rich, the Lex Licinia and
Sempronia were enacted. Gracchus increased the former by adding that, lest the
Law should be wrested, half should be given to the children, and the rest
divided to such poor as had nothing. And if any went about to enlarge their
portion by purchase, Triumviri or three men should be yearly appointed to judge
what ground was public, and what private.

7. This netled the Nobility exceedingly, who by virtue of this Law were to
part with their inheritances; and one of his Colleagues, Octavius by name, Livii
Epitom. l. 58. Velleius l. 2. c. 3.
opposed it, for which he so handled him, as glad he was to quit his place,
into which Gracchus chose Q. Mummius one of his own facton. This severity being
without president, much alienated even the minds of the multitude from
Gracchus, who also perceiving there was not ground enough to quiet them all
(the expectation of whom he had now raised) he offered a Law for distributing
the money which Attalus King of Pergamus had left, Proposing another Law for
dividing of money,
together with his Kingdom, to the People of Rome. The Senate being assembled
to consult what was to be done, and all being of opinion that P. Mutius
Scaevola the Consul should defend the Commonwealth by arms, he refused to do
any thing by force. Hereupon Scipio Nasica taking up his gown under his left
arm, held up his right hand, and bade every one that loved the State to follow
him. Up he went into the Capitol, A. M. 3872. Ol. 161. an. 4. V. C. 621. Ptol.
Physc. 14.
being accompanied with most of the Senate, many Equites, and some Commoners,
where Gracchus was speaking to the People, and endeavoring to be chosen Tribune
for the following year. They fell upon him and his hearers, whereof they killed
300, and amongst them himself with a piece of a seat as he ran down from the
Capitol. Thus he fell by the means of his own kinsman, He and his accomplices are
killed by the means of Scipio Nasica his kinsman, which was the first blood
drawn by the Romans from one another.
being a most excellently accomplished man, though too violent in a matter
honest enough. Offic. l. 1.
And this was the first blood which in a seditious way the Romans first drew
from one another, observed by Cicero to have been at the same time that the
other Scipio destroyed Numantia.

8. At this time were there some risings at Athens, and in Delos, Livii Epitom.
l. 59.
being as sparks of that fire formerly kindled by Ennus in Sicily, which with
some trouble were extinguished; neither was Italy altogether free from them.
But a more noble War insued about the Kingdom of Asia. For, Orosius l. 5. c. 8,
and 9.
Attalas King of Pergamus or Asia (for so he is called, because of a good part
of Asia given to Eumenes his father) by his last will left the People of Rome
his heir: But after his death Aristonicus his base brother seized on the
Kingdom as his inheritance. Aristonicus contesting with the Romans for the
Kingdom of Pergamus,
First was Licinius Crassus the Consul sent against him, Velleius Patercul. l.
2. c. 4. Florus l. 2. c. ult.
but was overthrown, and being taken struck one of the Soldiers on the eye, on
purpose to provoke him to kill him, which he did. He having thus miscarried
(though he was assisted in his enterprise by several Kings,) his Successor M.
Perpenna, hasting into Asia set upon Aristonicus at unawares, when he was not
yet recovered of the security contracted by his Victory, and overthrowing him
in battle besieged him in Stratonice, where he forced him by famine to yield,
and shortly after the Consul died at Pergamus. The remainder of the War was
finished by M. Aquilius the next year's Consul, Is taken
who poisoned Fountains for taking in some Cities, and having together with
those joined with him (according to the custom) settled the Province with
sufficient oppression of the people, he led Aristonicus in Triumph, though
taken by another man's labor; who by order of the Senate was strangled in
prison, in the 625 year of the City, And strangled.
the said M. Aquilius Nepos, and C. Sempronius Tuditanus being Consuls.

9. Vide Appian. de bello civili lib. 2. Velleium lib. 2. cap. 6. Plutarch in
Gracchis. Val. Maxim. lib. 6. cap. 2. Exemp. 3. Livii Epitom. lib. 59, 60.
Orosium lib. 5. cap. 10. Florum lib. 3. cap. 15.
The civil dissentions died not with Gracchus (who perished four years before)
his Law for division of the grounds being still in force, and the people being
sensible of the equity thereof, as they accounted it; for that the rich had got
all into their hands, The civil dissentions renewed.
and those that underwent all the toil in Conquering the Land, were ready to
starve, being also exhausted by the Wars, and almost none but slaves left in
Italy for ordering of the grounds. Gracchus had a younger brother called Caius,
whom together with Fulvius Flaccus, and Papirius Carbo, he had made Triumviri
for division of the grounds. Caius Graccbus, the brother of Tiberius,
patronizeth his Law.
He with his Colleagues undertook the patronage of the Law, and prosecuting his
Enterprise with all earnestness, such trouble arose about the division, in
accounting and removing, that the Italians finding themselves agrieved betook
themselves to Scipio Africanus. He refused not to undertake their patronage,
yet in the Senate spoke nothing against the Law; only thought fit that the
executive power thereof should be taken from the Triumviri, and given to some
others. The Senate most willingly did this, and conferred it on Sempronius
Tuditanus the Consul, who finding the work troublesome, went his way under
pretense of the War in Illyricum. There being now none to fly to in this case,
the people conceived great indignation against Scipio, as ungrateful, and
favoring the Italians more than themselves, from which his Enemies took
occasion to raise further jealousies. Indeed hearing of Gracchus his death at
Numantia by repeating a verse in (...). Odyss. 1.
Homer he liked well of what was done to him, and being at his return asked
concerning his death, he approved of it before all the people, which being
offended at him for it, he rebuked the multitude with contumelious language.
But at night going to his Chamber, he meditated of something he intended to
speak to the people the day following, and in the morning was found dead in his
bed, it is uncertain by what means. Scipio Africanus the younger dies suddenly.
Cornelia the Mother of the Gracchi was suspected to have joined with her
daughter his wife (who being not over-handsome, neither loved him much not was
over much loved) in practizing something upon him. No inquisition was made
after his death, and he was buried privately, though so great a man, and one
that had been the pillar of the Commonwealth.

10. The Possessors of the grounds still made delays in the division, and some
thought that they to whom they were to be divided should in way of recompense
be made free of the City, which however pleasing to others, was highly
displeasing to the Senate. While men muttered much of these things, C. Gracchus
procured the Tribuneship, and then bearing a grudge to the Senate effectually
showed it. Caius getting the Tribuneship prefers Laws distasteful to the
Senate.
He preferred a Law for dividing of the public Corn to every man monthly, and
getting his Office continued to him for another year, that he might gratify
the Equites, brought down the Office of judging corrupt Officers from the
Senators unto them. Romulus, as we said, instituted three Centuries of Equites
or Hors-men, whereof one from himself was named Ramnensis, another from Fitus
Tatius, Tatiensis; and the third from Lucanio (or Lucus) Luceris. Under
Romulus, and the Kings, they were also called Celeres, Flexumines and Trossuli.
Afterward, Tarquinius Priscus added 300 more, and so there continued to be 600
Equites. The Order and Rank of Equites, or Knights, how, and when it came up.
But though they were in the Commonwealth from the beginning, yet had they no
peculiar order, authority, or rank, till this Law of Gracchus, by which it was
enacted, that these judgments should be peculiar to them. Their reputation
thence forward increased with various success about the Publicans till
Cicero's time, who boasting himself of this order, procured it such honor,
that from his Consulship it came to be as a peculiar order in the State (before
being included in the Plebeian, though it had a distinction by way of service)
being added to the Senatorian and Plebeian; out of which respect it was written
after them both. Thus in several times were there several Ranks and
distinctions; the first distinction was betwixt Patricians and Plebeians; then
Plebeians wresting from the other a Communion in the greatest Offices and
places, though Patricians might still be distinguished in reference to
Families, yet all Dignities being common to the rest with them, such Plebeians
as could rise to be Senators, constituted with the other the Senatorian rank
(which included the Patritian, though the Patritian not it) thenceforth
distinct from the Plebeian which still contained the Equites. Then, as was
said, the Equites by the means of Gracchus and Cicero brake out from amongst
the Plebeians into a rank of their own.

11. By this Law (says Florus) Gracchus so divided the people of Rome, that he
made it double headed (bicipitem, which expression Varro also used, as
appears from Nonius) and the Equites having the lives, and fortunes of
Senators and Nobles in their hands, by seizing on the Revenue, with authority
pilled the Commonwealth. He took the best time that could be devised for the
making of the Law, because the Senators having had hitherto the power of
judging, were become odious of late, in that for money they had acquitted
Aurelius Cotta, Salinator, and M. Aquilius, persons Capitally guilty of
corruption. Its said, he boasted, that by this Law he had cut the finews of the
Senatorian rank. How the Senators lost in the translation of the judicial power
to the Equites by Caius.
And so he did; for by the authority of judicature they passed sentence upon
Roman Citizens, Italians and Senators, noting them with ignominy, banishing, or
putting them to death at pleasure; till such time as their power was abated, as
will he seen. For in the Comitia, or Assemblies, they conspired with the
Tribunes, and obtaining thereby what they pleased, had all things in their
power, and flourished with riches, whereas nothing remained to Senators, but a
vain show of Dignity. The Senators prevailed with Servilius Caepio when Consul,
to make themselves partakers of the power of judging, by a Law which he got
preferred; yet still had the Equites the better, for 300 Senators only were
added to them, who were in number 600. By the Laws of Livius Drusus, Sylla and
Cotta their power was abated, Drusus making it but equal in judgment with that
of Senators. Sylla transferred it wholely to the Senators, and Aurelius Cotta
communicated the power of judging to three sorts; viz. Senators, Equites, and
the Tribuni Aerarii. But the Equites alone were wont to farm the customs of
the Censors for five years, and thence from their farming the Public Revenue
had the name of Publicans. Publicans whence so called.
These were the principal of the Equestrian order, the Ornament of the City,
and the strength of the State, who made so many Companies as there were
Provinces subject to the payment of Toll, Tribute, Custom, or Impost.

12. But, C. Gracchus, further than this, to gratify the Commons, repaired the
highways throughout Italy, sent forth Colonies, bade the Italians sue for
their freedom, and gave power of suffrages to other Friends and Allies,
contrary to the custom; Caius attempteth other seditious acts
whom the Senate forbad to come near the City, at such time as they knew his
Laws would be offered, and to please the people, they gave way to the sending
out of twelve Colonies. Gracchus thus frustrated, departed into Africa with
Flaccus his Colleague, intending to plant a Colony where Carthage stood; but was
disappointed therein also, Wolves, it is said, removing the bounds of the
intended City by night, as they were laid by day, whereupon the Soothsayers
pronounced the design unlawful. Having been twice Tribune, he stood for it the
third time, and had many voices; but his Colleagues offended by his vehement
carriage, got Minucius Rufus chosen into his place, who rescinded many of his
Laws. Gracchus enraged hereat, when the Assembly was met, went up to the
Capitol, accompanied with Flaccus and his friends privily Armed. There Attilius
the Crier of Opimius the Consul taking him by the hand, and desiring him to
spare his own Country, was slain. He then went about to excuse the fact to the
people, but could not be heard, and so together with Flaccus, and his other
Confederates got them home, the Consul keeping strict watch all night in the
City. After this they were cited by the Senate to come and give an account of
their actions, but they betook themselves to the Aventine Mount, where
fortifying themselves, they offered in vain liberty to all slaves that would
come in to them. But the Consul sending a party against them, A. M. 3884. Ol.
164. ann. 4. V. C. 631. Ptol. Physc. 26.
Gracchus fled into a grove beyond Tiber, and procured his slave to kill him,
who instantly after he had cut off his head, run himself through with the
bloody sword. Is destroyed with his party.
Flaccus flying to a friends house was betrayed and slain: and of their party,
through the severe inquisition of the Consul, were put to death 3000 persons,
11 years after the death of the elder Gracchus. In the Consulship of this
Opimius was there such a temper of the air called Coctura, that wine being
congealed through the heat of the Sun into a consistency of honey, kept good
for near 200 years, and from him had the name of Vinum Opimianum, being still
preserved in Plinius Plin. l. 14. c. 4. and 14.
his time, though Lib. 2. c. 7.
Paterculus denies there was any in his, which was long before.

13. The death of Gracchus (whose head was not Sacrosanct, as Florus imagines,
being out of the Office of Tribune) for the present allayed the distempers of
the Commonwealth. The distempers of the State something allayed thereby.
For, presently after was a Law made, Lege Appianum de bello civili lib. 1.
that any one might sell his Land, which the Elder Gracchus had forbidden,
whereby the poor, partly by purchase, and partly by constraint, were again
dispossessed. Afterward the Law for division was fully abrogated by Sp. Borcus,
and the grounds left to their ancient Owners, with this condition, that a
Tribute out of them should be paid to the people, and this divided man by man.
But not long after another Tribune abrogated the Tribute it self, and so
nothing was left remaining to the poor.

14. During these Domestic troubles the Sardinians rebelled, and were reduced
by L. Aurelius, Livii Epitom. lib. 60.
and the Fregellans were punished with the loss of their City by L. Opimius
the Praetor. Upon Africa fell such a Pestilence, as for its Original, An horrid
Pestilence in Africa.
and effects, was strange and wonderful. Orosius lib. 5. cap. 11.
It arose from an infinite number of Locusts, which having overspread the
ground, and destroyed not only Corn and other fruits, but even Trees and dry
things themselves, at length by a wind were driven into the Mediterranean Sea,
and there putrefying corrupted the air. Hence ensued a most fearful plague,
both of men, Cattle, and Fowls. In Numidia, where Micipsa was now King, 800000
died; upon the Seacoasts about Carthage and Utica 200000; and in Utica it self
30000 Soldiers there lying in Garriison, 1500 being reported to have been
carried out in one day through one Gate alone. Two years after, Q. Metellus the
Consul subdued the Islands Baleares, and restrained pyracy there maintained,
and at the same time was carried on the War, called Bellum Allobrogicum; The
Allobrick War.
which hence arose. Livii Epitom. lib. 60, 61. Florus lib. 3. cap. 2.
The Salies in Gall beyond the Alps invaded the Massilians, the friends of the
people of Rome, and for this were chastized by Fulvius, and subdued by C.
Sextius Calvinus. Teutomalus their King flying out of the battle, was received,
and protected by the Allobroges, who also invaded the Aedui friends of Rome,
and drew into Confederacy the Arverni. First, Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus overthrew
them, and (by the use of Elephants especially) slew 20000. and took 3000
prisoners. After him Q. Fabius Maximus (Grandson of Paulus Aemilius, by his son
adopted into the Fabian family) defeated them, with the Arverni and Ruteni, in
a bloody battle, wherein 120000 are reported to have been slain, and taking
Bituitus (or Betultus) King of the Arverni prisoner, obtained the surname of
Allobrogicus. These Allobroges inhabited about the Countries now called
Daulphine and Savoy: the Ruteni nearer to the Sea; the Arverni more toward the
North; the Aedui in Burgundy, Caesar de bello Gallico lib. 1.
and the Saloii or Salyes in Piemont. Now was Gallia Narbonensis reduced into a
Province.

15. But the Scordisci, a people of Gallish Original, inhabiting Thrace, Livil
Epitom. lib. 53, and 55, Florus lib. 3. cap. 4. Velleius lib. 2. cap. 8.
defeated the Roman Army under Cato the Consul, yet were afterward driven back
into their own Country by Didius the Praetor, Affairs of Thrace very obscure.
and the Consul Drusus; and after this gave occasion of a glorious Triumph to
Minutius, of which honor Metellus also had partaken. These transactions of
Thrace are of all others most unknown; either because they are confounded with
those of Illyricum, Pannonia, Mysia, or Macedonia; or because what has been
written of that subject in particular, has miscarried. Now we arrive at two
Wars both together, and carrying noise sufficient with them through the variety
of events, and fullness of history: viz. that with Jugurtha, and the other with
the Cimbri and Teutones. Now to know the Original of the former, it is necessary
to fetch things a little higher.

16. Masanissa King of Numidia, that old and constant friend of the Romans,
left three sons: Gulassa, Mastanabal, and Micipsa, of whom the last (his
brothers being dead) obtained the Kingdom alone. The original of the War with
Jugurtha.
He had two sons, Hiempsal and Adherbal, with whom he brought up Jugurtha his
brother Mastanabal's son in the same condition, and receiving letters from
Scipio out of Spain, who gave him large commendations (and under whom he served
with his Uncle's Auxiliary forces) he adopted him. Lege Sallust. de bello
Jugurthino. Orosium l. 5. c. 15. Florum l. 3. c. 1. Livii Epitom. lib. 62, 64,
65, 66.
When Micipsa was dead, Jugurtha murdered Hiempsal, and attempted to do as much
for Adherbal, who fled to the Romans for succor. By this time avarice and
injustice had so much possessed the City, that Jugurtha sensible of it, sent
Ambassadors to Rome with full hands, who so wrought upon the Senate, that might
overcame right, and it was decreed, that ten Commissioners should be sent to
divide the Kingdom betwixt them. The Commissioners thinking they might lawfully
imitate those that sent them, were bribed to bestow the richest and best
Peopled part upon Jugurtha, who therewith not satisfied, after their departure,
fell suddenly upon Adherbal, besieged him in Cirtha, and at length getting him
into his hands made him away. For this, War was at length decreed against him
by the Senate, and committed to the management of L. Calpurnius Bestia the
Consul, in the 643 year of the City, A. M. 3894. V. C. 643.
the second of the 167 Olympiad, the seventh of Ptolomy Lathurus, the 25 of
Joh. Hyrcanus, P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica, and the said Calpurnius being
Consuls.

17. Calpurnius invaded Numidia with great fierceness, and took in some Towns,
but was presently stopped in his career, being allured with the golden balls of
Jugurtha; so that a Treaty of Peace was set on foot. The Senate was moved
hereat, and at the power of M. Scaurus, who accompanying the Consul as his
friend and counselor, was guilty of the same crime. The People was persuaded
to send L. Cassius Longinus the Praetor to fetch Jugurtha to Rome upon the
public faith, to discover his accomplices, whereof he had by gold procured many
in the Senate it self. Fighting with silver weapons he conquereth all
opposition,
Cassius persuaded him to cast himself upon the Peoples mercy, and he came to
the City in a mourning habit. But coming into the Assembly to do as he was
commanded, Baelus the Tribune bade him hold his Peace, being also bribed to put
off the business, and delude the People. At this time there was one Massina
the son of Gulussa his cousin german at Rome, who when he had murdered Adherbal
escaped out of Africa. Him Albinus the Consul, (who gladly would have had to do
with Numidia) persuaded to beg the Kingdom of the Senate: but Jugurtha having
some notice hereof, procured him to be killed, and conveyed away the murderer
into Numidia. Hereupon within a few days he was commanded to be gone, and
being out of the City, he looked back upon it, and uttered these words: O City
that would be sold if there was but a chapman for thee. This he said, as
having himself experience of the corruption of it is Inhabitants; so horribly
were they now degenerated from the fidelity and abstinence of the preceding age.

18. Albinus followed him with an Army, and at first seemed to be very
ambitious of finishing the War, before the creation of new Consuls. But upon
some account he prolonged it, and his brother, by virtue of some compact,
withdrew from Suthul, where the treasure of the Kingdom lay, when he was about
to besiege it. The Centurions also were so corrupted, as Jugurtha was suffered
to break into the Camp, whence beating out the Army, he either forced, or by
former agreement, brought Albinus to submit unto most dishonorable terms. In
this condition Metellus the following Consul found affairs and the Army spoiled
for want of discipline. But bringing the Soldiers into good order, But is
humbled by Metellus.
within the space of two years he overthrew Jugurtha several times, outed him
of several Towns, and chased him further than his own borders, which
constrained him to submit and beg Peace; but the conditions thereof he brake,
and the former hostility returned. Now was there one C. Marius, Legatus or
Lieutenant to Metellus, who by his good demeanor won much upon the Soldiers,
for being desirous of the Consulship, he took all ways to purchase their
favor. He calumniated Metellus privily to the Merchants at Utica, avowing that
he was able with half of the Army, and that within a few days, to take
Jugurtha. By these speeches he procured many complaints to be written to Rome
against Metellus, Marius by undermining Metellus gets the Consulship.
and getting leave to go thither, obtained his desire, being created Consul,
and had the management of the War committed to him, which now was even ended.
Notwithstanding, the People was so grateful to Metellus, that at his return,
being certified what he had done, they both granted him a Triumph, and bestowed
on him the surname of Numidicus.

19. This was the fourth Metellus, who from the Nation subdued obtained a
surname. The first was Q. Caecilius Metellus surnamed Macedonicus, of whom we
have formerly spoken. Much is said of this man's Consule Val. Max. l. 7. c. 1.
exemp. 1. Patercul. l. 1. c. 11. Ciceron. de Finibus lib. 4.
felicity, whereof this is chief, that when he died, he had, of four sons, seen
three Consuls, Several of the Metelli obtained sirnames from Countries
conquered.
and the fourth Praetor. Of these, the first was Q. Metellus surnamed
Balearicus from his subduing the Baleares, who was Consul in the 631 year of
the City: the second L. Metellus, who was Consul in the 635 year: the third M.
Metellus, Consul in the 639 year, the same wherein his father died: and the
fourth C. Metellus of Praetorian rank. But the third of this name who obtained
a surname was L. Coecilius Metellus, surnamed first Diadematus, because having
an ulcer in his forehead, he kept it bound a long time, and afterward
Dalmaticus, from the Dalmatians whom he subdued to get him a Triumph; this
People having nothing offended. He was son to L. Caecilius Metellus Calvus, who
was Consul in the 612 year. Lastly, the fourth thus surnamed was this Q.
Caecilius Metellus Numidicus, who was Consul together with M. Junius Silanus in
the 645 year of the City.

20. Marius after some time took the City Capsa a place very rich and strong,
and after this another called Mulucha. Jugurtha finding himself too weak, drew
in to his assistance Bocchus King of Mauritiana his Father in Law, by the help
of whose Horse he very much wearied the Roman Army. Coming to raise the siege
at Cirta, Marius overthrows Jugurtha and Bocchus.
before which Marius was sat down, what by the number of the Horse reported to
be 60000, and what by heat and dust, the Romans were sorely distressed, and the
fight continued dangerous and terrible to them for three days. Then a Tempest
of rain fell, which spoiled their Enemies weapons, and relieved Marius his men
almost killed with thirst; and the course of fortune changing, the two Kings
were defeated and fled. In another battle Marius, as it is said, killed 90000,
after which Bocchus began to repent of his enterprise, and sent to Rome to
enter into a League, which he could not procure, but obtained pardon of his
fault. Not long after, Marius took Jugurtha in an ambush, whither he had drawn
him by specious pretenses, Takes Jugurtha who is led in triumph and put to
death.
and delivered him up to Sylla his Quaestor, who had brought over some forces
gathered in Italy. Sylla having little or no skill in matters of War before,
under him got that skill, which afterward he used against his General.
Jugurtha being led in triumph by Marius with his two sons, was after, by order
of the Senate put to death, and so the War ended, after about seven years
continuance. Numidia was not now made a Province, as some have thought; for we
find other four Kings on which it was bestowed, viz. Hiempsal, Hiarbas, and
Juba, concerning whom we may have occasion to speak hereafter. Now is to be
described the War with the Cimbri.

21. The Cimbri inhabited the Chersonesus from them named Cimbrica, (now
Holsatia) and were a vagabond People. With a sort of Germans called Tentones
(from Tento or Tuisco the Patriarch, or reputed god of that Nation) they brake
into Illyricum in the 641 year of the City, and there put to flight Cn. Carbo
the Consul, to whom that Province had fallen by lot. Some three years after,
they made an irruption into Gall and Spain, but being repelled, sent to Silanus
the Consul, Lege Florum l. 3. c. 3. Livii Epitom. lib. 63, 65, 67, and 68.
Orosium l. 5. c. 16. Paterc. l. 2. c. 12.
desiring some ground wherein to plant and settle themselves. This being denied
by the Senate, they betook themselves from entreaties to force, and setting
upon the Consul put him to flight, entertaining M. Scaurus sent against them
into Gall in the same manner. The occasion of the War with the Cimbri by the
Greeks called (...).
Scaurus was succeeded by the Consul L. Cassius Longinus, who pursuing the
Tigurins (now Switzers) to the Ocean, was circumvented by them, and slain, with
L. Piso, a man of Consular dignity, his Lieutenant. After him Caepio the Consul
made War upon the T^ctosages or T^losans, whose chief City Tolose (now in
Gascoigne) he took, and therein a great treasure, which some said was taken out
of the Temple at Delphos by the Galls. His command was continued to him for the
following year, as Proconsul, in conjunction with Manilius (or Mallius) his
Successor. These two could not agree, but divided the Army, and parted the
Province betwixt them. At length they were overthrown in a bloody battle by the
Cimbri, to whom the Teutons, Tigurins, and Ambrones, another People of Gall
joined themselves: 80000 men were slain, and 40000 lackies and drudges, as also
both the Camps taken. Caepio for this was cast into prison, where he died,
these great defeats being charged upon his sacrilege, of which those Galls that
were guilty, were still followed and consumed by one plague after another.
After this, the Cimbri made another Expedition into Spain; but being thence
repelled by the Cel^berians, returned into Gall, whence, with the Teutons and
Ambrones, they resolved to pass over the Alps into Italy.

22. C. Marius having vanquished Jugurtha, was in his absence made Consul the
second time, to manage the War against the Cimbri. Whilst they continued in
Spain he waged War against their friends the Tolosans, whose King Copilus was
taken by Sylla his Lieutenant. Being created Consul again the following year,
he neglected to fight till their fury was abated. In his fourth Consulship they
were ready in three bands to pass over the Alps, which he considering,
attended their motions. His Army was almost oppressed with thirst, the Teutons
and Ambrones lying betwit it and the water, which made him desirous to engage
with them, and coming to fight, in two days he utterly destroyed them, Which
Marius dispatcheth.
taking prisoner Theutobocchus their King. The Cimbri escaped him and got over
into Italy, though it was Winter, and the Alps were covered with Snow, being
in vain opposed by Catulus, A. M. 3904. Ol. 169. an. 4. V. C. 653.
both at the Alps and the River Athesis near Verona. To Catulus did Marias
join himself now the fifth time Consul, for carrying on the War, and being
challenged to give battle slew 140000, and took 60000. Their wives resisted,
fighting from the Chariots, and when they saw all desperate, killed first their
children and then themselves. The third band of the Tigurines came to nothing;
and so an end was put to this War, on the third of the month Sextilis, as
Plutarch writes, after it had continued twelve years, in the 653 year of the
City, C. Marius the fifth time, In Mario.
and M. Aquilius Nepos being Consuls, the former whereof was counted the
preserver of his Country, and contented himself with one Triumph. And his
Colleague put an end to the second Servile War in Sicily, which now had lasted
almost four years.

23. These dangers abroad did not suppress domestic troubles. There was one
L. Apuleius Saturninus, Vide Appian. de bello civili. l. 1. Flor. l. 3. c. 16.
Livii Epitom. l. 69. Orosium l. 5. c. 17. Velleium Paterculum l. 2. c. 15.
who having been Quaestor at Ostia during a dearth, was put out of his place by
the Senate, for which he conceited great displeasure against it, The sedition
of Saturninus.
and to show it, procured the Tribuneship. By his help especially Marius
obtained the fourth Consulship. But after his year was out, Metellus Numidicus
being Censor would have removed him from the Senate, but he was hindered by his
Colleague; and to revenge this he stood to be Tribune the second time. Now was
Marius Consul the fifth time, and there being nine of the ten Tribunes chosen,
and A. Nonius standing in competition with him, by the assistance of Marius he
murdered him, and got the place. Now being again in power, he preferred a Law
for dividing of such Lands as Marius had recovered in Gall, and compelled the
Senate to swear to it, which Metellus refusing to do, he set him a day to
answer it before the people; but for fear of him and Marius, Metellus fled to
S^yrna. Saturninus being Tribune the third time, and finding C. Memmius to
stand for the Consulship; he also made him away to prefer Glaucius the Praetor,
a man most addicted to his own party. At these things the Senate being startled
took up resolution, and Marius now the sixth time Consul, seeing him in a
falling condition, withdrew himself from his friendship. The Consul were, as in
dangerous times, empowered by the Senate to see that the Commonwealth received
no damage. Marius therefore with his Colleague L. Valerius Flaccus, set upon
Saturninus in the public meeting place, and drove him and his followers into
the Capitol, where for want of water ( Marius having cut the pipes) they were
forced to yield. This they did upon his faith given for their safety; for
Saturninus and Glaucius much relied upon him, not sticking to give out that
they were but the actors of his designs. He is slain with his accomplices.
Notwithstanding, A. M. 3905. V. C. 654.
they were killed in the Courthouse by the Equites, which brake in amongst
them; and Metellus, through the labor of his son especially, was recalled,
with the general applause of the people.

24. For the space of about 8 years after, there was not any open Sedition; yet
great dissatisfaction amongst those of the Senatorian order. For, Lege Appian,
de bello civili lib. 1. Livii Epitom. lib. 71. Paterculum l. 2. cap. 13, 14.
it lay under great grievances by reason of the power of Judicature, which was
by Gracchus his Law brought down to the Equites, by whom they were cruelly, and
despightfully used, their lives, liberties, and estates being wholely in their
power. The Commonwealth was even bought and sold, the Publicans, who farmed the
customs, and public revenues, being, as Equites, both Judges and parties. It
happened that thirty years after Gracchus his Law, M. Livius Drusus the Tribune
cast in his mind how to restore the Fathers to their ancient power, Drusus the
Tribune laboring to reconcile the Fathers, and Equites, inlargeth the breach,
and yet not offend the Equites. He preferred therefore a Law, that because the
Senators were reduced to a small number, as many Equites should be added to
them, and the power of Judicature committed to this body. But herewith neither
party was satisfied. Not the Senators, because they disdained that the other
should be equal to them, and neither the Equites, for that they feared the
power would at length be wholly removed from them. Caepio also one of Drusus his
Colleagues (not that Caepio, as some mistake, who having been formerly Consul
had proposed such a Law, which took not, he himself being condemned, and dying
in prison as was said) opposed him, and coming into the Senate, there accused
some of the chief of unlawful seeking for Offices. Drusus to withstand his
endeavors, by the favor of the people proposed again the Agrarian Law, and
that the Allies and Confederates of Italy, now Possessors of the Lands, might
not be aggrieved, he gave them hopes to make them free of the City. Great
concourse there was, and as great contention. Q. Marcius Philippus the Consul
opposed the Law for division of Lands, and for that was soundly buffetted by a
Traveller. Drusus in this particular disappointed, still bent his mind how to
make good what he had offered to the Italians; but going home accompanied with
a great multitude, he was stabbed in the Court of his own house, its unknown by
whom, the knife being left in his body, and died within a few hours. And is
stabbed.
He was a man excellently accomplished, both with understanding and morals,
whose good intentions had not the fortune to be rightly understood by the great
ones, but to dissatisfie all parties. A. M. 3914. Ol. 172. ann. 2. V, C. 663.
And still more unfortunate he was in that great and dangerous War, which by
his means (though not intentious) was kindled, and which being foreseen or
feared, might perhaps have no small influence into his death.

25. This War is called by diverse names. Sometimes Bellum Sociale, because of
the Associates of the People of Rome, who managed it: sometimes Bellum
Marsicum, from the Marsi who began it, and otherwhiles Bellum Italicum, from
Italy the seat of it, Corfinium a City of the Peligni, being before all others
chosen for the place of the conspiracy. Strabo lib. 5. Velleius lib. 2. cap.
15, 16, 17. Cicero pro Archia. Appian ut supra.
The occasion of it was the disdain conceived by the Italians, because they
were not admitted to the freedom of the City, The occasion of the social War.
which had been partly promised them 36 years before by Flaccus the Consul, who
being earnest for it, was diverted into Gall by the Senate, and afterward
joined himself in the Tribuneship with the younger Gracchus, to no purpose
endeavoring with him the passing of it; with whom also as is formerly shown he
lost his life. Now again, their expectation was heightened by Drusus; but then
was he murdered, and all the great ones banished who stood for them, by a Law
which the Equites by force of Arms obtained, who hoped that having the power of
Judicature in themselves, the profit would be great which would arise in
ridding away their Enemies. They also thought they had reason enough to expect
this privilege from that City, which was maintained both in its subsistence
and Empire by their valor, they ever sending out forces double in number to
those of the Romans. Upon these grounds they resolved to procure by force what
could not be by fair means obtained, sending Messages to and fro, and for the
performance of what was agreed on, receiving Hostages from one another.

26. This being known late enough at Rome, so busied with its private seditious
contests, Spies were sent out into the several quarters. One of them seeing a
young man of Asculum carried into another City as an Hostage, therewith
acquainted Servilins the Proconsul, who going to Asculum and chiding the
Citizens, was set upon and slain, together with all the Romans. After this, the
Conspiracy being quite discovered, all broke out into open Rebellion: the
Marsi, Peligni, Vestini, Marrucini, Ferentani, Hirpini, Picentes, Pompeiani,
Venusini, Apulians, Lucanians, and the old Enemies of the Romans, the Samnites.
They thought good first to send to Rome to complain; but the Messengers could
not be admitted without repentance for what was already done. Preparations for
it.
Hereupon the War was committed to both the Consuls, L. Julius Caesar, and P.
Rutilius Lupus, to whom were added Cn. Pompeius Strabo (father to Pompey the
Great) C. Marius, who had been six times Consul, L. Sylla, Licinius Crassus,
C. Perpenna, Q. Caepio, Q. Metellus Pius (son to the Numidian) M. Marcellus,
Val. Messala, and T. Didius, who were all sent with Proconsular power. The
forces on either side amounted to 100000 fighting men. Rutilius the Consul
quickly lost his life, falling into an ambush laid for him by the Marsi, and
many other blows did the Romans receive; The Romans receive many blows.
so that they were forced to list such as once had been slaves. The bodies of
the Consul, and those of several others being carried into the City, the sight
of them so discouraged the people, that the Senate made a decree, that
thenceforth the slain should be buried where they died, which as a prudent
example was followed by the Enemy.

27. None succeeded Rutilius all the year, for that Caesar could not come to a
new Election, but his Army was committed to Marius his Lieutenant, and Q.
Caepio. Caepio was killed not long after, being intrapped by Popedius one of
the Italian Generals. Marius now alone commanding the forces, did good service,
as did also Sylla. For the following year, Cn. Pompeius Strabo, and L. Porcius
Cato were made Consuls. Now the Senate thought fit to make such Italians free
of the City as had not revolted, which thing established those, who
something vvavered in their minds, and took off the courage of the other
already engaged: Yet they chose them not into any of the 35 Tribes, but placed
them by themselves behind all; so that as in voting they could not hinder the
rest, so seldom were they called to vote at all, which afterward considered,
though not at present, wrought some disturbance. Cato the Consul did very good
service, but thereof boasted so much, that he compared himself to Marius, for
which, as he was fighting against the Marsi, he was killed in a crowd by
Marius his son. Pompey overthrew the Picentes and Asculani. Having long
besieged Asculum, he defeated the Enemy which sallied forth, killed 18000 of
the Marsi, took 3000. and being got into Asculum, caused all the Officers and
principal men to be beaten with Rods, and then beheaded. SECT. 5.
Sylla his Successor in the Consulship overthrew the Samnites, and stormed two
of their Camps, by which success elevated, he went, stood for, and carried
that greatest Office. A. M. 3917. Ol. 173. ann. 1. V. C. 666.
This War was ended by him after it had endured above two years, Sylla ends
the War.
in the 666 year of the City, he the said L. Cornelius Sylla, and Q. Pompeius
Rufus being Consuls.

28. What the Italians could not get with armed hand, was given them Conquered;
at first to all, except the Lucanians and Samnites, and shortly after to them
also, but ranked by themselves in the same manner as the former. After which
freedom of the City is given to the Conquered Italians, having been before
this denied to them.
Not long after this, which was a kind of Civil War, there were stirs in the
City about Usury, which being rigorously exacted by the Creditors, Asellio the
Praetor, who withstood it, was murdered by them. Yet hitherto these Seditions
in the City were managed but by private persons, or in a private manner, but
now came it to that pass, that the heads of the factions got whole Armies to
themselves, and carried on their interests in open War one against another,
their own Country being as the prize and reward of the victory, such were the
manners and behavior of those who through the infirmity of the Government were
not able to bear that greatness of fortune, which from the temperance and
moderation of their fathers had descended upon them. But an occasion to the
first Civil War was ministered by that with Mithridates, which began ere the
Social or Italian ended.

SECT. V. From the War with Mithridates, and first Civil War, to the
combinanation of Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar, termed by Varro Tricipitina,
which proved the ruin of the Popular Government, for the space for 28 years.
Mithridates King of Pontus.
1. MIthridates was King of Pontus (a Country of Asia, Justin lib. 37. Strabo
lib. 10.
so called because it lies upon the Euxine Sea) thought by some to have been
descended from one of the seven Persians, who conspired against the Magi that
had usurped after the death of Cambyses. He was surnamed Eupator and Dionysus,
being a man of a vast mind and ambitious spirit. Memnon apud Photium.
Succeeding his father, who was a friend of the people of Rome, at thirteen
years of age, within two years he made away his mother, who was left partner
with him in the Kingdom, and after her his brother also, and in his youth he
subdued the Kings about Phasis beyond Caucasus. His vast designs and great
attempts.
Thirty years after his coming to the Kingdom, he thought of no less than the
Empire of Asia, the Romans, as he fancied, being now sufficiently employed in
the Cimbrian and Italian Wars. He began with Paphlagonia, Strabo lib. 12.
Justin lib. 38.
parting it betwixt himself and Nicomedes King of Bithynia, and being checked
for this by the Romans, and commanded to desist, he pretended it was his
fathers inheritance, and to amend the matter he seized on Galatia too. Then
casting his eye upon Cappadocia, he caused to be murdered Ariarathes King
thereof, and his sisters husband, and when she married to Nicomedes he drove
out his forces, and pretended to seize upon it for the use of her son, whom
then he murdered also, and bestowed it on one of his own sons. The Cappadocians
refused to obey him, and called out of Asia Ariarathes one of their former
King's sons; but him did Mithridates drive away, and he shortly after died.
Nicomedes afterward procured one to counterfeit himself the brother of
Ariarathes, and beg the Kingdom of the people of Rome; and he sent his wife
thither to aver that she had three sons by Ariarathes. Mithridates hereupon
sent one to the Senate to affirm, that he whom he had placed in Cappadocia was
also the son of Ariarathes.

The Senate interposeth.
2. The Senate knowing well the aim of both, took from Mithridates Cappadocia;
and Paphlagonia from Nicomedes, who had got it into his hands, and left these
two Kingdoms to their own liberty. But the Cappadocians protested that they
could not live without a King, and being therefore allowed to choose one from
amongst themselves, made choice of one Ariobarzanes. Mithridates sorely
repining to be thus overruled, procured Tigranes the King of Armenia and his
son in Law to be an Enemy to the Romans, and persuaded him to expel
Ariobarzanes, whilst he did as much by young Nicomedes, who now had succeeded
his dead Father. Both of these Princes fled to Rome for relief, which was
decreed them, and Commissioners were appointed to re-establish them, whereof
Manius Aquilius was chief. This being performed, And restored the Kings he had
cast out.
they persuaded both the Kings to invade Mithridates. Nicomedes did it, though
unwillingly, whilst Mithridates opposed him not, that he might have an
advantage against him; only he sent Pelopidas to the Commissioners to complain
of him. They considering that Mithridates was a powerful Prince returned this
answer, that they did neither like that he should molest Nicomedes, nor
Nicomedes him; for the former was not convenient for the Roman Commonwealth. He
nothing moved with this answer, re-invaded Cappadocia, sending Pelopidas back
with a bold expostulation. They hereupon raised a considerable Army against him
on their own heads, without any decree of Senate or People. Nicomedes engaging
first of all with him was put to flight, though Mithridates his main body never
engaged, and next after him Manius was discomfited. But he again recovereth
many Countries.
Then seized Mithridates upon Bithynia, Phrygia, Mesia, Lycia, Pamphylia, and
other Provinces, as far as Ionia. He took also Q. Oppius and Aquilius, the
later whereof he killed by melted gold poured into his mouth, being ever wont
to upbraid the Romans with avarice and corruption.

3. The Romans hereupon decreed a War against him, A. M. 3917. Ol. 173. an. 1.
V. C. 666. Seleucid. 225.
though they were now employed in the Italian; and L. Cornelius Sylla and Q.
Pompeius Rufus being Consuls, Sylla has the charge of the War decreed against
him.
it fell by lot unto the former. But whilst he was yet employed in finishing
the Italian War about Nola, C. Marius, who had been six times Consul, either
moved by a desire of profit or of glory, persuaded P. Sulpitius Tribune of the
People to prefer a law for transferring the command against Mithridates to
himself. He drew the People of Italy to his party, by promising them that had
been of late made free of the City, Consule Appianum de bello civili lib. 1.
Patercul. l. 2. cap. 17, etc. Plutarch in Mario and Sylla. Livii Epitom. l. 77.
equal privilege with the rest, which were distribured into 35 tribes; so that
the thing was carried on by strong hand, and Pompey's son, the son in law of
Sylla, was killed in the heat of contention. Sylla hearing of this, hasted to
the City, easily persuading his Army to any thing, for that his Soldiers were
unwilling that any other should go that Expedition, from which they promised
themselves so great matters. To him his Colleague Pompey joined, and though
Marius and the Tribune made all opposition possible, with some difficulty they
entered the City, Which Marius seeking unjustly, is driven from the City and
declared an Enemy.
and Marius with his accomplices betook themselves to their heels. Sylla suffered
no harm to be done to the Citizens, but reversed what Sulpitius had done,
regulated the Senate, and procured Marius, with Sulpitius, and ten others, to
be declared Enemies to their Country, whom it might be lawful for any to kill,
and unlawful to harbor; their goods also being set to sale.

4. Sulpitius was found and put to death. Marius hid himself in the fens of
Minturnum, and being discovered, a Gall was sent to kill him, but could not do
it, he was so dashed at his presence; so that being conveyed out of that place,
he escaped into Africa. To him Cethegus and others, who had fled into Numidia,
joined themselves, expecting an opportunity to invade their own Country. Pompey
the Consul, to secure Italy, was appointed to receive the Army of Cn. Pompey,
who had done such good service in the Marsian War; but the Soldiers unwilling
to leave their old General, who also took it heavily, made away the Consul. For
the year following L. Cornelius Cinna and C. Octavius were Consuls, whereof
Cinna as some think corrupted, was altogether for the new Denisons, and
recalled Marius with the rest of the Exiles; but he was driven away by his
Colleague, and L. Merula was put in his place. He then going about to the
Italian Cities, by giving them fresh hopes of equal privilege, and pretending
that he suffered these things for their sakes, got much money. Marius also
coming over to him, they raised a considerable Army, wherewith Cinna sat down
before the City. Marius took Hostia by force, Recalled by Cinna.
and Cinna being not able to do any thing at Rome, stormed Ariminum. The
Consuls, for that they could not recall Sylla, sent for Metellus then lying in
Samnium, but he differing with them about some conditions, had them granted by
Marius, to whom then he joined himself. In the mean while the City itself was
near being betrayed to Marius by Appius Claudius a Tribune of the Army, who
being entrusted with the Janiculum, thus requited him for former kindness.

5. Though he and Cinna brake in, they were repelled by Octavius, and C. Pompey
the Proconsul, who shortly after was killed with a Thunderbolt. Marius after
this took in several Towns about Rome where provisions lay, and Cinna by
promise of liberty, drew many slaves out of the City, which the Senate
understanding, lest the People should make disturbance within, sent to him
about an agreement. He refused to admit of any address made to him as a
private man, so that they were forced to treat with him as Consul, and desired
he would swear to abstain from blood. This he flatly refused to do; but
promised, that wittingly and willingly he would not be the cause of any man's
death; so he was received, and the Law abrogated for banishing Marius and his
associates. Gets into Rome and there cruelly rages with Cinna his Colleague.
Upon their entrance began plundering and slaughters in all places. Octavius,
though having the oath both of Cinna and Marius, refusing to fly from his
charge, was killed, and his head set upon the Rostra, to which was afterward
added that of Antonius (Grandfather to the Triumvir) an excellent Orator, who
for a good space defended himself by his eloquence from the Soldiers, and
several others. None were spared, either for dignity, worth, or age. The dead
bodies, being mangled and abused otherwise, were left to be torn in pieces by
dogs and fowls, none daring to bury them. All Sylla's friends were killed, his
house defaced, and his goods put to sale, he being judged and declared an
Enemy. Merula, though he never sought the Consulship, but had it put upon him,
and Catulu, having their days set them to answer, destroyed themselves.

6. Cinna and Marius having thus satisfied their bloody minds, made themselves
Consuls for the following year: But Marius died ere the months end, having
born this Office now seven times; a man more profitable to his Country in the
time of War than of Peace. Dies.
To him succeeded Valerius Flaccus, whom Cinna sent into Asia, to supply the
room of Sylla there. But he by this time had done the work, and was coming home
to revenge the former injuries, having subdued Mithridates in less than three
years, killed 160000 of his men, recovered Grecce, Macedonia, Ionia, Asia, and
other Countries, which he had got into his hands, taken his Navy from him, and
forced him to be content with his own inheritance. These things are to be
declared in order.

7. After Mithridates had taken Aquilius with the rest, A. M. 3917.
and seized upon Asia and other Countries (whilst Sylla was at Rome, settling
things there against Marius and his faction, as is before showed) he sent his
letters abroad into all the Cities of Asia, willing them at one day prefixed,
to kill all Italians and Romans, Mithridates causes 80000 Italians and Romans
or more in one day to be killed.
with their wives and children, and cast them out unburied; then to seize on
their estates, taking one part to themselves, Valor. Max. l. 9. c. 2. Ext.
exemp. 3. Plutarch in Sylla.
and reserving the other for his use. This was accordingly done, and 80000
according to some; according to others 150000 perished in one day. Then went he
into the Island Cous, where getting great treasure into his hands, there laid
up by one of the Cleopatraes, he departed to Rhodes, and all manner of ways
attempted to take the City, though without success; such was the constancy and
fidelity of the Rhodians toward the Romans, amongst other confederates which
universally revolted. Then sent he Archelaus his General into Greece, leaving
Pelopidas in Lycia to carry on the War there, he himself providing Forces, and
punishing such as he found inclinable toward the Romans.

8. Archelaus first recovered Delos, which from the Athenians had revolted to
the Romans, then joined he to himself the Achaians, Lacaedemoniads, and
Boeotians. After this he was fought by Brittius, who had put to flight
Metrophanes sent also into Greece from the King; but having fresh supplies,
Brittius withdrew himself to the Piraeus, or Haven of Athens, Vide Appian. in
Mithridaticis, and Plutarch in Sylla.
which shortly after Archelaus took in with his Fleet. Now Sylla arrived in
Greece with five Legions and some Companies of Horse, Sylla arriving in Greece,
and having furnished himself with money and provisions in Aetolia and
Thessaly, marched into Attica against Archelaus, almost whole Boeotia, with
Thebes the chief City, revolting to him in his passage. He besieged Archelaus
in the Piraeus a very strong place, as fenced with a wall almost 40 cubits
high, consisting of square stones, and built by Pericles during the first
motions of the Peloponnesian War. Having also besieged Athens it self, he spent
the whole Summer in the siege, and at length took it, the Inhabitants being
unable to make any more resistance through famine, which so far prevailed, as
they made meat of sodden lether, Takes Athens and the Piraeus and overthrows
Archelaus the Kings General once,
and fed upon the bodies of dead men. The Piraeus was also shortly after taken,
and the walls thereof demolished, with the Arcenal, and all the rarities
therein were destroyed. Then Sylla followed Archelaus through Boeotia, and
fought with him near Cheronea, in a place so straight, that no way being open
for flight, he slew so many, that of 120000 not many more than 10000 remained,
this being an Army sent over by the King out of his new Provinces.

9. Mithridates put diverse Princes of his newly conquered Provinces to death,
for fear they should kill or betray him, by which cruelty he lost all
Gallograecia. Ephesus also, and other towns revolted from him, whereof such as
he recovered he used cruelly, Appian ut supra. Orosius lib. 6. cap. 2. Florus
l. 3. c. 5.
and afterward fearing a general defection, to purchase favor he set the
Greek Cities at liberty. Some that conspired his death were discovered, and
upon suspicion were 1600 men made away. Then sent he another supply to
Archelaus of 80000 men, which with the other 10000 remaining of the former
Army, were routed by Sylla near Orchomenes, and about 15000 being slain, the
rest betaking themselves to their Camp were also killed or taken, And again
a vast slaughter having been made. Archelaus having lost his son Diogenes hid
himself in a fen, and thence fled to Chalcis once more. After this Sylla
chastized the Boeotians for their fickleness (for they would stand to neither
party long) and took up his Winter quarters in Thessaly, providing himself of
shipping, because he heard nothing of Lucullus, whom he had sent into Egypt to
procure a Navy. Now at this time was Flaccus, who had succeeded Marius, sent
into Asia by Cinna to succeed Sylla. Him Fimbria his Quaestor killed in a
quarrel about lodging, being hated by his Soldiers, and he headed his Army,
with which he several times fought, and that prosperously, against Mithridates
his son, and drove the King himself into Pergamus, and thence to Pitane, where
he took ship and fled to Mitylene, and might have been taken if Lucullus would.
Then did Fimbria haraze Cappadocia, and burnt Ilium the daughter of Troy, for
that the Inhabitants had given up themselves to Sylla, and not to him; so that
though a Roman and so akin to them, he is said to have used them worse than did
Agamemnon himself. This happened to Ilium in the later end of the 173 Olympiad,
about 1050 years after the first taking it by the Greeks.

10. Mithridates receiving intelligence of the blow he had received at
Orchomenus, wrote to Archelaus, to procure his peace on as good terms as he
could. To a Peace Sylla was not now averse, being in great want of money, and
receiving no recruits from the City, where he was declared an Enemy, and
desiring above all things to carry back a good Army into Italy to revenge
himself. He offered Peace therefore on these conditions: That he should deliver
up all his Navy, Forces Mithridates to beg Peace.
all fugitives and Captives, A. M. 3921. Ol. 174. an. 1. V. C. 670. Seleucid.
229. L. Cor. Cinna 4. Cn. Papirio Carbone 2 Coss.
restore the Inhabitants of Chios, and others whom he had carried into Pontus,
remove his garrisons from all places whither he had brought them since the
breach of the Peace, pay all the charges of the War, and be content with his
Father's Kingdom. All these conditions were agreed to save parting with
Paphlagonia, but the Ambassadors saying they could have had better terms of
Fimbria, drove Sylla into a great displeasure, with a comparison so odious to
him. Shortly after Mithridates himself met him, and found him so resolute, as
he gladly accepted all the terms. So ended the first War with Mithridates,
being concluded by Sylla three years after his coming into Greece.

11. Sylla required of Fimbria the Army to be deliverd up to him, as held by no
authority; but was answered, as having as little himself. Appian. Plutarch in
Sylla.
Yet the Army denied to fight against that of Sylla, and forsook Fimbria, who
thereupon sent a Slave to murder Sylla, Fimbria's Army revolteth to him.
which was discovered. He begged pardon, and it was granted him, so he would
take ship and depart out of Asia; but he said, he had a better way, and going
to Pergamus there destroyed himself. Sylla gave him to be buried, saying, he
would not imitate the barbarism of Marius and Cinna toward his friends at
Rome, whom they deprived both of life and burial; yet he kept in this mind but
a while after his arival there, whither he now hasted, having fined Asia
grievously for it is revolt, He marches for Italy against his Enemies there.
and settled affairs according to present occasions. He took Athens in his way,
whence he carried with him the Library of Apellicon the Teian (in which were
most of the Books of Aristotle and Theophrastus, then not vulgarly known)
bought by him of the posterity of N^leus, to whom Theophrastus had given it. He
wrote to the Senate, to which he recounted all the great services he had done,
and then how he had been rewarded by the party of Marius, telling them plainly,
he would come and revenge both himself and the Public, by punishing the
authors of the injuries, not meddling with any other, either old or new
Citizens. The Senate hereat affrighted sent to treat with him, offering their
endeavor for his satisfaction, if he would presently make known his mind.
Cinna they ordered to stop his leavies; but he only returned them a plausible
answer, and proceeded, designing himself and his Colleague Carbo Consuls again
for the follovving year, that there might be no need of going to Rome to a new
creation. He passed over some of his forces into Dalmatia, there to fight
Sylla; but the hindermost were driven back by a tempest, and they refused
absolutely to fight against their Countrymen; so that those, who as yet had
not passed the Sea, refused to go aboard. Hereupon he going to speak with
them, an Officer who made way before him struck one of them, who struck him
again, for which offense he commanding him to be laid hold on, a tumult arose,
wherein he himself was ran through, and so perished in his fourth Consulship,
and the 670 year of the City, a man vvorthier to have died by command of the
Conquereur than the fury of the Soldiers. Carbo then continued Consul alone all
the remaining part of the year.

12. Cinna and Carbo had by a Law abrogated Sylla's command, and procured War
to be decreed against him, before the Senate was affrighted into the offer of a
mediation. He answered, that he would never be reconciled to such wicked
persons, as they desired he should; but if the People of Rome would give them
indemnity he should not oppose it; yet he thought those that would come to him
might be mose safe, seeing he had at his devotion such an Army. Hereby
declaring sufficiently what his intentions were, he also demanded restitution
of his estate, his ancient dignity and honors; but the messengers coming to
Brundusium, and there hearing of Cinna's death, and the disturbance of the
Commonwealth, returned back to him. Then crossed he the Sea to Brundusium with
a Fleet of 1600 ships, and 60000 men. Being landed, Landeth at Brundusium,
Metellus Pius, who had absented himself from Rome for fear of Marius and
Cinna, came to him, as also Pompey, afterward surnamed the Great, who though
his father was no friend to Sylla, yet coming now to him with some forces,
became afterward his greatest favorite. Besides these came Cethegus, who
having joined with Cinna now begged pardon. C. Norbanus and L. Scipio the
Consuls, with Carbo, made all preparation for resistance. The first trial at
arms was at Canusium, where Norbanus lost 6000 men, and fled to Capua. Scipio
through the treachery of his Army, came with his son into the power of Sylla,
Defeateth Norbanus.
who dismissed them both. After this Sulla sent to Norbanus to treat of Peace;
but (perhaps) being not thought serious, had no answer returned back.

13. He then passed on in Italy, making havoc of all things, as Carbo did, A.
M. 3922.
who getting into Rome, procured Metellus and the rest that joined with Sylla
to be declared Enemies to the State. Both parties sent up and down the Italian
Cities, laboring both by fair means and fowl to procure forces; and so all
this Summer was spent, wherein the Capitol was burnt none knows how. For the
following year Papirius Carbo the third time, and Marius, son (but adoptive as
most probable) to the old one, were Consuls; the later being but 27 years old.
A. M. 3923. Olymp. 174. ann. 3. V. C. 672.
In the Spring was Carinas the Lieutenant of Carbo overthrown by Metellus, and
Marius himself by Sylla, and beaten into Praeneste, where being close besieged,
and despairing of his own safety, he wrote to Brutus, then Praetor at Rome,
that he should under some pretext call together the Senate, and kill those his
Enemies: P. Antisthius, another Carbo, L. Domitius, and Mucius Scaevola the
High Priest, which was with cruelty enough performed. Metellus by his time
having overthrown another Army of Carbo's, Pompey defeated Marcius another of
that party, Sulla marched to Rome, Enters Rome.
which he easily entered, many of the opposite faction being fled. Their goods
he set to sale, and willing the people to be of good cheer, for that he was
necessitated thus to act, he left a sufficient Garrison, and departed to
Clusium, where he and his Officers several times overthrew Carbo's Armies.
Carbo sent to Praeneste to relieve Marius his Colleague eight Legions, which
Pompey meeting in a straight place slew many of them, and most of those that
escaped departed to their own homes. After this, Carbo and Norbanus in a fight
with Metellus had 10000 of their men slain, and 6000 yielded, whereupon many
fell off to Sylla's party, as also all Gall within the Alps. Norbanus fled to
Rhodes, where fearing to be given up he killed himself; Carbo into Africa,
though he had 30000 men at Clusium and other forces, which were then broken in
pieces by Pompey. Carinas, with other Commanders attempted to break through, by
the help of the Samnites, and relieve Marius; but this being with no effect,
they made then for Rome it self.

14. A bloody battle was fought at the Gates, where many thousands were slain
on both sides. Yet Sulla had the better. Carinas and Marcius were taken, and
their heads sent to Praeneste to be showed to the Inhabitants, at which sight
understanding how things had passed, they yielded up the Town to Lucullus, and
Marius killed himself, whose head was set up in the pleading place at Rome. All
his faction in Praeneste were put to death, and all the Natives with the
Samnites; the Romans only with the Women and Children were spared, who lost
all they had, the Town (the richest at that time of all others) being plundered.
Norba a little after was taken, and burnt to the ground by a fire which the
Inhabitants kindled over their own heads, Gets all Italy into his power.
some one way, and some another destroying themselves. So came Italy into the
power of Sylla, who in the improvement of his victory showed what fury and
revenge backed with power are able to do.

15. Having sent Pompey into Africa against Carbo, Lege Appian de bello civili
l. 1. Plutarch. in Sylla. Patercul. l. 2. Valerium Max. lib. 9. c. 2. Exemp. 1.
Florum lib. 3. c. 21. Orosium lib. 5. cap. 20, 21. Livii Epitom. l. 89.
and given him a charge thence to pass into Sicily against others of that
party, he called the people together, and told them that he would put them into
a better condition if they would obey his commands, but he was resolved to
prosecute his Enemies with all sorts of calamities. So he did in a larger
measure than any before him. He put to death 8000 together in the Villa
publica, a large house in the Campus Martius made for the reception of the
Ambassadors of Enemies; and liberty was given to his Soldiers to kill all they
met, till Furfidius putting him in mind that he ought to leave some to reign
over; he then first of any man published Tables of proscription, Publishes
Tables of proscription.
wherein were proscribed first of all 80 Senators, and 1600 Equites, to which
he afterward added more, promising two Talents to those that should discover
them, and threatened such as by whom they were harbored or concealed. Of those
outlawed persons some were slain in their houses, others killed in the streets,
and others prostrate at his feet; those that fled their goods were seized on.
Marius a man of Consular dignity, and brother to Sylla's great Enemy, had at
the Sepulcher of Catulus his eyes first pulled out of his head, and then his
hands and legs cut off at several times, that he might die by degrees. But not
only against private persons, but Cities also did he rage, whereof some, after
the Inhabitants were sold, he caused to be demolished. And rages cruelly both
against Persons and Cities.
Many were turned out of their possessions which were given to his Creatures.
Pompey drove Carbo into Sicily, and thence into Corcira, where being taken and
brought to him, after he had inveighed against him in an assembly, he caused
his head to be cut off, and sent it to Sylla.

16. Both the Consuls being now destroyed, Sylla withdrew himself out of the
City, and willed the Senate to create an Inter-rex, which they willingly did,
hoping they should have a new election of Consuls, and named Valerius Flaccus.
He then wrote to him to ask the people, that seeing the necessity of affairs
required so great an Officer, a Dictator might be created, and that not for any
limited time, but till all evils should be redressed; and now he spared not to
mention himself. He makes himself Dictator in perpetuum.
This the people was forced to yield to, as being in his power, and so this
Office which for the space of 120 years (ever since the years after Hannibals
quitting of Italy) had been intermitted, was conferred on him without any
limitation of time. A gilded Statue on hors-back was erected to his memory near
the Rostra, with this inscription, To L. Cornelius Sylla the happy General: for
he would be called Foelix, and sometime Aphroditus or beautiful. This happened
in the third year of the 174 Olympiad, the 672 year of the City, 80 before the
birth of Christ.

17. That a show of the Commonwealth might remain, he permitted Consuls to be
made, which were M. Tullius Decula, and Cn. Cornelius Dolabella; yet did he
plainly reign alone, having 24 Axes carried before, as the Kings in old time,
with a great Guard continually at his heels, abrogating old Laws, and enacting
new at his pleasure. He regulated the Consulship, A. M. 3925. Ol. 175. ann. 1.
V.C. 674. Seleucid. 233.
ordering that none should be capable of it without passing first through other
Offices. His actions while such.
He overthrew the Tribuneship, by making those that bore it incapable of any
other trust. To the Senate he added 300 out of the Equites, to the people 10000
out of the slaves of the proscribed, making them free, and calling them after
himself Cornelii; and to 23 Legions he assigned much Land in Italy to oblige
them to him. A. M. 3926. V. C. 675.
For the following year he gave way to have Consuls also, but joined himself
witst Q. Caecilius Metellus, which course the Emperors afterward imitated.
The year after, when the people to please him designed him Consul again, he
waved it, and created Servilius Isauricus and Appius Claudius Pulcher; and
then, to the astonishment of all men, He lays down his power,
laid down his Dictatorship, and though he had done such and so many horrid
things, yet offered to give an account of his actions.

18. None accused him except one young man, whose reviling language made him
say, that this for the time to come would keep any one from laying down such
Supreme power; which Caesar indeed seems to have been awar of. And dies.
Not long after he went into the Country, where minding nothing but his
pleasure, he not long after died at Puteoli of the Lousy disease, his body
being putrified, and all turned into Lice, as Plutarch writes. And this was
the end of L. Cornelius Sylla, a man born of the noble family of the Cornelii
(which of late had been Eclypsed through the laziness of his Ancestors) being
the sixth in descent from Cornelius Rufinus, A. M. 3927. V. C. 676.
one of the most eminent Captains in the War with Pyrrhus. As his life was
pernicious to his Country; so his death also brought trouble to it, the two
Consuls and their factions falling out about the honor which was to be given
to him at his funeral. A difference betwixt the Consuls about his burial, and
confirmation of his acts.
Catulus prevailed against Lepidus, and he was carried in great State through
the City, and first of any of his family was burned, being fearful, as Cicero
thought, lest he himself should be dealt with as he had used Marius, whose
bones he had caused to be dug up and thrown away. After the funeral, the
Consuls fell into a greater dissension. Lepidus would restore the grounds given
away by Sylla, and abolish his Laws. The Senate was fearful of another War,
and caused them both to swear that they would not decide the controversy by
the sword; but Lepidus was resolved not to return out of his Province, till the
new Creation was over, and when he should be out of his Office begin a War,
as then discharged from his Oath. Hereupon the Senate sent for him, and when
he came he would have brought his forces into the City, but being opposed by
Catulus and Pompey, a fight insued, wherein he had the worst, and then fled
into Sardinia, where he died the same year with Sylla.

19. The Civil dissentions died not with him; for, Livii Epitom. lib. 89.
though Pompey had suppressed Carbo in Sicily, M. Brutus in Gall, Cn. Domitius
and Hierba King of Numidia in Africa, who were preparing for War, (and for this
triumphed, being neither Consul nor Praetor, and scarcely 26 years of age;) yet
a more dangerous War was now depending, raised in Spain by Q. Sertorius. This
man being one of Cinna's faction, Sertorius rises in Spain.
joined with Carbo against Sylla, and having taken Suessa, thence passed into
Spain, which fell to him by lot as Prae^or. Thence he drove out such as were
for Sylla, and joining the Celtiberians to himself, stiffly resisted Metellus
who was sent against him, whereby obtaining a great name, he chose 300 of his
friends, whom he called a Senate, in opposition, and despite to that at Rome.
And now being made stronger by part of Lepidus his Army, which Perpenna had led
thither, he designed no less than the invasion of Italy. The Senate afraid of
this, Appian. de bello civili lib. 1. Plutarch. in Pompeio and Sertorio. Florus
lib. 3. cap. 22. Livii Epitom. lib. 90. Alii.
sent Pompey against him, a young man, but of great esteem, who passing the
Alps in imitation of Annibal, but another way, at first received some loss,
and in the Spring following had no success, (though Perpenna and Herculeus
were several times beaten by Metellus) but was reduced into great straights,
and wrote to Rome for a supply. Lucullus Consul for the following year procured
it to be sent him, lest the War that was renewed with Mithridates should be
committed to him if he came back into Italy, which he affirmed else he would.
Being now supplied with men and money, he, and his assistants, fell upon the
places subject to Sertorius; yet did they this year no great matters. But many
of Sertorius his Army came over to them, being aggrieved that he made the
Celtiberians his Guard, as distrusting themselves, and upon suspicion of the
alienation of their minds, being cruelly used by him.

20. The year following Pompey and Metellus being more bold, made excursions
into several places, and with more success; yet no considerable battle was
there fought. Indeed it needed not. For, Sertorius now grown lazy, spent his
time with women, and falling into an humor of cruelty had put many to death,
whereby he wrought his destruction from his own party. Perpenna fearing it
might fall to his lot to be made away amongst the rest, Is murdered by Perpenna.
resolved to prevent it, and so inviting him to a feast, murdered him after he
had besotted him and his attendants with Wine. A. M. 3932. Ol. 176. ann. 4.
V.C. 681.
This was the end of this great Captain, who for some ten years had stoutly
resisted such as had been sent against him, being rather Superior to them all,
and admired by the Spaniards as another Hannibal. Perpenna with much ado was
owned as his Successor, and not long after was overthrown, and taken in battle
by Pompey. He offered, if his life might be spared, to disclose certain things
of consequence in private unto Pompey; but he to his great commendation,
commanded him to be killed, lest accusing any man he should bring the State
into further trouble. So ended this War in the 681 year of the City. M.
Terentius Varro that vast Vir doctissimus undecunque Varro. Livii Epitom. l.
90, 91. Orosius lib. 5. cap. 23.
Scholar (being the most learned of any, either Greeks or Romans) and Caius
Cassius Varus being Consuls. Appius Claudius in Thrace, and after him
Scribonius Curio fought prosperously against the Scordisci and Dardanians at
this time: so did Servillius against the Pirates of Cilicia expelling them the
Seas, The War with Mithridates renewed.
and taking several of their Towns; as also Cosconius against the Dalmatians.
But these were inconsiderable matters in comparison of that War which now was
renewed with Mithridates.

21. Sylla, upon this daparture for Italy, had left Murena behind him in Asia,
to settle such things as were not yet composed, with the two Legions that
belonged to Fimbria. Murena being ambitious of a Triumph, had catched at all
occasions to renew the War, Upon what occasion.
and had one presented to him after this manner. Mithridates waging War with
them of Colchos and Bosphorus, who had revolted from him; Consule Appianum in
Mithridaticis.
the former desired and obtained his son for their King. This proved the
destruction of the young man, for his father thinking it to have been procured
by his seeking, put him to death, having sent for and bound him with iron
chains, though he had done him especial service against Fimbria. Against the
Bosphorians he made then great preparations, insomuch that every one thought he
designed another War against the Romans. Archelaus was now at this time out
of favor, for that he was thought to have granted too much unto Sylla in the
Treaty of Peace, and therefore fled to Murena, and stirred him up to invade
Mithridates, who neither had restored the entire possession of Cappadocia to
Ariobarzanes. Murena did so, sligh^ing the mention of Peace, which was objected
to him. Mithridates sent to Rome, to complain to Sylla, and expecting the
return of his Ambassadors, stirred not, though the other passing over the River
Halys fired 300 of his Villages. Afterward came Callidius from Rome, who
though he showed no Decree of the Senate, yet said, it was the pleasure of the
Fathers, The King overthrows Murena,
that all acts of hostility should be forborne, and afterward he talked with
Murena alone. Yet did not Murena forbear, so that the King judging that War
indeed was intended, resolved to look to himself, and passing over the River
overthrew Murena in battle, who fled into Phrygia. This Victory brought many
over to the King's party, and hereupon he drove all Murena's Garrisons out of
Cappadocia. Sylla now Dictator, was not well pleased he should be thus
disturbed, and therefore sent A. Gabinius to command Murena in good earnest to
forbear, and reconcile the King to Ariobarzanes. And the second War ends.
Mithridates gave him his son of four years of age for an Hostage, and received
part of Cappadocia. So things were settled again, and the second War, as Appian
says, ended in the third year. But some seven years after another was begun.

22. Presently after the last conclusion, he sent to Rome to have the
conditions of the League recorded, but the thing was neglected. Ariobarzanes
sent also to complain, that he kept the greater part of Cappadocia from him,
whereupon Sylla commanded him to quit it, which accordingly he did. Afterward
he sent again to desire that the League might be recorded; but Sylla being now
dead, the matter was not as much as reported to the Senate. Hereupon he
underhand procured Tigranes King of Armenia his son in Law to invade
Cappadocia, The War again breaks out and why.
whence he led away 300000 persons, and there built a City, to be the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, which from himself he named Tigranocerta, i. e. the
City of Tigranes. L. Magius, and L. Fannius, who had fled to him from Fimbria's
Army, persuaded him to send into Spain, and join in League with Sertorius,
which he did, and had granted to him Bithynia and Cappadocia, receiving from
him as a Captain M. Varius (or Marius) one of his Officers. Being now without
hope of pardon, he made all preparations possible, and got together an Army out
of diverse Countries, consisting of 140000 Foot, and 16000 Horse, wherewith the
following Spring he invaded Bithynia, which Country, Nicomedes being dead
without issue, had a little before given by testament to the People of Rome,
Mithridates recovereth Bithynia.
which thing enraged him. Cotta the Governor, a man of little courage, fled to
Chalcedon, and he got it all into his hands.

23. In the 680 year of the City, Appian ut supra. Plut. in Lucullo.
L. Lioinius Lucullus and M. Aurelius Cotta being Consuls, the former of them
was sent against Mithridates with one Legion out of the City, to which were
joined those two that belonged to Fimbria, and two more, so that in all he had
an Army of 30000 Foot, and 1600 Horse. He found the King before Cyzicus a City
of Propontis, and presently besieged the besieger. Lucullus besieges him
besieging Cyzicus.
He drove him to such straights by the help of L. Manius (who now again
revolted) that though having a great desire to the place, he labored much to
take it, yet through extreme famine he was forced first to send away the Horse,
and sick Footmen, into Bithynia, whereof 15000 were intercepted, and then to
fly himself with the rest that could escape the great slaughter made of them
in their flight. During this double siege, Eumachus one of Mithridates his
Captains made incursions into Phrygia, subdued the Pisidae, and Isauri, and
endeavored to do the same by Cilicia, till he was repelled by Detotarus one of
the Tetrarchs of Gallo graecia. But Lucullus improved his success on land by
several Victories at sea, wherein he took diverse of Mithridates his Commanders,
and hasted into Bithynia to overtake him. And forcing him to fly, persueth him
into his Kingdom,
He, flying with all speed for fear of this, suffered most grievous shipwreck,
and had been cast away, but that he was received into a Pirate's Vessel, to
which he was glad to commit himself in so great danger, and at length, after
many difficulties, got into his own Kingdom, whither now Lucullus pursued him,
A. M. 3932. V.C. 681.
having in his way taken in Bithynia and Paphlagonia. He made all possible
preparations for resistance, sending for aid to Tigranes his son in Law, and to
his own son reigning in Bosphorus; and he sent Diocles with great gifts to the
Scythians; but he ran away to Lucullus. In the space of a year he got together
40000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, with which force he once or twice repelled the
Romans, and struck some terror into them. But Lucullus sending out some Horse
for provisions, he also sent a party to interrupt them, which fighting in a
disadvantagious place was worsted. Being now destitute of Horse, he thought of
removing from Cabira, where he had wintred; and communicated his intention to
his friends. They not expecting the sign began to pack up, and send their
baggage out of the Camp before day, which the Army taking notice of, thought
much they should fly without any warning given, and in great fear and disorder
breaking out of the trenches ran away. The King went about to hinder them, but
none taking notice of him, he was born down in the crowd, and being got on
horseback betook himself also to flight, and might have been taken, but that
the Romans were too busy in plundering the Camp, though warned by their
General to forbear.

And into Armenia.
24. Mithridates first fled to Comana, and thence into Armenia to Tigranes, who
admitted him not to his presence, but caused him to be entertained like a King,
though in fenny and unwholesome places. All Pontus, except a few places,
yielded to Lucullus, to whom also Machares King of Bosphorus sent a crown of
gold, and purchased the title of his friend and allie. Afer this Lucullus
pursued Mithridates into Armenia, intending to fall on Tigranes King thereof,
if he gave him occasion by defending his Enemy. Tigranes at this time was a
very potent Prince, having conquered several Nations. He wrestred Asia from the
Parthians, transported many thousands of Greeks out of Cilicia and Cappadocia,
into a City built by him near Euphrates, and called Tigranocerta; be obtained
Syria and Palestine, displacing the Kings thereof, as was acknowledged by
Lucullus. This made him intollerably proud, so that when he rode, he would have
four of those Kings he had subdued to run beside him like Lackies, and stand
before him with their hands folded in token of subjection, when he sat on his
throne. Lucullus sent to him Appius Claudius his wive's brother, to demand
Mithridates; but he was then busied in Phoenicia, in reducing some places,
which the Messenger made an opportunity in his absence, secretly to withdraw
from him many, whom his intolerable pride had rendered impatient. At his return
he gave a negative answer, and therefore Lucullus with two Legions and scarcely
3000 Horse, passed over Euphrates, being not acknowleged a General, because he
had not given him the title of King of Kings.

25. Tigranes had no good intelligence of his coming, for he hanged him that
first brought the news, as a disturber of the Peace; but when he perceived it
was so indeed, he sent Mithrobarzanes with 2000 Horse to interrupt his passage,
left Mancaeus to guard Tigranocerta, and went himself up and down levying
forces. Whilst he was bringing 250000 Foot, and 50000 Horse, the former was
beaten back, and the later could not defend the City. Mithridates advised him
not to hazard all in a battle, but rather starve the Romans, as they had done
him at Cyzicus, but he slighted the motion, and jeered at the smallness of
their number, saying, that if they were Ambassadors they were very many, Where
he overthrows in battle Tigranes the King, who protected him.
and if Soldiers, very few. But Lucullus pitching upon an hill, sent his Horse
to provoke and draw out the Enemy, A. M. 3936. Ol. 177. an. 4. V. C. 685. Q.
Hortensio Nepote Q. Caecilio Metelio Coss.
that he might break his ranks, and then setting upon the carriage beasts,
caused them to drive the Foot amongst the Horse, whereby a great confusion was
made, and great execution continued all the day. Tigranocerta was taken by the
means of certain Greeks, who being out of jealousy disarmed by Mancaeus, took
clubs, and setting upon him and his men, got the better, and received the
Romans within the walls. After this, another great Army was raised, and
committed to the conduct of Mithridates. They then endeavored to incompasse
Lucullus, but were crossed in their expectation, and both parties continued
without any great matter performed, till want of victuals forced them to
depart. Then went Tigranes further into his Kingdom, and Mithridates marched
away into his own, being pursued by Lucullus.

26. Mithridates overthrew Fabius, who had been left in Pontus by Lucullus, and
after him Triarius, who being sent with a new supply, Dion Cassius. Hirtius de
b^llo Alexandrino.
out of a desire of glory ventured to fight ere the General came. He lost in
one engagement 24 Tribunes, and 150 Centurions (which numbers were seldom heard
of in an overthrow of the Roman Armies) and 7000 in all were slain near the
Mountain Scotius, about three miles distant from Zela a City of Pontus.
Lucullus having heard of the Kings intention to set upon Triarius, procured the
Soldiers of Fimbria to march, who through the procurement of P. Clodius mutined
against him, as formerly against Flaccus by the means of Fimbria. But
Mithridates taking away all the necessaries he could carry, and destroying the
rest, departed into Armenia the less. Lucullus would gladly have followed him,
Lucullus being in a fair way to finish the War, is interrupted by the coming of
Glabrio.
and might have put an end to the War, Dio. l. 35.
but that now by the procurement of A. Gabinius the Tribune, Manius Acilius
Glabrio that years Consul, was appointed his successor, and an order made for
disbanding of Fimbria's Soldiers. This being known, Lucullus was slighted by
his Army so much, that hardly could his men be drawn to stay, Plutarch in
Lucullo.
though they marched no further against Mithridates; so that the King began to
recruit himself, and Tigranes wasted Cappadocia. Shortly after, Glabrio arrived
in his Province, and sent about to give notice, that the Senate was displeased
with Lucullus for prolonging the War, disbanded his Army, and would confiscate
the estates of such as should disobey it is order. Hereupon all the Army forsook
him, except some few poor men, who had no cause to regard the threatenings; and
Lucullus being outed of his command, Mithridates recovered almost his whole
Kingdom, and did much hurt to Cappadocia; Glabrio not as much as coming to the
Army; but loitering in Bithynia. This happened in the eighth year after Lucullus
had undertaken the War; the 687 of the City, C. Calpurnius Piso and the said M.
Acilius Glabrio being Consuls. The year following the War was committed to
Cneius Pompey (afterward surnamed the Great) by the means of C. Manilius the
Tribune, The War committed afterward to Pompey.
Dio. lib. 36. Livii Epitom. l. 100. Plutarch in Pompeio.
who having offended the Senate by a Law, which gave the same right of
suffrages to Liberti or Freemen (once slaves) as to their Patrons, or such as
manumitted them, procured this Law also to pass to curry favor with him, who
now had a very great name and power, having scarcely finished the Piratick
War, which for his famous and speedy Expedition, must be described, after we
have first spoken something of the War with Spartacus, that was managed whilst
Lucullus was busy in Pontus.

The war with Spartacus.
27. Spartacus a Thracian born, was a Fencer in the house of Lentulus at Capua,
where persuading about 70 of his condition, Consule Appian de bello civili l.
1. Plut. in Crasso. Florum l. 3. c. 20. Eutrop. lib. 6. Orosium lib. 5. c. 24.
rather to fight for their own liberty than the pleasure of spectators, they
broke the house and fled to Vesuvius the hill in Campania, where receiving to
them all fugitives, they fell down upon the parts adjacent, and robbed them. By
making equal division of the booty, he got together a great power of men, over
whom he set as Captains two Fencers that were Galls by birth, called Oenomaus
and Crixus. Clodius the Praetor, who was sent against them from the City, they
routed and put to flight, as also P. Varinus, whose Lictors and Horse they
took. Spartacus now having got together 70000 men, and making great
preparations, began to be formidable to the Romans, who therefore sent against
him L. Gellius Poplicola, and Cn. Cornelius Lentulus the Consuls with two
Legions. Crixus was at the Hill Garganus defeated and slain. Spartacus making
for Gall, was beset before and behind by the Consuls; but one after the other
he overthrew, and putting them both to flight, killed 300 prisoners to appease
the Ghost of Crixus. Marching then toward the Alps he was opposed by Cassius
the Praetor, whom he also overthrew, and who hardly escaped from the engagement.

28. Spartacus puffed up by such success, now consulted of no less than
setting upon Rome it self. At the Comitia for Praetors, when the Canditate
appeared, M. Licinius Crassus, a person of great Nobility, and exceeding rich,
undertook the Office, and was sent against Spartacus with six Legions. He
ordered Mummins his Lieutenant with two Legions to attend the Enemies motions,
but not to fight, which doing, he was worsted, and many being taken, many also
cast away their Arms and fled. Crassus to terrify others, used great severity
against such as forsook their Colors, decimating 500 who had first begun to
fly; which ancient kind of Discipline being of a long time difused, he hereby
revived. Spartacus having by this time passed to the Sea, thought of going over
into Sicily; but failing of his design upon some Cicilian Rovers, he sat down
in the Peninsula of Rhegium, where Crassus as it were besieged him, having
drawn a line through the Isthmus from Sea to Sea, to cut off all Provisions.
Spartacus in a tempestuous night made a shift to fill up the Ditch, and get
over the third part of his Army, then engaging with Crassus lost 12000 men.
After this defeat he went toward the Petiline Mountains, and the Lieutenant and
Quaestor of Crassus pursuing him, he faced about, and put them to flight,
whereby his men being encouraged, refused not to give the Romans battle.
Crassus now desired also to fight, because Pompey, who was lately returned out
of Spain was reported as coming to end this War. He is defeated and slain by
Crassus.
Pitching then one against another, Spartacus engaged with all his forces, and
made at Crassus through the midst of Weapons and Wounds, whom yet he missed,
but killed two of his Centurions. At length such as stood near him running
away, whilst he stood his ground manfully he was slain, and the rest were
disordered and put to flight. Some that escaped from the battle, and made head
again, Pompey suppressed, three years before he undertook the War against the
Pirates.

29. The Pirates who had been a little repressed by Servilius Isauricus (as we
said before) were now grown so numerous and powerful, that there was no
passing of the Seas, The insolence of Pirates.
nor any dwelling upon the Coasts; for they not only took and robbed ships on
the Sea, Appian in Mithridaticis.
but also whole Provinces on the Land; the chief place of their Rendezvous
being Cilicia the Rough. Mithridates first set them on work, which finding
profitable they ceased not when he left off, but continued their Robberies; Dio
lib. 36. Plutarch. in Pompeio.
many thousands of several Nations, as Syrians, Cypriots, Pamphylians, the
Natives of Pontus, and almost all others of that part of the World joying
together. For, seeing that the War continued, they thought it more wisdom to
damnifie others, than lose their own Estates. Because they made choice of
Cilicia, as most commodious in the Mountainy and Craggy places thereof to
secure themselves, they all went under the name of Cilices. They had defeated
several Roman Praetors. Murena did little good against them, and Servilius but
a little repressed their violence; for so impudent were they now grown, that
besides their incursions into Sicily and other places, which made the
Inhabitants of the Coasts forsake their habitations, they landed in Italy near
Brundus^um, whence they took away several women of quality; and more than that,
two Armies with their Ensigns.

30. The People of Rome being very sensible of these disgraceful losses, a Law
was preferred by A. Gabinius the Tribune, Provokes the people of Rome.
('it is uncertain whether at the motion of Pompey, or from his own desire to
ingratiate himself with him; for being none of the best men, he little valued
the good of the Commonwealth) that some one from amongst those of Consular
Dignity should be Created General with full power for three years against the
Pirates, to whom also should be granted large forces, and many Lieutenants for
carrying on the War. This Law little pleased the Fathers, who now began to be
jealous of Pompey's power; but to him was the business committed, having equal
authority with Proconsuls any where within fifty miles distance from the Sea,
and full power over all persons within that compass, whether Kings or others,
Which sends Pompey against them.
that they might assist him in the work. The Senate permitted him to choose out
of their body fifteen Lieutenants, to whom he might commit several Provinces;
to take up as much money out of the Treasury and from the Publicans as he
pleased; to raise what force he would, and take 200 ships. But he obtained
greater things of the people, and doubled his preparations, getting 500 ships,
120000 foot, and some 5000 horse. He had also out of the Senate about 25
Vicegerents, two Quaestors, and took up 6000 Attick Talents; so difficult a
thing it seemed to destroy so many Fleets as the Pirates had, in such a Sea,
where there was so many places of retreat and refuge.

31. He distributed to his Lieutenants the Mediterranean Sea, including all the
Bays, Havens, Promontories, Straights, Peninsulaes, and windings whatsoever,
furnishing them with convenient shipping, forces, and authority; Florus lib. 3.
cap. 6.
so that the Pirates being rouzed out of their lurking holes by some, His
Method.
might be received by the next, and chased by others, and none might need to
sail too far. He himself like a King of so many Kings sailed up and down,
Appian ut supra. Plutarch. Dio. Cicero pro lege Manilia.
and visiting, giving directions, and overseeing, took care that not one Pirate
escaped. By this course prosecuted with singular industry, in 40 days he
scoured all the Seas about Africa, Sardinia, Corsica, and Sicily; and the
Pirates that escaped flocked into Cilicia, as the common receptacle. He coming
to Rome about some necessary occasions, quickly after followed them with 60
Galleys; but though they prepared to give him battle at Sea, yet when they saw
his Fleet at hand, submitted to mercy. Then in the space of 40 days he reduced
Cilicia unto Roman obedience; for though he had provided Engines of all sorts
to batter their Walls, it needed not, the greatness of his name, and
preparation for the War had so terrified them, that one after another they all
yielded themselves with the furniture for their trade. Such as remained of them
being above 20000 he was unwilling to kill, A. M. 3938. Ol. 178. ann. 2. V. C.
687.
and to let them return to their old habitations was not safe: therefore he
removed them into another place at a good distance from the Sea, where he gave
them houses and Land; With wonderful expedition in three months he finisheth
the War.
and furnished their seats with new Inhabitants. Thus having taken well nigh
400 ships, killed 10000 men, and taken 120 Forts, he finished this War in three
months, using the Conquered with more clemency than did Q. Metellus in Crete,
which being the other nest of these Pirates, and glorying that it never
underwent the yoke of any, he subdued, and obtained with a Triumph the surname
of Creticus. Having succeeded Antonius (who died in the action, and had as
large authority there as Pompey) he used the Pirates very roughly, and so much
the more, because hearing of Pompey's mercy, they had by a Message given up
themselves into his hands.

The Lex Manilia.

Whereby the War against Mithridates with vast power is committed to Pompey.


32. Whilst he was putting an end to this Piratick War, did Manilius prefer a
Law as we said before, Dio lib. 36.
that all the Armies the Romans had any where, with the Government of all Asia,
and the War against Mithridates and Tigranes, might be committed to him. The
Nobility conceived great indignation against this Law, as which did manifest
injury to Lucullus, Glabrio, and Marcius; but especially out of an high
jealousy of Pompey's greatness, to whom now even all the Roman Empire was
subject, having these Provinces laid to his former, with the same power of
Peace and War, and making what friends and enemies he pleased, and chiefly for
that he had Jurisdiction over all Armies whatsoever, which things had never
before been conferred upon any single person. But the Commons with great
alacrity embraced the Law; Cicero the Praetor pressing it exceedingly, who
having formerly set himself to defend the Nobility, now had betaken himself to
the vulgar sort. And C. Julius Caesar (who of late had been Quaestor) is said
to have favored it, that he might have the people more inclined afterward to
commit extraordinary commands to himself.

33. It being now the 688 year of the City, A. M. 3939. V. C. 688.
the 64th before the birth of Christ, the fourth of Aristobulus King of Judaea,
M. Aemilius Lepidus, and L. Volcatius Tullus being Consuls, Pompey undertook
the expedition. He first sent to Mithridates, offering him good terms; but he
slighted them, Idem ibid. Plutarch. in Pompeio and Lucul.
because he hoped to have Phraates the Parthian on his side; yet when he heard
that he had first made a League with him, on the same conditions as were
offered to Sylla and Lucullus, He offers the King terms to no purpose.
he himself then sent and asked peace. Pompey commanded him to lay down Arms,
and deliver up all Fugitives; who fearing they should be given up, and the
other Soldiers mutining for being about to be deprived of their help, a great
trouble insued, which he evaded, by saying that he only sent to make an
espial, and by swearing, that he never would be reconciled to the Romans,
because of their insatiable avarice. Then marched Pompey into Galatia, where
meeting with Lucullus, much ado there was betwixt them. Stirs betwixt Lucullus
and him.
Lucullus said the War was finished, and that the Commissioners sent from Rome
were to decide the business, and when Pompey would not hear of this, he
reviled him with an immoderate thirst after power; Pompey again objecting
covetousness to him, so that the accusations could on neither side be denied.
Lucullus gave out commands as yet in power, but Pompey by his Edicts forbade
them, nulled all his Acts, and at length drew away most of his men. But at his
return he was received with great honor by the Senate, carrying with him
amongst his booty gotten in Pontus, many Isidorus Orig. l. 6. c. 3.
books, wherewith he furnished his Library, which ever stood open to Greeks
especially. He also first brought Plin. l. 15. cap. 25.
the Cherry-Tree out of of Pontus (from a City of which Region it was called
Cerasus) into Italy.

34. Mithridates had now got together a considerable Army; but coming to engage
with Pompey was inferior to him in all skirmishes. Dio. Appian. and Plutarch.
ut supra.
Pompey considering how the King had wasted all the Country on purpose to
straighten him for Provisions, went into Armenia the less, subject to
Mithridates, who fearing he might get that Country into his hands, followed
him thither. First here Mithridates had hopes to starve him; but was
disappointed with considerable loss, and was himself encompassed with a Trench
150 furlongs about. Hearing that Marcius was joined to Pompey, who had
Provisions at will, he fled away, having first killed all such as were sick,
and useless, He defeateth Mithridates,
about him. But Pompey pursued, and prevented him from passing over Euphrates;
then forced him to fight in the night, being surprised, and at unawares. The
Moon being low, and on the backs of the Romans, so lengthened their shadows,
that his Soldiers thinking them nearer than they were, shot most of their
Arrows without doing any execution. He lost many thousands; but he himself
brake out with 800 horse, whereof but 300 stayed with him. Then wandering
through the Woods with his horse in his hand, he light of some Mercenaries, and
about 3000 foot, by which he was conveyed into a Castle where he had laid up
much Treasure. Hence he sent to Tigranes, who refused to receive him, laying to
his charge, that by his means Tigranes his son (by the daughter of Mithridates)
had rebelled against him, Who flies to Cholcos.
and offering 100 Talents for his head. He fled therefore to Cholcos, which
formerly he had subdued.

35. Pompey followed him to Cholcos, thinking he would not have stirred
thence; And thence into Scythia.
but he passed into Scythia, where partly by force, and partly by persuasion,
he made the Princes thereof of his party, bestowing his daughters in marriage
upon them. For he had now vast designs in his head, though outed of his
Kingdom, even no less than of passing through Thrace, Macedonia, and Pannonia,
and so over the Alps into Italy. Pompey departing from Cholcos, and escaping
the ambushes laid for him by the Albanians and Iberians, marched into Armenia
against Tigranes, who was resolved now not to fight, for that having had
three sons by Mithridates his daughter, two of them upon provocation he had
already killed, and he that remained rebelling also, was now after an
overthrow received from his Father, fled to Pompey. This son prevailed that his
Ambassadors were not heard, Tigranes submits to Pompey.
who come to ask Peace. But Pompey marching against the City Artaxa, Tigranes
yielded it up to him, Patercul. l. 2. c. 37.
and afterward, without sending any beforehand, came into his Camp, and giving
up himself with all he had into his hands, made him umpire betwixt him and his
son, who would not so much as rise up to him, or give him any respect, though
Pompey used him very civily. Pompey left him his inheritance of Armenia, with a
great part also of Mesopotamia (allowing the son to reign in Gordena and
Sophena, and expect the rest after his father's death) but deprived him of all
the Provinces he had subdued, and fined him 6000 Talents of Silver for the
charge he had put the People of Rome to in the War. The conditions set him.
So, he not only quitted part of Cappadocia and Cilicia, but also all Syria
and Phoenicia from Euphrates to the Sea, which he had got into his hands, Live.
Epitom. l. 101.
with part of Cilicia, after he had ejected Antiochus Pius, as is said before
in the reign of this unfortunate King. Tigranes the son was very refractory,
unwilling his father should have the treasure adjudged to him by Pompey, that
he might be able to pay his fine. Being minded to make away his father, and for
that cast into prison; where therein also he solicited the Parthians against
the Romans, His rebellious son put to death.
he was reserved for a Triumph, and after that killed in prison. The old King
paid more than his fine, and gave something to every Officer and Soldier,
after which he was accounted a Friend and Allie of the People of Rome.

36. Pompey restored Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, gave him also Sophene and
Gordene, with Cabala a City of Cilicia, and others. A. M. 3940. V. C. 689.
After this with some ado he forced the Albanians and Iberians to beg Peace,
and then passing over the mountain Taurus, made War upon Antiochus Comaginus,
and also Darius the Median, either for that he had helped Antiochus, Appian ut
supra, Dio l. 37, Plutarch ut prius.
or made War against Tigranes, or Aretas King of the Nabathaean Arabs. Then
Phraates the Parthian affrighted at his great achievements begged Peace, which
he granted not, but sent Afranius into Gordiene, to drive out his forces, and
restore it to Tigranes, who about it had warred with the Persian. Phraates
hereupon invaded Armenia, and Tigranes sent to Pompey for aid; who being
unwilling to begin a War with Phraates without an order from Rome, sent three
Commissioners to agree them. Antiochus son of Antiochus Pius, to whom Lucullus
granted Syria his inheritance, thought first of betaking himself to the
Parthian; yet upon second thoughts, resolved to cast himself upon the good
nature of Pompey. But he having obtained it without a stroke, put him beside
it, commanding him to content himself with Comagena, though he had never ill
deserved of the People of Rome: for knowing he was not able to right himself,
he excused the matter, saying, it was not fit that Syria, whence Tigranes had
banished the posterity of Seleucus, should now rather fall to it being
conquered, Pompey reduces Syria into a Roman Frovince.
than to the Romans, Appian. Justin l. 40. A. M. 3942. Ol. 179. an. 2. V. C.
691. Seleucid. 250.
who were Conquerours. He refused flatly to give Antiochus what before he could
not keep (for he had layn in a corner of Cilicia fourteen years, all the time
that Tigranes enjoyed it) lest he should again render it liable to the
incursions of the Jews and Arabians. Therefore having overcome the Ituraeans
and Arabians, he reduced Syria into the form of a Province.

37. Mithridates, in the mean time had sent to Pompey to ask Peace, offering to
pay tribute; but being willed to come to him, he flatly refused, and made great
preparations to renew the War. Appian.
After this Castor his Governor of Phanagoria a Port Town of Pontus revolted,
and calling the People to their liberty, took the Castle held by Mithridates
his sons, whereof four he sent to Roman Garrisons. Hereupon several places fell
off, which made him put many persons to death, amongst whom were diverse of his
own friends, and one of his sons. Seeing also that many revolted, and his new
Army had no heart to the service, he sent to the Princes of Scythia to hasten
their supplies, sending his daughters to them with a convoy of 500 Horse; but
these men killing the Eunuchs who had molested them about the King, carried away
the women unto Pompey. Yet such a courage still he had, as to think of passing
through Scythia and ^stria, and joining with the Galls of Europe to invade
Italy, hoping there to find many enemies of the Romans; though Pompey coming
out of S^ria had through ambition done what he condemned in Lucullus,
Mithridates designing in his mind great things,
having reduced his Kingdom into the form of a Province, whilst he was yet
alive, and provided for new opposition. But his Army was startled at the news
of his intentions, hating the tediousness of the journey, and having small hope
to conquer those in Italy, whom at their own doors they could not withstand.
Yet such was his authority, as for a while they were quiet, till his own son
whom he had most loved, and destined his successor, became the procuror of
their defection and his death.

38. This was Pharnaces, who either out of apprehension that this attempt upon
Italy would cut off all pardon from his family, or upon other grounds,
conspired against him. The plot was discovered, and though his Accomplices were
tortured and put to death, yet was he pardoned, Orosius l. 6. c. 5. Dio lib.
37. Florus l. 3. c. 5. alii.
and betook himself to the fugitive Romans, showing them their danger in case
Italy were invaded, and then to the Army, His son Pharnaces draws the Army
from him.
which with small trouble he drew to his party. Mithridates coming to speak to
them, his own guard forsook him, his horse as he fled was killed under him, and
Pharnaces saluted King, having a piece of parchment put about his head in form
of a diadem. Mithridates seeing this from a high room, sent diverse to ask leave
to depart, who not returning, he himself often desired it of his son, but in
vain, who bidding him dye, he cried out, and prayed, that he might hear one day
the same words from his own children. Then came he down to his wives,
daughters, and concubines, to whom when he had given poison, fearing he should
be delivered up to the Romans, he took some himself; but having used much his
body to antidotes (such as yet are named from him) it would not work, though he
walked much for that purpose, whereupon he wounded himself, but this not
dispatching him soon enough, He kills himself.
he called one Bitaetus (or Bithocus) a Gall, who, the wall being broken, had
got in, by whose hand partly, and partly by his own, he dispatched himself. A
man, as one says, neither, without good heed, A. M. 3942. Patercul. l. 2. c.
18.
to be omitted nor spoken of; in War most eager and fierce, and always of
notable valor. Sometimes in fortune, all times in courage of highest rank; in
direction a good Captain, in execution a good Soldier, in hatred to the Romans
another Hannibal; finally, the greatest King after Alexander in the judgment of
Cicero. This end came he to, after the War had first commenced just 20 years;
for it began when Cn. Pompeius Strabo, and L. Porcius Cato, and ended now when
M. Tullus Cicero the Orator, and C. Antonius Nepos were Consuls, in the 691
year of the City, the second of the 179 Olympiad, and the first of the reign of
Hyrcanus, 61 years before the birth of Christ. A. M. 3942.

39. Pompey, when the first tidings of his death came to him, was near Jericho,
marching toward Jerusalem against Aristobulus King of Judaea, who had
displeased his elder brother Hyrcanus and usurped the Kingdom. Hyrcanus
complained of his brother to Pompey at Damascus, Joseph. Antiq. l. 15. c. 9.
and l. 14. c. 5, etc. and de bello l. 10. c. 5. Livius lib. 102. Plutarch in
Pompeio. Tacitus Histor. l. 5. c. 9. Florus l. 3. c. 5. Dio l. 37. p. 36. C.
who came thither to answer for himself. Pompey used them both kindly, telling
them, that as soon as he had dispatched some affairs he would come into their
Country, Pompey invadeth Judaea, where he setleth matters betwixt Hyrcanus and
Aristobulus the two brothers.
which after he had settled Syria, subdued the Arabians with the Ituraeans, and
reduced Pontus into a Province, (all in a short time) he now performed, being
much incensed by Hyrcanus against the other. He sent to Aristobulus to come to
him, and deliver up all his holds, which he did with much regret, and
afterward withdrew himself to Jerusalem, to prepare for War. Pompey
suspecting some such matter, delayed not to follow him, who then came out to
meet him; but though the City was entered without opposition, his Soldiers
fortified the Temple and stood out, which made him be delivered into custody.
The Temple being very strong by it is situation, was after much labor taken in
the third month, Faustus the son of Sylla having first mounted the walls.
Twelve thousand Jews were slain, of the Romans very few. Pompey entered the Holy
of Holies, but meddled with nothing, restored Hyrcanus to the Priesthood and
Government (yet with command not to wear a diadem) and took Aristobulus along
with him, making Judaea tributary to Rome, as is more largely related in it is
proper place. After this, leaving Syria with two Legions to Scaur^^ his
Quaestor, he fully subdued Cilicia, and thence returning into Pontus, settled
things there, bestowing the Kingdom of Bosphor^^ upon Phar^^ces. At his return
he wintred at Ephesus, whence having subdued many Princes, and joined others as
Allies to the State of Rome, having taken 1000 Castles, 900 Cities, and
restored 39; having planted Colonies in eight Cities and Countries, and ordered
the policy of such as through the continent of Asia belonged to the Romans; and
having magnificently rewarded his Soldiers, he returned into Italy, A. M. 3444.
V.C. 693.
and at Rome triumphed two days together very gloriously, leading amongst
other captives Aristobulus King of Judaea, after he had spent five years in his
Eastern Expedition.

40. The same year wherein Mithridates died, and the Temple of Jerusalem was
taken, happened a most dangerous conspiracy at Rome, Lege Sallust. de
Conjuratione Catalinae. Orosium l. 6. c. 3. and 6. Appian de bello civili lib.
2. Dionem l. 37. p. 42. E.
by the means of L. Sergius Catalina, The conspiracy of Cataline
a Patrician by degree, but one of a debaucht and infamous life. Some years
before he had been accused of incest with Fabia a Vestal Nan; but by the means
of Cacul^s was acquitted; suspected also to have murdered his son for the love
of Aurelia, who would not marry one that had children. Having contracted by
this looseness of life a vast debt, he grew desperate, and sought for power
and command, that he might if possible obtain the sovereignty over all; but
being also suspected hereof, he twice received a repulse in standing for the
Consulship. The later time it was carried from him by Cicero, whom he would have
killed in the Comitia, and railed at as a foreiner and upstart, because he was
born but of an Equestrian family at Arpinum a Town in Pug^ia, a Province (now)
of the Kingdom of Naples. Hereby driven into extreme disdain and rage, he fell
into that course wherein formerly he had been engaged with Piso for the
destruction of his Country, to whom also L. Aurelius Cotta and L. M^^lius
Torquatus (being denied the Consulship which they had sought by indirect means
two years before) joined themselves, and anew plotted the destruction of the
Consuls and Senate, Velleium Patercul. l. 2. c. 34, 35. Livii Epitom. lib. 103.
the burning of the City, and overthrowing of the Commonwealth, with Lentulus,
C. Cethegus, and others. This Lentalus had been Consul seven years before, and
now was Praetor (as also Cethegas) being driven on by a vain confidence he had
in the Books of Sibylla, which he would often say did portend that the
sovereign power, should be in the hands of three Cornelii, viz. Sylla, Cinna,
and himself.

Discovered by the means of Fulvia.
41. The plot was discovered through Falvia a Courtisan, to whom Q. Curious one
of the Conspirators (a man that for his debaucheries had by the Censors been
removed out of the Senate) blabbed it out, while he boasted to her, that
shortly he should be a very considerable man. She gave intelligence to Cicero,
who out of them two got the whole matter, how, and where they had met, and what
designs they had in hand; particularly for his own destruction to be brought
about by L. Vasgunteius a Senator, and C. Cornelius of Equestrian rank, under
pretense of a kind visit. He appointed guards to the several parts of the City,
and on the eighth of November (as the year then went) called the Senate
together, whither came Cataline amongst the rest; but none of the Senators
would come near him, so as that part of the bench whereon he sat, was wholly
void. Cicero, whether feaing him, or angry to see him there, Cicero makes his
first Oration against him.
made his first Oration against him, wherein he commanded him to depart the
City. He went away late in the night with 300 armed men, and Lictors carrying
Axes and Rods before him as a Magistrate, into Etruria, gathering Soldiers all
along, intending to return and make prey of the City, which upon his departure
he had given order to burn, as also to kill Cicero, which Lentulus and Cethegus
took upon them to do, as soon as he should come to Faesulae. In the mean time
the Ambassadors of the Allobroges, who were come to Town to accuse their
Magistrates, were also drawn in, to stir up the Galls against the Commonwealth;
but declaring it to Fabius Sanga their Patron (it was the custom for each
Nation or State to have one in the City) it came to Tullie's ear, and so was
prevented.

42. The day after Cataline's departure, the Consul made his second Oration,
wherein he Congratulates the People, and Commonwealth, concerning his absence.
His second.
The Senate judged Cataline an Enemy, and Manlius, with whom in Etruria he had
joined; they deprived Lentulus of his Office, by whom the Ambassadors had been
drawn in, who confessed they had often heard from him what he idly
conjectured out of Sibylla's books. Cicero's third Oration declares what was
done in the Senate. Third.
The times being very dangerous, he propounded to the Fathers to consider what
course was to be taken with Lentulus, Cethegus, Stalius, and Cassius, all whom
he having secured, this bred a great disturbance; for the Slaves and Dependents
of the two former got together a great company of Artificers, and endeavored
to break in upon the backside of the Praetor's house, and rescue their Lords.
This being known, the Consul hasted out of the Senate House, and appointed a
vvatch to be set, then returning, asked the opinions of the Senators. Silanus
designed Consul for the ensuing year, being first asked his opinion, according
to the custom, was for putting them to death, and so were diverse others, till
Nero dissuaded it, judging it better to secure them till Cataline were
suppressed, and the thing better sifted out. Of this opinion was C. Julius
Caesar, something suspected to be privy to the design. He would have them
dispersed in several Towns in Italy by the Consul's appointment, afterward to
be tried, and not put to death altogether unheard. This seemed very plausible,
till Cato (great Grandson to M. Porcius Cato the Censor) very earnestly
pressed the contrary, falling foul upon Caesar as a suspicious person. Fourth.
Then the Consul made his fourth Oration, wherein he so disputes of the two
contrary opinions, as he evidently inclines to severity, as fearing what the
guilty party might do the night following out of necessity and desperation.
Catalines accomplices put to death,
Hereby the Senate was induced to put them to death as surprised in the fact,
which Cicero saw done accordingly ere the house arose. After this Cataline was
overtaken by C. Antonius, the other Consul, near the Alps, as he was going into
Gall to perfect his Levies, and there fighting most valiantly was slain. And he
himself slain.
His men also fought it out to the last, scarcely one of them being taken. So
was quasht this most dangerous conspiracy, by the vigilance especially of
Cicero the Consul, who wrote an History thereof which is lost. Public thanks
for his great care and pains were given to him, and, at the instance of Cato,
with diverse acclamations of the People, he was first of all others styled
Father of his Country.

C. Julius Caesar begins to be eminent.
43. Now began C. Julius Caesar to be very eminent, two years after these stirs
being sent as Praetor into the further Spain. Lege Suttonium in Julio.
He was born in the 654 year of the City, C. Marius the sixth time, and L.
Valerius Flaccus being Consuls, the same that the Sedition about Saturninus
happened, on the 12th day of the month Quinctilis, afterward from him named July
by Antonius his Law. His birth.
His father was C. Julius Caesar, who never arose higher than the Praetorship,
and died suddenly at Pisae, as his shoes were drawing on in the morning: his
mother was Aurelia, the daughter of C. Cotta; and Julia the wife of Marius was
his Aunt. In his youth having married Cinna's daughter (by which he had Julia)
refusing to put her away, he was in great danger, being with much ado spared by
Sylla, who as it were foretelling what trouble he would bring to the State,
said, that in Caesar were many Marii. The foundation of his Military skill he
laid in Asia, The foundation of his Military skill.
under M. Thermus the Praetor, by whom being sent into Bithynia to fetch away
the Navy, he stayed with Nicomedes the King, to whom it was suspected that he
prostituted himself. Afterward in the taking of Mitylene he had deserved well,
and served under Servilius Isauricus in Cilicia; but not long. For, hearing of
Sylla's death, and hoping to make his fortune out of the dissentions raised by
Lepidus, home he came; but not finding a convenient oppportunity, and having to
no purpose accused Dolobella, to shun the Envy thereby contracted, he went to
Rhodes to hear Apollonius, whence sailing in Winter, he fell into the hands of
the Pirates, and was forced to purchase his freedom with fifty Talents; to
revenge which, he procured some ships, and took some of them, whom he nailed to
Crosses, though without leave from the Praetor, who would have sold them. After
this he gave a stop to Mithridates his Lieutenant, and saved diverse Cities in
Asia. He assisted Pompey the Consul, and others, Made Quaestor.
in restoring the Tribuneship which Sylla had broken. Shortly after he was made
Quaestor, and sent into further Spain, where going about to administer Justice,
he came to Gades, and saw Alexanders image in the Temple of Hercules. It
troubled him exceedingly, to consider that he himself had done no memorable
thing at that age wherein Alexander had Conquered the World, and thereupon he
earnestly desired to be recalled, that being in the City, he might catch at
some opportunity for his own advancement.

Joyneth with factious persons.
44. Having got leave to return ere his time was out, he joined presently with
the Latin Colonies in demanding the freedom of the City, and had incited them
to some desperate design, but that the Senate for fear of the worst, retained
the Legions some time, which were raised for Cilicia. He was suspected to have
been of the party of M. Crassus, of P. Sulla also, and Autronius (who having
been designed Consuls, were found to have indirectly sought for the Office, and
so according to Law forfeited their places to the discoverers) in the beginning
of the year to set upon the Senate, and kill whom they pleased. Crassus being
made Dictator, he was to have been Master of the hors-men under him, and all
things being ordered according to their pleasure, the Consulship was to have
been restored to the other two. ^ome have affirmed (whom Suetonius cites) that
he also conspired with Cn. Piso, that the one in the City, and the other
abroad, should rise, which was prevented by Piso's death. Made Aedilis.
Being after this Aedilis, he so managed the business of public buildings,
and shows, that all was ascribed to him, and nothing to his Colleague; by which
means, and others, he procured the favor of the People, and essayed by the
Tribunes to get Egypt assigned to him, which, now having expelled the King, he
thought would affoard him an opportunity of an extraordinary command. But he
was crossed by the great ones, whom that he might vex, he restored the Trophies
erected by Marius over the Cimbri, which Sulla had caused to be pulled down,
and suborned those who accused Rabirius. By his means especially the Senate had
suppressed Saturninus the seditious Tribune, and now being brought before
Caesar as his Judge, he was so severe against him, that nothing so much helped
the man in his appeal from him to the People.

45. After his repulse as to Egypt he stood for the High Priesthood, and by
large sums (such corruption were those times arrived at) bought so many voices
as he carried it from two most powerful men and his Seniors, Gets by
bribery the High Priesthood.
having more suffrages out of their two Tribes, than they had out of all the
rest besides. Then being Praetor, he stood for the accomplices of Cataline so
earnestly, as he drew to his party the brother of Cicero the Consul, and
diverse others. After this he assisted Caecilius Metellus the Tribune in
preferring turbulent Laws, till both of them by a decree of the Senate were
displaced, and yet then would he sit, and execute his Office still, till forced
to withdraw: then, out of policy he restrained the multitude which flocked to
him, Joyneth again with seditious men.
and offered to restore him by strong hand, of which the Senate taking notice,
gave him thanks with great commendations, and re-invested him in his Office.
After this, he fell into another danger, being accused by Vettius and Curious,
as a partner of Cataline; yet, appealing to Cicero that he had discovered some
things to him, he came off, and revenged himself upon his accusers. Then
obtained he by lot, as we said, the Government of Spain, and having contracted
a vast debt, Goes Praetor into Spain.
put off his Creditors for that time, by the interposition of sureties. Coming
into his Province he spent not his time in administering Justice, A. M. 3944. V.
C. 693.
but pierced farther into the Country, and subdued certain people before this
untouched, seeking matter for a Triumph, which then to obtain he hasted to
Rome. But it being now the time for the Consular Comitia, he had an
extraordinary desire to that Office, and begged of the Senate, that he might
stand for it by proxy, for that he could not himself be present, it being
against the custom for any that was to Triumph to enter the City ere that day
came; for which as yet he was not provided. This, though against the Laws, was
not without president, but could not now be granted. Therefore he resolved
rather to lose his Triumph than miss of the Consulship, and coming to Town,
stood for it himself.

46. Great contests happened about this Office, and he had not carried it, but
that Pompey at this time stood in need of it. Obtains the Consulship by the
means of Pompey.
For, Idem ibid. Plutarch in Pompeio, Caesare, and Lucullo Velleius Patercul.
l. 2. c. 20. Appian de bello civili lib. 2. Dio lib. 37. page 55. A. Livii
Epitom. lib. 103.
the great ones envying his fame, refused to confirm those conditions which he
had granted to the Kings, Governors, and Cities of Asia. Lucullus his
Predecessor in the War with Mithridates, who since his return had given up
himself wholly to idleness and luxury (for he first brought into Rome the
extravagancy of buildings and feasting) they stirred up, by his authority to
promote their opposition, and he presently fell upon him, together with
Metellus Creticus, who bore him malice also ever since the Piratick War.
Lucullus bade him report his matters singly, and not as a Sovereign Lord expect
they should all be confirmed without any consideration: and whereas he had
rescinded several of his acts, he desired of the Senate that this might be
considered of, whether justly done or otherwise. Cato, Metellus Celer, the
Consul, and Crassus, defended Lucullus, who boasted that the victory over
Mithridates was his own; and he obtained that his decrees which Pompey had
repealed might be in force, and those that Pompey made in reference to the
Conquered Kings should be null: and he hindered, by the help of Cato, a Law
which he would have preferred about dividing grounds to his Soldiers. Pompey
being thus used in the Senate, betook himself to the Tribunes, one whereof (L.
Flavius) that the Law for the grounds might more easily pass, would have given
the suffrage to all Citizens, but Metellus the Consul so earnestly opposed it,
that though the Tribune cast him in prison, yet would he not depart from his
former sense, which pertinaciousnesse of him and others, when Pompey saw, he
desisted, repenting too late that he had disbanded his Armies, and exposed
himself thus to the malice of his Enemies.

47. At this time came C. Julius Caesar to Rome to stand for the Consulship.
Pompey joined with him, upon condition that he procuring the Consulship for
him, he would confirm his acts. And whereas Pompey and M. Crassus had formerly
been at odds ever since their joint Consulship which they executed with great
discord; Pompey and Crassus made friends, and they three make the conspiracy,
called the Tricipitina.
Caesar now made them friends, A. M. 3946. Ol. 180. ann. 2. V.C. 695. Hyrcani 5.
and not only so, but they all three conspired together, that nothing should
be done in the Commonwealth which displeased any one of them; which conspiracy,
say Writers, was pernicious to the City, the World, and at length to
themselves. This conspiracy of these three principal persons, Varro (who wrote
490 books) described in one book, and called it (...), Tricipitina, or Three
headed. Diodorus Siculus fetches the Original of Caesarean matters from this
year, wherein he traveled into Egypt, when young Ptolomy Dionysus was King.
With this conspiracy also Asinius Pollio begun his History of the Civil War.
For the falling out of Caesar and Pompey, did not, as most have thought,
procure the Civil Wars; but rather their Conjunction, which was designed to
break in pieces the power of the Nobility, as Plutarch observes in the life of
Caesar. This was the 694th year of the City, the first of the 180th Olympiad,
Herodes being Archon at Athens, the 58th year before the birth of Christ, A. M.
3945. Q. Caecilius Metellus, and L. Afranius being Consuls.

SECT. 6.
SECT. VI. From the beginning of the Tricipitina or first Triumvirate, to the
absoluteness of Julius Caesar, containing the space of sixteen years.
1. CAESAR by the help of Pompey obtained the Consulship; but not without the
assistance of money also. There were two other Competitors, L. Lucerius and M.
Bibulus, whereof he was much for the former, Caesar and also his adversaries
purchase the Consulship.
having agreed with him, that because he was less in favor, Velleius l. 2. c.
33. Appian belli civilis l. 2. p. 435. Strabo lib. 12. p. 558. Plutarch in
Caesare, Lucullo, and Pompeio. Livii Epirom. l. 10.
but very rich, he should give money for them both through the Centuries. But
the Grandees understanding this, and fearing if he had him for his Colleague he
might do what he listed, they caused Bibulus to offer more, they themselves
contributing to the expense, which corruption Cato denied not to be for the
good of the Commonwealth, now brought by the means of such evil members into
absolute danger and necessity. Caesar confirmed Pompey's acts according to
agreement, neither Lucullus nor any other opposing it, and Pompey procured,
that what honor Lucullus had promised to certain men of Pontus, should not be
confirmed by the Senate, filling the City with Soldiers, and by force casting
him and Cato out of the Forum. In this his first Consulship he sold alliances
with Rome, and also Kingdoms; and, to procure the favor of the Commons, His
acts therein.
preferred a Law for dividing certain grounds in Campania (which had been
preserved to defray public charges) to such Citizens as had three children or
more. This he caused to pass by force, and compelled all Plebeians to swear to
observe the Law, and the Senators also, though Cato urged them to refuse; for
they did it to save their lives, he having caused the People to decree, that it
should be capital for any to deny it. He had recourse to the People in all
cases, making little use of the Senate, which he seldom called together.
Bibulus his Colleague having opposed his actions for some time to no purpose,
kept himself at home, and stirred not for the remaining part of the year.
Caesar then governed alone, and was much courted by the Equites or Knights, who
having farmed the custom, desired an abatement of the rent. The Senate refused
to remit any thing, but he did their business for them, procuring the People
to abate a third part. By this and other ways of shows and largesses, By
inveigling the People he procures Gall for five years.
he so inveigled the multitude, that he got Gall to be decreed to him for five
years, with four Legions, and for the remaining part of the year, spent it in
seeking how to establish himself for the time to come.

2. Knowing how considerable a man Pompey was, to bind him faster to him, He
marieth his daughter Julia to Pompey, and otherwise provideth for his own
interest.
he gave him in marriage his daughter Julia. He procured two of his own
creatures, A. Gabinius and L. Calpurnius Piso (whose daughter he had married
after Cornelia's death) to be designed Consuls for the following year, as also
Vatinius and Clodius Tribunes, though the later had abused his wife (for he was
a person exceedingly loose that way) having in women's clothes crept into the
meetings proper only to that Sex, for which he was accused as a breaker of the
sacred customs by Cicero. He appeared not against him though he put away his
wife, nay he helped him to his place, as it is thought, out of opposition to the
Orator (who was wont to declame against the combination of the three great
ones, as pernicious to the Commonwealth) and in way of requital for the help
he had afforded him in the procurement of Gall, whither, when the time of his
Consulship was expired, Eusebius.
he departed. This year was Titus Livius the Historiographer born at Padua.

Clodius the Tribune
3. Clodius out of malice to Cicero seeking for the Tribuneship, whereas he was
a Patrician, thereby incapable of the place, he procured himself to be adopted
by a Plebeian, and so with the loss of his former dignity obtained it. Then
did he prefer a Law, that whosoever had put to death any Roman Citizen unheard,
water and fire should be forbidden him, which amounted to as much as
banishment; and set Cicero his day of appearance, for putting to death
Cethegus, Lentulus* and others of Catalines conspiracy unheard. Pompey at first
stood stiffly for the accused, saying, he would rather dye himself than Tully
should be hurt; but Caesar took him off, because Cicero having desired to go
his Lieutenant into Gall, upon Clodiu^ his seeming willing to be reconciled,
had changed his resolution, and hereby displeased him. This is certain, that he
who was wont to defend others so earnestly, was very timorous in his own cause
(which happened also to Demosthenes) and chose rather to depart the City,
Banisheth Cicero.
and late at night, than undergo his trial, A. M. 3947. V. C. 696.
after that Pompey had forsaken him, and the Consuls would give him little
hopes. After his departure Clodius banished him by decree of the People 400
miles from Italy, demolished his Villages and his house, on the plot whereof he
built a Temple to Liberty, and set his goods to sale. He went to Thessalonica a
City of Macedonia, being by letters of the Senate commended to such Kings, or
Governors, as into the Dominions of whom he might have occasion to come.

4. Clodius having thus rid himself of Cicero, for that Cato's presence was
very troublesome to him, sent him also out of the way, under color of doing him
honor. Sends Cato to spoil the King of Cyprus most unjustly of his estate.
He preferred a Law against Ptolomy King of Cyprus (brother to Anletes of
Egypt) for the spoiling him of all his estate, and reducing that Island into
the form of a Province, though this man had nothing ill deserved. He was indeed
very vicious, if that could have given them any right to what he had; but the
truth was, Lege Plutarchum in Catone Minore.
Clodius had been taken by the Pirates, and sending to him for money to redeem
him, he would part but with two talents, and therefore he took this occasion to
be revenged on him and Cato both together. The King hearing of Cato's coming,
killed himself, and some said that he cast his treasures into the Sea. Cato
sold his goods, and brought a great sum of money into the treasury. But, by
this time Pompey repented that he had forsaken Cicero; for, Clodius wanting
other matter now to work on, vexed all the great ones, and repealed some things
which he had done, so that now he set himself to have him recalled. Clodius
withstood it, but thereupon the Senate passed a Decree, that nothing should be
heard before his restitution was propounded. Lentulus the Consul propounded it
on the Calends of January; but the matter being hindered, several ways, was
brought down to the People on the eighth before the Calends of February, where
was great endeavor used by T. Annius Milo and P. Sextius two other Tribunes
for his restitution. Clodius their Colleague taking some Fencers belonging to
his brother Appius, fell upon the multitude and killed many: The Tribunes were
wounded, Cicero recalled.
and Q. Cicero brother of the banished (newly returned from Asia, which he had
governed three years) lay for dead amongst the slain. Now the People began
seriously to bethink themselves. Milo ventured to draw Clodius by force to
judgment, and Pompey possessing himself of the Forum, put the People to their
suffrages, who with universal consent voted his restitution. The Senate decreed
honor to such Cities as had entertained him, and that his house and Villages
should be re-edified at the public charge. So Cicero who had been banished the
year before about the Calends of April, returned this year in the month
Sextilis, or, the day before the Nones of September, and therefore was absent
about sixteen months. As Plutarch more rightly computeth than A. M. 1948.
Simpson, who strangely forgetting himself, blaming him, for saying he returned
in the sixteenth month, contendeth that from the first of April to the month
Sextilis or August of the following year, intervene but fourteen months. Now
P. Cornelius Lentulus and Q. Caecilius Metellus were Consuls.

5. Caesar having obtained of the People Gall within the Alps, Vide Caesaris
comment. de bello Gallco. l. 1. Plutarch in Caesare. Dionem l. 38. p. 78. E.
and Illyricum, with three Legions, the Senate added, that beyond the Alps
(which in part we now call France) with another Legion. His first work was to
repel the Helvetians (now called Switzers) who having burnt their houses and
resolved to seek out more convenient habitations, intended to pass over the
Rhoane, and so through his Province. He having intelligence thereof, hasted to
Geneva, and pulled down the bridge there. They then sent to him to desire that
they might pass through his Province without offense, Caesar's acts in Gall
the first year.
to consider whereof he took time till the Ides of April, and in the mean time
raised a wall twenty miles in length, from the Lake Lemanus to the Hill Jura
(which divdeth Burgoin from Switzer-land) and thereby hindered their passage.
They then bent their course to Araris (a River in France now called Saon) where
in their passage be overthrew and dispersed them. Florum l. 3. c. 10. Livii
Epitom. l. 103. Orosium l. 6. c. 7.
They sent him another message to no purpose, and repelled 4000 of his Horse
which too greedily chased them; but he continually followed, and hindering them
from wasting the Country, at length quite routed and put them to flight; of
348000, 130000 only remaining, who also shortly after were forced for want of
provisions to yield, and giving Hostages, and delivering up their arms, to
return from whence they came, and rebuild their Towns and Villages. After this
was done, the Galls complained to him of Ariovistus King of the Germans, who
had seized on a third part of the Country belonging to the Sequani (now
Burgundians) and intended to take the rest also. He first sent to him, but this
being in vain, he led his Army against him, and they came to an enterview,
which succeeding not, he overthrew him also, and he fled into Germany in a
little boat, two of his wives and as many daughters being taken. These things
Caesar accomplished in the first Summer, in the Consulship of his two
creatures, Piso and Gabinius.

6. The following year all the Belgae (now inhabitants of the Low Countries for
the most part) except those about Rheimes, conspired together against the
Romans, The acts of his second year.
Caesar Comment. l. 2.
and besieged Bibrax (now Bearne) and another fort kept by Q. Titunus. Caesar
hereupon marched to the River Axona (now Le Disne) and there overthrew them,
after which diverse yielded themselves; but the Nervii (a People about Tournay
in Flanders) a warlike and severe Nation, stood out, with whom joined the
Attrebates and Veromandui (now Inhabitants of Artois, and of part of Picardie)
but these he utterly overthrew, scarcely any escaping out of the field. This
was done that year wherein Cicero was recalled. In the third year, purposing
for Italy himself, he sent Servius Galba with the twelfth Legion and part of
the Horse against the Antuates, Veragri, The third.
and Seduni, Lib. 3. Dio lib. 39.
Nations inhabiting from the River Rhene as high as the Alps, because he would
have the passage thereabout cleared for traffic. Galba defeated a great
multitude of them, which set upon him in his Camp. Caesar not long after
returning, found the Veneti and other Nations of Gall^a Celtica in rebellion,
who gave him trouble enough, but at length he overthrew the Veneti at Sea,
Crassus subdued the Sontiates, and the greatest part of Aquitaine, and Sabinus
the Unelli and maritime Cities. Then fell he upon the Marini (a People near
Calais in Picardy) and the Menapii also, these two Nations still being in Arms.
But, Winter growing on, foul weather secured them in the marshes, and caused
him to remove his men to their winter quarters.

7. Now by this time he had got great store of of wealth, Sueton in Julio.
Appian belli civilis lib. 2. Pultarch in Pompeio, and in Crasso. Dio lib. 39.
p. 108. Patercul. l. 2. c. 46.
wherewith he not only paid his debts, but made him great store of friends by
gifts and contributions. Herewith he corrupted the Aediles, Praetors, Consuls
and their wives. Passing over the Alps this Winter into Luca, where he took up
his head quarters, so great concourse was made to him, that there were present
200 Senators, amongst whom were Crassus and Pompey, and so many Proconsuls and
Praetors, Great confluence to him at Luca.
that 120 bundles of rods have been seen together at his gates. He fearing he
might be recalled, procured Pompey and Crassus to obtain the Consulship for the
following year, and continue him his employment in Gall for other five years.
Cato persuaded L. Domitius to stand for the Consulship, telling him he should
contend not for Magistracy but for liberty against the Tyrants. But Pompey
fearing Cato's vehemence, lest, having the whole Senate in his power, he should
persuade the People to what was best, sent some armed men upon Domitius as he
went down to the Forum, who killed the slave that carried the light before them,
dispersed them all, Cato being the last that fled, who received a wound on his
arm whilst he fought for Domitius. Pompey and Crassus having thus by force
obtained the Consulship, bore themselves nothing more moderately afterward.
The people being about to give Cato the Praetorship, Pompey and Crassus
according to agreement obtained the Consulships by force, and continue to
Caesar his Command for other five years.
Pompey pretended a strange fight from Heaven, and dismissed the Assembly: then
corrupting the Tribes with money, he procured Antias and Vatinius to be chosen
Praetors. A. M. 3950. Ol. 181. ann. 2. V. C. 699. Hyrcani 9.
Then by the help of Trebonius the Tribune they procured Laws, which continued
to Caesar (as they had agreed) his Government in Gall for other five years,
assigned Syria to Crassus with the Parthian War; and to Pompey all Africa, and
the Spains with four Legions, whereof two he lent to Caesar for the Gallick
Wars. Pompey being permitted to Govern his Provinces by Deputies stayed at
Rome, where he spent his time in shows and pastimes. Crassus much rejoiced in
his part, scarcely being able to contain himself abroad and at home, contrary
to his wonted gravity, breaking forth into Childish expressions of joy. For, he
slighted the thoughts of Syria and Parthia, as one who would so order his
affairs, that the exploits of Lucullus against Tigranos, and of Pompey in the
War with Mithridates, should seem but toys, extending his hopes as far as
Bactria, the Indians, and the utmost Ocean.

8. The Tribunes hindered all they could, the Consuls from raising men, and
labored to repeal the Laws made for their expeditions. Crassus against the
minds of all men resolving to go against the Parthians.
Pompey was herewith well enough contented, having sent his Lieutenants into
his Provinces, and being unwilling to leave the City, as he pretended,
Plutarch. and Dio ut prius.
because of the charge of Provisions committed to him, which Cicero, in way of
recompense for his labor in his restitution, had procured him from the Senate,
that so he might have authority all over the Roman Empire. But Crassus betook
himself to force, which when the Tribunes saw themselves unable to withstand,
they desisted, but loaded him with curses, and when he made the accustomed
prayers in the Capitol for prosperous success, they spoke of unluck auspicia
and prodigies which had happened. Atteius the Tribune labored to hinder him from
going, many exclaiming against it as an unworthy thing that he should fall with
War upon those, who had nothing ill deserved of the Romans, but were at peace
with them. This made him fly to Pompey to conduct him forth, at the sight of
whom those who came to stop him gave way. But Atteius meeting him, earnestly
exhorted him to desist, and when that would not do, sent a Viator to lay hold
of him; but the rest of the Tribunes not permitting this, and the Viator not
quite dismissing him, Atteius got before to the Gate where he had some fire
ready, and as Crassus came by, throwing his Odours upon the Coals, devoted him
with horrible and bitter curses, invocating certain terrible and unheard of
gods. These secret, and ancient execrations the Romans, thought to be of that
force as no man ever escaped destruction to whom they were denounced, and also
proved unfortunate to the denouncer, and therefore they were seldom used, and
Crassus was blamed on the behalf of the City. Lib. 3. cap. 11.
Florus calls this Tribune Metellus, and others write that the Tribunes
generally thus devoted him, but it appears, Lib. 1. de Divinat.
from Cicero, that P. Atteius was principal in this action.

Rifleth the Temple of Jerusalem.
9. Crassus in his march rifled the Temple of Jerusalem, Lege Plutarch. in
Crasso. Dionem lib. 40. Florum l. 3. c. 11. Orosium lib. 6. cap. 13. Velleium
lib. 2. cap. 40. Strab. lib. 16.
and took away the Treasures which Pompey touched not. He spent many days in
weighing the Treasure of the Idol, called Atargatis by the Syrians, and by the
Greeks Derceto, the Goddess of Hierapolis, otherwise called Edessa, and
Bambyce, and Magog by the Syrians. In his whole passage he showed more
covetousness than valor, listing men, and then for money discharging them
again. He neglected his opportunities of falling on the Parthians unprovided,
and the friendship of the Armenian King, who offered him to invade Parthia
through his Kingdom, as also of refreshing his Army in some City, (as Cassius
advised him) till he had certain news of the Parthians, or else passing down
the River to Seleucia, where he might have Provisions by water, and could not
be compassed in by the Parthians. This later Counsel he rejected by the cunning
insinuations of Abgarus the Osroenian (otherwise called Angarus, Mazares,
Mazarus, Marachus, Macorus, Ariamnes, and In Tacitus (Annal. l. 12.) Is written
Abbarus, but Lipsius notes upon it that in the Vatican Copy it is ever Acbarus,
and was common to all the Arabian Kings, as Ptolomy to those of Egypt, in
Appian it is (...).
Acbarus by several) the Regulus, or Petty Prince of the Arabians, who having
formerly been a friend and Ally of the Romans, had now applied his mind to the
Parthian, and feeding Crassus with money, to conceal his Treachery, gave him
notice of whatsoever was done. He persuaded him to leave off thoughts of
Seleucia and Ctesiphon, and go straight against Surenas and Sillax the Kings
Captains. This he did, and thereby first losing his son, a choice young man, he
himself was by Surenas circumvented under pretense of a Treaty, and either
slain by his Enemies, or killed by some of his own men, And is slain.
to prevent his falling into their hands. This happened at Sinnaca, a City of
Mesopotamia, on the sixth of the Ides of June, as Ovid informs us; 20000 men
were slain, and 10000 taken, according to Plutarch (not to name other accounts)
so that the East being almost destitute of forces, many Provinces thereof
revolted; but by the care, industry, and valor of C. Cassius the Quaestor of
Crassus (the same who afterward with Brutus, killed Julius Caesar) Syria was
appeased. This King of Parthia against whom Crassus miscarried (called Orodes,
Herodes, and Hyrodes) was something skilled in the Greek tongue, and other
learning. Artabazel, or Artavasdes the Armenian (that first offered kindness
to Crassus) had reconciled himself to the Parthian, who was now with him. A. M.
3952. V. C. 701.
He being also learned, (for he wrote Tragedies, Orations, and Histories) some
of Euripides his Bacchae was repeated, and the head of Crassus was brought in
as it were by chance, and thrown at their feet. But Surenas was afterward
punished for his treachery, being killed by his Master who envied him his
glory. And Orodes himself having lost his son Pacorus in a battle against the
Romans, and falln into that kind of Dropsy, called Anasarca, Phraates (or
Phraortes) his other son gave him Aconitum, or Wolfs bane, which working so
upon him, as with it self it brought out the humor, and gave him ease, he made
short work of it, and strangled him.

10. Thus perished Crassus Cicero Offic. lib. 1.
(who was so rich that he would have none so accounted, but he that could by
his own Revenues maintain an Army) and one of the heads of the Tricipitina was
hereby cut off. Whereby one head of the Tricipitina is cut off.
This laid the foundation of the Civil War betwixt the other two, for he,
whilst he lived, balancing them, when he was gone, Caesar must bring under
Pompey before he could be Chief. Whilst Crassus warred against the Parthians,
Gabinius, who had been Consul when Cicero was banished, reduced Idem Epistolis
ad Quintum fratrem and ad Atticum Dio lib. 39. Valor. Maxim. lib. 8. cap. 1.
Exemp. 3.
into his Kingdom Ptolomy Auletes, whom his subjects had expelled. Then was he
Proconsul of Syria; but at his return being accused, especially for making War
upon Egypt (which was supposed to be forbidden by the Verses of Sibylla) and
ready to be torn in pieces by the people, he was yet acquitted by corrupted
Judges (or Laelius the Tribune) of treason, but banished, as upon other
accounts, so chiefly for that he had served out of his Province 100000
Drachmas, Gabinius banished.
or Denarii, and was afterward recalled by Caesar. Caesar. Comment. l. 4.
In the mean time several Nations of Germany, driven out by the Suevi (not
Swedes (in Latin Sueci) but Grisons now for the most part) came into Gall to
seek new seats, and there outed the Menapii of their dwellings. Caesar defeated
them, killing many thousands, and pursued them over the Rhine, on which he laid
a wooden bridge, into the Country of the Sigambri (now Guelderland) and freed
the Ubii (now Inhabitants of Cullen) from the Dominion of the Suevi, Caesar
defeateth the Germans.
to whom they had been Tributaries. Then returned he to the Morini, or into
Picardy, and thence came over into Britain.

Britain.
11. Britain, or Britany, which also is Albion, being in Greek PETANIA, PETANIK,
PETANIS, ALION, and ALOYON, was by the Romans called Britania and Remania. It
is most probable, says Cambden, Consul. Cambdenum in Britania.
the Inhabitants were called Britans from their painted bodies, for whatsoever
is thus painted and colored, in their ancient Country speech they call Brith,
The name, whence derived
having been of old much given to paint themselves, as many Writers do
testify. Now the ancient Greeks who sailed by the Coasts, understanding that
the Nation was called Brith, might unto, it add Tania (which word in Greek, as
the Glossaries show, betokens a Region) and thereof made the compound name
(...), that is Britons-Land, which is corrupted into (...), but by Lucretius
and Caesar the two first Romans that make mention thereof is truly called
Britania. In confirmation of this opinion Cambden observes, that in the names
of well-nigh all the ancient Britains, there appears some signification of a
color, which no doubt (he says) arose from this kind of painting. The Red
color is of the Britans called Coch and Goch, which in his judgment lies
Couched in these names, Cogidunu^, Argentocoxus, and Segonax. The Black color
called Du, shows it self in Mandubratius, Cartimandua, Togodumnus, Bunduica,
Cogidunus. The White color called Gwin, in Venutius and Immanuentius. The
Waterish called Gwellwe in Vellocatus, Carvilius and Suella. The Blew, which
they call Glass in Cuniglasus, and he proceeds further. But this Learned man
coming to speak of the time wherein Britain came to be known abroad, denies
that the Britains were with Hercules at the rape of Hesione, that Ulysses was
ever in Britain, that the Britans bestowed any Presents upon Cato, that King
Alexander the Great, or Hannibal, was ever in the Island; he doubts whether
ever the ship of Hiero mentioned by Athenaeus came hither; yet thinks that
the Britans were mingled with the C^mbri and Galls, in their expeditions into
Italy and Greece.

Cambdens arguments that Britain was but known lately.
12. But as the Romans, Galls, and Spaniards were unknown to Herodotus, and the
ancient Greek Geographers, so of this mind he ever was, that it was late ere
the Greeks and Romans heard of the Britans name. For he judges that little
book of the World, which goes abroad under the name of Aristotle, and makes
mention of the Britans, of Albion and Hierne, to be of later days by far than
that Philosopher, as the best learned men (says he) have judged. He accounts
Polybius the antientest Greek writer that mentions the British Isles; who
yet knew nothing of them: then does he, in reference to other Nations, count it
but a fable that Himilco the Carthaginian, being commanded by his Superious to
discover the Western Seacoasts of Europe, entered into this Isle many years
before that time. And the first Latin Author to his knowledge that made mention
of Britain was Lucretius, in his Verses concerning the difference of air. Now
that Lucretius lived but a little before Caesar no man denies: at what time we
are taught out of Caesar himself, that Divitiacus King of the Soissons, and the
most mighty Prince of all Gall, Governed Britain, which, as also appears from
Caesar, is only to be understood of the Maritime Coasts. Howbeit, Diodorus
Siculus writes that Britain had experience of no foreiners rule; for neither
Dionysus (or Bacchus) nor Hercules, nor any other worthy, or Demigod have we
heard (says he) to have attempted War upon that people. Now Caesar, who for
his noble acts is called Divus, was the first that subdued the Britans, and
forced them to pay a certain Tribute. From his time (says Cambden) and no
further off must the Writer of our History fetch the beginning of his work, if
he thoroughly weigh with judgment what the Learned Varro has in time past
written ( viz. of the three distinctions of times which we have formerly
mentioned, uncertain before the Flood, Fabulous before the Olympiads, and
Historical since the beginning of them) and my self already heretofore
signified. This most learned man mentions this division of Varro, because that
the British History of Geffrey of Monmouth takes its beginning 333 years
before the first Olympiad. This History we must absolutely disclaim as utterly
Fabulous in reference to King Brutus, and other fictions depending on his
story. But whether or no Britain was not known abroad till so late time as our
Anquary judges, must be examined for the honor of our Country, saving ever
that respect which is due (and that justly) unto his name, and will not be at
all dimished, seeing the contest is betwixt him also, and Bochartus himself.

13. The controversy is decided clearly against Cambden if two things can but
be made out. 1. That the Cassiterides or Islands of tin were known very
anciently, The contrary asserted.
and 2. That the Cassiterides are no other than the British Isles. The first is
proved from the testimony of many, that the Phoenicians were wont to trade to
the Cassiterides, and thence to fetch plenty of Tin. * Strabo affirms it,
and that they first traded thither alone from Gades, Lib. 3. p. 175.
hiding from others this course of traffic, insomuch that a certain Phoenician
Sailor being chased by a Roman Vessel, chose rather to run his ship aground and
suffer shipwreck, to cause his pursuers to miscary, than to reveal the matter,
for which fidelity, having escaped himself, he had his loss made up out of the
public Treasury at his return to Carthage. Pliny also writes, Lib. 7. c. 56.
in the Chapter of the first inventors, that Midacritus first carried Lead from
the Island Cassiteris. For Midacritus is to be read Melcarthus or Melicartus
the Phoenician Hercules, according to Sanchoniathon, whom the Phoenicians make
Author of the Western voyages. Lib. 3. c. 115.
Herodotus acknowledges he knew not where the Cassiterides were; but that
there were some then he acknowlegeth also, whence Tin came to them the
Greeks, and from him it appears, that they were situate in the utmost limits
of Europe. The Phoenicians being unwilling that any should know them but
themselves, the Greeks bought Tin and Lead, either of them, or the Venets or
Narbonenses, to whom it was wont to be carried by Land in a journey of thirty
days, as Diodorus tells us. Videsis apud Bocharti Canaan l. 1. c. 39.
Dionysius Paeriegetes mentions them under the name of Hesperides, and so
does ^zetzes. Festus Anienus speaks of them under the name of Cestrymnedes,
expressly of the sailing of the Phoenicians to them, and that Hamilco, who was
sent from the Senate of Carthage to discover the West, came thither, as he
himself recorded, whom Festus professes to follow in the description of the
West, having made his collections out of the depth of the Punick Annals. These
things considered, prove sufficiently, that the Cassiterides were known in very
ancient times.

14. For the second, that the British Isles are those Cassiterides or
Stannaries, there needs no proof, Cambden himself confessing, nay proving by
many arguments, that the Islands of Silly lying off from the Promontory of
Cornwall eight leagues, and in number 145, are the very same that from the
plenty of Tin were called Cassiterides, from their site Hesperides, and
Oestrymnides from Oestrymnis the Promontory of the Artabri, now Gallitia in
Spain, over against which they lie. Now for the consequence of the thing, can
any imagine that these Islands should be so long known, and not Britain it self
to which they lie so close, and from which they are deservedly called British
Isles? And what reason is there to think (as Camden does) that such dream as
believe that Hamilco came hither? It Is a wonder he should say, that there is
nothing for it but a Verse or two of Festus Anienus; when Festus says, that he
read the story of the whole Navigation, described by Hamilco himself in the
Punick Annals, Cambden himself contendeth, that from the Cassiterides was Lead
first of all carried into Greece, His arguments refuted.
whence it follows, that they were known before the time of Homer, who makes
mention of that metal. As for what he urges concerning Polybius, that he was
utterly ignorant of these parts, if it were granted that he was, yet the
Phoenicians, who in the Heroic times sent out Colonies into the Ocean beyond
Gades, knew these Coasts sufficiently. But Cambden mistook the Historian, as
may appear from all that passage read together, which only imports, that as
it was not known whether Asia and Africa on the South side were terminated by
the Sea, so neither whether the Sea flowed about the Northern parts of Europe
that lie above Narbon; which truly at this day we know not certainly, though in
so much light. That this interpretation is to be made, and that Polybius did
not mean, that in his age whatever lay above Narbon was unknown, and that they
dreamed who spoke or wrote any thing of it, hence appears. For he himself
accurately described the Fountains of Rhodanus, with Corbilon upon Ligeris, and
many other places of Gall above Narbon. And in his third book he promises he
would write of what lay beyond the Sea, and what was there remarkable, nay
(which is especially to be noted) of the British Isles and making of Tin. That
he performed his promise in the Books that are lost, appears from Lib. 2. p.
104.
Strabo, who tells us, that Polybius describing the regions of Europe, said,
he would let pass the ancients, and inquire into such as reprehended them, as
Dicaearchus, and Eratosthenes, who last of all had handled Geography, and
Pytheas who had imposed upon many. For, he (Pytheas) said he had not viewed all
the soil of Britain; but the Island was above 40000 (stadia or furlongs I
suppose) in compass.

15. From this place it appears, that several whom Polybius calls (...) or
ancients wrote of these parts, before either Dicaearchus or Eratosthenes,
Pythaeas, or himself. Now Eratosthenes, who, as he says, was the last that
handled Geography, Suidas writes to have been born in the 126 Olympiad, which
was celebrated in the 37 year of the Seleucidae, the seventh of Antiochus
Soter, the ninth of Ptolomy Philadelphus, and the 478 year of the City, when Q.
Fabius Gurges and C. Genutius Clepsina were Consuls, Pyrrhus then warring in
Sicily, 274 years before the birth of Christ. But Dicaearchus bosteth in
Athenaeus, that he had Aristotle for his Master; and then Pytheas who was cited
by both, must needs have preceded them. Yet these Writers were but of late in
comparison of Orpheus the most ancient Poet, one of the Argonautae, by whom
Cambden himself affirms Britain to have been described. Although in truth
Orpheus was not Author of those Poems fathered on him, but Onomacritus an
Athaenian Poet, who lived under the Pisistracidae, as both Stromat. l. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus and Orat. contra Graecos page 173. Edit. una cum
Athenagora and Theophylo.
Tatianus inform us; yet two advantages we have hereby. For first, Cambden is
inconstant, denying that Britain was known to the ancient Greeks; and secondly,
this Island must have been known then long before the former Geographers; for
the Pisistratidae were banished. Athens in the third year of the 67 Olympiad,
the twelfth of Darius Hystaspis, the 244 of the City (at the same time that
Tarquinius was banished) 508 years before the birth of Christ, though they
write that he flourished in the 50 Olympiad, in the first year whereof
Pisistratus indeed got the Sovereignty over that City. These things
sufficiently prove, that Britain was known of old to several Nations, though we
mentioned not what Bochartus probably conjectureth concerning the Etymology of
the name. The Phoenicians trading hither for Lead or Tin, might justly call it
Barat-Anac, that is, The Land of Lead or Tin, as the Greeks Cassiteris; and
this might easily be changed into Bretanica. Anac signifies both Lead and Tin,
no places in the World are so fruitful of either as the British Isles. And it
may seem no wonder that the Word should be so altered, seeing that from
Phoenice are derived Poenicus, Punicus, Puniceus, and Poenus. He also gives
other marks of the Phoenicians their planting in those Islands, in the 39
Chapter of the first Book of that excellent Work entitled Canaan, concerning
the Colonies and Language of that People, to which we refer the studious in
Antiquity, having thus far in some sort seemed to vindicate the honor of our
Country, yet with submission to the impartially Learned Reader. Now to return
to the course of our History.

16. The occasion of this Expedition was given by the Britains. Caesar Comment.
lib. 4.
They had sent a continual supply to the Galls, almost in all their Wars
against the Romans, and therefore he resolved to use this advantage, and pass
over this Summer, though it was well spent, judging it would be worth his
labor, though he but viewed the country, and took notice of the Havens and
Natives, of any whereof the Galls could give him but very small intelligence.
Caesar passes over into Britain.
A. M. 3950. V. C. 699 Ante Christum 53. Cn. Pompeio M. 2. M. Licinio Crasso 2.
Coss.
He sent Voluseus beforehand to make what discovery he could, after whose
return, having received the Morini into friendship, that he might have no
Enemies at his back, about two of the clock at night he put forth to Sea, and
at ten in the morning got to the Coasts of Britain, where he might see all the
shore full of men to oppose him, for they had received intelligence of his
coming. He perceived there was no good landing place where he was, and
therefore staying for the Fleet till three of the clock, he sailed eight miles
further. Here, though on an even shore, was he so opposed, that his Soldiers
fought not with their wonted alacrity, because their ships being great and
deep, could not come near the Land, until he got more shallow Vessels, and the
Ensign-bearer of the tenth Legion leaping out, drew others moved with shame
after him. No order was kept in the fight, but every one as he leaped forth
into the water, joined himself to the next Ensign. Caesar sending out
continually fresh supplies of men, at length landed all his Army, and the
Britains fled.

17. His horse being not come over, he could not pursue them, but they
presently sent to treat, promising to give Hostages, and do further what he
should enjoin them. He accepted of their offer, and some Hostages they
delivered, promising to give up the rest with convenience. But it happened that
the horse being come within kenning, was driven by the tide (the Moon now being
at full) to the Westward, and forced back to the Continent; the ships which
brought over the Legions, lying at Anchor, by tempest were miserably shattered,
and no Provisions had Caesar brought over, as not intending to Winter here. The
Britains, having knowledge of these things, agreed amongst themselves to break
their promise, concluding, that if they could but intercept or destroy his
Army, besides getting much plunder, they should not be invaded for the time to
come. They then set upon the seventh Legion as it was reaping Corn, His
success.
but Caesar being informed by the Watch of a greater dust than ordinary that
way, suspected what the matter was, and going to the rescue killed many, and
burnt their houses for a good compass. Hereupon they sent to him again for
peace. He required a double number of Hostages, whom he commanded them to send
over into the Continent; for the Aequinoctial being near, he would not in
Winter trust himself, and the Army, in such weak Vessels. Going on board about
midnight he came safe to Land; but 41 Vessels being driven, the men were forced
to Land at another place, whereof 300 were presently besieged by the Morini,
His retreat.
(who before had been reconciled to Caesar) out of hope of some booty. They
were presently rescued, and T. Labienus was sent to chastize the Rebels, who
being reduced to obedience, he, and L. Cotta harrazed the Country of the
Menapii, who hid themselves in the thick Woods. Then was the Army led into its
Winter quarters, in Belgia. The first expedition of Caesar into Britain fell
out in the second year of the 181 Olympiad, the 699th of the City, 53 years
before the birth of Christ, A. M. 3950. Cn. Pompeius the Great, and M. Licinius
Crassus (both of them the second time) being Consuls.

18. Caesar going into Italy according to his custom, ordered a great Navy to
be provided. Having dispatched his business within the Alps, Idem lib. 5.
he went into Illyricum against the Pinistae, who had invaded his Province.
After this having settled things amongst the Treviri (or them of Triers) who
neither came to Councils, nor were otherwise obedient, he took ship at the
Haven Iccius (now Calis) with five Legions, and 2000 horse, at Sunset, and
being for sometime carried down by the Tide toward the right hand, arrived
again in Britain the next day by noon. He returns.
A. M. 3951. V. C. 700.
The Natives seeing a great number of ships (for in all there were 800 Vessels)
for that they had falsified their word (all but two sorts of people, who sent
their Hostages over into Belgia) for fear withdrew themselves into the Woods.
Caesar pursuing them took one of their Fortresses, which they made only with
great Trees laid together, and when he was busied in skirmishing, word came
that his Navy was shattered by another Tempest, whereupon he retreated, and
took care for the repairing of such ships as were fit to be mended (four being
utterly lost) in which work ten days were spent with the great labor of the
Soldiers. Drawing then up such as were repaired, Cassivellaun General of the
Britans.
and fortifying the Camp, he returned. In the mean time the Britains had made
Cassivellaun (whose Dominions lay North the River of Thames, and with whom
before Caesar's coming they had waged War) their General against the Romans. At
first the Britains fighting from their Wagons put their Enemies to it, and
killed Q. Laberius Durius a Tribune; but the day following, the Romans
recovered their credit, putting the other to flight who had falln upon them as
they were gathering forage, so as they durst not after this time meddle any
more with them when in any considerable body.

Caesar passes over the Tham^s.
19. Then did Caesar pass the Thames (the Soldiers wading over with their heads
only above water) though the Britains had fastened sharp stakes under the bank,
and there made all opposition they could, which was inconsiderable. Passing on
in Cassivellaun's Country he wasted it, Cassivellaun (or Cassibellin) having
dismissed all his Army except 4000 Wagons, wherewith he much endamaged the
Romans by making sallies upon advantage out of the Woods. But the Tri^obantes
(inhabiting those parts long after by the Saxons called Essex and Middlesex)
having had their King Imannentius killed by Cassivellaun, for that Mandubratius
his son had escaped to Caesar, yielded themselves, and desired that the young
man being restored first to his Father's Kingdom might be protected against
Cassivellaun. This Caesar granted, receiving 40 Hostages and Corn for his Army;
and these having protection given them, others near adjoining yielded
themselves. Then did Caesar take Cassivelaun's Town not far distant, being
only a fortified place in the Woods. He sent into Kent, where four petty
Kings, Cingetorix, Carnilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax reigned, ordering them
if possible to seize on Caesor's ships; but Caesar having left to guard the
Camp ten Companies of foot and 300 horse, these repulsed them with great loss,
killing many of their men, and amongst the rest Lugatorix, a Captain of great
account. Cassivellaun beggeth peace and Caesar returns into Gall.
Cassibellaun hearing this, and knowing the defection of the Trinobantes and
the rest, sent, and begged peace of Caesar, who being resolved, for fear of
insurrections in Gall, there to vvinter, for that Summer was now almost spent,
commanded him to deliver in Hostages, ordered what Tribute Britain should pay
yearly to the People of Rome, commanded him not to offend Mandubratius nor the
Trinobants, and then drew down his Army to the Sea, which he wafted over at
twice, for that he had many Prisoners, and many ships had perished by Tempest.
The season being very good they came all safe to land, and he quartered them
about in several places, because Provisions were very scarce in Gall. This
second expedition of Caesar into Britain happened the next year after the former;
L. Domitius Aenobarbus, and Appius Claudius Pulcher being Consuls.

The Galls revolt.
20. This Winter did most of the Galls revolt. First, the Eburones (now
inhabiting the Bishopric of Liege) by the instigation of Ambiorix their
Prince, who by treachery circumvented two of Caesar's Officers, Q. Titurius
Sabinus, and L. Arunculeius Cotta, with a whole Legion. Idem ibid.
He also besieged Q. Cicero, who commanded the Legion that quartered amongst
the Nervii, who had their seats about Tournay in Flanders. Dio lib. 40.
But Caesar came in to the rescue, and overthrew the Galls. Labienus lying with
another Legion about Rheimes, the Treviri and Indutiomarus came to his Camp,
Orosius lib. 6. cap. 10.
intending to destroy him; but he took his opportunity, and powered out his men
upon them, willing his Soldiers to be sure that they killed Indutiomarus, which
being done, things again were a little settled. Whilst Caesar was thus employed
abroad, Julia dies.
in the City, this year died his daughter Julia, Pompey's Wife, in Childbed,
and the Infant (whether Son or Daughter, it is as uncertain, so immaterial) with
her. Hereby was the bond of friendship betwixt them two broken, and their
mutual envy, which thereby only was restrained, now wanted but an occasion to
vent it self. But Caesar foreseeing great stirs in Gall, Caesar comment. lib. 6.
increased his forces, subdued the Nervii, brought under the Senones and
Carnutes (now changed into Chartres) the Menapii also; whilst Labienus reduced
such as inhabited about Triers. Then did he again cross the Rhine, because of
the Conjunction of the Germans with the Galls, and attempting something upon
the Suevi to no purpose, Caesar reduces Revolters.
turned against the Eburones. Whilst he harrazed their Territories, the
Sigambri set upon the Camp of Cicero then absent, which they could not storm,
though they caused great consternation amongst his men, and killed many. After
this he wasted again the grounds of the Enemy, then called a Council in Gall
for the punishment of Revolters, and Providing the Army of necessaries drew it
into its Winter quarters.

Stirs in the City.
21. The following year produced great stirs in the City, and those no less in
Gall. For now were the times so altered, Lege Appian. de bello civil. l. 2.
as that Rome could not be found in Rome. Nothing was managed by ancient equity
and moderation, all Offices were purchased by Money, or else by Stones, Clubs,
or Swords, and the inconveniences of popular Government now grew ripe, the name
of a free State, or Commonwealth, covering the greatest injustice, disorder,
and oppression of the peoples liberty. The Consuls being debarred by the power
of the Tricipitina from leading out Armies, or waging Wars according to the
ancient right and custom, made up their markets out of the public Revenue, or
their Offices by indirect practices, and therefore none of honor would seek
after the Consulship. Pompey connived at this, hoping that a necessity of
affairs would draw upon him the Dictatorship, as some of his Creatures, though
not in his name, did not stick to hint. This year especially was there such an
horrid contention amongst the Canditates (all or most men of large consciences)
as for a long time no Consul could be elected; and this heightened the matter,
that T. Annius Milo, one of them, being at great enmity with Clodius, killed
him as they met in the way not far from the City. Milo kills Clodius.
This fact the people ill resented, and naughty, and dissolute persons, under
pretense of searching for Milo's friends, committed many outrages in Rome. This
turned indeed all men's eyes upon Pompey, as the fittest person to redress
those evils, and whilst they thought of making him Dictator, Cato drew the
Senate to this resolution, A. M. 3953. Ol. 182. ann. 1. V. C. 702. Ante Christ.
50.
that he should be made Consul alone, that he might be called to an account for
his male-admistration if need were, Pompey made Consul alone.
and so he was made sole Consul, without any President at all.

22. First, he sat in judgment alone, and examined Milo's case; he also made
inquisition after such as had by indirect means procured Offices. His Acts.
Idem ibid. Plutarch in Pompeio.
Milo was defended by Cicero, or rather should have been; for the Orator was so
terrified with Pompey's Soldiers, and Clodius his friends, that he could not
proceed, and is therefore said to have written that Oration afterward, which
is now extant. Milo then was banished, with several others for other Crimes.
Livii Epitom. lib. 107.
Pompey having hitherto as it were executed the Office of Dictator, took to him
a Colleague, Q. Scipio Metellus, whose daughter Cornelia he had married. These
things being heard in the further Gall, and a rumor spread that Caesar who now
was in Italy, The Galls hearing of these stirs rebel.
would be there retained by the motions in the City, many of the Natives
conspired for the recovery of their liberty, and chose Vercingerotix for their
Captain.

23. Caesar, though in the midst of Winter, and forced to make his way through
depths of Snow, returned, and came upon the Arverni at unawares. He took
several of their Towns, Caesar comment, lib. 7.
but besieging one that was situated upon an high Hill, he fought with
disadvantage, and was driven off with the loss of 46 Centurions. From this
siege he was called by the revolt of the Hedui, and an insurrection of the
Bellovaci; and Labienus, who had prosperously managed his affairs about Paris,
joined with him. Now, most of the Galls being revolted, he first overthrew
Vercingetorix, then pursued, and besieged him in Alesia, Caesar reduces them.
a Town of the Mandubii, which, when the Galls were not able to relieve,
Vercingetorix, according to his own offer, was delivered up, with Alesia, and
all their Arms. Then reduced he the Hedui, the Arveni also yielded, with diverse
others, which being done, he sent the Army away into its Winter quarters.
Hirtius lib. 8.
In winter the Galls hatched a new conspiracy. A new conspiracy
Caesar therefore departing from Bibracte, wasted the Territories of the
Bituriges (about Bourdeaux) and of the Carnutes; subdued also the Bellovaci
with others. C. Fabius also reduced some in the mean time, and Caninius having
routed several parties, with him Caesar joined, and besieged Uxellodinum, a
Town of the Cadurci, very strongly fortified by its situation. He obtained this
Town without striking one stroke, by cutting the veins of a Fountain which
served them with water. After this the Cities of Aquitaine yielded, and going
to Narbon he disposed of his Army into their Winter quarters. These things
happened in the eighth year after his coming into Gall, Ser. Sulpitius Rufus,
Disappointed.
and M. Claudius Marcellus being Consuls, wherein also were began those
contentions betwixt him and his adversaries at Rome, that shortly after brake
into Civil wars, which proved deadly in the end to the heads of both the
factions, and fatal to that form of Government which (though laboring under
mortal distempers) was yet on foot.

24. Caesar's carriage, especially in his Consulship, had rendered him very
distastefull to the Senate. Pompey on the other side, by his fair demeanor had
of late gained much upon it, which Caesar being aware of, desired leave to
stand for a second Consulship in his absence. This was granted him; but he
fearing the malice of his adversaries in case he were reduced to a private
condition, further importuned the Fathers that he might have his Government of
Gall prorogued, The grounds and occasions of the Civil Wars betwixt Pompey and
Caesar.
casting about all manner of ways to keep his Army till he should be Consul.
This was hindered by Marcellus the Consul, who had succeeded Pompey; whereupon
Caesar laying his hand upon his Sword, said, that that should obtain it for
him. Appian. de bello civili lib. 2. Velleius Paterc. l. 2. c. 48.
This Marcellus was very bitter against him, pressing hard that a Successor
should be sent to him; but this was crossed by Pompey, either out of good
nature, or policy. Such were designed Consuls for the ensuing year, as were
most opposite to Caesar, viz. L. Aemilius Paulus, and C. Claudius Marcellus
Nephew to the former Consul by his brother: Curio also, an inveterate Enemy of
Caesar, was made Tribune. Yet all these, except Claudius, were drawn aside by
money; Paulus by 1500 Talents, and Curio, who was much indebted, by 100000
Sesterces. Marcellus then urging that a Successor was to be sent to Caesar,
Curio stisly withstood it, alleging that then ought Pompey also to dismiss his
Army; for that his power was equally dangerous to the public liberty. Pompey
outwardly seemed willing, and said he would disband his men; but Curio fell
foul upon him, telling him, that promise without performance was nothing; and,
that he might seem to stand for the good of the Commonwealth, and not carry
favor with Caesar, he desired, that if they both refused to disband, they
should, the one as well as the other, be declared Enemies to the State.

25. Pompey exceedingly netled hereat threatened him; but he ceased not to urge
the thing. The Senate could have wished them both reduced, but feared to
disb^nd Pompey's Army, looking upon Caesar as the more dangerous person. Pompey
sent now to him for the Legion he had lent him, both of them being ordered into
Syria to defend the Eastern parts now in danger by the overthrow of Crassus: he
sent him this Legion, and another of his own; but there being no need of them
in Syria, they wintred at Capua. Those that brought them into Italy did ill
Offices for Caesar, and gave out, as if his Army at his return would all
revolt, which though very false was believed by Pompey, who thereupon neglected
to provide for so dangerous a War as followed. The next year C. Claudius
Marcellus and L. Corn. Lentulus were Consuls, and it was propounded to the
Senate, whether both Pompey and Caesar should lay down all power. Though once
it was carried that Caesar only should, when the Consul propounded it
severally, yet Consule Appianum de bello civili lib. 2. page 446.
Curio again putting it to the question, it was carried against both by 348
voices. Curio labors hard for Caesar.
Hereat the Consuls enraged, left the City, and gave Pompey power as from
themselves to fight for his Country against Caesar, which he seemed not
altogether to approve. Now Curio perceiving himself in danger, and that he
could do no more service for Caesar, fled unto him.

26. Curio being called to a Consultation, would have had him presently to
invade Italy; but he chose rather first to make an overture of Peace, as it is
said, writing to his friends to procure, though it were but two Legions with
Gall within the Alps and Illyricum, until he should be Consul, which though it
seemed something reasonable to Pompey, the Consuls would not admit of it. Then
wrote he to the Senate a menacing and bitter letter, as it is styled by Epistol.
ad familiar. l. 16. Epist. 11.
Cicero, (who now was returned from Cilicia his Province, which he governed a
year, and for his good service in the field was saluted Imperator, and had a
triumph decreed him by the Senate, which these disturbances quite put off, he
saying, that so an agreement were made, he had rather follow the chariot of
Caesar) wherein after an honorable mention made of his own exploits, he
signified, that he was willing to resign his power, Dio l. 40. initio.
in case Pompey did the like; otherwise he should retain his Forces, and
presently come to revenge those injuries which had as well been offered to
himself as his Country. At the reading of these last words all cried out, that
War was denounced, and they sent L. Domitius to succeed him in his Government,
L. Domitius sent by the Senate to succeed Caesar.
with four newly raised Legions. For that Antonius and Cassius the Tribunes
were of Curio's judgment, the Consuls bade them depart out of the Senate, lest
their persons Sacrosanct (as the term was) by their Office, should be violated;
who in a great rage departing that night, fled toward Caesar. So now began
this famous Civil War, in the fourth year of the 182 Olympiad, the 705 of the
City, 47 before the birth of Christ, A. M. 3956, the aforesaid C. Claudius
Marcellus, and L. Corn. Lentulus being Consuls.

27. The Senate did not think that Caesar would return presently out of Gall,
as being unprepared for such an undertaking; Lege Appian. ubi supra. Caesar de
bello Civil. l. 1. Dio l. 40.
and therefore were more flow in their Levies; but he ever judging expedition
to be the greatest help in his undertakings, resolved with five Legions to
begin the work, and take in the commodious places in Italy, and so did he with
admirable speed Ariminum and others. This unexpected thing terrified the
Senate, and the People, Caesar invadeth Italy.
which called to mind the sad effects of the Civil Wars betwixt Sylla and
Marius. Cicero would have had them sent to Caesar, but the Consuls withstood
it. Then departed Pompey to the Army at Capua, whom the Consuls presently
followed. The Senators being at their Wits end, spent all that night in their
house, and at length followed Pompey to Brundusium. A. M. 3956. Ol. 182. ann.
4. V. C. 705. Hyrcani 15.
Caesar at Corfinium met Domitius who was sent to succeed him, whom he
dismissed, after he had received his Soldiers, that now revolted to him. Then
followed he Pompey to Brundusium, who had sent over the Consuls with part of
the Legions into Epirus, which he intended to make the seat of the War,
staying in the Town till the return of the ships, Follows Pompey to
Brundusium,
to transport the rest of the Army. Caesar attempted to storm the place, but he
withstood him, till such time as he had shipped his men, and so passed over to
Dirrhachium.

28. Caesar knew not well now what to do. For hearing such concourse to be made
to Pompey (who drew to his party all the forces of the East) and knowing his
old Army to be in Spain his Province, he feared to follow him over, lest he
should expose Italy to it, and have an enemy at his back. Appian ut prius
Caesaris de bello civil. l. 2. Plutarch in Caesare and Pompeio. Sueton in Julio.
He therefore returned to Rome, having in the space of 60 days got all Italy
into his hands without blood, and breaking open the Treasury took out the money
which had layn there ever since the taking of the City by the Galls, being
reserved for such another case of extremity. Returns to Rome.
For the Aerarium or Treasury in the Temple of Saturn was threefold. One
wherein the tributes or customs gathered from Citizens and associates was kept,
as also booty got by Generals, Rifleth the Treasury.
which was reserved for the ordinary expenses of War. Another more private,
wherein the Vicessimae, or twentieth parts gathered from them that were
manumized, were laid up for extraordinary causes. And there was a third yet
more private and sacred, wherein money was treasured up for any extremity that
might happen from the Galls, and upon no other occasion might it be touched, A.
M. 3957. V. C. 706.
bitter curses being laid upon him or them that should do or suffer it. But
Caesar did it (though L. Metellus the Tribune did all he could to hinder it)
pretending that the People was discharged of the curse, for that nothing more
was to be feared from the Galls, whom he had thoroughly subdued.

29. Then went he into Spain, where in a short time he brought all under,
though Pompey had there a strong Army under three Captains, Petreius, Afranius,
and Varro, whom yielding, he permitted to depart with all their Forces. Goes
into Spain.
At this time he lost two legions in Africa under Curio, and Antonius was
overthrown in Illyricum by Dolobella one of Pompey's Officers. But now M.
Lepidus the Praetor of the City pronounced him Dictator, and therefore he
returned to Rome, where the People being struck with fear, he took upon him the
Office, and held the Comitia. But finding it to be odious, he laid it down
again after eleven days, and procured himself to be chosen Consul, with
Servilius Isauricus. Then about the middle of Winter did he order all his forces
to meet him at Brundusium, Dictator for eleven days, and then Consu^.
expecting in the City the beginning of January for his entering into the
Consulship. Caesar de bello Civili l. 2. Appian.
When he came to Brundusium, though his forces were not all come together,
desiring to set upon Pompey at unawares, he passed over with all he had, viz.
five Legions, and 600 Horse, although in the depth of Winter, and without
provisions; Pompey now having eleven Italian Legions, and 7000 Horse, besides
other supplies out of Greece and Asia. Passes over into Epirus.
But, those five Legions and two that followed being landed, he took Oricum and
Appollonia without fighting one stroke, and then matched straight to
Dyrrhachium, the magazin and granary of Pompey. Both of them sat down by the
River Apis, Caesar expecting his other forces, which at length Antony brought
over, though the Seas were watched by the other party, and Pompey exercising
his men who were raw and unexperienced. Pompey hearing of Antonie's coming,
departed with his whole Army to the River Asparagus. Caesar followed him, and
would have fought; but he not stirring out of his trenches, he marched back to
Dyrrhachium, which having on one side and Pompey on the other, he was
grievously straightened for provisions, and above all things desired to fight. In
several skirmishes he had the better; but in another considerable engagement
was shrewdly beaten, and chased to his Camp, which might have been taken, and a
period put to the War, as he himself confessed, had the Enemy known how to
improve the Victory; Pompey neglecting the advantage, either through the advice
of Labienus, or his own inadvertency, for that providence had otherwise
determined. Though some now advised Caesar to make use of the shame and anger
of his Army, which desired again to be led out to battle, Comes to the plains
of Pharsalum,
to redeem it is credit, yet he thought it most convenient to depart thence, and
so went into Thessaly, whither Pompey followed him, and pitched his Camp on the
fatal plains of Pharsalum, not of Philippi, as L. 4. c. 2. and 7.
Florus falsely relates, and with him Manilius and Virgil.

30. Betwixt that Town and the River Enipeus, was fought that great and famous
battle betwixt these two great Captains, who both of them are said to have wept
in the heads of their Armies, Vide Plutarch in Caesare, and Pompeio, and Appian
ut supra.
considering that so many of the same Country and Nation should be slain,
brother fighting against brother, to satisfy the ambition of two men. The
Armies stood for some time gazing on each other, both being unwilling to begin,
till Pompey's Auxiliaries, whom he had commanded to stand aloof off, till such
time as the Enemy should be broken, and then give the chase (as unwilling to
have them engage in the battle) being wearied with expectation, began to break
their ranks. Fearing they might cause his main body to do so too, though he was
unwilling at this time to fight, and managed not his command with wonted
alacrity, he caused a charge to be founded, his word being Unconquered
Hercules, and Caesar's Victorious Venus. The battle was fought with great
courage and admirable silence on both sides; Where he overthrows Pompey.
but Pompey's Army, though greater by far, being less experienced, was at
length broken and put to flight, at the beginning of which fight all his
Auxiliaries, though great multitudes, ran away as fast as might be, whom Caesar
only suffered in the pursuit to be slain, commanding that all Italians should
be spared. Pompey betook himself to his tent, and sat silent, thinking of
Ajax, who was thus served in the siege of Troy, till Caesar bringing his
Legions to storm his Camp, he took Horse, and with four in his company rode as
far as Larissa, ere he stopped. On Caesar's part were said to be slain 30
Centurions, and 200 common soldiers; but as others affirmed, 1200. On Pompey's
fell ten Senators (amongst whom that Domitius who had been sent to succeed
Caesar) with about 40 Equites or Knights, and of the common sort, they that say
most, 25000; but Asinius Pollio who was in the Fight, and one of Caesar's
Captains, in his Commentaries wrote but of 6000.

31. Pompey thought first of flying to the Parthian, then to Juba into Numidia;
but being dissuaded by those about him, he resolved upon Egypt, Plutarch in
Pompeio. Appian ubi supra. Livii Epitom. l. 112. Paterculus l. 2. c. 53.
as a Country at hand, Pompey flying into Egypt
powerful, and the King whereof was engaged to him in way of friendship as his
Guardian. Thither when he came and sent to be received, the King being a boy,
Achillas, Pothinus the Eunuch, and Theodotus his Schoolmaster consulting about
the matter, one would have him received, and another not, but the last, to show
his eloquence, declared both their ways to be bad, and that he was to be
received, and then slain, subjoyning, Mortuum non mordere, that the dead bites
not, which saying long after Patrick Gray traitorously suggested to Queen
Elizabeth, persuading her to put to death the Queen of Scots, though he was
sent from King James this Queen's son to work her deliverance. This was
resolved, either out of fear, as they pretended, that he should get Egypt into
his power, or because they contemned so great a person now unfortunate, or
rather to curry favor with Caesar. Pompey then being received into a little
boat, as though to come to the King, who stood on the other side of one of the
mouths of Nile with his Army, was treacherously slain, when he could neither
fly nor defend himself. Is treacherously slain.
He covered his face with his gown, and neither speaking nor doing any thing
unbecoming him, with a groan patiently received the strokes. So fell this great
man, being in War a most able Captain, and in Peace (except when he stood in
fear of a concurrent equal) full of modesty, in the 58 year of his age, and the
very day preceding his birthday, and the third year of these unhappy
differences. His head was cut off, and reserved as a present for Caesar; his
body was cast upon the shore for every one to gaze at, and afterward being
washed with Seawater by Philip his Libertus or Freed-man, (who stood by it
till all had looked their full) he wrapped it in his own coat, and burnt it
with the rotten pieces of a Fisher's boat which he there found.

32. Caesar having staid two days at Pharsalum, on the third pursued Pompey,
lest he should renew the War, and so came to Alexandria, where his head and
ring were presented to him. He took the ring, but was grievously offended at
the sight of the head, Dio lib. 42.
and weeping (which Lucan accounts but feigned) commanded it to be buried.
The news of Caesar's success was not believed at Rome till he sent Pompeys
ring thither. Then was power given him by them there, Caesar thereupon honored
at Rome.
to determine of his Enemies as he pleased, and to make War where he would
without asking leave of the People. They voted him Consul for five years, and
Dictator, not for half an one (as was the custom) but a whole year, with the
power of a Tribune for his life, which thing was never granted to any before
him. He accepted these honors, and entered upon his second Dictatorship. But
ere his departure out of Egypt he was put to much trouble and danger. For,
there being at that time a difference betwixtt young Ptolomy and his sister
about the Government, he stood much her friend, which favor she is said to
have purchased with the loss of her chastity. His endeavors for her Pothinus
the Eunuch, Caesar de bello civili l. 3. Dio l. 42. Hirtius de bello
Alexandrino. Sueton. in Julio.
who now feared to be punished for the sedition he had raised about Pompey,
interpreted as sinisterly meant toward the King, The Alexandrian War.
and thereby raised a dangerous War, which yet though in Winter, was
prosperously ended by Caesar, and the young King flying from his Camp was
drowned, too many of his followers pressing into and sinking the boat. Caesar
then gave the Kingdom to Cleopatra, and to color the matter, caused her to
take as an husband her younger brother but eleven years of age. But she brought
the Dictator himself a son not long after, who by his permission she named
Caesario; and had kept him longer with her than nine months, or else had
followed him to Rome, but that he was necessarily drawn another way by the
means of Pharnaces, who now had invaded Pontus his father's Kingdom. Plutarch.
in Antonio.
Yet this woman after his departure is said to have been as familiar with his
Enemy Cn. Pompey the eldest son of Pompey the Great.

33. Caesar then went against Pharnaces, and taking Syria in his way, visited
the Cities. He restored Hyrcanus to the Priesthood in Judaea, Josephi Antiquit.
lib. 14. cap. 15.
though Antigonus the son of Aristobulus (who being let out of Prison by him,
and sent home, had been poisoned by Pompey's party) sued to him for the
Government. He made also Antipater (whom Hyrcanus had sent to join with
Mithridates of Pergamus with 3000 horse, Hirtius.
and who did good service in the Alexandrian War) Governor of Judaea. He
promoted his own Kinsman Sexius Caesar from a Quaestorship to the Government of
Syria, A. M. 3958. V. C. 707.
which Scipio father-in-law to Pompey had enjoyed the year before. From Syria
he sailed into Cilicia, and thence marched with all speed against Pharnaces,
who out of fear sent several times to him about a Peace, but he returned him
only good words, that he might surprise him. At length he gave him conditions,
which he neglected to perform, Caesar overthrows Pharnaces.
hoping Caesar would be called away, and therefore he fell on, Plutarch. in
Caesare. Appian belli civil. lib. 2.
and overthrew him at the Hill Scotius (where formerly Mithridates defeated
Triarius) within five days after his arrival, and four hours after he had got
a sight of his Army, so that writing to a friend at Rome, to note the celerity
of this Enterprise he expressed it in three words, Veni, Vidi, Vici. Then
receiving such places as Pharnaces had seized on, and settling things in Asia,
as he passed, exacting much money of the people, he was called home into Italy
by stirs which happened in the City.

Returns to Rome.
34. He quieted the Seditions, and the mutiny of his own Soldiers, Plutarch. in
Caesare. Dio lib. 42. Appian ut supra. A. M. 3959. V. C. 708. Lege Plutarch. in
Catone minore.
who flew high in their demands for a dismission, and a payment of what he had
promised them. Then being declared Consul for the following year, for that the
year of his Dictatorship was out, he passed over into Africa, where Scipio,
Cato, Labienus, Petreius, and others of Pompey's Captains were with Juba.
Suppresseth Pompey's friends in Africa.
He got the better in several battles. Juba caused his slave to kill him, and
his young Son Caesar led in Triumph, who being brought up in Italy proved an
excellent Historian. Cato at Utica stabbed himself, having read over Plato his
Phaedo of the Souls immortality. The wound not being deep enough he died not
presently, but struggling betwixt life and death, cast himself off from his bed,
and threw down a Geometrical Table, which making a noise, his son and servants
rushed in, and finding him in that condition, his Freed-man, who was a
Physician, began to put in the bowels which were untouched, and sow up his
belly. But he coming to himself pushed him from him, and tearing out his
bowels, enlarged the wound and died, being a man of wonderful Justice,
Severity, and Magnanimity. Caesar hearing of his death let fall some
expressions, which signified a great desire to have got him into his hands, and
hinted (as was thought) an intention of dealing mildly with him. Petreius and
Scipio also perished in Africa. After these things returning to Rome he
Triumphed four times, over Gall, Pontus, Alexandria, and Africa, it being
unlawful to do it over any Roman; although he carried in Tables, a
representation of what he had done in the Civil Wars. Then went he once more
into Spain against Pompey's sons, Pompey's sons in Spain.
A. M. 3960. Ol. 183. ann. 4. V. C. 709. Hyrcani 20.
to whom several had fled out of Africa, where coming to fight near Munda, his
Army was struck with such fear, as it was never nearer running. It had fled,
but that he snatching a Target out of a Soldier's hand, went, and engaged the
Enemy himself, and had 200 Darts thrown at him, whereat his Officers being
ashamed came on, and he got the day, 30000 of his Enemies being slain, with two
of their Captains, Labienus and Varus. Cn. Pompey also, though he fled, was
taken, and his head sent to Caesar.

35. This year being that of his third Consulship (which he exercised with M.
Aemilius Lepidus) being Pontifex Maximus, or High Priest, he amended Sueton. in
Julio. Plutarch. in Caesare. Dio l. 43. p. 226. E. Caesorinus de die natali c.
20. Macrobius Saturnal. l. 1. c. 14. Plin. l. 18. c. 25.
the Roman year, which reformed by him, is yet after him called Julian. The
Julian year.
Herein he used the skill of Sosigenes an excellent Mathematician of Alexandria
(where he learned this account, though the Alexandrian Months consisted of 30
days apiece, and five days were added at the end of every year) in
Astronomical Calculations, SECT. 7.
and of Flaevius the Scribe in rectifying the Calendar. Whereas now in the
Month of February were intercalated 23 days, he intercalated betwixt November
and December two other Months containing 67 days: so that this present year
had fifteen Months and 445 days. But this work seems to have been done
before his last expedition into Spain. After his return he Dio ut supra p. 236.
c.
laid down the Conshulship, and bringing in a new mode of creating honorary
Consuls for three months, made Q. Fabius Maximus, and C. Trebonius, whereof
the former dying in the last day of the year, Caninius Rebilus obtained to
succeed him for the few hours that remained, whereupon Tully Famil. Epist. l.
7. Epist. 30. Caninio consule scito neminem prandisse, nihil tamen eo consule
mali factum est fuit enim mirifica vigilantia, qui suo toto consulatu somnum
non viderit.
calls him the most vigilant Consul, for that he never slept during his Office.
Now were vast honors decreed him by the Senate, Vast honors decreed to Caesar.
Dio ut supra. Livius lib. 116. Appian belli civil. lib. 2.
as that he should be Dictator in perpetuum, and have the style of Imperator,
not in that sense as Generals were wont to have it given by their Soldiers
after some worthy exploit, but whereby the greatest Authority in the
Commonwealth was signified. For, the Militia was to be wholely and solely at
his disposal, as also raising of money: and all sorts of Magistrates, even
Plebeian, were to be subject to him, and swear to contradict none of his
decrees.

SECT. VII. From the absoluteness of Julius Caesar, to the end of the second
Triumvirate, and the absoluteness of Octavius Caesar, or Caesar Octavianus,
the space of 15 years.
1. CAESAR being now Consul the fifth time, with M. Antonius (whom he much
favored, and promoted, for that in his Tribuneship he so much stood for him)
to shun Sueton in Julio. Appian belli civil. lib. 2.
envy in the City, thought upon making War upon the Getae and Dacae, which had
made inroads into Pontus and Thrace. About this time young Castor, the son of
Castor (by Lib. 12. page 568. Suidas in voce (...). Vide Gerard. Vossium de
Historicis Graecis lib. 1. cap. ult.
Strabo called Saocondarius) by the daughter of Deiotarus the King or Tetrarch
of Galatia (to whom Pompey gave Armenia the Less, which gift the Senate having
confirmed was taken away by Caesar, because he took part with Pompey) came to
Rome to accuse his Grandfather. He was sent by his father and mother, together
with Phidippus a Physician and Deiotarus his slave, who was corrupted by their
promises to feign an accusation against his Lord, that he would have killed
Caesar when he entertained him in his Tetrarchy. King Diotarus defended by
Cicero.
Deiotarus, father, and son, who reigned together, had at that time four
Ambassadors in the City, who offered their own bodies to Caesar for the
safety of their Masters. But Cicero being mindful of the friendship and
familiarity he had had with the old man, made an Oration for him in Caesar's
house, wherein he premiseth, that it was so unusual a thing for a King (a
real King; for as for the Kings of Lacedaemon, who were called to account by
the impudent Ephori, they were indeed no Kings, having nothing but the title,
and therefore this can make nothing against this truth) to be questioned for
his life, that before that time it was never heard of. Deiotarus being
acquitted by Caesar, put to death his daughter as she had deserved, together
with her husband Castor Saocondarius that noble Chronographer, concerning whom
Gerard John Vossius is to be consulted, in his Treatise of Greek Historians.

2. Caesar in his last Consulship, to Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 14. cap. 17.
gratify Hyrcanus the High-Prtest and Ethnarcha of the Jews, as also the
Nation, granted to him to enjoy, and Govern the City of Jerusalem as he
pleased, which he might also fortify with Walls. To the Jews he granted also a
freedom from the charge of Portage and Toll, with an abatement of the public
Revenue in the second year of letting it out to farm. In this second Julian
year his Colleague Appian bell. civil lib. 2. Dio lib. 44. Censorin. de die
Natali cap. 9.
M. Antonius procured by a Law that the Month Quintilis should in honor of
his name be after it called July. He now restored Dio lib. 43. Strabo lib. 8.
and 17.
Carthage and Corinth (which two Cities had both in one year been destroyed) by
Roman Colonies sent thither. The month Quintilis called July.
Now Dio lib. 43. Appian belli civil. lib. 2. Plutarch. in Caesare. Sueton. in
Julio. Livii Epitom. lib. 116.
the people had a great desire to be revenged on the Parthian, for the loss of
Crassus and his Army, and to him unanimously the War was decreed, and lest any
stirs should be in his absence, he was permitted to name all Officers that
should be in the City for three years. It Is thought he would gladly have had
the title of King, though, the people being against it, he declined it. For, as
he came into the City from the Hill Albanus where he had sacrifized, some
saluted him by the name of King, which the people took ill, whereupon he said,
he was not King but Caesar; and all holding their peace, he passed on sad and
grieving. And when one of the multitude put upon a statue a Laurel Crown, tied
with a white Ribband (which was a royal Ensign) the Tribunes commanded it to be
taken away, and the man carried to Prison: but Caesar being vexed, either for
that the motion of the Kingdom succeeded not, or, as he pretended, that the
glory of refusing it was taken from him, grievously rated the Tribunes, and put
them out of their Office. At the solemnity of the Lupercalia (which were
celebrated on the fifteenth of February) as Caesar sat in the Rostra, Crowned,
in a purple Gown, and in a gilded Chair, Antony his Colleague running naked, as
the custom was, amongst the Luperci, came to him as a suppliant, and in the
name of the People of Rome offered him a Diadem, which being twice set upon his
head, Caesar took off, and laid in the Chair. He answered, Caesar seeming to
affect the title of King,
that Jupiter alone was King of the Romans, and sending the Diadem into the
Capitol unto Jupiter, commanded it to be registered, how in the name of the
people the Kingdom had been offered him, and he would not take it. This gave
suspicion that the thing was done by agreement, and that he desired the title
of King; but would be as it were compelled to accept of it.

3. A rumor was also at this time spread abroad, that the Quindecimviri had
found in Sibyll's books, that the Parthians could only be overcome by the
Romans under conduct of a King; and that at the next sitting of the Senate, L.
Cotta, one of the Quindecimviri, would move that Caesar might have the title.
^ome gave out, that he was indeed to be called Dictator, or Imperator, of the
Romans, but plainly King of the other Nations subject to their Empire. These
things drew envy upon him, and the indignation of the great ones, even of such
as he had (as to their particular) well deserved of. And that saying undid him,
Sylla nescivit literas, non potuit dictare, utterly thereby cutting off all
hope that he would give over the Dictatorship. Being sensible of the envy he
had contracted, he desired to haste out of the City, but four days before the
time appointed, he was slain in the Senate House by a conspiracy of above 60
Senators and Equites. Though his death was portended several ways, yet he
neglected it. It Is said, that as he went down to the house that very morning,
that the names of the Conspirators were put into his hands, but he folded them
up amongst other papers and never read them. A. M. 3961. V.C. 710.
The chief of them were M. Brutus, C. Trebonius, C. Cassius, and of his own
party Decimus Brutus. Is slain in the Senate House.
Coming into the Senate House, which then was Pompey's Court, thinking of the
Parthian expedition, as he sat in his Curule Chair, they fell upon him, and
killed him with 23 wounds. So he who had Plinius lib. 7. cap. 15.
fought fifty battles, and killed 1192000 men, in that Senate, which he himself
for the most part had chosen, in the Court of Pompey, and before Pompey's
Statue, so many of his Centurions looking on, Cicero lib. 2. de Divinat.
fell by the hands of most Noble Citizens, many of whom he had to his utmost
gratified, and so lay he, that not so much as a friend nor slave came near his
body.

4. So great a man he was that Plutarch In Caesare.
being judge, there was none of the greatest, and most admired Captains, to
whom the Gallick War alone did not demonstrate him equal in commendations, both
as a General, and as a Soldier. For, whether we consider the Pabis, Scipioes,
Metelli, his Contemporaries, or those that went before him, as Sylla, Marius,
and both the Luculli, and even him whose glory for all warlike abilities
reaches to the skies, Pompey himself, the actions of Caesar excel all their
exploits. For, sometimes he obtained greater glory, for the inconvenience of
the places wherein he made War, sometimes for the greatness of the Countries
which he subdued, sometimes for the multitude and strength of his Enemies
overthrown, sometimes for the perfidiousnesse and barbarism of the Nations
subdued, sometimes for clemency showed to the conquered, or otherwhiles for his
liberality toward his fellow soldiers; but always in respect of the number of
battles, and of those that were slain. For having carried on the War in Gall not
fully ten years, he took above 800 Cities, subdued 300 several sorts of People,
and having engaged at several times with three millions of men, killed the
third part, and took the other alive. So great was the affection of his
Soldiers to him, and their care to please him, that whereas otherwise they were
nothing better than others, His character.
yet being invincible for his credit, they would not refuse any danger. This
disposition in them he first bred and then maintained by conferring honors and
rewards upon them, wherein he spared nothing; then by undertaking all dangers
with them, and refusing no labor. His boldness indeed and courage,
considering that it proceeded from incredible desire of glory, they admired not
so much; but his labor and toil which he endured above his strength did
astonish them. For, he was of a thin habit of body, pale and tender, had a
sickly head, and was subject to the falling sickness or Epilepsie, which first
took him at Corduba. But he took not an occasion of laziness from his want of
health, but by Expeditions, most difficult journeys, slenderness of diet, and
by continuing abroad in the open air, sought to drive away his disease, and
keep his body healthful. Most commonly he slept as he was carried in his chariot
or litter, so that his sleep was not idle. On the day time he was carried about
the Forts, Cities and Camps, with a boy sitting by him, who wrote down what he
dictated, and a Soldier with a sword standing at his back. He made so great
journeys, that in his first Expedition from Rome, in eight incampings he came
to the River Rhodanus. From his childhood he had learnt and practiced riding,
so that putting his hands behind him upon his back, he would sit an horse in
his full speed, which was very much for one that had his disease. Moreover in
that Expedition he exercised himself so, that riding, he would dictate several
letters to two Secretaries or more. He was a man ambitious of power, and
unsatisfied with any thing on this side Sovereignty, but Victory pleased him,
not revenge nor cruelty, in which respect Cicero, to note his ambition, and yet
acknowledge his goodness of nature, compared him to Pisistratus.

5. The conspirators conscious of the greatness of the fact, Vide Appian. ut
supra. Patercul. l. 2. c. 58. Dionem l. 44.
fearing the worst, secured themselves in the Capitol, it being in the Senate
strongly debated how it should look upon the thing, and consequently upon them.
But for Antonius the Consul (who also resolved when he should be able, to
punish it, though now he betrayed no such intention) the fact had been approved
of, as done upon an Usurper and a Tyrant, though they had not long before taken
a solemn oath for his preservation, and decreed such vast honors to him.
Antonius by putting them in mind, that if he were judged deservedly slain, all
his acts were to be nulled, and consequently the assignment of several Offices,
which he had of late made to several of them, effected that no more was done
than to decree an Amnestie or oblivion for all that was past, An Amnestie voted
by the Senate.
for which Cicero much labored. The offices were confirmed with this reason
entered, because it was requisite for the good of the Commonwealth, and the day
following the Senate meeting again, decreed Provinces to the murderers, viz. to
M. Brutus Crete, Afnick to Cassius, to Thobonius Asia, to Cimber Bithynia, and
Gall about Padus to Decimus Brutus. After this, Caesar's testament was opened,
wherein he made heirs three Nephews of his Sisters, Caesar's Testament.
C. Octavius of three parts in four of his estate (not of half only, Sueton in
Julio. Flor. l. 4. c. 4.
as it is found in Livy's Epitome) and L. Pinarius and Q. Pedius of the other
fourth part. C. Octavius he adopted into his name and family, and most of those
that killed him he named amongst the Guardians of his son, if one should be
born to him. As second heirs, if the former should not possess the
inheritance, he named Decimus Brutus and M. Autonius. He also in his will gave
no small matter to the Romans, to be divided man by man, as Plutarch writes.
This moved the People out of measure to indignation against the Conspirators,
Antonius the Consul vehemently stirring up the multitude in his funeral
Oration. They were driven to that rage, that after the burning of the Corpse
they were hardly dissuaded from firing their houses, and they tore in pieces
one Cinna whom they mistook for another of that name that was one of them.

6. Now the series of affairs brings us to Caesar Octavianus the adopted son
of Julius. He was grandson to his sister Julia, which woman was wife to M.
Attilius Ba^bus, Octavius his heir.
and by him had a daughter that was married to C. Octavius. He was born in the
Consulship of Cicero, Appian de bello civili l. 3. Sueton in Augusto. Dio l. 45.
and lost his father (who governing Macedonia, died suddenly before he could
stand for the Consulship) when but four years old. He accompanied this his
great Uncle in the last Spanish War, who ever kept him close to him in their
travail, and was now sent by him to Apollonia to study, intending to take him
along with him in the Parthian War. There he heard of his death, and the
inheritance left to him. His Mother and Father-in-Law Marcius Philippus, were
unwilling he should take the name of Caesar, as subject to much envy; but after
some pause he resolved to the contrary, and assuming the name of Caesar
Octavianus, made use of the good affections of his Uncles friends in Greece,
who accompanying him to the City, he was met by a vast number of others from
Rome. Here, after he had accepted of the adoption, and confirmed it by the
authority of the Praetor as the custom was, he went to Antony, whom he expected
to have his friend and assistant in prosecuting his Uncle's Enemies. But after
some waiting, he entertained him with great contempt, and though he had got a
great quantity of Caesar's money, yet he denied to let him have any, fearing he
should grow into too much esteem. Purchases the Love of the People.
Caesar hereupon sold his own inheritance to pay the legacy given to the
People, which procured him much love, his Uncle's (or Father's, as now he must
be called) old Soldiers flocked to him, whom he accepted of out of fear of
Antony, who now became every day more odious, both to him, to People and Senate.

7. The Senate suspected Antony as intending to set up himself, Appian. Livii
Epitom. lib. 117. Dio l. 45.
and he intended nothing more, for which cause he resolved to have some
Province assigned him, Antony practizeth for his own advancement.
wherein he might get power. To curry favor then he propounded to be
considered Sextus Pompey, who yet remained of the sons of Pompey the Great
(that beloved man) that in requital for his fathers estate confiscated, he
might have an allowance out of the public, and command of the Seas, with that
Navy he formerly had. This being received with great applause was enacted; and
so Pompey was called back into Sicily, where he afterward waged a great War
against Caesar. Antony persuaded Dolobella his Colleague (a young man whom
Caesar having ordained to be Consul after his departure out of the City, when
he was dead, took the Office, and inveighing against his benefactor, would have
had the day of his death styled the birthday of the City) though he loved him
not, to ask Syria, not of the Senate, but the People, hoping that after him he
should not be denied such a request. The difference increasing betwixt him and
Caesar, he desired to have the six Legions which lay in Macedonia, and obtained
them, deceiving the Senate by a false rumor, that the Getes hearing of
Caesar's death, had invaded that Province. He baited them, by preferring a Law
against any one's being Dictator. It was his design to bring these Legions over
into Italy to awe and command all, and that he might effect this, he preferred
by force a Law for changing of Provinces, and thereby procured to his brother
C. Antonius Macedonia, which formerly had been assigned to M. Brutus, and to
himself the nearer Gall (or Gallia Cisalpina) which before was given to Decimus
Brutus.

8. The Senate would in no wise grant this, whereupon he betook himself to the
People. When he had brought over his Legions, part of them revolted to Caesar,
who now out of fear went up and down Italy, gathering Soldiers out of the
Colonies his father had planted. With a considerable Army at length Antony
marched into Gall, whence he commanded Brutus to be gone, who gave way to him
then, but departed to Mu^^na, resolving there to stay and endure a siege, for
that he had some considerable strength, and expected assistance. Here Antony
straightly besieged him, which the Senate hearing of, by Cicero's working
especially (who now began to speak and write his fourteen Orations, in
imitation of those of Demosthenes, called Philipicks) declared him an Enemy to
the State, which proved a means for the bringing in and preferring of Caesar
Octavianus. The hatred of him procures young Caesar's preferment.
For though the Senate cared not at all for him, as being generally of Pompey's
faction, Appian ut supra. Dio l. 46. Plutarch in Antonio. Cicero Philip. 5.
Sueton in Octavio.
yet they resolved to make use of him for his Armies sake, and therefore
erected him a statue, made him a Senator, though but nineteen years old,
decreed, that he should be considered toward preferment as ten years older,
and gave him equal power with Hirtius and Pausa the Consuls, whom now they sent
to relieve Brutus. They took Bononia; but Antony being bold, for that he had
got the better in some skirmikes, went and met Pansa, whom he overthrew, but
returning carelessly into his Camp, was worsted by Hirtius. A littel after, a
great battle was fought near Mutina, wherein Antony was quite defeated, and
fled to Lepidus then Proconsul in the further Gall. A. M. 3962. V. C. 712.
Both the Consuls died of wounds; Hirtius in Antonie's Camp, and Pansa at
Bononia. Brutus being at this time spared by Caesar, thought of departing with
his ten Legions to M. Brutus and Cassius, now in Greece, but his Soldiers moved
by the difficulty of the journey revolted, the six new raised Legions to Caesar,
and the four of old Soldiers to Antony. He then purposing with a small
attendance to pass through Gall, was taken at Aquilea, and betrayed by Capenus
Sequanus Governor of the Country, who sent his head to Antony. Before this,
Appian. Livius lib. 120. Cicero Philip. 11.
Trebonius another of his Accomplices in Caesar's death, excluding Dolabella
(whom the Senate had judged an Enemy) from Pergamus and Smyrna, was taken by
him in the later place, and after grievous torments, had his head cut off,
which the Soldiers kicking about as a football, did so abuse, as no face was
to be seen on it. Not long after the death of Decimus Brutus, Minutius Basilius
another of the Conspiratours was slain by his slaves, whom he had gelded in a
great rage.

9. Now the Senate having no need of young Caesar, slighted him exceedingly,
Yet having no need of Caesar, the Senate again slighted him,
decreeing the honor due to him unto Brutus, whom he had relieved, giving him
very bitter taunts, and denying him a Triumph. Being sensible hereof, and how
most of them were of Compey's Faction, Appian ut supra. Livius l 119. Sueton.
in Angusto. Patercul. l. 2. c. 62. Livii Epitom. lib. 120.
he began to tamper with Antony by Letters, as also with Lepidus, for a
conjunction, and sent 400 Soldiers into the City, in the name of the Army, to
demand the Consulship for him. Hereat the Senate straining hard, one Cornelius a
Centurion laying his hand on his Sword, said, This shall do it, if you will
not. Then called he Antony and Lepidus into Italy, whereat the Senate much
startled, and too late blaming their own rigidity, decreed him Consul, and
whomsoever he would take to himself. So he invaded the Consulship, a month and
five days before he was twenty years old, and took Q. Pedius for his Colleague.
Then by a Law was fire and water forbidden to all that had an hand in the death
of Caesar, and their goods were sold. The Senate was now so changed, either
through good advice or fear, that in stead of slighting they advanced him above
all example. Vide Dionem lib. 46.
They resolved that after his Consulship he should take place of all Consuls,
and though formerly they were displeased with his levying forces being a
private man; now they desired him to add to his Army, and decreed to him the
Legions of Decimus Brutus. The City was committed to his care, Livii Epit. l.
120. Appian bell. civil. l. 4.
and power given him to act what he pleased, Which procures the Thumvirate.
though without the prescript of the Laws, which he retained fifty six years
till his death. Not long after came Aemilius Lepidus and M. Antonius into
Italy, whom he met about Bononia, and after a three days conference entered
into confederacy with them, which is famous by the name of the Triumvirate.

The Terms of the Combination.
10. The terms of this Combination were, That Caesar for the remainder of the
year should leave the Consulship to Ventidius, who formerly in the Social War
when a Boy was led in Triumph, and after that rubbed the heels of Concurrite
omnes Augures, Aruspices, Portentum inusitatum constatum est recens, Nam mulos
qui frecabat Consul factus est.
Mules for his living. Idem ibid. Dio lib. 46.
That a new authority of three men should be erected to take away civil
dissentions; which they three should execute for five years with Consular power
(for, the Dictatorship was waved, because of a Law lately preferred against it
by Antony) with authority to dispose of all Offices for that Term. That Antony
should have as a Province all Gall, except that of Narbon, which Lepidus was to
have with Spain; and to Caesar was Africa, with Sardinia and Sicily assigned;
other places beyond the Seas being left to another time. They agreed further,
that their Enemies should be destroyed, wherein the case of Cicero moved the
greatest controversy. For Antony would not meddle except he in the first place
should be slain, These Verses were scattered up and down the City.
Lepidus was content, but Caesar stood much against it, Gellius lib. 5. cap. 4.
yet on the third day he assented an exchange being made; for he yielding up
Cicero, Lepidus permitted his brother Paulus, and Antony L. Caesar his Uncle by
the Mother's side to be proscribed. Lastly, it was agreed that Lepidus should
be Consul the following year, instead of Decimus Brutus, designed formerly by
Julius Caesar. He guarding Rome and Italy, the other two were to make War upon
Brutus and Cassius, who now (though at first without any decree of the Senate)
had seized on Macedonia and Syria. Cassius in Laodicea besieged Dolabella, who
being judged an Enemy by the Senate for the death of Trebonius, when the City
was taken caused his Page to cut off his head, and so ended his life, being a
man of no great solidity. He was son-in-law to Cicero: but after the divorcing
of Tullia they fell into great enmity, vvhereupon the Orator proved a back
friend to him in the Senate, reigning amongst the Fathers and the People with
his Eloquence.

The effects of it.
11. The first effect of the Triumvirate was a Proscription of some 300 persons
of Equestrian and Senatorian ranks. Appian.
Though the pretense was to revenge Caesar's death, yet many were murdered for
their rich Estates, others out of malice, and some for their convenient Houses
and Gardens. Amongst those of greatest note was Varro, who now living to see
and feel a second Tricipitina, yet escaped with his life. Cicero the man most
aimed at by Antony for opposing him so vehemently in the Senate, upon the
Triumvirs their coming went to Sea; but the winds being contrary, and because
he could not endure the shaking of the ship, he returned, saying, he would die
in his Country often preserved by him. Being weary both of his flight and
life, Plutarch. in Cicerone.
he came to a Village a little more than a mile distant from the Sea. Here his
servants terrified by several prodigies, partly by persuasion, and partly by
force put him again in his litter, and were carrying him back to the Sea, when
hearing of those that came to seek for him, he caused the Litter to be set
down, and quietly stretched out his neck to Popilius Laenas, whom formerly by
his Oratory he had saved from condemnation. He ill favouredly enough cut off
his head and hands, which he presented to Antony, and for so doing received a
great reward. Cicero slain.
After the head had been sufficiently gazed on by him and his wife Fulvia (who
set on her knees, pulled out the Tongue, and pricking it with Needles,
otherwise shamefully showed her spite) it was to the grief of all men set up in
the pleading place, or Rostra. To such an end came this most famous man, the
father of Roman eloquence. He was born at Arpinum, on the third of the Nones of
January, in the 648 year of the City, C. Atilius Serranus, and Q. Servilius
Capio being Consuls, the same wherein Pompey the Great was born, on the Calends
of October. His father was of Equestrian rank, and issued, as some said, from
Tullius Attius, a Noble King of the Volsci. Paterculus l. 2. cap. 66. Plinius
lib. 7. cap. 30.
He first deserved the Triumph of the Gown, and the Laurel of the Tongue. And
as Caesar the Dictator wrote of him, he obtained a Laurel greater than all
Triumphs (though he had one decreed to him for his good service in the field)
by how much the more it is a greater and more excellent thing to enlarge the
bounds of Roman wit, than of Empire. He died on the seventh of December, when
he had lived 63 years eleven months and five days. His brother Quintus and
his sons were slain, but his own escaped; for that he had sent him beforehand
unto Athens.

And many others.
12. All places in the City were full of slaughters. Idem.
The ordinary rate of one head brought to the Triumvirs, if by a freeman, was
100000 Sesterces; if by a slave, half so much, with the liberty of the City.
This corrupted many, so as forgetting both duty and natural affection, they
betrayed those for whose preservation they ought to have labored. Yet now many
rare, and admirable examples, of the love of wives to their husbands, and of
slaves to their Masters, appeared; fewest of Children toward their Parents.
Yet Oppius his Act seems to stand for many, who Aeneas like carried out his
old and decrepit father, and conveyed him to the Sea, sometimes leading, and
sometimes carrying him on his back, till they both escaped into Sicily, whence
afterward returning, the people out of a sense of his piety made him Aedilis,
and for that he wanted money to set out the usual Games, the Artificers
willingly wrought for him without wages, and the Spectators by a contribution
made him rich. Of such proscribed persons as escaped, some fled to Brutus and
Cassius, who received them kindly; but most unto Sextus Pompey now in Sicily,
who sent out Vessels to hover upon the Coasts for them, and furnished them when
came over with necessaries. The Triumvirs condemn the estates of women to get
money.
But the Triumvirs wanting great sums for carrying on the War against Cassius
and Brutus, by reason that few would buy Confiscated Estates, condemned also,
though not the persons, yet the goods of many rich women, as well as men.

13. Cassius, after he had got Syria into his power, Idem.
thought of making an expedition into Egypt against Cleopatra (who now was
going with a great power to the aid of Caesar and his followers) but was
recalled by Brutus; for that Antony and Caesar (who having attempted something
against Ptolemy in Sicily, Plutarch. in M. Bruto.
put it now off till another time) were coming against them with forty
Legions, And Cassius and Brutus take extravagant courses for Treasure.
whereof eight had already passed the Ionian Sea. Therefore leaving Syria to
his brother's son with one Legion, he sent some into Cappadocia; who killed
Ariobarzanes as one that had conspired against him, and brought him a mass of
money. Exacting money with much rigor he came into Asia, and meeting Brutus at
Smyrna, they consulted about the War. Brutus moved that they should pass
over into Macedonia, and there encounter their Enemies; but Cassius prevailed
that the Rhodians and Lycians should first be reduced, who refused to
Contribute any thing, and were powerful at Sea. It seeming good not to leave
any Enemy at their back, this was performed, and vast sums of money by that,
and other means raised. The Xanthians standing out, Orosius lib. 6. cap. 18.
as they had done in former times against Cyrus and Alexander, were scarce any
of them left alive; and the Rhodians had little besides their lives left unto
them.

14. After this, both the Armies met at Philippi, that City of Macedonia, to
which, being built by Philip to restrain the Thracians, as we have formerly
shown, The two parties meet at Philippi.
St. Paul wrote his Epistle. Here appeared on either side 19 Legions. Appian
belli civil. lib. 4. Plutarch. in Antonio. Florus l. 4. c. 7. Patercul. lib. 2.
cap. 70. Livii Epitom. lib. 124.
Antony and Caesar brought into the field 13000 horse; but Brutus and Cassius
20000. who coming thither first, encamped on an high and convenient ground near
the Sea, whence they could have Provisions in abundance. The other party was
exceedingly straightned for necessaries, having only Macedonia and Thessaly
open to it, for that Pompey cut off all intercourse from Africa, as Murcus and
Aenobarbus from Italy, by their Navies. This made Antony desirous to fight
above measure, which the Enemy knowing well enough, refused to engage, till
Antony making a way through a Fen to intercept his Provisions, and a work being
raised by Cassius against him, this procured a fight, wherein Cassius had the
worst on his part, and his Camp was taken by Antony. On the other side Caesar's
Wing was worsted, and his Camp also taken by Brutus. Cassius departing to an
Hill not far off, expected the event of the fight on his partner's side, and
because for the dust he could not discern what horse it was that made toward
him, sent Titinius to discover. He being received with joy by those that were
bringing tidings of victory, stayed so long, till Cassius, fearing the worst,
and that the Messenger was intercepted, Cassius kills himself out of
misapprehension.
killed himself, or caused his Liberius, or Freedman, to cut off his head.
Scarcely was it falln, when Titinius coming, followed him by his own hands,
whom as he said, he had killed by loitering.

15. Brutus presently caused his Colleagues body to be buried out of sight,
Appian ut supra. Dio lib. 47. Plutarch. in M. Bruto. Patercul. ut prius. Livius
lib. 124.
lest the Army should be dejected; and then had no mind to fight, desiring
rather to starve the Enemy, who now was in desperate condition by want of
necessaries, till fearing a defection, for that some had revolted already, or
till being forced by the earnestness of his Soldiers he led them out to
battle. Both parties, though Contrymen, were so greedy of engaging, that
they neglected to use any missive weapons, and betook themselves to their
Swords, fighting with great animosity, till at length Brutus his side was born
down, and put to the rout. And Brutus after a defeat.
He escaped to an Hill, where remaining all night, when in the morning he saw
no way of escaping ( Antony having made him sure, lest he should renew the War)
he set his swords point to his left pap, where the motion of the heart is felt,
and forcing it into his breast, expired. A. M. 3963. Ol. 185. ann. 3. V.C. 712.
Hyrcani 22. Ante Christ. 40.
This was the end of these two men, by the same weapons as some write
wherewith they killed Caesar, who had given them their lives, and received them
into favor after the battle of Pharsalum. While they sought liberty by his
death, by that very means they lost that which they accounted such, being
indeed no other than a liberty for the common sort to run into extravagancies,
and for particular men to abuse their credulity, and by flattery to procure
power, which they then would improve (even Pompey himself, as well as Sylla,
Cinna, Marius and Caesar) further than their Commissions extended. With them
perished the hopes of that called a Commonwealth, which thenceforth never was
more seen. Appian.
As for the succeeding bickerings which the Triumviri had with young Pompey,
they were but inconsiderable in comparison of this War with Cassius and Brutus,
who having under their power all the Roman Empire from Macedonia to the River
Euphrates, with above 20 Legions, 20000 horse, 200 long ships, and infinite
sums of money, so long as they remained, the Commonwealth seemed (though not at
Rome) as yet to be surviving.

16. Caesar being indisposed (for he had not his health this expedition, and
therefore was not in the first fight) returned into Italy. Caesar returns to
Rome.
Antony went into Asia to gather up money for the payment of largesses promised
to the Soldiers. Here he squeezed out of the poor Inhabitants that little which
was left them by Cassius and Brutus, Appian belli civil. lib. 5. Plutarch. in
Antonio. Dio lib. 48.
the followers of whom he also restored as he met with them, except such as had
an hand in Caesar's death. In Cilicia he met with Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, on
whom he presently doated, having formerly had much affection for her when yet a
Girl, at such time as he accompanied Gabinius into that Kingdom. Antony
follows Cleopatra into Egypt.
Thither he now followed her, having first sent a party of horse to plunder
Palmyra, a Town situate near Euphrates, and laid most heavy Tributes and
Impositions upon the Provinces. After Caesar had recovered, A. M. 3964. V.C.
713.
according to their agreement at parting he set himself to divide Lands to the
Army in Italy, which hereby was put into a great combustion, the number of
Soldiers being so great, that multitudes of Inhabitants were turned out, and
many Towns emptied to give place to those new comers, who committed many
outrages, and had not purchased those Lands by any service to the State (as was
complained) but by serving to inthrall it to the Dominion of three men. Fulvia
the wife of Antony, and Lucius his brother now Consul, envied Caesar this
popularity with the Soldiers, and contended earnestly that they ought to settle
the Soldiers of Antony, which was granted. But herewith not contented, they
resolved to prosecute him with War. She, for that she desired her husband might
be recalled thereby from Cleopatra, concerning whom she had too much cause to
be jealous of him: and he out of desire to innovate, pretending an endeavor to
suppress the Triumvirate, and to reduce the ancient form of Government, and
trusting much to the strength of his brother.

The Perusian War betwixt Caesar, and the brother and wife of Antony.
17. Much ado was made to reconcile them, but to no purpose. The ancient
Possessors of the grounds flocked to Lucius, and the new ones to Caesar, to
whom Salvidienus coming out of Gall with great strength, Appian.
Lucius went to oppose him, but was diverted by Agrippa, and reduced to such
straights betwixt them two, (though Ventidius and Asinius, two of Antonie's
Captains were not far off) that glad he was to betake himself for security to
Perusia a strong Town, where he was closely besieged by Caesar and his party.
He stood out very courageously, till forced by famine to yield to mercy; then
coming out first, and casting himself into Caesar's hands, he interceded for
his Soldiers, and desired all the blame might be upon himself: he was received
honorably, and his Soldiers were pardoned at the desire of their Enemies. The
Town was to be plundered, but by a madman, A M. 3965. V. C. 714.
who set his own house on fire and therein perished, it was burnt down to the
ground. About this time was the first Ecloge of Virgil written (who now was
some 28 years old) during the division of those Lands, as clearly appears
from it: Vide Servium in locum.
the above mentioned L. Antonius and P. Servilius Isauricus being Consuls, in
the 713th year of the City, and the third of the Triumvirate.

18. After the Perusian War (for so it is called) Caesar suspecting Antonie's
affection toward him; Appian.
to strengthen himself seized on Spain and Gall, Caesar provideth for the worst.
though his Provinces, taking occasion at the death of his Lieutenant, whereby
being 40 Legions strong, he was able to graple with him if need should
require. But having no shipping he was at a loss as to Sea matters, and
therefore married Scribonia the sister of Libo, father-in-law to Sextus Pompey,
from whom he hoped by this alliance if need were to obtain peace. Antony this
Spring moved from Alexandria, where he had lived all Winter very loosely with
Cleopatra, as against the Parthians, who now under conduct of Labienus had
overrun Syria as far as Tire. Antonies carriage in the East.
Though this Town was set upon by them, and he pretended he would relieve it,
yet he did not, alleging a necessity of going to the War against Pompey, who
now hindered all Provisions from coming to the City, and thereby caused a great
dearth: Dio lib. 48.
and he again excused himself why he came no sooner to that against Pompey,
because he was retained by the Parthian War. Sailing then into Asia, he had
news of the event of the Perusian War, and blamed much his wife and brother;
whence passing into Greece he met with her, and his mother Julia, whom Pompey
having taken now sent safe to him. Thence he sailed over the Ionian Sea, where
Aenobarbus delivered up all his Fleet and forces to him; and so they came to
Brundusium, where they were kept out by a Garrison placed there by Caesar.

The Triumvirs fall out.
19. This made such a breach betwixt them, that Antony blocked up the Town, and
procured Pompey from Sicily to invade Italy. Appian.
Caesar came to Brundusium, where the old Soldiers being unwilling to fight
against Antony, the Army labored to reconcile the Triumvirs, which Cocceius
friend to both at length effected with much labor; Pollio on Antonie's side,
and Maecenas on Caesar's, as Delegates making up the breach. All offenses were
mutually to be forgiven, and for that Marcellus husband to Octavia Caesar's
sister was now dead, and also Fulvia Antonie's wife for grief that he neglected
her, Antony married Octavia. Then was the Roman Empire divided betwixt them,
Are reconciled and a new agreement is made.
the bounds of their Dominins being Codropolis a Town of Illyricum, all from it
Westward being to obey Caesar, and all Eastward Antony. Africa was left to
Lepidus, who now was even no body, and having offended Caesar had been confined
by him to that Province. The War against the Parthians was judged to Antony,
and that against Pompey (who must needs now be suppressed) unto Caesar. Antony
sent Ventidius into Asia to restrain the Parthians, who now had made an
incursion as far as Ionia. But out of Sardinia did Menodorus Pompey's Admiral
the second time eject Helenus Caesar's Captain, whereupon Caesar refused to
hearken to Antony, when he moved him to be reconciled unto Pompey. Both the
Triumvirs (or rather now the Duumvirs) being come to the City, were received
with most lamentable complaints of poor people, ready to starve for want of
Provisions, which Pompey hindered from coming, from the East by Sicily, from the
West by Sardidinia and Corsica, which he had in his power, and from Africa by
his Navy also, which then was most powerful at Sea. Caesar could not be drawn
to make Peace with him, A great famine caused by Sextus Pompey.
notwithstanding the loud cries and prayers of the multitude, which obstinacy
drew him, and Antony (rescuing him) into such danger, as both of them were near
stoning. At length being forced to it, and Pompey being persuaded, they met,
but Pompey expecting to be admitted into the power and place of Lepidus, the
Treaty came to nothing. Yet the pressure of the famine brought them together
again, and amongst other things it was concluded, that Pompey retaining all the
Islands he had already, and Peloponnesus over and above, as long as they should
hold their power; and having liberty to be Consul, and to discharge the Office
by any of his friends, he was to leave the Sea open, Procures an agreement
with him.
and pay to the People what corn was due out of Sicily. The proscribed persons,
except such as were guilty of Caesar 's death, had now all liberty to return.
The day following, Consuls were designed for four years. Frst Antonius and
Libo, than Caesar and Pompey, next Aenobarbus and Sosius, and lastly, Caesar
and Antony, who then (it might be hoped) might restore the Government to the
People. Then did Antony and Caesar return, and were most joyfully received.
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14. c. 26.
And this year being the 714 of the City, did they procure Herod the Great to
be declared King of Judaea, in the first year of the 184 Olympiad, Cn. Domitius
Calvinus the second time, and C. Asinius Pollio being Consuls.

20. Antony departed toward the East again for the Parthian War, Dio lib.
49. Appian in Parthicis.
which hitherto Ventidius his Lieutenant had managed with good success, having
got several victories, wherein Labienus, who brought them into Syria, and
Pharnapates, (or Phraates, or Barzapharnes, being called by several names) the
greatest of their Captains, Ventidius prospers against the Parthians.
with Pacorus son to Orodes the King, Florus l. 4. c. 9.
were slain. After this he repelled them in Media and Mesopotamia, and besieged
Antiochus Comagenus in Samosata, whom he suffered, upon promise of 1000
talents, to send Ambassadors unto Antony, who now drew near, and for that the
siege was likely long to continue, by reason of the desperate resolution of the
defendants, granted him Peace for 300 talents, accepted but of two Hostages,
and those inconsiderable ones; and he gave him leave to put to death Alexander,
who had formerly revolted to the Romans. This by Dio ut prius.
some he was thought to do for fear of the Army, which was angry at his ill
usage of Ventidius; though others say, Plutarch in Antonio.
he honored him according to his deserts, who though a man of an obscure
extract, now first of all others triumphed over the Parthians. Antony having
settled the affairs of Syria, departed to Athens, where he spent the winter with
Octavia. But the Appian de bello Civil. l. 4.
peace with Pompey continued but a short time. The cause of the breach
(whatever secretly was aimed at) was pretended to be, for that Antony being to
quit Peloponnesus, would do it but upon this condition, that Pompey should give
him satisfaction for such moneys as was due to him from the Inhabitants. But
Pompey liked not of any such condition, and therefore rigged a new Fleet, and
provided himself of forces, perhaps giving credit to Metrodorus, who would tell
him, that the present state of affairs was no true Peace, but rather a
cessation of arms. He then renewed his Piracy, which renewed the former
grievances, and made the People cry out, that the matter was only altered from
three Tyrants to four. But Metrodorus revolted to Caesar, bringing in with him
Corsica, Sardinia, and three Legions, and then Antony was called to Brundusium
to consult about the War. Thither he came at the day appointed, but Caesar
keeping not his word he stayed not for him, either not liking the breach of the
Peace, The Peace with Pompey broken.
or for that he envied Caesar all that power he saw him have; for still they
suspected and grudged each other. A. M. 3967. V. C. 716. Herodis 2.
But Caesar being provided, set out to Sea, as to invade Sicily, and was beaten
back by Pompey, though he took him at unawares, who heard nothing of the revolt
of Metrodorus, till also of Caesar's coming. Afterward his ships lying at
Anchor, were extremely battered, and most of the men were cast away.

21. Caesar fortified the Coasts of Italy, for fear lest Pompey should make an
invasion, which he, not knowing how to improve a Victory, Idem.
was never wont to attempt. Then wanting all manner of provisions for the
War, he sent Maecenas to Antony, who refusing not to join with him, this
cheared him, together with a Victory got by Agrippa in Aquitaine; many Cities,
and private persons also promising aid. Antony came to Tarentum with 300 ships,
but whether there was something else betwixt them, or for that he was now
furnished, he slighted his help, Caesar excused himself that he met him not,
which the other took in ill part, yet sent for him again. For having laid out
much upon the Fleet, he intended to exchange it for some Italian Legions, to be
used in the Parthian War, it being difficult for him to raise men in Italy,
which was subject to Caesar, though by their last agreement both were left free
there to make their Levies. Antony and Caesar make a new agreement and prorogue
their power.
Octavia coming over to her brother, agreed them, who then made the exchange,
and because the time of the Triumvirate set by the Senate was almost out,
prorogued their power for five years longer, without any consideration had of
the suffrages of the People. So Antony departed into Syria, Caesar deferring
his Expedition into Sicily until the following year.

22. He determined to invade Sicily from three several quarters: Lepidus, Idem.
who now joined with him, was to invade it from Africa, Taurus from Tarentum,
and he himself from Puteoli. Pompey resolved to oppose him so many several
ways, but at this time it needed not; for Caesar's Navy was the second time
wracked by a Tempest, which so puffed up Pompey, that he styled himself
Neptune's son. But Caesar gave not over the enterprise; for the same Summer
having recruited his forces, and mended his ships, he put forth to sea, and
then, though on Lepidus his part were lost two Legions, overthrew Pompey's
Fleet, but was again worsted, and yet landed 21 Legions, and 2000 Horse,
besides 5000 lightly armed. No great or memorable battle was there on Land; but
Pompey sent to his Enemy, to know if he would fight by Sea, fearing his
Landforces. He accepted of his offer, and then finally defeated him, having
sunk 28 of his Vessels. The rest were either taken or broken, Pompey overthrown
by Caesar.
seventeen only escaped, A. M. 3969. V. C. 718.
and at the sight of this overthrow his Landforces yielded to Caesar, so that
with his seventeen Vessels he fled to Antony, from whom he expected protection,
having restored formerly his mother safe to him, when in such a condition.
Messana still stood out, but the Garrison at length yielded to Lepidus, who
granted to the Soldiers, to draw them to his party, the plunder of the Town
equal with his own. Having now by the addition of those Forces 22 Legions, and
a strong body of Horse under his command, he pleased himself with thoughts of
getting all Sicily into his hands, to which he pretended a right, as first
invaded by him; and he sought to hinder Caesar all he could from the possession
of it.

23. Caesar expostulated with him for his ingratitude; but to no purpose. Then
found he means to draw away all his Army from him, Appian ut supra. Plutarch in
Antonio. Dio. l. 49.
which now was something averse to Civil Wars, and satisfied of the greater
worth of Caesar, being moreover incensed against their General, for making
Pompey's Soldiers partakers with them in the plunder of Messana. Yet though his
Soldiers would have killed him did he save them alive, but outed him of all
power, and banished him; One head of the Tricipitina broken off.
so that thus fell one head of this Tricipitina. Pompey not being persued by
Caesar, craved protection from Antony; yet sent to the Parthian, in case he
should not be received by him. Then thought he of seizing upon Syria, and the
parts adjacent, upon a rumor of Antony's being overthrown; whereupon he was
pursued by his party, and at last taken and killed at Midaius a Town of
Phrygia, as Dio writes, but as Florus and Appian at Miletus, in the fourtieth
year of his age, fourteen years after the death of his Father. Pompey killed.
Caesar at his return restrained roberies in the City, setting watches therein,
and administered things in the ancient way by annual Magistrates. He burnt all
letters written in time of War, promising he would restore the Commonwealth as
soon as Antony should return, who, he knew, would also lay down the Magistracy,
all Civil Wars being ended. He was therefore received with luckie
acclamations, and had a Perpetual Tribuneship bestowed on him, as invited by
this honor to lay down his other power. Concerning this he wrote privately to
Antony, who, whilst Caesar was thus employed about Pompey, had called Cleopatra
into Syria, and there given her Phoenicia, Caelesyria, Cyprus, a great part of
Cilicia, with part of Arabia Nabathaea, Antony doateth on Cleopatra.
and so much of Judaea as brought Balsamum. Then sending her home, he marched
into Armenia, where yet he could do nothing (for desire of her) like himself;
but ever thought of returning to her, which shortly after he did; but was much
troubled in his passage by the Parthians, to whom his Army had revolted, but
that they killed such as first passed over to them.

24. The year following, and that wherein Pompey was slain, Plutarch. Dio.
he was solicited by the King of Media in conjunction with him to make War
upon the Parthian; but was hindered by stirs which happened betwixt Cleopatra and
Octavia his wife, who now returning to him out of Italy, met with letters at
Athens to stop her there, he pretending necessary avocations by War. Caesar
then would have had her come to his house, but she would go to her husbands,
where she educated both his children and her own, as became her. Then did
Antony return into Armenia, where he caught the King by a wile, and brought him
in triumph into Egypt. Now would he be called Father Bacchus, His
extravagancies in Egypt.
as Cleopatra Isis, who now was styled by him Queen of Egypt, Cyprus, Africa,
and Caelesyria, Caesario whom she had by Julius Caesar being her partner in
these Principalities. But his own sons by her, Alexander and Ptolomy, he named
Kings of Kings; betwixt whom he did not only part what Provinces he himself
had, but also Armenia, Parthia, and Media, and to Cleopatra their daughter
assigned Cyrene. These things, together with the disgrace of his sister
provoked Caesar, who made report of them to the Senate and People. Hereby he
incensed men's minds against Antony, who shortly after went into Media, and
entered into league with the King thereof. Caesar at the same time fought
against several People of Illyrioum, and the next year both provided for the
Civil War betwixt themselves.

25. Antony in way of recrimination to Caesar, objected his putting Lepidus
besides the Triumvirate, and taking his Soldiers as those of Pompey to himself,
which ought to have been equally free for both; and he challenged his part of
the Soldiers raised in Italy. Caesar and he fall out.
For, Caesar besides what we formerly mentioned, accused him of taking Egypt
as his Province, Dio l. 50. Florus l. 4. c. 11.
killing Pompey, abusing Artavasdes the Armenian King, to the great infamy of
the Roman State; but above all upbraided him with Cleopatra, and what he had
assigned to their children, as also for that he owned Caesario as begotten by
Caesar, though to the Senate he had acknowledged him for his own son. Antony,
bewitched by Cleopatra so far as not to be able to rule himself, wrote to the
Senate to have those things confirmed, which he had settled upon her and her
children. The two Consuls Cn. Domitius and C. Sosius being much for him, were
forced to leave the City, and get over to him, who now also having raised great
forces, sent to Rome, to drive Octavia out of his house and if taking his
opportunity he had this Summer invaded Italy, he might in all probability have
put an end to the quarrel. For, Caesar was not yet provided, wanting money
exceedingly, which he now exacted throughout Italy. But this delay herein
helped him, that men's minds were more and more bent against Antony, especially
after Caesar had published his Testament, A. M. 3973. Ol. 187. an. 1. V. l.
722. Herodis 8.
wherein he disposed as formerly, to his and Cleopatra's children, and
ordained, that though he should dye at Rome, his body should be sent to her at
Alexandria: it was also reported, that he meant, if his matters prospered, to
give her Rome, and transfer the seat of the Empire into Egypt. Hereupon the
War was decreed against her, and he was divested of his Triumvirate, Vide
Dionem ubi supra.
but not declared an Enemy, for fear of those with him. For then must they
necessarily have been included in the same capacity, and so driven upon
desperate Councils: to them therefore rewards were promised, if they would
forsake him; and hereby was he thought rendered more inexcusable, in that being
unhurt he should make War for an Egyptian woman against his Country. Then did
the one draw all the East, and the other the West to his party. Caesar had
ready 250 ships of War, 80000 foot, and 12000 horse. Antony had 500 such like
ships, Their preparations for war.
very big and stately, with 100000 foot, and also 12000 horse. The King of the
Medes also sent him aid, which being not sent back, and Antony also recalling
his forces he had left with him for the protection of that Country, the
Parthian became Master of that Kingdom, and Armenia also was lost.

26. The following year Agrippa being sent before by Caesar, Idem. Plutarch in
Antonio.
took diverse ships coming to Antony with Provisions, Antony worsted.
and molested him exceedingly upon the Sea, wherewith Caesar encouraged passed
from Brundusium into Epirus, to a Promontory whereof that lies near the Bay of
Ambracia sending his forces, he took in Corcyra; so did Agrippa the Island
Leucas near to Actium, with Patrae and Corinth; Titius also and Taurus routed
Antonies horse. Then several persons of note fell off from Antony. Sosius was
beaten, and lost his life at Sea, and Antony himself was also worsted by a
guard of Caesar's. Being much troubled hereat, Canidius would have persuaded him
to send away Cleopatra, and decide the quarrel either in Thrace or Macedonia,
for that he was stronger in Land forces. But though his navy had been twice
worsted, and he had lost many ships, yet she obtained of him to fight at Sea,
providing withal all things as for a fight. For four days the Sea was so
rough with winds that it hindered them from fighting; but on the fifth they
joined, and then Caesar's ships being light could easily tack about and invade
Antonies, which were unwieldly, and of little use. Cleopatra wearied with long
expectation, ere it could certainly be known how things would go, with her
gilded deck, Purple sayls, A. M. 3974. V. C. 723. Herodis 9. Ante Christ. 29.
and sixty light Egyptian Galleys fled away, which Antony seeing, presently
followed, forsaking his men, and running away, who ought to have animadverted
upon such as did so. Overthrown at Actium in a Sea Fight.
His Soldiers fought most valiantly, notwithstanding the baseness of their
General (who getting into Cleopatra's Gally, went, and sat by himself in a
deep silence, Patercul. l. 2. c. 85.
holding his head with both his hands) till at the tenth hour they were partly
persuaded, and partly constrained to submit, it being confessed that in this
fight they behaved themselves like to, and executed the Office of, the best
General, and their General played the part of a runaway Soldier. From this
victory of Caesar at Actium a Promontory of Epirus, Several Dio. Suetonius.
Aurelius Victor.
Authors date his Monarchy, which lasted from the second of September whereon
the battle was fought, to the 19th of August, on which he died, 44 years
wanting 13 days. Now was he himself the third time, Eutropius.
and M. Valerius Messala Consuls, in the 723th year of the City, the second of
the 187 Olympiad, and the seventh of Herod King of Judaea, as Josephus
gathers, the 29th before the Era of Christ, A. M. 3974.

27. His Land forces could scarcely believe his flight, Plutarch. in Antonio.
having such an Army left to him entire, and for seven days were so constant
to him, that though the thing was clearly known, they rejected Caesar's
messages, but being now over-taken by him, and forsaken of their Leader
Canidius, Patercul. lib. 2. cap. 87. Dio lib. 51.
who had posted away after Antony, they yielded, and were taken into Caesar's
Army. Then did Caesar go to Athens, His Land forces yield to Caesar.
where he put to death Cassius Parmensis, one of those that slew his Uncle, and
settling the affairs both of Greece and Asia, determined to vvinter in Samus;
but was called into Italy by Agrippa to quiet his Soldiers who now mutinied. He
sailed then to Brundusium, but the Senate meeting him there, he went no
further, and having dispatched his business within thirty days returned into
Asia. Antony for some time lived disconsolately by himself. Cleopatra conveyed
ships over into the Red Sea, intending there to seek her fortune, she had
thought also of flying into Spain. They both sent to Caesar, she that her
Children might have Egypt granted them, and he that he might be permitted to
live privately at Athens. She sent him a Golden Crown and Scepter, with a royal
seat, privily to curry favor, and he, though openly he threatened her, secretly
promised her safety and her Kingdom, if she would kill Antony, who was also
advised by Joseph Antiq. l. 15. c. 10.
Herod of Judaea to do as much by her.

28. They sent again to him the first and second time, and he gave up to him
Turullius a Senator, and one of the murderers of Julius Caesar. He putting the
man to death returned no answer, neither the second time, when he sent Antyllus
his son to him with much Gold, which he received. Dio lib. 5. Plutarch. in
Antonio.
But with her he still dealt, sending Thyrsus his Freed-man to her to make her
believe that he was in love with her, hoping she might kill Antony, and
preserve her Treasures, which she threatened to burn if she came into any
danger. Now going down into Egypt he sent Cornelius Gallus before him, who
seized on Paraetonium the Chief City on that part near Africa; and Pelusium
the other strongest Town toward Syria did Cleopatra betray to him, secretly
forbidding the Alexandrians to go out against him. Antony once fought
prosperously against his horse, and the second time was beaten; then he sent
him a challenge, which Caesar refused, saying, that if Antony so pleased there
were 1000 ways lying open for his destruction. Wherefore bethinking himself
that he could not die with more credit than in battle, he resolved to oppose
Caesar both by Sea and Land; but Cleopatra procured, that both his Navy, and
horse revolted. Hereupon he returned into the City, crying out, that he was
betrayed by her for whose sake he had taken up Arms. She being afraid of him
departed to her Monument, and sent some to tell him she was dead, pretending
fear of Caesar. Upon which message, he resolving to follow her, wounded himself
in the belly. The wound not quickly dispatching him, she sent for him up into
her Monument, whither he was pulled up by her self, and two women, being
willing to live now that she was alive, Antony kills himself.
and hoping he might possibly recover. But he shortly after died, willing her
as well as she could to provide for her self, and not grieve for him, but
rather rejoice, in that he had been the most famous of men, as also most
powerful, and now being a Roman was not through laziness overcome by a Roman.
Such was the end of this man, who through desire of fame became the Author of
sad Tragedies to his Country, who in the use of his power greatly abused it,
and was not only overcome by a Roman, but also by a Woman, and then so behaved
himself, that he could not be excused from laziness, effeminatenesse, and
luxury, all which things checked that goodness of disposition supposed once to
be in him, and left Cleopatra little cause to rejoice for any real glory that
might accrue unto him.

20. Caesar endeavored to get Cleopatra into his hands, that he might lead her
in Triumph. He easily obtained Alexandria, Dio ut supra. Sueton. in Octavio.
Plutarch. in Antonio. Orosius lib. 6. cap. 19. Patercul. lib. 2. cap. 87.
Florus lib. 4. cap. 11. Livii Epit. lib. 133. Julian ad Themistium.
the Inhabitants whereof he pardoned, but put to death Antyllus the son of
Antony, and some others. He viewed the body of Alexander the Great, and out of
honor to his memory set on it a Golden Crown, and strewed it with flowers; but
touching it he broke off a little piece of the Nose, and refused to see the
bodies of the Ptolomies, though the Alexandrians much desired it, saying, he
had a mind to see the King, and not dead men. Cleopatra dealt with her
Physician to dispatch her, but being terrified by Caesar upon the account of
her Children, she gave it over, and did all she could, but in vain, to work
upon his affections when he came to see her. So does Cleopatra her self, and
Egypt is made a Province.
Then did she give him an Inventory of her goods, and he promised her fair
things, thinking thereby that he deceived her, though he himself was deceived.
For she understanding that she was reserved for a Triumph, prevented it by a
voluntary death, as is in the History of her Kingdom related. Caesar made Egypt
a Tributary Province, and would have conferred the Government thereof upon
Arius the Philosopher, who formerly had taught him, but he refusing the
employment, he gave it to Cornelius Gallus, a man of obscure birth. Caesario
the son of Cleopatra by Julius Caesar, had by his mother been sent toward
India with a great sum of money, but at Rhodes his Governor persuaded him to
return, as now being to expect the Kingdom. Caesar consulting what to do with
him, Ariaeus, alluding to (...).
that prudent sentence of Homer, said, (...). To have many Caesar's is not good;
and so he was sent after his mother. A. M. 3975. Ol. 187. ann. 3. V.C. 724.
Herodis 10. Ante Christum 28.
Whilst these things were doing at Alexandria, was M. Tullius Cicero, son of
the Orator, Consul at Rome (taken in by Caesar to blot out the ignominy of
betraying his father) in the room of Licinius Crassus, where he published
Caesar his Collegue's Letters concerning the overthrow of Antony, and put them
up over the pleading place, where his father's head had formerly been set. But
this overthrow and death of Cleopatra happened in the 14th year after the death
of Julius Caesar, the third of the 187 Olympiad, the 724 of the City, 28
before the birth of Christ, A. M. 3975. 294 after the death of Alexander the
Great, under whom as the Macedonian Empire began, so now in Cleopatra (and not
till now) it was quite extinct; and here the Contemporaries with it receive
their period.

AN INSTITUTION OF General History. The First Part. BOOK IV. The Roman Empire.
CHAP. I. From the absoluteness of Octavius, to the death of Tiberius,
containing the space of 66 years.
1. THE Roman Empire had now swallowed up the Macedonian, The Grandeur of the
Roman Empire.
with such Kingdoms and States as were at all considerable, and Contemporary
with it (whereof though some might retain a show of liberty, yet were they but
in a condition of vassalage) except the Parthian Kingdom, which as yet
acknowledged no subjection, and when it did, being forced thereto for the most
part by intestine divisions, not long continued in that acknowledgement.

2. This Empire now labored under it is own weight, and, like to some unwieldy
thing, staggered, by reason of the turgency of it is inward burden, without any
extraneous violence: it was grown up to an athletick habit, and had already
sufficiently manifested the danger of this constitution. For, being all head
and no body, it wanted those limbs, which by direction from a superior sense,
could secure it is progress; or indeed being all body, and no head, It
labors under it is own own weight.
it was void of that influence which effects an orderly motion, and is
necessary for the subsistence of life it self. The proper fruits of Popular
Government were now grown fully ripe. Every one would command, and none would
be ruled, yet every man challenging a part in the Supreme power, none enjoyed
it much, and therefore but few were really sollicitous for the upholding of it
as Popular, any further than some private interests led them. The heady
multitude indeed was violently carried on in it is desires after the chief
command; but some desired it rather that others might not enjoy it, holding
this Principle, to oppose all rising, though excellent persons whatsoever.
Others tickled with an humor of ruling, and in intellectuals above their
fellows, set themselves to please the rabble by maligning other men, crying up
liberty and equality, extolling the justice of the Agrarian, and vaunting of
great matters intended to be done by themselves, when in a capacity. Sometimes
their boldness and cunning procured their rise, most commonly some
capitulations, and otherwhiles money distributed to the rabble, when the step
was great. For after that the Romans passed the Seas, more luxury, avarice, and
corruption, than of Victory was brought home. When they came abroad,
notwithstanding the repute of their abstinence, they found the same temptations
as other men, and made themselves Masters of the manners, as well as the
possessions of the conquered. All things were now bought and sold, from the
meanest Office to the Consulship, and the lowest privilege to the right of
Suffrages.

3. The daily sight of these things corrupted such, as else might have proved
just. It seemed a prudent Principle, rather to command than to be commanded;
rather to buy than to be sold, and to get something, rather than suffer all
things to be lost. The body of the People was now grown large, the Italians
being received to the freedom of the City, and liberty of Suffrages. Hence
ambitious men had advantage enough to make parties, and to carry things in the
Comitia or Assemblies, having once by indirect practices ingratiated
themselves. Having obtained commands afar off, they had opportunity to increase
their power, through the distance of place, the credit of their conquests, and
the affections of their Armies. Power once obtained, is difficultly laid down,
both by reason that man's nature is averse to diminution, and for that
something may be committed in height of passion, or through convenience, or
otherwise, whereof it might not be safe to give an account, as neither to lie
open and naked to the malice of revengeful Enemies. The Empire being now vast,
And under such distempers
several men at the same time might be found in these capacities, so that
jealousies and emulations must thence be heightened, and one strive to reduce
the other into order. Further, the largnesse of Empire afforded multiplicity of
places, always of several, and sometimes of contrary interests or humors,
which would espouse quarrels accordingly, whence never would be wanting
sufficient and convenient matter for public combustions.

4. Such was the present State of Roman affairs, and such had been their
constitution before the present juncture, which loudly, in the understanding of
all prudent men, As Monarchy could only cure.
called for the help of some single Person duly qualified, whose Monarchy could
only put an end to the civil dissentions, by removing the loose liberty of the
multitude, which gave occasion to those distempers, by preventing ambitious
endeavors of private persons after Sovereignty, which fomented them, and by
checking all exorbitant power of particular men, which effectually procured
them. Caesar on the one side considering these things, as also being sensible
of the power he already enjoyed, and of the danger he might incur by removing
himself to a private life; and on the other, weighing the envy and odium he
should contract by the establishment of himself, after he had conquered Antony
and Cleopatra, and (having entered his fourth Consulship in the Isle Samus)
returned to Rome, he asked the advice of his two most inward Counselors and
bosom friends, Aggrippa and Maecenas. Vipsanius Agrippa, a man of mean
Parentage (which Vipsanius manifesting, he changed into Marcus) and no great
endowments, except in what concerned War, though of a well-meaning mind, and a
great lover of Caesar, answered him first, Vid Dionis. l. 52. ad initium p.
463, etc.
and earnestly advised him to lay down his power, and remit the Government into
the hands of the Multitude. His arguments for the most part respected the
danger of Caesar's person, being drawn from the averseness of the Romans to
Monarchy, Agrippa his advice to Caesar for Democracy.
and enforced by examples of others, who had attempted to establish themselves,
Against Monarchy it self he could produce little of moment. He would prove that
Popular Government was better for the Greeks, who, he said, did nothing that
was notable, till they put themselves into that way. He said, there were others
also, the condition of whom pleaded for this Government, yet named none. But he
especially instanced in the Romans themselves, who being averse to Monarchy,
had done all these great things under that form of rule and domination which
was opposite to it.

5. But Maecenas, a man, though but of Equestrian rank, yet, of Maecenas atavis
edite regibus. Horat. i. e. Cui Menodorus pater Menippus avus, Rex Etruscorum
fuit atavus.
high descent, Maecenas his plea for Monarchy.
and Ingeniosus vir ille (Maecenas) fuit. Magnum exemplum Romanae eloquentiae
daturus, nisi illum enervasset faelicitas imo castrasset. Seneca Epistol. 19.
extraordinary abilities, desired Caesar, that

if he loved his Country, he would alter, correct and reduce it into a better
form of Government. He said, he would not have him deceived with a specious
show of names and words; but considering what should follow, to restrain the
f^ry of the multitude, and take to himself, all sted by excellent persons, the
Government; that the most prudent might consult, the best Captains have the
command of Armies, and the most robust and poor serve in them. Hereby every one
minding his own business, and one affoarding help to another, none would find
any defect, and the true power of the People with liberty and safety would be
preserved. For, the power of the multitude, he said, being indeed the slavery
of every worthy man, was most grievous, and brought common destruction unto
all: but this, wherein modesty should ever be preferred, and men's deserts
considered, would make all alike to be happy. He would have him therefore
assisted and advised by worthy persons, to order all things needful, to make
War, create Magistrates, reward, punish, and make Laws; all others being
obedient; so that Wars might be made with secrecy, and upon occasion, such as
were preferred might be chosen, not by lot, or through the prevalence of their
ambition, but for their worth. Thus good men might be honored, and bad
punished without disturbance; and so at length things would be rightly carried,
when nothing should be referred to the Vulgar, nor openly be consulted of, nor
be committed to intruders, nor come into danger through their ambition. In sum,
all would enjoy their own, no dangerous Wars nor wicked Seditions being made.

6. But these evils he proved to be common in a Popular Government, wherein the
great ones aspiring to the top, and with money or otherwise purchasing the help
of the ordinary sort, disturbed all things. He said, they had now had large
experience of these things, and that by no other means could they be ended,
than by that whereof he spoke; whereof this was an evident sign, that for a
long time they had been vexed with Wars and Seditions, The infusterable
inconveniences of Popular Government.
by reason of the multitude of men, and greatness of affairs; for that men
were so various in Nature and Nations, and induced with such diversity of
affections and desires: and because things hereby were brought to that pass,
that with difficulty could they be managed. Now that he spoke true, he said,
the deeds themselves bore mention; for, as long as the multitude of the Roman
People was not great, nor much more considerable than their neighbors, the
State was in a good condtion, and almost all Italy was subdued by them. But
after that passing out of Italy, they went abroad into all Countries and
Islands, and filled all Seas and Lands with their name and power, no good got
they by it: but first of all, at home and within the walls, riots being made,
they shook the Commonwealth, and afterward propagated the same mischief into
their Enemies. Therefore their City, like to some great ship of burden, filled
with a various multitude, and destitute of a Pilot, having been for many ages
beaten and tossed with grievous waves, now floted, and having no stay, was
tossed here and there. He desired him therefore, that he would not still
neglect her thus conflicting with Tempests (for he saw how much water she had
already taken in) nor suffer the stay to be quite broken off (for she was now
battered, and could not long subsist) but seeing that the gods had presented
him as an Overseer and Governor to his Country, not to cast her off; but as
by his means she had a little recovered her spirits, so, for the ages to come,
she might remain in safety by the same means. Having used these arguments drawn
from the Thing, he took others from the Man, and showed him his imminent
danger, in case he laid down his power, in the several cases of Pompey, Marius
and Sylla. Pompey, he said, having divested himself of his power, was
contemned, and being laid at by his Enemies perished, because he could not
recover it. He told him, that his father (meaning Julius Caesar) going about
the same miscarried. The same had happened to Marius and Sylla, but that they
were prevented by death; though some said also that Sylla killed himself to
prevent his Enemies: it is certain, that many of his Laws began to be repealed
whilst he yet lived. In conclusion, he told him, he must expects many such as
Lepidus, Sertorius, Brutus, and Cassius. This is the sum of Maecenas his speech
in behalf of Monarchy, whereof the beginning is lost, as also the conclusion of
that of Agrippa.

7. These things sufficiently evidence, that it was impossible in an humane way
for the Empire to subsist in a Commonwealth so called; and not only that,
Democratical Government impracticable in one or more Nations, considerable for
wealth, and of various interests.
but any one considerable Nation, or more (not to speak of one, or a few
Cities, or places at present) which must necessarily consist of multitudes of
people, diversely qualified, variously inclined, and very unequally possessed of
wealth and honors. Such having the Supreme power in their own hands must needs
foment several humors. The rich, and honorable, must either not meddle, and so
out of discontent watch for an advantage to alter things, or if they do, they
will not be content with equal employments. When any extraordinary power is
obtained, such inforcements as were formerly mentioned will happen, which being
driven on by that ambition which is but natural to all mankind, will drive
either fear, or desire, into Monarchy. A civil war especially produces this,
and more especially when the quarrel is betwixt single persons; and yet more
especially is it enforced by a religious pretense, under which Vizard the
greatest deceit has triumphed, accompanied, or ushered in by a sacrilegious
asserting of approving providence, whereby inviolable Majesty, O^der,
Propriety, and all things excellent have been contaminated, overturned, and
trampled on, and yet a structure erected at length out of the materials of
those very things, which formerly were only by the intruders accounted bad,
because they stood upon another ground. But not only in a Democratical way is
it impossible for one, or more considerable Nations to be governed, but in an
Aristocratical also. For if the wealth and propriety of a Nation be diffused,
and not limited in the possessions of a few of the chiefest persons, such would
find a continual repugnancy in their subjects, others thinking themselves as
capable of power as they. Hence quarrels and implacable enmities must arise,
and he who shall be best able will at length command the rest, though he ought
to have been their fellow subject, and demonstrate a necessity of Monarchical
Government.

8. The affairs of the Graecians urged by Agrippa to make against Monarchy do
much plead for it, and evince the necessity of it. For after that the multitude
in the several Cities had rebelliously withdrawn themselves from that
obedience, An answer to Agrippa's argument drawn from the Greeks.
which both the Law of God, and just title of succession challenged as due to
their Kings (who as Thucydides acknowledges governed them with Justice and
Moderation) how miserably were they inslaved by their fellow Citizens (called
by them Tyranni or Tyrants) and forced to submit to Usurpers, who punished them
for their disobedience toward their rightful Sovereigns. Never were there
such Tumults, Seditions, Civil Wars, Massacres, and Desolations, as in, and
amongst those Cities which called themselves Commonwealths. Such were the
extravagancies of the multitude, that the best men were rejected, and bold,
impudent, and saucy fellows domineered, who being corrupted with money, bought,
and sold all that was of consequence, and by their cunning speeches turned, and
led the rabble which way soever they pleased. As for what Agrippa urged, that
they only did things of moment after that the power came into the peoples
hands; those things of moment were amongst themselves, and such as made them
miserable, they tearing one another in pieces in the Peloponnesian, and other
Wars, breathing nothing but rage, malice, and revenge against one another.
Nothing of consequence did, or could they do against the Barbarians, as they
accounted all besides themselves, till reduced under the Monarchy of Alexander
they became instruments in his hands. Common danger engaged them against
Xerxes, whose multitudes destroyed themselves; but had it not been for the mere
wisdom of Themistocles, want of Order, of Government, and discretion, had
ruined them all in departing into Peloponnesus, and foolishly applying
themselves to the fortifying of the Isthmus. Though they several times assisted
the Ionians in their rebellion, yet still at length were their endeavors
defeated. Cimon indeed got several victories, and did notable exploits in a
piratical way, but what effects produced they? The most that was effected at
land was by Agesilaus, but he having not done much was recalled, for that many
Cities having been allured with Persian Gold (which never failed to corrupt the
Councils, overthrow the projects, and disturb the affairs of these petty
States, by taking off the great Leaders of the rabble) had conspired against
Sparta. But what great matters they could do against Monarchy appeared; in that
first, Philip, then Alexander his son, and their Successors, easily subdued,
and kept them under. As for their Colonies, each one usually followed the
fortune of its Metropolis; little but tumults, banishments, and Massacres do we
hear of, or of private men's getting the power over them, for that wanting
rightful, and successive Princes, they lay open to the cheats of their fellow
Citizens. The particular cases of Corcyra, Samus, Syracuse, and others
demonstrate this, and therewith the danger, and infirmity of Antimonarchical
Government.

9. But in particular, such were the several constitutions of these Cities,
that Aristotle himself liked none of them, as appears in his books of
Politics. The constitutions of their several States were dangerous.
The Cretian Commonwealth had its extravagancies, and if a Government may be
judged from the carriage, and disposition of the people, in the opinion of
Epimenides one of their own Poets, it was most naught. Lycurgus by taking away
the just, and Hereditary power of the Kings of Sparta, and contrary both to
nature and loyalty dissolving the Government of his Forefathers made but way
for many inconveniences in the too great power of the Senate, and otherwise;
but especially for the tyranny of the Ephori, five fellows chosen yearly out of
the rabble, who domineered with unparalleld insolence over all. Solon's
constitution, after so many changes and alterations wherein no rest could be
procured from the time they forsook Kingly Government, gave no such setlement,
but that Pisistratus presently after cheating the rabble over and over, very
easily made himself Master of Athens. Their Ostracism frighted all able persons
from meddling with the Commonwealth, as also did the Petalism of Syracuse;
whereupon their affairs went down the wind, till they were forced to recall the
banished, and change still from one constitution to another, never being at
quiet, for that the multitude tyrannized in their assemblies. As for the
learning of the Greeks whereof they so much boasted, they had it either from
the Egyptians or Caldaeans who were subject to, and from the beginning
flourished under, Monarchy: and Pisistratus who was a Monarch (though of his
own making) made the first Collection of books, and thereby brought learning
into Athens and Greece. Finally, the Greeks in their Wars were forced to make
use of single persons; and at home in their greatest necessities did they fly
to them, as Dionysius of Halicarnassus mentions the Harmostes of Lacedaemon,
the Archus of the Thessalians, and the Aes^mnetes of the Mitylenaeans, whom he
compares with the Dictator of the Romans.

10. For the Romans, it is a mere mistake of Agrippa. Their affairs never more
prospered than under Monarchy, if we consider the small beginnings of the City.
An answer to Agrippa's Argument taken from the Romans.
Romulus did exceeding much for his time, and so did his successors in their
several ways, with so small a power as such a Colony could produce, insomuch
as revengeful and furious Brutus acknowledged, that no better way of Government
could be found out than what they had chalked out to them. The faults in it
seem to have been his something too much indulging at his first constitutions a
popular humor which might bring him to his end afterward. Then Servius to
curry favor with the rabble, that they might maintain him in his illegally
procured power, diminished the Regal authority, and that of the Senate, which
gave the multitude such a scope, as after could they not be reduced into any
order. After him Tarquinius the heir of Priscus might go about to recover this
power (for, a little charity may be allowed us, for one who lived in so dark
and remote times, and whose actions were only recorded by his Enemies, seeing
we have formerly related his story as we find it) and thereby might incur that
prejudice which, together with the fault of his son, and the implacable malice
of Brutus, procured his banishment. This may be added as an ill accident, that
Romulus dying childlesse, the Kingdom came to be elective, which thing must at
length bring great inconveniences; so that experience now has taught such
Kingdoms to continue the Government to particular Families. But Brutus his
giving to his Consuls full regal power (though they were two, and Annual) and
putting the sword fully into their hands, together with his acknowledgement of
the good government of all the former Kings, do more than make us suspect his
spleen to have acted him most in the change of the power, especially the
consequences considered. For, the power of the Consuls being shortly after
diminished, or rather enervated by Valerius (who by flattering of the multitude
got the name of Poplicola) the common sort got head, and confounded all things,
nothing but changes, and re-changes hapening, till at length they quite outed
the Patricians of their power, giving them leisure to repent their joining with
Brutus, and brought things to that ruin and disorder formerly mentioned, as
compelled them to turn about, and by their Lex Regia (hereafter to be spoken
of) to devolve all their power upon a single Person.

11. Such and so many were these seditions and tumults, that thrice the common
sort departed from the Patricians out of the City. And no sooner was the War
against their King ended, but the stirs begun; and these very stirs have we
proved from Dionysius, The disorders and tumults arising from their
Antimonarchical Government.
to have procured immediately the setting up of another King in effect, for
half a year's continuance, viz. the Dictator, to which Officer they were forced
to fly in all difficulties. Now it sufficiently appeared, that the want of a
King hindered the promotion of their affairs, for, ever when any work was to be
done abroad, nay when the Enemy was even at the gates, would the multitude
mutiny, and with so much ado at length could be drawn out, that business was
retarded, and thereby their affairs not a little impaired, the Monarch being
wanting, who should have kept both orders in subjection and awe. The weight of
Usury and oppression was the first pretended cause of these stirs; but from it
the multitude passed on from one thing to another, never resting till it had
got all Offices of dignity, power, and profit, into it is own hands, as has
been at large made out. To effect this, they would one while have Consuls, and
another while Tribunes Military, having formerly made Decemviri for the making
of new Laws; so that within the space of 134 years, they had 37 changes in the
Government, 37 Changes of Government in 134 years.
whereof (to make it clear) fifteen were from Consuls to Tribunes Military, and
from Tribunes to Consuls, the two grand ones from Kings to Consuls, and from
Consuls to Decemviri, and twenty Dictatorships, besides Interregnums many an
one, whereby for five days the chief power was in the hands of their
Interreges. Thus was the Government tossed to and fro by the multitude, and
little was done abroad, by reason of these confusions, nay the City was taken
by the Galls, and razed, all but the Capitol, through the cowardice of their
Tribunes, who also being in number three or more, by their several opinions
confounded their Armies, and showed the truth of that speech of Agamemnon in
Homer. And this is worthy observation, (...), etc.
that when the contention arose about the Consulship, which the Commons would
have equally with the Patritians, so incredible were those confusions, that for
five years the Tribuni Plebis (those great incendiaries) suffered no supreme
Magistrates at all to be created.

12. All the great conquests afterward were made by single persons, who abroad
had alone the command of Armies. And so far was this present kind of Government
from being instrumental to them, that it manifestly hindered and obstructed all
good procedings. For, when a Consul's year was out, then must he be recalled,
Great conquests were made by single persons.
and a successor sent him, though he was in never so fair a way for the
conquering of any Nation, which at length began to be understood, and then was
their command continued to them, under the name of Proconsuls, after which time
it was, that the great matters were performed; before this the Generals being
glad to shuffle up a Peace, lest they should be defrauded of the credit of
ending the Wars by their successors. The main cause of the growth of their
Empire (under the all-disposing Providence of God) was the valor and virtue of
their Captains and Senators, at that time when Pyrrhus set upon them; the
courage also of the Soldiers was extraordinary, so that (as Pyrrhus spoke of
himself) a King, whose command and conduct would have been constant and
uncontroled, might have done greater wonders with such men. But as for the
Government, so far was it from contributing to justice or virtue, that, even in
these times, which their Writers so celebrate for these things, the multitude
having by the Hortensian Law wrested this power from the Senate, to oblige all
whatsoever by their Plebiscita, decreed aid to be sent to the Mamertines,
though against all equity and conscience, the Senate having utterly refused to
assist those thieves, murderers, intruders. But the multitude was told of great
profit which would accrue to all men in particular, and therefore profit must
bear down right, and forces must be sent into Sicily to get footing there, to
enrich these virtuous and temperate men: and hence is to be fetched the rise of
the Carthaginian Wars (which with what injustice they were managed on the Roman
part, has been seen) and indeed this was the original of all their conquests.
The main things performed were done by such, as rather awed the people, than
were awed by it, though to obtain their commands, they corrupted the multitude
with money. Marius, Sylla, Pompey, and Caesar, after they had successively
engrossed the power, made the greatest conquests. After the overthrow of
Carthage especially, scarcely any great command was obtained, but by some great
promises underhand, some new attempts of innovation, or money distributed to
the Tribes. So weak, imperfect, and vicious was the Government.

Hence appears the excellency and necessity of Monarchy.
13. These things evidence the excellency of Monarchical Government above the
rest; a neceessity of it in any considerable Nation or Nations, and in Cities
which extend the freedom of Suffrages to their Subjects or Associates, and are
considerable, for number, power, and interest. Single Cities have for some time
subsisted otherwise; but if we view those that have been mentioned in this
Work, some of them we shall find to have been kept in that way by such strange
discipline, and principles of equality and levelling, as are even repugnant to
Nature, and destroy that lawful use of such things as were ordained for man's
comfort and delight. Such was the constitution of that of Sparta, which yet
secured it not from the tyranny of the Ephori, and when but the use of Gold,
Silver, and other things, very lawful in themselves, came up, the
Lacedaemonians were sensible of their slavery to such harsh constitutions, and
the Government tottered. Again, in others that were left more to their liberty,
we see how impossible it was for the People to use it, but for their own
destruction; so that for any one place to subsist without such miseries and
disasters, is near to a miracle. Monarchy, though it may have it is defects (as
all things managed by mere men) yet in it self includes more order, certainty,
and security, it is force being commonly turned outward. It Is that which is most
agreeable with primitive prudence, when men were not arrived at that ambition
and wickedness, The antiquity,
which later times have produced. All Nations at first had their Kings from the
very first foundation, as is clear in the case of the Greeks, and others; so
that they voluntarily submitted to them, at the first leading out of Colonies
from the East, being their Captains; and thence we may see that the Government
is natural, flowing from paternal rule, and proceeding from that superiority
which Masters of Families, and Heads of Kindreds might well challenge over
others. It Is most suitable to the Government of the Universe, And authority of
it.
which is in God alone, who therefore acknowledges Kings for his Vicegerents,
and calls them gods, promising they should be nursing Fathers to his Church,
and taking no notice herein of other Governments. Hence our Kings owe account
to him alone, are Sacrosanct (which term the Romans gave to their very Tribunes
who were inviolable, it being death to injure them in the least, and therefore
we may well apply it to Kings) and that perpetually; and are entrusted by him
with a Prerogative, which is necessary for the good of their Subjects. For all
power flowing from them, it is contradictory for authority to challenge it self,
as unnatural and violent, for a derived stream, to oppose the current of the
Fountain.

14. But (to return from this requisite digression, whereby an answer is given
to Agrippa's arguments, and Students are directed to make the right and natural
use of History) after that Maecenas had pressed Caesar with these urgent
reasons, Maecenas his advice to Caesar for the ordering of his affairs.
to take the Government upon him, he gave him directions for the management of
his affairs.

First he advised him to regulate the Senate, Consule Dionem l. 12. p. 476. D.
placing and displacing according to the worth of persons; and to have a
special regard to Nobility and Gentry, to gratify them with employments. To
admit none into the Equestrian rank before eighteen years of age, and none into
the Senate till 25, before which time the Romans were never accounted of full
age. When these had born the Offices of Quaestor, Aedilis, and Tribunus plebis,
then being thirty years old, he would have them made Praetors, all which at
first were to be Romans alone, lest he should seem suddenly to change the
customs of his Country. All these Magistrates he would have of Caesar's making,
and not this power to be left in any case to the Senate, or People. He
counseled him by all means to diminish their ancient power, which else might
procure trouble and alteration; but leave them their whole honor and dignity.
The way to this was to make them execute their Offices in the City, Magistrates
of Senatorian dignity.
and not suffer them then, nor presesently after, to have any Military command,
but for some time to live privately. He would have these Magistrates, to
celebrate games, and exercise judicial power in all cases, except that of
murder; for some Judges were to be chosen from amongst the rest of the
Senators, but the chief power to remain in these. Then he said, a certain
Governor or Mayor of the City was to be made out of the most principal men,
who had born these Offices, to join with the rest in governing the City, to
receive appeals, and judge capital causes, except some afterward to be spoken
of, both in the City, and 81 miles round about. Another of the same rank was to
be chosen, who should make inspection into the stock, estates and manners of
Senators, and Knights or Equites, both those of under age and others, and as
well of women as the other Sex, to correct such things, as being not worthy of
punishment, yet being neglected might occasion great inconveniences; and refer
the greater matters to Caesar himself, who was to bear the name of Censor, and
the other being a Patrician, and the next in dignity to the Mayor, but that of
Subcensor. These two Officers might be, for life, except they committed some
fault, or by old age or sickness were rendered unserviceable; for no damage
could thence arise, the one having no Soldiers, and the other but a few, and
who should execute his Office before Caesar's eyes, for the most part. The
other Magistrates, would fear to do any unjust thing, being presently to be
reduced into a private condition, and others to succeed them in their power. He
added, that the Provinces were only to be committed to men of Praetorian rank;
the rest being Propraetors in order once and again, should arrive at the
Consulship, (if they well exercised their former Offices) and then be preferred
to greater commands.

15. He further advised him to divide Italy, for 94 miles round about the City,
and all the rest of conquered Countries after such a manner, according to
People, Nations, and Cities, as if they were to be governed by single men with
absolute power. In each of these Soldiers were to be placed, over whom was to
be set one person of Consular dignity, and two more of Praetorian rank, from
those there lying appeal to the other, in all cases, except when Officers of
the Army were to be animadverted on, who were to be punished by none but Caesar
himself, lest they should thereby be brought by fearing some one more, to
attempt something against the Prince. All those who had any command out of the
City, were to have their salaries set as was suitable to the employment, for
that they could not live of their own, and it was not convenient they should
spend what they list, as they did at present. They were not to hold their
employments under the term of three years, nor longer than five, for in so
short a space they could but learn the interests of places, and how to behave
themselves, and longer commands made men but proud, and provoked them to
attempt new matters. And one great command he said, was not to be given them
presenly after another, for this would amount to as much, as if they had one
continued to them; but after they had been reduced to a private condition, and
therein lived at home. Thus much for Senators.

16. From amongst the Equites, he would have him choose out two of the most
excellent, Of Equestrian rank.
and make them Captains of his Guard. For to commit that trust to one would not
be safe, and to more than two, would not want trouble. Being two in number, if
one should be treacherous, the other would preserve him. They were to be such
as had been trained up in the Wars, and much exercised in Offices, and to have
the command not only of his Guard, but of all Soldiers in Italy, so as to
punish and reward them, except Centurions, and such as belonged to Senatorian
Magistrates. These Captains of the Guard ought to have their Deputies, and hold
their places for their lives, as also the Mayor of the City, and the Subcensor.
Besides, out of the next rank of Equites, one should be chosen for Captain of
the Watch, and another ^o take care for provision of Corn, but these for a
limited time. The care of the Treasury, Exchecker, and other matters, as well
at Rome as throughout Italy, was to be committed to those of Equestrian rank,
who were to have salaries suitable to their condition, being poorer than
Senators. He told him the reason why he would have these Offices committed to
them, was, for that it was inconvenient to have both the sword and money in the
same hands, and better that public business should be managed by many, both
that more might reap benefit from it, and learn experience; and hereby his
Subjects would love him more, and he would have a sufficient number fit for
employment. One Eques would be sufficient at Rome for gathering money, and one
in each Province, who might have assistants out of the Equites, and Caesar's
Liberti or Freed-men. For he told him it was convenient to join those with
them, that his servants might get something, and he receive certain
intelligence how matters should go. Now if any Eques (or Knight, if we may so
call him) should grow so famous by business, as to be thought worthy to be
received into the Senatorian rank, his age ought not to be any obstacle: and
sometimes some Officers of the Army were to be received into the Senate,
provided they had never been ordinary Soldiers, but from the beginning
Centurions at the least.

17. He further advised him to educate all of Senatorian and Equestrian rank,
Education of the children of Senators and Equites.
whilst they were boys, at School in humanity, and when grown up, in fencing
and riding, by Masters hired publicly in both places. Forasmuch as it is the
part of an excellent Prince, not only that he do well himself, but to take
care that all else do so. This would be effected, not by permitting them to do
ill, and then correcting them, but teaching them beforehand such things. And he
added, that he needed not to fear, that such as were so excellently educated,
would attempt innovation; forasmuch as such as were not cultivated by any
discipline, but dissolute in breeding and carriage, were hereof to be
suspected, who easily would commit the most wicked and abominable things, both
against themselves and others.

18. Forasmuch as by reason of the largeness of the Empire, and nearness of
Enemies, The Militia and money.
it was necessary to have a standing Army, he would have levies made out of the
porest and lustiest young men, who being continually exercised and trained up
in Military discipline, all others were to be forbidden the use of Arms. Then
for money, which he showed to be necessary for carrying on of affairs, in all
Governments, as well as under Monarchy, he advised him to make money of all
public things gotten in War, and let it out upon moderate interest: to look
well to the Mines, and impose Tribute upon all Subjects, it being reasonable
that all should contribute to the expense of that, which tended to the
protection and good of all. But there was no danger he said, but men would be
willing to pay, seeing most of them should receive it back with advantage;
either, by bearing Offices of Magistracy or Government, or serving in the War,
especially when they understood that Caesar himself lived soberly and frugally,
not improving the public expense to any private excess.

Rome to be adorned.
19. For the rest, he would have him adorn Rome with all magnificence, and set
it out with all sorts of solemnities, to make it in great reverence and esteem
abroad. No Nation was to have any power in it is own hands, nor meet in any
public Assemblies of debate, for that would procure disturbance, for which
reason neither was the Roman People, The Provinces curbed.
he said, to be permitted either to come together for passing of Judgment, to
the Comitia, or any other Council, for the enacting of any thing. No City or
People was to be suffered to use any excess in buildings or in games: none to
use any peculiar coin, weight, or measure. None were to send any peculiar
message to him, except the matter required his inspection, but have recourse to
the Governor of the place, who was therewith to acquaint Caesar. Ambassadors
either from Enemies or confederate Kings or States, were to have audience from
the Senate, that the power seeming to be in the Senate, they might see how many
Enemies they should have if the case so required, and matters being dispatched
by consent of the Fathers, the Majesty of the Empire would be the more
established. All of Senatorian rank he would have impeached before, and judged
by the Senate, that Caesar might escape the envy of condemnation, and others by
so formal proceedings, might be kept in awe. How scandalous words to be thought
of.
As for any scandalous words against himself, he told him he should neither
hear any accusation, nor punish them. For it was not good, he said, that he
should believe, that any one would injure him, who hurt no body, but did good
to all; for, says he, bad Princes only do this, whom their guilty consciences
make credulous. Neither is it fitting to take those things ill, which if true
ought not to have been done, and if false should be neglected and dissembled:
for that many by punishing them, minister greater occasion of worse discourse.
His sense therefore of scandalous words was this: that he ought to be higher
than all injury, and neither himself to fancy, nor make other believe, that any
one durst be so saucy, How Traitors to be punished.
but that the same opinion of veneration was had of him, as of the eternal
gods. If any plotted his destruction, he would neither have him himself to
judge, nor sentence him, but refer him to the Senate, and if he were convicted,
to punish him as lightly as might be, that his crime might gain belief. But he
here excepted such, as having command of Armies, made open insurrections, who
were not to be formally arraigned, but punished as Enemies.

The Senate to be made use of.
20. These things, and most of the rest which concerned the Commonwealth, he
would have him propound to the Senate, wherein all the members should have
equal power of voting, except any of them were accused. If the party indeed
were not as yet a Senator, or but of the rank of a Quaestor, all might have
voices; but it was against reason that he, who never had been a Tribune of the
People, or Aedilis, should pass sentence upon him that had born these Offices,
or that those should do it upon one of Praetorian rank, or such an one upon a
Consular person: but it was fitting enough that those of Consular Dignity might
judge all the several sorts, and the rest their equals or inferiors. Caesar
himself was to be Judge in all Appeals made from the greater sorts of
Magistrates, his Procurators, the Governor of the City, Subcensor, Chief
Justices, Overseers of Provisions or Proveditors, and Masters of the watches:
for none ought to have so absolute a power, but that appeal ought to lie from
him. Of these he ought to take Cognizance, as also of the causes of Equites,
Centurions, or prime Officers, when the controversy is about life or
reputation. (...) what Cases ^eals ought (...) to Cae^
For these Cases ought to be referred to him alone, and for the fore mentioned
causes none other ought to Judge them. Yet to the hearing of them he might
nominate some of the principal men of Senatorian or Equestrian rank, or of
Consular, or Praetorian Dignity, that he and they having had hereby experience
one of another, he might employ them in other matters abroad. In the Cases of
greatest consequence he would not have him ask their opinions openly, lest
favoring their friends they might not speak freely their minds; but their
opinions were to be written down, and then presently blotted out, which secrecy
would procure them to use all freedom. He advised him in his affairs of Causes,
Letters, business of Cities, and Petitions of private men, and in other things
of Government, to use the assistance of the Equites. To refuse to hear no man's
advice, and to look at the Will, and not at the success, both of Counselors
and Soldiers; as, neither, to envy the glory of military men. For, many fearing
the envy of Princes and States, have rather chosen to lose than gain in the
Wars, to provide for their own safety. Military men not to be envied.
Wherefore he would not have him (whom especially the event, either as to
profit or disprofit would concern) in word others, and indeed, to envy himself.

21. He desired him speak and do such things, as he would have his Officers to
think and practice, for this would more easily teach them their duty, men being
led more by example than precept, and the actions of Princes being especially
pried into, and more imitated than their threatenings feared. The lives of
others he should look into, Rules for Caesar's General carriage.
but not greatly enquire: what Crimes by others were detected he ought to
punish, but dissemble such as had no accuser, and know how to correct mildly,
which in some cases does more good than rigorous proceedings. Then as for
rewards, he told him, Deserving persons rather to be rewarded above then below
their merits.
he was to requite deserving persons rather above than below their merits; for
this was the way to win upon them, and to make them virtuous. He then advised
him not to admit of any extraordinary honors from Senate or others, for this
would be needless, chargeable, and dangerous. He bade him by virtue seek for
immortality, not by Temples built unto his name. The gods he told him he was
ever, and all over to worship, according to the custom of his Country, and
compel others so to do: and to punish Authors of strange religions, not only
for reverence to his gods, but also because such things draw men to the use of
foreign customs, whence conspiracies, and bandyings arise, which are no whit
agreeable with the Government of a single person. Neither was he to suffer any
Magicians, and to have a care of Philosophers also, who by their foretellings
often raised Seditions. He was to be studious of peace, content with present
enjoyments, and yet to be ready for War upon all occasions. Though he must use
Intelligencers and Spies; yet he ought not to be too credulous, and not indulge
his servants, or Dependents too much, for all their failings would be imputed
to him. He was to right inferior and private men, encourage arts, and
profitable occupations, as to punish idle, and vicious persons; not to suffer
contentious, or animosities to grow, nor peculiar names to be assumed, nor any
other thing whence discord might arise. He was to keep an equality in his
granting requests as much as could be; and therefore not to suffer any to ask
him what he should not grant; but to endeavor that none should petition for
any thing forbidden. In sum, he advised him never to abuse his power, and not
to think this a diminution of it, if he did not do all that he might: but by
how much the more he could do what he would, by so much to take care to will
all things that became him. He bade him always consider whether he did well or
ill: whether by such an action he procured love or ill will, that he might do
and forbear accordingly. He told him, that though he heard no body blame him,
yet ought he not to conclude, that therefore he did well; nor to expect that
any should be so mad as openly to upbraid him. This no man would do, though
most extremely injured. Nay, many, says he, are constrained openly to commend
those by whom they have been wronged, lest they should be thought to blame
them. But it is the duty of a Prince not to guess at the affections of others
from their words; but from those things which it is most probable that they
think of.

22. These, and other like things he would have him do; for many things he said
he passed over, because all could not be spoken at the same time. One thing he
would say, which was the sum of all, either said or to be said. If he would do
all those things, which if he were a subject he would have his Prince do to
him, he should in nothing offend, prosper in all things, and lead both a safe,
The sum of all Maecenas his advice.
and most happy life. For how could not all but look upon him, and love him as
a father, and preserver, when they should see him modest, of unblameable life,
and excellent both in Peace and War; when he should neither disgrace nor injure
any one, but carry himself humbly: not exact money from others, whilst he
himself flowed with wealth; not afflicting others whilst he was luxurious; not
punishing others whilst he himself was loose and licentious; but in all things
as it were sharing with them? Therefore relying on that defense which would be
great in thy self if thou hurtest no man; believe me, says he, thou will have
no body, neither hate thee, or devise any thing against thee, which being so,
thou must needs lead a pleasant life. For, what can be more sweet, what more
happy, than for one with virtue to enjoy all humane good things, and to be able
to confer them upon others? In conclusion, those, and other things heretofore
spoken being considered, he bade him yield to him, and not contemn Fortune,
which had preferred him, picked out from amongst all others, to be chief. Now,
if taking in reality to himself alone the Sovereign power, he feared the name
of a Kingdom as odious he might omit that, and order his matters under the
other of Caesar: if he desired other titles they would give him that of
Imperator, heretofore given to his father: they would adorn him also with some
other venerable note of honor, so that he might enjoy all the Privileges of a
Kingdom without the envied name thereof.

Caesar follows the advice of Maecenas.
23. Maecenas concluded with these words, whose advice Caesar followed, though
he greatly commended them both, for wisdom, copiousnesse, and freedom of
speech: yet he did not presently set upon all those things which he offered,
lest if on a sudden he should attempt to change the constitution of the State,
he might fail in his endeavors: therefore some things he changed out of hand,
other afterward: and some things he left to be perfected by his Successors,
which he thought might be better settled through the advantage of time and
opportunity. Takes the title of Imperator, and orders several matters.
He used also the industry of Agrippa in the prosecution of these designs no
less than if he had advised him to this course. In this same year, and his
fifth Consulship, he took the name of Imperator; not in that sense wherein
anciently it was wont to be given for victories obtained (for so he had it
given him often both before this and after) but in respect of chief Command, or
Authority, as it had been decreed to his father Julius, and his sons, and
posterity. Then was he made Censor with Agrippa, and amongst other things
belonging to that Office, purged the Senate, into which many Equites and
unworthy Plebeians had crept during the Civil Wars; and increased it to the
number of a thousand. Two persons, viz. C. Cl^ilius and C. Furnius he put into
the rank of Consulares, because being designed Consuls they had been prevented
by others. He also ranked certain families amongst the Patricians, because most
of those had perished in the Wars. He commanded that no Senator without his
leave should pass beyond Italy, which is at this day observed, says Dio, it
being unlawful for any of that rank to travel, except into Sicily, or Gallia
Narbonensis, whither any that have Estates in those Provinces may go without
leave, because those Countries are in quiet, and destitute of Arms. Caesar also
considering that many Senators and others trusted him not, lest they should
attempt new matters, he gave out that he had burned all the Letters found in
Antony his Coffers: and indeed some of them were lost, but most of them he very
carefully kept, and afterward made use of them as he had occasion. He sent for
Antiochus Commagenus, who had treacherously killed his brother, sent on an
Embassy to Rome, and put him to death, being condemned by the Senate.

24. Caesar in his sixth Consulship, together with M. Agrippa his Colleague made
a Lustrum 41 years after the last Celebration of one (by Cn. Lentulus and L.
Gellius) and herein were cessed 4063000 Polls of Roman Citizens. Makes a
Lustum.
He celebrated Games also, which had been decreed in memory of his victory at
Actium, and it was ordered they should be renewed every fifth year, four
Colleges of Priests taking care of them, viz. the Pontifices, Augurs,
Septemviri, and Quindecimviri by courses. He caused other sorts of Games and
Exercises to be made at his own cost, borrowing money; ordered that two persons
of Praetorian rank should yearly oversee the Treasury, gave to the people four
times as much Corn as they were wont to have, to some Senators he gave money,
some of this rank being so poor, that they could not bear Offices belonging to
them. All engagements and debts to the Exchequer he made void that stood good
before the battle at Actium, except what concerned buildings. He suffered no
sacrifize to be offered to Egyptian gods within the Pomaerium, took also care
for repairing of Temples. And because many unjust things had been ordained
during the late Seditions and Civil Wars, especially in the Triumvirate, he
made them all void by one Edict, and caused them to cease from his sixth
Consulship. Being in the eyes and mouths of all for these things, he considered
how he might increase his reputation, and confirm his single power by the
consent, and without the constraint of the people. Being then Consul the
seventh time, when he had prepared every Senator beforehand, whom he knew to
be well affected toward him, he came to the Senate House, and there read a set
speech which he had written down fitly for this purpose.

Pretending in a set speech to the Senate, a desire to lay down his power.
25. Herein he first exceedingly magnified with much affected art, the things he
was about to do, and then signified, that though he had such opportunity to
establish himself as no man ever had more, yet did he now divest himself of all
power, and restore all unto them, Arms, Laws, and Provinces: and not only such
things as he had been untrusted with, but he gave them besides what he himself
had further acquired. This then his gift he much illustrated by his self
denial, shown as well formerly as at present, being very sorry that ever there
had been occasion for the Commonwealth to use him. He spoke of the justice and
prudence of this resignation, and boasted of the glory of it, which he avowed
to exceed the Conquests of Gall, Mysia, Egypt, or Pannonia, the victories over
Pharnaces, Juba, or Phraates, the expedition into Britain or the passage of the
Rhine, and all the difficulties of the Civil Wars. He demanded if any could be
found that excelled him in greatness of mind, who had so many Cities, Nations,
and Soldiers at his back, and whom none durst oppose? Horatius, Macius,
Curtius, Regulus, and the Decii, who ventured their lives for glory were not
comparable to him, for as much as by this resignation he exceeded both them,
and all others in glory. And showed hence that the gallantry of spirit found in
the ancient Romans was not extinct. Having discoursed much in this vein, he
concluded with his advice to the Senate how to manage public affairs, telling
them, that if they followed it they would be happy and thankful to him, who
rescuing them from seditions, had brought them into that estate: but if they
did not punctually observe it, they would make him repent of what he had done,
and cast themselves again into manifold Wars, and great dangers.

26. Caesar having read his writing, the minds of the Senators were
marvailously affected. Some there were who knew his design, and therefore
agreed with him; the rest either suspected his intent, or believed him. Of
these some admired his craft in concealing his purposes; others were troubled
at his design: some at his cunning; and others at his refusal of the
Government. For there were some who hated the Popular form as turbulent, and
approving of the change, were well pleased with Caesar's administration. Yet
the product of these several affections was the same; for neither they that
believed he spoke as he thought, could rejoice; those that wished he were
reduced to a private condition, being yet fearful how things would go; and they
that desired he might keep his power, being sorry for the loss of their hopes.
Neither could they that believed him not reprehend him, because to some will,
and to others courage was wanting. No man yet, whether he believed him, or
believed him not, durst commend his speech, for that some liked it not, and
others feared to do it. Wherefore having often interrupted him whilst speaking,
when he had done, they all besought him with many words, that he would alone
undertake the Government, and by many arguments compelled him at length to
accept of the Sovereignty. Then that his person might be preserved, Thereby
confirms it.
they presently decreed the pay of his Guard to be double to that of other
Soldiers.

27. Caesar by this artifice pretending that he would lay down his power,
effected that it was confirmed to him, by Senate and People. Yet that he might
seem to be Popular, he said, he would not govern all the Provinces, nor obtain
perpetual power over such as he should take care of; therefore the weaker,
because they were more quiet, he left to others: the most powerful which had
appearance of most danger (having an Enemy near at hand, or likely to be
turbulent) he kept himself, under pretense that the Fathers might enjoy their
power safely, and he himself undergo labor and dangers; but by this device he
rendered the Senate really helpless, and weak, and engrossed to himself the
Militia. Divides the Principalities bethixt the Senate and himself.
To the Senate and People was left Africa, Numidia, Asia, Greece, with Epirus,
Dalmatia, Macedonia, Sicily, Crete, Libya called Cyrenaica, Bithynia, with the
neighboring Pontus, Sardinia, and that part of Spain called Hispania Baetica.
Caesar kept the rest of Spain, all Gall and Germany, as also Coelesyria,
Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Egypt. Over these Provinces he assumed the Government
but for ten years, within which time he undertook to reduce them into order,
adding with a certain juvenile kind of boasting, that as soon as ever he could
quiet them, he would quit his power. Then did he set over the Provinces of both
sorts, men of Patrician dignity, but over Egypt one of Equestrian rank only,
for the causes above rehearsed. To Senators he allotted by themselves Africa
and Asia, and the rest of the Provinces to Praetorians. He forbad either to
take this employment within five years after they had born Offices in the City.
They held their Governments but for a year. And as soon as successors were sent
them, they were presently to depart the Provinces, and not loiter in their
return, but come to Rome within three months. The distribution of the
Provinces was made on the Ides of January, as may be gathered from Ovid, who
thought also that Caesar Octavianus had the Surname of Augustus given him the
same day, which indeed was the fourth day after, as appears from Censorinus.

28. For, the Provinces being divided, and all things settled, it was debated in
the Senate, whether he ought not to be called Romulus, because he had founded
the Empire; but the other more venerable name of Augustus, propounded by
Munacius Plancus, at length seemed best; for, sacred places and Temples
consecrated by Augurs the Romans termed Augusta. Caesar though he much desired
that of Romu^us (says Dio) yet perceiving he should be suspected of affecting
the Kingdom, omitted it, and was surnamed Augustus, as greater than the nature
of man could make him. For those things are called Augusta, Surnamed Augustus.
which are most worthy of honor, and most sacred; wherefore the Greeks
express it by (...), as if thou should say Venerable. Thus Caesar alone got
the whole power into his hands, having both money (for though he had his own
separate from the Treasury, yet did he use this at his pleasure) and the
Militia in his own hands. When his ten years were out other five, and when they
were expired five more, and these ended, ten more, and ten more after them were
added; so that he had his authority still continued for his life; for which
cause his Successors, though they had the power settled on them for life, yet at
the end of every ten years, solemnized as it were the renewing of it. As soon
as Caesar had but made his Oration about resigning his command, and
distributing the Provinces, many honors were conferred on him, as that Laurel
should be planted before his gates in the Palatium, and upon those trees Oaken
garlands hung, as for him who was a perpetual Conqueror of Enemies, and
preserver of Citizens. The house of the Emperor also was wont afterward to be
called the Palatium or Palace; not for that it was ever so decreed; but because
Caesar lived in the Palatium or Palatine hill, and there was his Praetorium;
his house also received some dignity from the Mount it self, because Romulus
there lived: therefore though the Emperor, says the Historian, live
elsewhere, yet is his house called the Palatium or Palace. But after he had
done those things which he promised, then was he called Augustus by the Senate
and People. From this day forward began the sovereign power and authority to be
in the hands of one man, which the Greeks called Monarchy. Yet the Romans
derived the Epoche of their Augusti from the Kalends of January of this year,
as Censorinus writes, who compares with the 265 year of this Era, the 283 of
the Julian ordination. This seventh Consulship of Augustus Caesar, and the
beginning of his Monarchy, fell out in the 727 year of the City, the second of
the 188 Olympiad, the thirteenth of Herod the Great, 25 before the birth of
Christ, A. M. 3978, he himself, as it is said, the seventh, and M. Vipsanius
Agrippa the third time being Consuls.

29. On this manner all the power of the People and Senate was transferred upon
Augustus, All power of Senate and People transferred upon him.
says Dio. Lib. 55. p. 517. A. M. 3978. Ol. 188. an. 2. V.C. 727. Herodis 13.
For this notable translation and change in the Government there was a Law
made, which is famous by the name of Lex Regia, after which it is convenient to
make a little enquiry, for the better information of Students in this great
affair. A Law may be so (and is so) called, either for that a King made, or
preferred it, or because it was made and enacted concerning a King or Kingly
power. In the first sense, such Laws as were made by Romulus and his successors
the ancient Kings of Rome, are by Lawyers called Legee Regiae, whereof
Dionysius Halicarnasseus has recorded many, and of which several have been
already mentioned in their due places; and in the Tit. de mortuo inferendo l. 2.
Code is yet extant a Law called Lex Regia, concerning the burial of a woman
with child, so called, because enacted by some ancient King. But in the later
acceptance is to be understood this Law, whereby Regal (and that absolute)
power was conferred upon Augustus by the Roman People. The Law it self is not
now extant in terms, nor exemplified in any Author still remaining, yet it is
mentioned by Justinian in his Lib. 1. Tit. 2. de Jure Not. etc.
Institutions of Law, who there writes (speaking of several sorts of Law) that
what pleases the Prince, has the vigor of a Law; forasmuch as by the Lex
Regia, which was made concerning his power, the People granted to him all it is
command and authority. By a Law called Lex Regia.
In the L. 1. Tit. de Constit. Principum.
Pandects he also mentions it, well-nigh in these very words; in a third L.
1. sect. cum itaque C. tit. de Vet. Jure Enucleando.
place also expressing it to the same purpose, that by an ancient Law called
Lex Regia, all the right and all the power of the Roman People was translated
into the Emperors authority: therefore it is otherwise called Lex Imperii, and
Augustum privilegium. As for Commentators upon both Institutions and Pandects,
with other parts of the Civil Law, nothing is more acknowledged by them all, as
they have occasion.

30. But as fot the interpretation of this Law, some difference there has been
amongst Expositors, who lived since the Civil Law was restored in the West. A
different manner of expounding it.
For some there have been ever since that time, who rightly understood all
manner of power and authority, to be so by the Roman People transferred upon
the Prince by that Law, that they affirmed the People thereby deprived and made
destitute of all power and authority. Others thought power and authority indeed
was given to the Prince to make Laws, but so that by this concession the power
of the People was in no sort diminished, and the force of Plebiscitums and
Senatusconsultums, as well future as past, was the same as formerly; so that
Prince, People, Senate, and Commons, had equal authority in this matter: both
these opinions being held, as appears from Accursius, Hostiensis, and others.
But the later of them seems thence to have risen, The Reason.
that they mistook this Lex Regia (called also corruptly Lex Remnia) for the
Hortensian Law, or rather thence, as a late Joh. Seldenus in Fletam Dissert.
cap. 3. sect. 3.
learned man judges, that the Professors and Students of the Civil Law, which
was newly restored, were fearful, lest by asserting the true power of the
Emperors, they should give offense to such People and Cities, as then lived in
a course contrary to such a prerogative, and thereby injure their newly
restored profession. And hence might that most known controversy arise,
concerning the power of the Prince, from this Law, betwixt the Martinians and
Bulgarians. But as for that conceit about the Hortensian Law, it was enacted by
Q. Hortensius the Dictator, in the 468 year of the City (not the 422, as that
same learned man has it) and the 284 (not the 330) before the birth of Christ,
upon the third separation of the Commons, and 259 before the enacting of the
Regal Law. The purport of it was, that all Quirites or Romans should be bound
by the Plebiscita, or the Decrees of the People. Hence, as we formerly observed
out of Pomponius, concerning the Original of the Roman Laws, the authority of
making Laws was the same, though the fashions differed, although the same thing
in effect, was done long before the Hortensian Law, viz. by L. Valerius and V.
C. 305.
M. Horatius the Consuls, who got it enacted by a Law in the Centuriata
Comitia, that what the Commons resolved on in their Tribes, or Tributa Comitia,
says Livy, but in their Curiae or Curiata Comitia, says Dionysius, should
bind the whole People, which thing we having formerly omitted in it is own
place, here supply, having yet Lib. 2. c. 4. sect. 2. par. 46.
observed, that a Law was also preferred by Q. Publius Philo the Dictator, 111
years after the other, to the same purpose, and 211 before the Lex Regia.

31. Now strange it is, that Accursius and others, should wrest any thing of
the Hortensian Law, and apply it to the Lex Regia, or rather make them all one,
as he does, expounding the Regia thus; Scil. lata ab Hortensio mirabili
Oratore, although he acknowledges, as necessarily he must, that the Hortensian
Law made only express mention of the power of Senate and Commons. It Is not
easy to guess what he meant by so strange a conceit; but this interpretation
is made of it by * one as able to judge as any, The Hortensian Law strangely
wrested by some.
that as the Hortensian Law concerning Regal Right, that is, Seldenus ubi supra.
the Right of Regiment or Government, gave to the People and Senate (of which
two orders or estates then the Roman body politic consisted) equal power and
authority; so when the Prince came to be joined as a third party, in like
manner an equal power should be granted to him, as to the other two, and that
from the sense of the same Law. And those of this opinion interpret. Justinian
(who says concerning the Plebiscita, that from the Hortensian Law they began
to be of no less value than Laws, and also the same of the Senatusconsulta,
that because the People was so increased, that it could not easily meet
together for making of Laws, that therefore the Senate was consulted) as though
the same power remained to Senate and People still under the Emperors as
before. They strangely disputed also, whether the power so granted by the
People to the Emperor, might not be revoked, as that which is given to
Delegates from the Delegators. And this is all that can be imagined, as meant
by those men concerning the Hortensian Law, as to the subject in hand, though
it be strangely wrested to their design, and makes nothing for their purpose.

But in vain.
32. For nothing is more certain than the former opinion, viz. that the people
by the Lex Regia were wholly deprived of all Power and Authority in making Laws.
This is clear from the words of Justinian formerly cited, which clearly
signify that the whole Power and Authority of People and Senate was
transferred upon, and yielded or granted to the Emperors by this Law. And he
L. 12. C. tit. de Legibus, etc.
elsewhere declares, that his sentence stands for Law, and binds all under
his command, which indeed the very composing of the body of Law, as from him it
is transmitted to us, sufficiently demonstrateth, wherein he by his sole
Authority repealeth what he pleases, and enacteth anew what seems good to
him, without interposition of any other Authority; which he could not have done
(nor his Predecessors) as to the Plebiscita and Senatusconsulta, though he
might as to the Principales Constitutiones, except he had had that power which
formerly belonged to People and Senate, For the whole power of people and
Senate was given up by the Lex Regia to the Emperor.
and they were divested of all. C. Tit. de Legib. l. 1.
Constantine challenges to himself alone Authority to judge betwixt Law and
Equity. Ulpian wrote, that all the Power and Authority which they had, the
People placed upon, and in the Emperor, by the Lex Regia, and the most
learned, and accurate Consule inter alios Francisc. de Amaya obs. l. 1. c. 1.
expositors of more later times agree with him herein, rejecting the Hortensian
Law utterly, as having any thing to do in this matter of the Regal Law. In the
Laterane Palace at Rome, or the Capitol, is extant Inscript. Gruteri p. 142.
and Ursinus Notis ad Leges and Senatusconsulta.
a Table of brass, wherein is to be seen a fragment of this Law renewed, as to
Vespasian, confirming many things of Soverain, and sole Authority, as
descending upon him from his Predecessors, and enacting, that what he had done,
decreed, or commanded, before this ratification, should be held and taken for
as good Law, as if the People it self had done, decreed, or commanded it. For,
though he might make use of this ratification, yet his right was as strong
before; there being no such custom as some have thought, that particular
Princes had particular and several Laws made for their Authority, that one for
Augustus respecting himself, and Successors, as is clear from Justinian, who
never mentions any other, nor speaks in the plural number.

33. If we fetch an explanation of the Lex Regia from Historians, we shall find
that though they mention it not in words, yet they give that Supreme and
absolute power to Augustus, which devesteth the Senate and People of all
Legislative Authority, and shows that his command (and that of his
Successors) was as large as could be transferred upon a Prince that was to
govern persons of free condition without Tyranny. Suetonius says, that he
received perpetual Tribunitial power (which could obstruct all proceedings of
Senate and People) and perpetual regiment of manners, and of the Laws.
Historians show it.
Dio says expressly, that (...).
all the power of People and Senate was transferred upon him; and that all
things were managed merely as the Emperor pleased, though all other
Magistrates, except the Censors were preserved. And that the Emperors may
appear to have so great power, says he, not by force but from the Laws; all
things which under the Popular Government were of greatest force (and that by
Universal consent) together with the names, they take upon them, except
Dictatorship. For they are often Consuls, and when without the Pomaerium, are
called Proconsuls; and they bear the name of Imperator, (not only such as have
obtained victories, but all of them) to signify their plenary and absolute
power; in the room of King and Dictator, which being taken away they never
assume, but confirm the force and matter of them by the title of Emperor.
Accordingly they have the power of raising men and money, making War and Peace,
commanding all things effectually, both at home and abroad, putting to death
Equites and Senators, even within the Pomaerium, and doing all other things,
which a Consul and other Magistrates who had absolute power might do. As
Censors also they have Authority to inquire into our life and Manners, to make
the Census, admit persons into the Equestrian or Senatorian rank, and remove
thence according to their pleasure. And in as much as they are inaugurate in
all Priesthoods, admit Priests into the Colleges, and ever one of them (if
there be two or three Emperors at one time) is Chief Priest, it is that they
may have all religious things and sacred in their own hands. As for the
Tribunitial power, which every eminent Emperor was wont to have, it inableth
them to interpose against any thing that may be done contrary to their
pleasure, and they are thereby Sacrosanct, or Inviolable, so that if any one
injure them by the least, not only deed, but word, they may put him to death
without process as Piacularly Criminal. The Emperors count it unlawful to be
Tribunes, because they are Patricians, but they receive Tribunitial power as
large as ever any enjoyed; and as renewing it yearly with the annual Tribunes,
the years of their reign or power, are counted accordingly. These things, as
they were established in the Popular Government, do the Emperors, together
with the name, take unto them, that they may appear to have nothing but what
was freely conferred on them.

34. But they have another privilege (so Dio proceeds) which never was
universally granted to any Roman. For the Emperors are loosed from the Laws;
by which thing alone liberty is given them to do those which we have related,
and all other things. After this manner, with these names which were used in
the Popular State, they receive all the power of the whole Commonwealth, and
the Kingly also, shunning only the name. For, the titles of Caesar and
Augustus add nothing of peculiar power unto them: but the one signifies the
succession, and the other the splendor of their Dignity. As for the name of
Fathers, though it gives them such right over their subjects, as Parents have
over Children; yet at first it was given only for honor, and to admonish them
to hold their Subjects as dear as Children, and these them as Parents. These
are the titles which the Emperors according to the Laws and Customs use even
in our days and in our age, all these are at the same time given to them,
except that of Censor; but in times past they were severally according to the
Laws decreed to them. The name also of Censor, some of them according to the
ancient custom have received, and Domitian bore it all his life; but now it is
not so. For, the Emperors of our time having the thing it self, are neither
chosen to the Censorship, nor bear the name of the Office, except during the
Census. But (...).
thus the Commonwealth was changed into a better form and order; for it was
utterly impossible it should subsist under the power of the people. Thus far
Dio, excellently, according to his custom of relating the principal matters of
State. It clearly appears from him, how absolute the power of the Emperors
was, and how without any coordinate power of People or Senate in any respect.
The main of their Authority lay in the title of Imperator; assisted by the
Tribunitial power, which two, (nay the former of them) make good our exposition
of the Lex Regia, without the other titles which they might take upon them for
popularity, and to prevent the pretenses of others, though their Authority was
large, and strong enough without them. Our Author concludes this discourse
with an Attestation to that truth we formerly asserted against Agrippa.

35. The same night that Caesar received the surname of Augustus, Dio lib. 53.
page 510.
a considerable sign (as it was accounted) of his confirmation happened. For
Tiber so overflowed, that all the lower parts of Rome were Navigable, which the
Fortune tellers interpreted to signify his great advancement, and that he
should have the whole City in his power. Now many sought to flatter him, but
the endeavors of Sextus Pacuvius (or Apudius) exceeded all, who being Tribune
of the People, after the custom of the Spaniard, consecrated himself to him,
and caused others to do so. Having now obtained the Government by consent of
the people, he set himself more effectually to look after it, and made several
Laws. Yet did he not all on his own head, but propounded many things to be
debated in public, that if any were displeased he might amend them: he desired
all, freely, and openly, to deliver their opinions, and being moved by their
reasons changed something: but he especially desired to be advised by the
Consuls, or his Colleague, if he himself bore that Office. The general course of
Augustus his administration.
Of the other Magistrates he made choice of one out of each sort, and out of
the Senate fifteen chosen by lot, who were for six months to be his
Counselors; that hereby he might seem to communicate his designs to the rest.
Some things he brought down to the whole Senate; but he thought it fitter to
consult with a few persons at leisure about the greatest affairs. He called
also these men sometimes to decide causes: although the Senate still heard
certain matters, and gave answer to the Ambassadors of Kings and States as
formerly. Although the Comitia, or Assemblies of the People were sometimes
held, yet nothing was done but according to the pleasure of Augustus. He partly
named Magistrates, and left others to be created by the People; only taking
care that no unworthy persons by indirect practices advanced themselves. This
was the general course of Augustus his administration, says Dio.

He reduces the Spaniards, and shuts the Temple of Janus the second time.
36. The year following Augustus made an expedition into Spain, Orosius lib. 6.
cap. 2. Florus lib. 4. c. ult. Sueton. in Octavio.
which never had been well quieted since the Romans first set footing there;
but now the Cantabrians and Asturians were not only ready to defend their own
liberty, but endeavored also to lay the yoke upon their neighbors. Yet he
reduced, and brought all under, and being then at Tarracon, came Ambassadors
from India to beg his friendship. Returning home, he shut the Temple of Janus
the second time, having formerly so done after his Triumph over Antony, and his
return out of Egypt, which shutting was the third from the foundation of the
City. Strabo lib. 2.
But after his return out of Spain it continued not long shut. For Aelius
Gallus made War against the Arabians, and piercing far into their Country, had
subdued all Arabia Foelix, but that he was betrayed. At the same time also
Candace, Queen of Aethiopia, sent her Captains to invade Egypt, but they were
repulsed by Petronius Governor of that Country (for Cornelius Gallus having
bespattered Augustus, Lib. 17.
and for that being condemned by the Senate had killed himself) who also
pursued them, and taking diverse Towns, forced the Queen to beg peace, and
returned enriched to Alexandria. Dio l. 17.
Augustus some time after went into Greece, and thence into Syria, whither the
Parthian now affrighted, sent the Ensigns taken at the overthrow of Crassus,
and flight of Antony; and now again did the two Kings of India, Pandion, and
Porus, send Ambassodors with presents. As he returned home, Virgil the Poet met
him at Athens, who now out of a desire to finish his Ae^eiados had resolved to
withdraw himself out of the way into Greece and Asia; but meeting here with
Augustus, in whose especial favor he flourished, he was drawn back with him,
and viewing Megara in a very hot season contracted a distemper, which was so
much increased with sailing, that growing still worse, Vide vitam Virgilii. A.
M. 3990. V. C. 735.
he died at Brundusium within a few days after his landing, Virgil dies.
in the 52th year of his age, on the 12th of September, and the 735th year of
the City, C. Sextius and Q. Lucretius being Consuls.

37. Augustus his first wife was Scribonia, which had been married to two
persons of Consular Dignity, and by one was a Mother. Of her he begat his
daughter Julia, but within a short time divorced her, as he pretended, Sueton
in Octavio cap. 62. 63, 64.
because of the perversity of her disposition. Then did Nero, who had followed
L. Antonius to Perusium, Augustus his wives and issue.
but afterward was reconciled, freely yield unto him Livia Drusilla, though he
had had one son already by her, named Tiberius, and she was big with another,
which being born three months after she had married Caesar, was called Drusus.
By Livia, Augustus had no Children but abortive. His daughter Julia he married
to Marcellus, his sister Octavia's son, and after his death to Agrippa, making
him put away his wife, the daughter of Octavia; for in a consultation Macenas
took the liberty to tell him, that he must either marry his daughter to
Agrippa, or take away his life, there was no third way, he had made him so
great. By Agrippa she had three sons, Caius, Lucius, and Agrippa Posthu^^us,
and two daughters, Agrippina and Julia. The three sons were adopted by their
Grandfather, but the two former died before, and the later was killed by
Tiberius after: the death of Augustus. Dio lib. 54.
Tiberius and Drusus subdued the Rhatians and Vindelicians, People of Germany,
and afterward the Pannonians and Frisians apart. Agrippa was made partaker of
the Tribunitial power by Augustus, amongst other honors, and ruled Syria by
himself and Agents ten years. Being sent into Pannonia (of which Hungaria is
part) he stilled the Natives by the rumor of his coming, and returning into
Campania, died shortly after. Then was Tiberius compelled to mary Julia,
although he had already to wife Agrippina the daugher of Agrippa. Within two or
three years after, Sueton. in Claudio.
Drusus having pierced very far into Germany, and entered his Consulship
together with L. Quintius Crispinus, died also, leaving two sons, viz.
Germanicus and Claudius, in the 746 year of the City.

38. The same year that Drusus died (by a fall from his Horse, as Livy wrote,
Sueton in Octavio. Plinius l. 18. c. 25. Orosius lib. 6. cap. 21. Dio l. 55. p.
552. A. M. 3996. V. C. 745. Sueton in Tiberio. Seneca de beneficiis. l. 32.
Tacitus Annal. lib. 1.
who intended his History just so far) Augustus being High Priest (which Office
he took not upon him till the death of Lepidus) amended the Calendar, He
amendeth the Calendar.
corrected formerly by his adoptive Father. For in those 36 years there had
been made an intercalation of twelve days, whereas there ought to have been
but of nine, therefore he commanded that the twelve years following should
pass without any intercalation at all, that so the three days might be
swallowed up. Now he named August after himself the month Sextilis, because in
it he entered his first Consulship, and had the first ensigns of Victory and
Power, rather than September wherein he was born. The month ^^^ilis called
(...) him A^g^s^.
Not long after did Tiberius, rather by craft than force of Arms, again subdue
the Germans, who maintained a most difficult War. After his Triumph he
withdrew himself into the Island Rhodes, either because of Caius and Lucius, or
by reason of the intolerable dishonesty of his wife Julia; for she was so
abominably wanton, that her father at length banished her into the Island
Pandataria, and very imprudently in his anger, revealed her naughty carriage in
way of complaint to the Senate, of which indiscretion being afterward sensible,
he would often say, that if either Agrippa or Maecenas had lived, no such thing
had hapened to him.

39. Agrippa, as we said, having quieted Pannonia, died after his return into
Campania, in the 743 year of the City, three years before Drusus. A. M. 3993.
V. C. 743. Lib. 7. c. 8.
Pliny tells, that they were first called Agrippae, which were born with the
feet forward, as if a man should say, born hardly, or with much ado. And in
this manner, The death of Agrippa,
(says he) as they say, M. Agrippa came forth of his mothers womb, the only
man almost known to have brought any good fortune with him, and prospered in
the World, of all that were in that sort born Yet he was much pained with the
Gout, and passed all his youth, and many a day after in bloody Wars, and in
danger of a thousand deaths. Unfortunate he was in his children, and especially
in his two daughters the Agrippinae, who brought forth two children pernicious
to the whole Earth, namely C. Caligula and Domitius Nero Emperors. He died in
the 51 year of his age, A. M. 3997. V. C. 746. Velleius l. 2. c. 88. Dio l. 55.
p. 552.
tormented and vexed with the adulteries of his wife, and oppressed with the
intolerable servitude in which he lived under her father. Four years after him,
and the year after Drusus, died Maecenas, the other favorite of Augustus, Of
Maecenas.
and the great Patron of Learned men. He was in as great grace with Caesar as
Agrippa, though less honored: for he contented himself with the Equestrian
rank; neither could he not obtain greater things, but he would Maecenas eques
Hetrusco de Sanguint regum Intra fortunam qui cupis esse tuam. Propertius l. 3.
not. He had great power with Augustus, which he improved to the allaying of
his passion, and doing good offices for others, as one example shows above the
rest. On a time, as Augustus sat in Judgment, and was about to sentence many
to death, he perceiving it, and nor able to come at him for the crowd, wrote
these words, Rise up at last Executioner, in a table, and cast them into
Caesar's lap as some other matter, who having read them, presently departed
without condemning any. Neither did this offend Augustus, but he was glad that
he had one who would be so free with him, and curb that anger, which either his
inclination or the urgency of business moved him to. Cilnius Arreti Tyrrhenis
ortus in oris Clarum nomen erat. Silius Italicus.
Cilnius was the ancient name of his Family, and Arretium in the Tyrrhenian
Coasts the place of it. L. 7. c. 5^.
Pliny tells strange passages of him, as that he never was without an Ague,
and for three years before his death, never slept a quarter of an hour
together. In the same year (which was that wherein Augustus mended the
Calendar, and called the month Sextilis after himself) Horace the Poet also
died, in the 57 year of his age. His familiarity with Caesar and Maecenas is
sufficiently known. His life is written by Suetonius.

40. Augustus having again quieted all Nations, and shut the Temple of Janus
the third time; having ordained a general taxation throughout the Empire, that
he might know the State and worth thereof; having also refused the name of
Dominus or Lord with great earnestness, which he forbad even his Children and
Nephews by an edict to use toward him, the Lord and Heir of all things came
into the World, in the fullness of time, revealed by the Angel Gabriel to the
Prophet Daniel, for the fulfilling of the promises made concerning the seed of
the woman, The birth of our Lord Jesus Christ.
which should break the serpents head. A. M. 4003. Ol. 194. an. 3. V. C. 752.
Caesare Augusto 13. M. Plautio Silano Coss.
Great difference there is in assigning the year of the World wherein our
Savior was born, by reason of the difficulty of computation arising from the
several versions of the Scriptures, the intricate and uncertain successions of
the Judges, the variety of the forms of years, and the several reckonings as to
parcels of such as are related in Scripture. A great help for the regulation of
these things is afforded from profane Histories. But it begins but with
Cyrus, whose History, as to the restoration of the Jews, presents us with
the first certain note of conjunction (he being so named both by holy and
profane Writers, but not Nebuchadnesar) and yet the duration of his reign is
also uncertain. Yet as from all these opinions weighed together, a good account
may be given in another place, more proper for the length of it, as to the year
of the World, so the Evangelist teaching us, that in the fifteenth year of
Tiberius, Christ was about thirty years old, it must needs follow, that
Augustus reigned fifteen years after his birth; so that if we count (as some
do) the reign of Augustus from the death of Julius Caesar, it lasted 57 years,
and then must Christ be born in the 42 of it. But if we follow them (as the
order of this Work does) who with more reason fetch the beginning of his Empire
from the death of Antony, and the conquest of Egypt, then Christ's birth fell
into the 28 year thereof, and according to the computation which we most
approve into the 4003 year of the World, the 752 of the City, and the third
year of the 194 Olympiad, wherein Caesar Augustus himself the thirteenth time,
and M. Plautius Silanus were Consuls. Although Cyrenius (who was Consul ten
years before, and is called elsewhere P. Sulpicius Quirinus) might not formally
be President of Syria (which Office as others say, was now obtained by
Quintilius Vanus, Josephus Antiq. l. 17. c. 7.
who succeeded Saturninus, who as yet was not departed out of the Province) yet
being set over this taxation by Augustus in that place, this title might well
be given him, though he then governed Cilicia, De bello Judaic. l. 1. c. 15.
as Herod is by Jesephus said to be constituted Procurator of all Syria, though
it had it is Officers, who were to act by his assistance and direction. Herod
had now reigned 37 years and odd months, and being deluded by the Wise Men
(whom he willingly suffered to search out Christ, that he might destroy him)
killed all the children in and about Bethlehem of two years and under; Matthew.
2.16.
which cruelty was but agreeable with his disposition and constant practice.
Here, that we may describe his affairs, we must make a little digression, and
take them where we formerly left them.

A digression to the affairs of Herod.
41. After he had obtained the possession of his Kingdom, Josephus Antiq. l. 15.
c. 1, etc.
he put to death 45 of Antigonus his friends, having procured him to be
beheaded, as we formerly showed. Then did he prefer to the High Priesthood one
Ananel an obscure man, neglecting Aristobulus the son of Aristobulus the King,
and brother to his own wife Mariamne; and Antony desiring to see this youth,
for the fame of his beauty, he fearing the Roman might advance him, to stay him
at home, gave him the Priesthood, and excused his neglect to send him, by the
inclination of the Jews to rebellion. Perceiving him then to be in
extraordinary favor with the Jews, and that his mother Alexandra (which he
kept very close because of her restless spirit) plorted the escape of her self
and son into Egypt, a year after, as he was swimming, he caused him to be
drowned, and though Cleopatra accused him hereof to Antony, yet by presents he
made his Peace. He makes away Aristobulus.
In the Civil Wars he sided with Antony, who having forces sufficient, desired
him to chastize the Arabians, that denied the Tribute imposed on them. This he
did, and though at first his attempts miscarried, yet in another battle he quite
overthrew and brought them under. After the overthrow of Antony, he had little
hope that his own matters would go well. He murdered Hyrcanus, who only
survived of all the males of the Royal Family, and whom he had recalled from
Babylon, Idem ibid. c. 9, etc.
whither he was carried by the Parthians. He took the advantage of the old man's
intent to fly into Arabia, through the importunity of his daughter Alexandra,
who promised him great things, if Herod should miscary under the power of
Augustus. Then providing as well as he could for the worst, in case it should
happen, he went to Rhodes to visit Caesar, from whom he concealed not the love
he bore to Antony, but with notable courage declaring it, withal signified
that he was ready to serve him as faithfully, which so wrought upon the
magnificent Prince, that he liked him extremely, and confirmed him in his
estate. Is reconciled to Caesar, having sided with Antony.
After Caesar's return out of Egypt into Syria, he entertained him, and as he
thereby procured the reputation of a noble and heroic spirit, so also an
addition to his Kingdom. Yet was he unfortunate at home, having commanded
several times, that if any thing hapened in his absence, they should make away
his beloved wife Mariamne. She hearing of it used him frowardly, whereat being
enraged, he was thoroughly persuaded to put her to death by his sister Salome,
which envious woman feigned certain accusations against her. Kills his wife
Mariamne.
But after the deed was done, having extraordinarily loved her, he fell even
mad, and thereby into a great sickness, so that casting off all Government, he
departed to Samaria, then called Sebaste, in honor of Augustus.

42. Alexandra in the mean time endeavored to get the strong places of
Jerusalem into her hands, wherewith he being acquainted, Cap. 11, etc.
ordered her to be put to death, Grows cruel.
and then returning to the City, grew exceeding cruel and distasteful. The
prejudice was increased by his making Games in honor of Caesar, and hanging
his Theater with Trophies, which the People sorely distasted, as being by their
Religion principled against Pictures. Ten men conspired against him, but were
discovered and put to death. Not long after he redeemed his credit by
liberality in a great dearth, and married the daughter of Simon, whom he
preferred to the Priesthood, having displaced Jesus the son of Phabes. Then did
he employ his time and treasure in sumptuous and royal buildings, as that of
Caesarea amongst the rest, formerly called the Tower of Straton; and he built a
Temple to the honor of Augustus, who had again enlarged his Dominions, and
bestowed a Tetrarchy at his desire upon his brother Pheroras. To the People,
which was ready to mutiny, because of his idolatry, he released the third part
of their Tributes to please them, forbad all their meetings, punished severely
such as were obstinate, and bound the rest to him by an oath. After this,
taking down the old Temple of Jerusalem, he built another much more stately and
magnificent (being a Work of most admirable beauty) in the space of nine years
and six months, Repaireth the Temple at at Jerusalem.
during which time, it is said, that it only rained on nights, lest the Work
should be hindered. In the dedication he sacrificed 300 Oxen, and the rest of
the People according to their abilities. He made a Law, that thieves which
broke walls should be sold for slaves, out of the Kingdom. Josephus Antiq. l.
16. c. 1, etc.
Which the People ill resented, as against their Religion, which not only
provided otherwise concerning thieves, but would be broken also by these men,
who must necessarily serve Idolaters. Now he himself fetched from Rome
Alexander and Aristobulus his sons by Mariamne, whom having sent thither to be
bred, Augustus had kindly entertained. These youths were feared by Salome and
Pheroras, as intending to revenge their mothers death, and therefore they
resolved they must not live, especially she that was encouraged by the success
she had had against their mother. And they presented her with an opportunity of
accusing them, seeming indeed not to be well affected toward their father,
desiring the Kingdom, and exclaiming greatly against the authors of their
mother's death. Herod troubled hereat, called to Court Antipater his son,
begotten when he was a private man, that opposing him against them he might
make them more careful of their behavior. But thereby were they more
incensed, and Antipater making use of his time got more and more into his
father's affections, who commended him in especial manner to Caesar (though he
had not a thought at first of making him his Heir) and sent him to Rome to
procure the Emperor's favor.

43. Antipater improving his father's displeasure against his brothers, Idem
ibid. cap. 7. etc.
effected that he carried them to Augustus then at Aquileia, and grievously
accused them of an intention to poison him. Accuses his two sons begotten of
Mariamne unto Caesar.
Yet the young men by their tears, and Alexander's refutation of the calumny,
so moved Caesar, that he reconciled them; and for that Herod had given him 300
Talents, and been very liberal, as his custom was to be in all places, unto the
people of Rome, he bestowed on him half of the profits of the Mines in Cyprus,
and gave him liberty to leave which of his sons he pleased his Successor, or if
he would, to distribute his Kingdom amongst them all, which Herod presently
would have done, but Caesar would not permit it. In his absence the Inhabitants
of Trachonitis a considerable part of his Kingdom rebelled, and were reduced by
his Captains. After his return he made a speech to the people, and named to
succeed him first Antipater, and then his sons by Mariamne, which naming a
Successor beforehand, when the inheritance is uncertain, has ever wrought
great inconvenience to both parties. Cap. 11. etc.
After he had opened David's Sepulcher to search for Treasure, (as John
Hyrcanus had done before him) where he found none except very costly Attire,
After his rifling of David's Sepulcher his affairs decline.
and Ornaments of Gold, it is observed that his family fell into a very sad
condition, nothing being heard but complaints and accusations one against
another. The greatest part of Antipater's malice fell upon Alexander, and the
Court hereby was filled with tortures and slaughters. Herod suspecting all, and
trusting none, put many to death, and those of his most intimate friends, and
committed Alexander to prison, being captivated by so great a fear of an
untimely death, that he was almost ready to run mad. These things were diverted
by the rebellion of the Inhabitants of Trachonitis (which Country Caesar,
having taken it from Zenodorus, gave unto him) who again revolting, were
protected by Syllaeus an Arabian, that being to marry his sister Salome was
rejected, because he would not turn Jew. Saturninus and Voluminous Presidents of
Syria, resolved he might by force of Arms chastize these Rebels, whereupon he
entered Arabia, and having formerly destroyed their families, which they left in
their Corn Country, took a Castle they held there. Syllaeus now being at Rome
accused Herod unto Caesar, as having wasted all Arabia, and he so far believed
it, that he twice denied his Ambassadors audience. The Rebels and Arabians
hereupon did him much injury, which he was glad to put up for the present, but
sent Nicholaus Damascenus to plead his cause.

44. He first joined with the Ambassadors of Aretas King of Arabia, Cap. 16.
etc. ^ ^
in accusing Syllaeus, thence came to lay open his forgeries against Herod, to
whom Augustus was thoroughly reconciled, and had given him Arabia too, but that
he received from him other Letters, containing another complaint against his
sons. For whilst he was thus out with Caesar, the former stirs were renewed in
his house by means of Eurycles a Lacedaemonian, who winding himself into
Alexander's acquaintance, betrayed him first to Antipater, and then to Herod
himself. He denied all accusations, except that he intended with his wife to
fly to Archelaus King of Cappadocia her father; but Caesar being consulted, as
we said, willed Herod to call a Council at Berytum with the Roman Presidents,
Archelaus of Cappadocia, and the rest of his friends and Nobility there abouts,
and do as he should be advised. He called all but Archelaus, and in an Assembly
of 150 men declaimed most furiously against his sons, not producing any proof
at all, further than that they intended to fly, and not suffering them to be
present to answer for themselves; He only required the suffrages of the
Assembly to countenance his private resolution, which the major part giving
(though Saturninus and his sons gave an indifferent sentence) he acted by fury,
Puts his on^ to death.
and unnatural madness, Joseph Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 1. etc.
caused them to be strangled at Sebaste. Antipater, after the death of his
brothers, quickly plotted the destruction of his father, and for that he was
hated by all men, procured some esteem by his gifts, and drew Pheroras into the
conspiracy, to the issue of whom the Pharisees promised the Kingdom. For
refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance, they were fined by Herod, to whose
Kingdom they prophesied destruction, and happiness to the family of Pheroras,
because his wife paid their fine. Herod getting out these things by the means
of Salome, put the principal of the Pharisees to death, with others, and urged
his brother Pheroras to put away his wife, which he refusing to do, he banished
him his Kingdom. Pheroras then departing into his Terrarchy, died shortly
after, being visited by Herod, who buried him honorably at Jerusalem.
Antipater standing in fear of his father, wrought by his Creatures at Rome to
be sent for by Caesar. But this availed nothing; for in his absence all came
out, which confirmed Salome's words (to which the King in this matter had given
but little credit, knowing her to be too free in accusations) and brought
vengeance upon him, notwithstanding all his craft, for the murder of his
brethren.

45. Pheroras his wife being accused of poisoning her husband, Cap. 6. etc.
her maids were tortured, and in their pain gave some suspicion of the
conspiracy, which was more cleared by one Antipater that had the ordering of
Antipater's affairs, A grievous Conspiracy against him.
who confessed that his Master had compounded a poison, and delivered it to
Pheroras to be given to the King in his absence, and that it was kept by
Pheroras his wife: She confirmed the same, declaring that the poison was bought
in Egypt by Antipater's procurement, that it was committed to her charge, and
how, that when her husband was sick, and Herod came out of kindness to visit
him, being overcome with his love he forbade her to give it him. Amongst the
accessaries was Herod's own wife, the daughter of the High Priest; she was put
away, her father deposed, and Mathias the son of Theophilus preferred to his
place; Herod also her son was put out of the Kings Te^^ment, wherein he had
bequeathed the Kingdom to him after his death. In the mean time Bathillus the
Freed-man of Antipater returning from Rome was tortured, and confessed that he
had brought with him a poison to deliver to Pheroras, wherewith the King might
be certainly and speedily dispatched in case the other should fail. Antipater
returned ignorant of these passages, for that almost every one was his Enemy,
and before his father and Quintilius Varus, though he sought to cover his
wickedness, all things were made plain against him, whereupon he was committed
to close prison. He sickneth.
Shortly after Herod himself sickned, and became exceeding teasty and
wrathful, as well for these things as for that he thought the people was glad
of his misfortunes, having at the instigation of the Doctors of their Law cut
down an Eagle of Gold of great value that stood over the Portal of the Temple.
But his sickness more and more increased.

46. His disease was strange and fearful. Cap. 8. and 9.
For he burned with an inward heat, which pierced and tormented him in his
bowels. He was also vexed with a ravenous and infatiable appetite, and an Ulcer
in his Entrails, with a strange and furious Colic. His feet were swollen with
moisture, and a shining kind of phlegm, His strange Disease.
his stomach being no less afflicted. His body rotted, and was full of
crawling Worms, which afforded an intolerable stench; besides, he was held
with a filthy and troublesome Priapism, a strong Convulsion of his Nerves, and
shortness of breath, being generally judged thus to be punished for his
infinite impieties and sins committed against the Majesty of God; and
doubtless his intention to kill Christ, with the innocent blood of the Infants
cried loud. He used all means for recovery, and went over Jordan to the hot
Baths of Callirhoe. Thence returning to Jericho, a melancholic humor seized
on him; which rendered him unsociable, and displeased with all men. Perceiving
now that he should die, and supposing that the Jews would much rejoice in his
death, he shut up many of the chiefest of them in the Hippodrome, and gave in
charge to his sister Salome, and her husband Alexas, that as soon as he was
dead they should cause them all to be killed, that a lamentation might
accompany his funeral. Before his death he received Letters from Caesar, who
gave him leave to deal with his son as he saw occasion. Antipater yet believing
that he was dead, plotted how to escape and seize on the Kingdom, but his
Jailer with whom he dealt revealed it to Herod, He kills his son Antipater,
who had procured the death of his brothers, and plotted against his father's
life.
who commanded one of his Guard instantly to kill him; and to such an end came
he for the murder of his brethren, and the sad Tragedies he had raised in his
father's house. Herod having attempted to kill himself, died some five days
after his son, in the 72 year of his age, 27 after his getting possession of
the Kingdom, and 29 after he had been declared King by the Romans; it is
uncertain how long after the birth of Christ, but as is supposed not above two
years, in the first of the 195 Olympiad, the 754 of the City, A. D. 2. Ol.
195. ann. 1. V. C. 754.
Caius Caesar, and L. Aemilius Paulus being Consuls. Salome and Alexas before
his death was thoroughly known, And dies.
to their great honor discharged those that were locked up in the Hippodrome.

47. Herod not long before his end renewed his Testament, Cap. 10, 11, and 13.
wherein he ordained his son Antipas Tetrarch of Galile and Peraea, having
before this appointed him his Successor in the Kingdom, for that he was
incensed against Archelaus and Philip, Archelaus his son being left his
Successor in Judaea,
by the means of Antipater. Now he made Archelaus King, gave the Province
Gaulonitis, Trachonitis, Batanea, and Peneade to Philip, left Salome very well,
and gave great Legacies to Caesar and Livia his wife. Archelaus at first was
much cried up by the people; but afterward the multitude calling to mind the
death of Mathias, and his Confederates whom Herod had slain for breaking down
the Eagle, fell into a Sedition (many flocking out of the Country to the
Passover) and demanded justice against diverse of his Officers; but this tumult
was settled by the slaughter of 3000 about the Temple. Then went Archelaus to
Rome, not daring to take upon him the title without the leave of Augustus, to
whose disposal his father had referred his Testament. Many followed, and spoke
against him, being affected better toward Antipas, the Jews also sent their
Ambassadors, with whom joined 8000 of their Contrymen then living at Rome,
in a Petition to Caesar, that they might be joined to Syria, and live under
Roman Governors without any King. Augustus gives him half of the Kingdom, and
the other half to his two brothers.
At length Caesar came to this resolution, to give half that Dominion, which
Herod enjoyed, unto Archelaus, viz. of Idumaea, Judaea, and Samaria, with
Caesarea, Sebaste, Joppe, and Jerusalem: the other half he divided betwixt
Antipas and Philip. The former had the Country lying on the further side of
Jordan and Galile, with 200 Talents of annual revenue. Philip obtained
Bathanea, Trachonitis, and Auranitis with 100 Talents. Archelaus had 500
Talents of yearly rent out of his Country. Whilst these things were in hand
at Rome, grievous Seditions tore the Jews in pieces at home; for they being now
destitute of a King, several took upon them that title, Sabinus, Cap. 12.
who superintended the affairs of Caesar there, gave the occasion, by pilling
the people, which now at the feast of Pentecoste gathering together from all
quarters, sought to shake off that yoke. Seditions in Judaea.
After great slaughters, at length all was quieted by the coming of Varus from
Antioch, who left the first Legion in Garrison at Jerusalem.

48. The succession being settled by Augustus, a young man, and a Jew, Cap. 14.
born at Sidon, counterfeited himself Alexander the son of Herod by Mariamne,
One counterfeits Alexander the son of Herod by Mariamne.
affirming, that both he and Aristobulus were delivered by a friend, who had it
in charge to see them executed, others being killed in their rooms. He deluded
thousands of Jews inhabiting Melas, as also them at Rome, by whom he was
received as their King. But he could not deceive Caesar, who made him confess
the forgery, and because he had promised him pardon, if he would acknowledge
the deceit, for that he had formerly labored with his hands, And is detected
by Augustus.
he condemned him to the Galleys, and put the man to death who had persuaded
him to turn counterfeit. As for Archelaus, Cap. 15.
he tyrannized for ten years, and then being accused by the Jews, Augustus sent
for him to Rome, where his cause being heard, he banished him to Vienna in
Gall, and confiscated his goods. After this Cyrenius being sent into Syria to
succeed Varus, valued the goods of each Inhabitants, and seized the estate of
Archelaus. This cesse or valuation of their estates, Josephus Antiq. lib. 18.
c. 1, and 3. Act. 5.37.
gave occasion to a great Sedition, by the means one Judas a Gaulonite, Sodoc a
Pharise, and his confederate, alleging that this description was no other than
a manifest token of their servitude, and exhorting all to maintain their
liberty, to no purpose. Judaea governed by Deputies.
For Judaea now having no more Princes of it is own, was governed by Deputies,
of which Coponius being the first, was shortly after succeeded by M. Ambivius,
and he by Annius Rufus.

49. Dio l. 55.
Augustus (that we may return to Roman matters) adopted his two Grandsons Caius
and Lucius, having got them to be called Principes Juventutis, and designed
them Consuls. It happened that the Armenians cast out Artavasdus, whom he had
placed as King over them, and were in this Sedition assisted by the Parthians.
This troubled him exceedingly; for he grew old himself, and his adopted sons
were too young on the other hand. Yet sent he Caius with Proconsular power to
compose these troubles, giving him for a greater grace Lollia Paulina to wife,
Sueton in Claudio, A. D. 3. V.C. ^55. Idem in Tiberio c. 12, 13.
the daughter (or niece) of M. Lollius, Caius Caesar sent against the Armenians.
who went with him as his Governor. Tiberius met him at Samus, but was
slightly looked on, being little better than a banished man. But Caius falling
out with Lollius, who had incensed him against him, he had leave to return
home, in the eighth year of his retirement, Augustus giving way to it, through
the importunity of Livia, but denying to do any thing without the consent of
Caius, and then recalling him with this condition, that he should not at all
meddle with affairs of State. As for Caius, he prospered at his first entrance
into Armenia, but not long after received an hurt in a rash and unadvised
conference, after which he grew listlesse and sluggish, and this distemper was
increased by flatterers, so that he desired to stay in the East, Patercul. l.
2. c. 102, and 103. Floru^ l. 4. c. ult.
and lead there a private life. His Grandfather vehemently urged his return,
with condition also, that then he might do what he pleased, so that unwillingly
journying for Italy, Dies 18 months after his brother Lucius.
he died at Limyra a City of Lycia. His brother Lucius going into Spain, was
dead eighteen months before, after whose decease Augustus would have adopted
Tiberius; but he (if we believe Paterculus an egregious flatterer of him)
fearing the envy of Caius, vehemently withstood the attempt. A. D. 4. V. C. 756.
But now both of them being dead (and it is thought helped away by his mother
Livia for his sake) he was adopted, together with Agrippa Posthumus, who had
been born of Julia after Agrippa's death. And lest he should attempt any new
matters, he was constrained to adopt Germanicus, one of the sons of his brother
Drusus, Dio ut supra. A. D. 5. V. C. 757.
though he had a son of his own called also Drusus, in the 757 year of the
City, Sexius Aelius Latus and C. Sextius Saturninus being Consuls, the fifth
after the birth of Christ.

50. Tiberius was presently sent into Germany, where three years before a
famous War had broken out; and with him Velleins Paterculus the Historian
(formerly a Tribune in the Army) in quality of General of the Horse, as
succeeding his father in his places; and for nine whole years was he, as he
tells us, Vide l. 2. c. 104, 105, 106.
the spectator of Tiberius his heavenly actions, either in that place, or as
Lieutenant, and as far as the meannesse of his faculties could reach, an
assistant in them. This Summer he passed over the River Viturgis, and reduced
diverse Nations; but in the next even all Germany. For, the Roman Army was led
400 miles upwards from the Rhine, Tiberius subdueth Germany.
as far the River Elbe which runs by Sons, now the fear of an Archbishop,
and a people then called Hermundurians, and was met there by the Fleet, which
having sailed through the British Sea (till then unknown and unheard of)
having conquered many Nations, and brought infinite provision of all things
there joined with it. Now nothing was left unconquered, except the Marcomanni,
who under conduct of Marobodunus quitting their former seat, had settled
themselves upon these grounds surrounded by the Hercinian Wood, Idem ibid. c.
109, 110.
and through his ordering were raised to a considerable and emulous greatness.
Tiberius intended to set upon them the next summer; but was diverted by the
rebellion of all Pannonia and Dalmatia, A. D. 8. V. 760.
which not satisfied with the benefits of a long Peace, and grown in strength,
drew into society all the Nations about them, and flew to arms, to the number
of 800000 fighting men.

51. Augustus himself was much affrighted at this rebellion, and well he might,
for the Rebels having raised 200000 foot, and 9000 Horse, all select men, they
ordered that part of this Army should make for Italy it self, Dio l. 55.
Paterculus l. 2. c. 110, 111.
under expert Captains, that part should break into Macod^nia, and a third band
be left at home to defend their own. Levies therefore were carefully made, all
the old Soldiers recalled from every quarter, and such men and women both, as
were found within the cesse of Freed-men, were compelled to find Soldiers, the
Prince himself being heard to say in the Senate, that except they took good
heed, within ten days the Enemy might face the walls of Rome. Tiberius was
appointed General, and amongst other Officers Paterculas went his Quaestor;
Germanicus also is said to have deserved well in this Expedition. Though the
War at first was full of difficulties, and the more through scarcity of
provisions, yet was it in the space of three years concluded by Tiberius.
Reduces the Pannonians and Dalmatians.
Pannonia first submitted, Baro and Pinetus their most famous Leaders being
taken off, for the one was made a prisoner, and the other yielded himself. And
though the Dalmatians were hard to be overcome, through the difficult situation
of their places, the fierceness of their natures, and their wondrous abilities
in matters of War, yet not long after they were reduced, being almost totally
ruined. During these troubles abroad, Tacitus l. 1. c. 3. Sueton in Tiberio c.
20.
Agrippa the other adopted son of Augustus lived as a banished person, being by
him confined to Planasia an Island near Corsica, for his great folly and
rudeness, though he was not found guilty of any notable crime. To Tiberius a
Triumph and other great honors were decreed for reducing Illyricum, but he put
off the Triumph as very unseasonable, the City being now in great heaviness
for the loss of the Legions, and Varus in Germany.

52. Quintilius Varus formerly President of Syria (which being rich he entered
poor, but left it poor coming away rich, Paterculus ut supra. c. 117, 118, 119,
120.
as one expresses it) was sent into Germany, which he governed with great
negligence and security, as not considering that he lay in an Enemies Country,
but administering Justice as if he had been in the Forum at Rome. Against him
thus secure did the Germans conspire at the instigation of Arminius, Tacitus
Annal. l. 1.
son to Sigimerus Prince of that Nation, and a young man of excellent parts.
The plot was revealed to Varus by Segostes, but he refused to give any credit
to the relation. Dio l. 56. Sueton in Octavio.
They left no room therefore for a second discoverer, The overthrow of the
Legions under Varus in Germany.
but intangling the best Army the Romans had (both for discipline, valor, and
experience) amongst bogs, woods, and ambuscadoes, cut in pieces three Legions,
with as many wings, and six cohorts. Varus killed himself, Florus l. 4. c. ult.
Voluminous his Lieutenant most basely leaving the foot, ran away with the
horse; yet he overlived not those whom he had forsaken, but died a betrayer of
his Country. A. D. 9. V.C. 761.
Lucus Asprenas who commanded two Legions under his uncle Varus, preserved his
party in so great a calamity, and by coming down in a seasonable time to the
lower Wintering quarters, settled the wavering minds of such People as inhabited
on this side the Rhine. L. Seditius the Camp-Master, and others with him, being
shut up in Alisone, and besieged by innumerable forces, when they wanted
necessaries, brake through and came to their own party. This disaster fell out
in the 762 year of the City, Q. Sulpicius Camerinus and C. Poppaeus Sabinus
being Consult.

53. Augustus was out of all measure troubled at so dishonorable a loss,
Suetonius in Octavio c. 23.
so that counting it as full of danger as disgrace, he appointed watches about
in the City, prorogued the commands of Presidents over the Provinces, that by
them who were experienced and well known to the people, they might the better
be kept in order, and he vowed to celebrate Games in honor of Jupiter, if the
Commonwealth should recover it is former and better condition. Nayhe was struck
with such consternation, that for several months he never cut the hair of his
head or beard, and sometimes would he knock his head against the doors, crying
out in a kind of distraction Read Legiones Quintili Vare. Patercul. l. 2. c.
120, 121, 122. Sueton in Tiberio c. 18, 19, etc.
Quintilius Varus restore the Legions: he also observed the day of the defeat,
as unluckie and dismal every year. He sent Tiberius into Germany, who settling
the affairs of Gall, passed over the Rhene, Tiberius setleth that Country.
and wasting the Country defeated all he met. Perceiving the former miscariages
to have happened through the negligence and temerity of the General, he took
good advice, though at other times wont to act things on his own head, and
exacted Military discipline according to the most ancient strictness thereof.
For two years he managed this War, being once in danger of his life, and then
returning to Rome, triumphed three times, whereas if we believe Velleius, who
served under him, he deserved seven. The year following Germanicus Caesar,
after the end of his Confulship, was sent into Germany. Tiberius was well
rewarded. For Augustus procured him equal power with himself over Provinces and
Armies, which he held for two years, and then arrived at the Monarchy of the
Roman Empire.

54. Augustus in the year preceding his death, when his fourth ten years
Government was now expiring, unwillingly, as he ever pretended, Dio l. 56.
accepted of the fifth, and prorogued to Tiberius the Tribuneship for other
five years. The year wherein he died he made his third Census with Tiberius his
Colleague, and in this Lustrum were found 4137000 polls of Roman Citizens.
Inscript. Gruteri p. 230.
Celebrating the Lustrum in the Campus Martius, and with great concourse of
People, an Eagle flew about him several times, and directing her flight to a
Chapel near adjoining, sat down over the name of Agrippa, at the first letter.
Which considering, Sueton. in Octavio c. 99, 100
he commanded Tiberius his Colleague to make those vows, which it was the custom
to make for the following Lustrum. For though the tables were written and
ready, yet he refused to undertake that which he should not perform. About the
same time, the first letter of his name on his statue in the Capitol was
stricken out by a Thunderbolt. The Fortune Tellers answered, that he should
only live 100 days longer, Patercul. l. 2. c. 123.
which was signified by the letter C: and must be reckoned amongst the gods;
for AESAR the rest of the name in the Hetruscan language signified a God. In
the mean time he wrote a breviary of his actions, which he commanded to be cut
in brass, and set before his Mansoleum. Then sending Tiberius into Illyricum
to settle matters there, he followed him as far as Beneventum; but returning
back indisposed by a Dirrhaea, he came to Nola, whither he also recalled
Tiberius, and had long discourse with him in private. His last day being come,
he called for a looking-glass, caused his hair to be combed, and his wrinckled
cheeks smoothed up. Then asking his friends if he had not acted his part well,
upon their answer yea, he said Plaudite, and so died in the embraces of his
beloved wife Livia, A. D. 15. V. C. 767.
bidding her remember their Marriage and Farewell. Augustus dies.
He died in the same rome as Octavius his Father had done, and on the same day
( August 19) on which he entered his first Consulship, having lived 76 years all
but 35 days, in the 767 year of the City, the second of the 198 Olympiad, the
57 after the death of Julius Caesar, and the fifteenth after the death of
Christ. Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Apuleius being Consuls. He was the founder
of the Roman Monarchy, his Uncle having been rather the chalker of it out.
Having obtained it with the destruction of many, he managed it with great
prudence and moderation. His public demeanor was with modesty, and his
private with temperance, altogether void of luxury; for though his fortune was
high, his fare was but mean, and his apparel suitable, being made of cloth
wrought in his own house by his wife, sister, and daughter. He was most
unfortunate in his first marriage, through the incredible wantonness of his
daughter Julia, which died at Rhegium in confinement not long after him. And he
was not much happier in his second marriage, except his dearly beloved Livia was
much wronged. For it is reported that she (fearing Agrippa Posthumus might be
received into favor again, whom Augustus had lately visited) set him foreward
to his long home, by poisoning some Figs as they hung on a Tree, from which she
knew he was wont to gather that kind of fruit.

55. Tacitus makes it a doubt whether Tiberius found him alive or dead, Sueton
in Tiberio Capp. 22, and 24.
for Livia kept all things close, gave out words sometimes as if he recovered,
secured the Highways, denied all access to the house, and sent for her son
(her self) when he had scarcely entered Illyricum; so that by their practices
Agrippa Posthumus was first taken out of the way, Tacitus Annal. lib. 1.
and all things necessary being provided, the very same report gave information
that Augustus was dead, Tiberius succeeds him.
and Tiberius possessed of the Soverainty. For he had secured it to himself by
strength, though he played the dissembler most egregiously, refusing the
Government so long as till the Senators fell down at his feet, and besought him
to accept of it, whom he answered with ambiguous words, and at length
complaining that a miserable and intolerable servitude was imposed on him,
received it as by constraint, and yet so as he seemed to signify that he would
again relinquish it. Indeed there was cause for him to say, as he did, that he
took a Wolf by the ears. For Clemens the slave of Agrippa had got a
considerable party together under pretense of revenging his Lord's death:
Scribonius Libo secretly plotted his own advancement, and the Legions both in
Germany and Illyricum mutined, the former choosing Germanicus for their Prince,
who earnestly refused to accept of their offer, and at length quieted them with
much ado, as Drusus did the other in Pannonia, they being frighted into
obedience by a total Eclypse of the Moon, which fell out on the 27th of
September, five hours after midnight. Clemens was apprehended, and Libo not
effecting any thing was in the second year accused to the Senate. Tiberius in
the mean while looking carefully to himself, notwithstanding those motions
obtained the Supreme power, betwixt which and his rule with Augustus for two
years there was this difference; that his former command extended only to the
Armies and Provinces subject to Augustus, but this to the City it self
Mistress of all. Formerly he had Tribunitial and Censorian power; but now he
became Monarch, and was loose or exempt from all power of Laws, as Augustus
before him. For he had not together with him when living so equal authority as
afterward L. Verus had with M. Antoninus the Philosopher, which two first
governed the Commonwealth upon equal terms; but such like as Antoninus Pius had
with Adrian, who also adopted him, and made him his Colleague in the Proconsular
power as to Provinces, and in the Tribunitial power at home. And therefore
Suetonius tells us, In Tiberio cap. 23.
that Tiberius first assembled the Senate by virtue of his Tribunitial Office
only.

56. Sueton in Tiberio Capp. 26, 27, 28, etc. Tacitus ut supra.
Tiberius at first carried himself (as ever in some cases) very cunningly,
cloaking with marvelous dissimulation those enormities which afterward
appeared. Tiberius at first dissembleth his vices.
For some time he counterfeited incredible patience, stooped too low in his
complementing of Senators and Magistrates, rejected all high titles and honors
(not enduring the name of Domin^s or Lord) and consulted the Senate
continually, not doing little or much without its consents; nay, suffering some
things therein to be carried against his mind; he was also at first very
temperate in his diet, and exact in reforming manners, by degrees falling into
his natural humor. Envieth Germanicus.
From the beginning he was much afflicted with the fame of Germanicus, his
brother Drusus his son by nature (begotten of Antonia the younger, daughter of
Antony the Triumvir, by Octavia the sister of Augustus, concerning which
Antonia, Pliny reports that she never spate) and his own by adoption, who now
prosperously carried on the War in Germany. Within two or three years a very
plausible occasion presented it self for the calling of him back from those
Legions which were so much at his devotion. For it happened then that the
Parthians were in great commotions about their Kings. Phraates had 27 years
before for his own security sent four of his sons as Hostages to Rome, through
the procurement of his wife I hermusa an Italian woman, Josephus Antiquit. lib.
18. cap. 3.
which having been formerly his Concubine had then a son by him, and that this
her son might obtain the Crown, got the rest to be sent out of the way, and
then they two murdered the King. This Bastard called Phraataces reigned; but
being hated by the people for his paricide, was not long after slain, and then
was set up one Orodes of the family of the Arsacidae, who being also hated for
his cruelty came to the same end. Tacitus Annal. l. 2.
Then sent the Parthians for one of the Hostages, and Vonones the eldest was
dismissed by Tiberius. But they counting it a disgrace for any to reign over
them, who (as they termed it) had been a slave to Caesar, rebelliously cast him
off, and called in Artabanus, who then reigned in Media, and was also one of
the Arsacidae or the blood royal of Parthia. He at his first entrance was
repulsed by Vonones; but the second time overthrew him, and got possession of
the Kingdom. Vonones retiring into Armenia sent to Tiberius for aid, who, for
that Artabanus threatened hard, and the principal of the Armenians were of his
faction, did not think fit to make War upon him: therefore Vonones yielded
himself to Creticus Silanus, who governed Syria, and Artabanus set Orodes one
of his own sons over Armenia. At the same time Antiochus King of Commagena
dying, Sueton in Tiberio cap. 49. Tacitus ut prius.
a contention arose betwixt the Nobility and Commons; the former would have the
Country reduced into the form of a Roman Province, but the people were for a
King. Now also Philopator King of Cilicia being dead, his subjects were divided
upon the very same grounds. Syria also, and Judaea being weary of their
burdens, desired a diminution of their Tributes.

57. Idem cap. 43.
Tiberius now persuaded the Senate that the abilities of Germanicus were
requisite for quieting the East, whereupon the Provinces beyond the Seas were
decreed to him, with larger power than had been granted to any that governed
them, either by lot or the gift of the Prince. Germanicus was often importuned
by Tiberius upon this ground to return, yet intent upon his business he first
subdued several Nations in Germany, and by the overthrow of Arminius obtained
great glory, which was something obscured at last by a shipwreck. It was the
design of Tiberius to expose him unto danger and treachery; therefore he
removed Silanus his friend, and put Cn. Piso a froward man into his room, to
whom he gave in charge some secret thing as many believed. Under pretense of
quieting the East exposes him to danger and treachery.
Germanicus, being thus expelled to compose the affairs of the East, as Sueton
in Caligula cap. 1. Tacitus ibid. cap, 56.
one truly terms it, placed Zeno the son of Polemo King of Pontus over
Armenia. Q. Veranius a Knight had the oversight of Cappadocia, which was made a
Province; for Archelaus the King thereof courted not Tiberius enough when he
was at Rhodes, and therefore was called to Rome, and there kept till his death.
Q. Servaeus also was set over Commagena. Artabanus sent to Germanicus about
renewing the league, and good correspondence, desiring that Vonones might not
be kept in Syria, nor suffered by his Messengers to sow discord amongst the
people, offering him also leave to come to the bank of Euphrates; to which he
answered, as became the State and himself. This year died Livy the Historian,
Eusebius. in Chronico.
who was born at Padua; and also Ovid the Poet, having remained a banished man
in Pontus several years, whither the displeasure of Augustus confined him,
either for that he had seen him do some unseemly thing which he would not have
known, or for publishing his wanton books concerning Love, A. D. 19. V.C. 771.
Lib. 2. De Tristibus.
as he hints himself. This was the 771 year of the City, the 19th after the
birth of Christ, Tiberius Augustus the third, and Germanicus Caesar the second
time being Consuls.

58. Germanicus the year following made a voyage into Egypt, Tacitus lib. 2.
Capp. 59, 60, etc. A. D. 20. V. C. 772. Sueton in Caligula cap. i, 2, 3, 4,
etc. Josephus Antiquit. l. 18 c. 8.
to view it for the rarity of its Antiquities, for which he was chidden by
Tiberius, as going without his leave. Thence returning into Syria, he was most
shamefully, and without any measure affronted by Piso, and at length died of a
lingering disease at Antioch, Who dies of a lingering disease at Antioch.
being thought to miscarry by the fraud of Tiberius, and the Ministry of Piso,
who plainly said, that he must either displease Father or Son. But the fruit he
reaped in pleasing thus the Father was but unpleasing; for returning to Rome
the year following, he escaped narrowly tearing in pieces by the people, and
being condemned by the Senate killed himself. For Germanicus there was an
universal mourning, not only in Rome and the Provinces, but also amongst
Barbarians and Enemies themselves. He was a person excellently accomplished,
and of a most sweet disposition, whereby he became the love and delight of the
people, and Augustus long debating with himself whether he should not leave him
his Successor, at length caused Tiberius to adopt him, who, it is thought, being
restrained by fear, and reverence of him, after his death broke out into such
courses as made the other more missed and glorious. By his wife Agrippina (the
daughter of Agrippa and Julia) he died father of three sons, His issue.
viz. Nero, Drusus, and Caius; and of as many daughters. He died in the 34th
year of his age, and that which followed his second Consulship, M. Junius
Solanus, and C. Norbanus Flaccus being Consuls.

59. Three or four years after was Tiberius punished in his own kind by the
poisoning of his own son Drusus, and that by his greatest favorite Aelius
Seianus. This man being the son of Seius Strabo a Roman Knight, Tacitus Annal.
lib. 4.
when very young followed Caius the Nephew of Augustus, and afterward by
diverse Arts wound himself into the affections of Tiberius, who used him as his
most inward Counselor, or Minister of State, and erected to his honor his
statue of brass in the Theater. Tiberius punished by the treachery of Seianus,
who poysoneth his son Drusus.
Now he thought of no less than the Empire it self, as a step to which, he
poisoned Drusus the son of Tiberius, having brought Livia the young man's wife
to a compliance with him by his filthy dalliance, and corrupted Lygdus the
Eunuch to betray his trust. Drusus had the year before the Tribumtial power
conferred on him; but for that he was none of the most towardly was little
regarded by his father, who as soon as his Funeral was over, returned to his
wonted employments, forbidding any longer vacation upon his account. Sueton in
Tiberio cap. 52.
The Inhabitants of Ilium sending their Ambassadors something too late to
condole his death, he answered, that he also was sorry for the death of Hector
their excellent Countryman. Tiberius after this commended the two sons of
Germanicus, Nero and Drusus, to the Senate, which done, Seianus began to strike
at them, though at first through the sides of their mother, laboring to bring
them all into suspicion and hatred. Tacitus ut supra.
This first advantage he took was from the prayers of the Priests, who made
vows for their health, as for that of Tiberius; for he took it hainously that
they herein should be made equal to him. Then did he provoke them, and never
ceased till he caused them to be declared Enemies by the Senate, after which he
starved them to death, using also their mother most injuriously, for that she
was not sparing of her tongue in reprehending and upbraiding him. Now was
Tacfarinas, who had maintained a tedious war in Africa, slain by Dolabella.
Sueton. in Tib. cap. 40.
As for Tiberius by the persuasion of Seianus he withdrew into the Isle
Capreae, and thence forward minding nothing gave up himself to all sorts of
enormities.

60. For, casting off all care of the State, being out of sight, Idem ibid.
Capp. 41, 42. etc.
he returned to his natural disposition, not looking to the supply, either of
Army or Provinces; suffering Armenia to be seized on by the Parthians, Maesia
by the Dacians and Sarmatians, Tiberius returns to his natural humor.
and Gall to be wasted by the Germans. He instituted a new Office for the
management of pleasures, unto which he preferred a Knight, T. Caesonius
Prisous: he held such in greatest esteem, and bestowed Offices on men that were
most for his turn that way, being given up to such beastliness as is
incredible, and not to be mentioned. He was excessively covetous, both as to
getting, and keeping what was unjust. He was so undutifull to his mother, as he
refused to come at her, when living, and when dead, he neglected to bury her;
neither would he perform her will, but persecuted her friends; but she was
justly rewarded (though as to him unjustly) having over and above other wicked
practices been suspected to have had an hand in the death of Germanicus. His
Character given him by his Schoolmaster.
So cruel, and filthy he became, that he verified the Character given him* when
but young, by Theodorus Gadareus his Schoolmaster, that he was (...), or Dirt
mingled with blood. Having chosen twenty of the principal men of the City to
be his Counselors, he scarcely left two or three of them alive, Seianus being
found out, and punished justly for his wickedness, amongst others that were
innocent. He spared not the familiar friends of his mother, nephews, Agrippina
or Seianus. No day either holy or profane was free from slaughters. Every
offense little or great was Capital. Many were condemned with their wives and
children. Rewards were proposed to informers, and all testimonies taken for
true. Simple death he accounted nothing, and therefore invented painful ways;
especially after he knew how his son Drusus died, he neither spared any person
nor sort of torments. Caius the son of Germanicus he cared not for, as
suspecting him, and Tiberius his grandson by Drusus he despised, as conceived
in adultery.

61. Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 3. and Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 9. Luc. 3.
In the twelfth year of Tiberius was Pontius Pilate sent into Judaea to succeed
Valerius Gratus, the fourth Governor after the banishment of Archelans the son
of Herod to Vienna. Pontius Pilate succeeds Gratus in Judaea.
Coponius was the first, M. Ambivius the second, Annius Rufus the third, and
Gratus the fourth. Pilate at his first entrance set up the Images of Caesar at
Jerusalem, which moved the Jews to sedition; but overcome by their entreaties,
he removed them to Caesarea. He being now Governor of Judaea, Herod Antipas
Tetrarch of Galile, his brother Philip Tetrarch of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and
Lysanias of Abilene; Annas (who, formerly having had the Office, though
displaced by Gratus, yet for his authority still carried the name) and Ca^phas
(otherwise called Joseph, whom lately Gratus had placed in the room of Simon,
by him deposed also) being Highpriests, in the fifteenth year of Tiberius
entering, John Baptist began to preach and baptize in the resemblance and
spirit of Elias. John Baptist begins to preach and baptize.
Amongst others he baptized Christ himself, of whom he was the forerunner. His
ministry is thought to have commenced on the tenth day of the seventh month,
which was Penitential, and so great a Fast, A. D. 29. Ol. 201. an. 4. V. C. 781.
that the soul which did not afflict it self, was to be cut off from amongst
it is People; and was also Expiatorie, wherein the High Priest (the Type of him
before whose face John was sent) entered into the Holy of Holies alone, with
blood expiating the sins of the People, this being also the same day wherein by
trumpet the Jubilee was proclaimed.

62. Jesus now about thirty years of age, being baptized of John in Jordan (and
owned for the Messiah and son of God, by the descending of the Holy Ghost in
the form of a dove, and resting upon him, as also by a voice from Heaven) was
led of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil. A. D. 30.
Ol. 202. an. 1. V. C. 782.
After his temptation he returned in the power of the Spirit into Galile. Going
into Galile he received Andrew, and Simon his brother, the day following called
Phlip of Bethsaida the City of Andrew, and Simon surnamed Cephas or Peter by
the Lord. On the third day being invited to a marriage in Cana of Galile, he
turned water into wine, this being his first miracle, and by it his glory was
manifested, and his Disciples believed in him. Afterward he went down to
Capernaum with his mother, The Lord Jesus executes his Ministry.
his brethren, (or kinsmen) and disciples, where they abode not many days.
Then came he to the exercise of his Ministry, the acts whereof are
distinguished by four Passeovers. Amongst the four Evangelists which describe
them, Matthew alone has neglected the order of time, which is constantly
observed by the rest, except in the History of John's casting into prison, as
Luke has recorded it.

63. Jesus having ascended to Jerusalam at the time of the first Passover,
cast buyers and sellers out of the Temple, wrought miracles, Ex Usserio
Armachano uti ille ex Richardsono Episcopo Ardachadensi in provincia Armachana.
and instructed Nicodemus in the mystery of Regeneration, and Faith in himself.
Leaving then Jerusalem he went into Judaea with his Disciples, The first
Passover thereof.
where abiding, he baptized by the ministry of them; John then baptizing in
Aenon; for he was not yet cast in prison. A certain question arose about
purifying betwixt some of John's Disciples and the Jews. John instructed now
his Disciples concerning Christ the last time, as they told him of his acts
with some emulation, and not long after he was cast into prison, for
reprehending Herod the Tetrarch his incest with his brother Philip's wife.
Jesus hearing of his captivity, and that the Pharisees took notice that he
baptized more by the hands of his Disciples, departed out of Judaea (where he
had remained some eight months) and came into Galile. In his passage through
Samar^a he discoursed with a woman at a Well near unto the City Sychar, the
Inhabitants of which by her means he brought to the acknowledgement of himself,
four months before harvest, or the Passover, about the middle of the ninth
month called Ab. Having stayed two days at Sychar, he proceeded, and returned
the second time into Galile out of Judaea after his baptism, being received
with great respect by the Galilaeans, who had seen what he did at Jerusalem.
Preaching in their Synagogues here, he also healed at Cana, the son of the
Nobleman that was sick at Capernaum, which was his second miracle in Galile.
Having wrought miracles at Capernaum, he went to Nazareth, where he had been
brought up, and expounding the Prophet Esaias concerning himself, they first
admired, and then cast him out, and would have thrown him down headlong, but he
passed away through the midst of them.

64. Leaving then Nazareth, he taught at Capernaum, where they were astonished
at his doctrine, and cast out an unclean spirit that was first commanded
silence. Departing out of the Synagogue into the house of Simon and Andrew, he
cured of a Fever Simons wive's mother. At Sunset he healed sick folks
brought to him, and cast out Devils, first put to silence. In the morning he
went out into a desert place to pray, and the multitudes endeavoring to detain
him, he answered, he must also preach in other places; and coasting through
Galile, he preached in their Synagogues, and cast out Devils. Then taught he
the People out of Simon's ship on the Lake of Genesareth, and helped them to a
miraculous draught of fishes, whereupon Simon Peter, Andrew, James, and John,
being commanded to follow him, he makes fishers of men. Then going through all
Galile healing and teaching, his fame spread through Syria, and multitudes
flocked to him. In a certain City he healed a Leper, which though forbidden,
yet noised his fame, and such companies now followed him that he could not
enter the City, but taught without in desert places, and prayed. After a few
days he returned to Capernaum, and teaching in his own house he healed the
Paralitick, who was let down in a bed, and forgave him his sins before the
Pharisees. Thence going toward the Sea, he taught, and passing by called Levi
or Matthew, then sitting at the receipt of custom, by whom being feasted, he
defended his disciples against the Pharisees, for eating with Publicans and
sinners, and for not fasting. And it came to pass, that on the second Sabbath
after the first (that is, on the second Sabbath of the new year, instituted
after their return out of Egypt, and beginning with the month Nisan or Abib)
Jesus passing through the Cornfieldsd, defended his Disciples, who plucked and
ate ears of Corn, against the Pharisees, and explained the Doctrine of the
observation of the Sabbath.

65. After these things there was a Feast of the Jews (that is, Joh. 5.
the second Passover of his Ministry) and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, where on
the Sabbath Day he healed one who had layn 38 years diseased at the Pool of
Bethesda, The second Passover.
for which thing, and because he had called God his Father, the Jews went about
to kill him, and he opposed against them his most divine apology. Departing
thence, in the Synagogue, on another Sabbath, he healed a man that had a
withered hand, for which the Pharisees and Herodians presently sought to kill
him. Jesus knowing this, departed to the Sea, where teaching the People, he
commanded a little Vessel to wait on him, because the multitude crowded him. In
these days he spent a whole night in prayer upon a mountain, and when it was
day, made choice of twelve, whom he called Apostles. Going down into the plain
he healed the sick, and coming home, such was the press, that they could not
eat, whereupon his friends came to take him, supposing he had been besides
himself. When he had seen the multitude he ascended into the mountain, and his
Disciples coming to him, there he preached his long Sermon, first speaking to
the Apostles, and then to the multitude. Having ended all his words in the
audience of the People, he entered into Capernaum, and healed the Centurions
servant ready to die. The day following he raised from the dead the widdow's
son in the City Naim, whence his fame was spread abroad. Then sent John his
Disciples from prison to him, to ask whether he was the man, or they must look
for another, who being departed with an answer, Christ took occasion to speak
of John, and upbraided the Cities, aquiescing in the Will of his Father as to
the revealing or hiding the things of salvation. Then Simon the Pharisee
inviting him to dinner, a woman that was a sinner washed his feet with her
tears, which defending against Simon, he forgave her her sins. And it came to
pass afterward, that he preached through every City and Village, his Diciples
being with him, and certain women ministering to him, amongst which was Joanna
the wife of Chusa, Herod's Steward. Then healed he a man possessed with a dumb
and deaf Devil, and defended himself against the Pharisees, who said, that he
cast out Devils by Beelzebub Prince of Devils. To the Scribes and Pharisees
demanding a sign, he only gives that of Jonas, and his mother and brethren
asking to speak with him, he declares who are his nearest relations. On that
day going to the Sea, he taught the People from the ship in the Parable of the
Sower and others. On this same day when it was evening, he would they should
pass to the further side, and having dismissed the multitude, when in their
passage a great Tempest arose, he chiding the winds stilled the Sea, and saved
his Disciples then in danger. Coming unto the further side into the Country of
the Gaderens, or Gergasens, which lies over against Galile, two Daemoniacks
met him, exceeding fierce (whereof Mark and Luke mention but one) out of which
he casting the Devils, permitted them to enter into the Swine. The Gaderens
hereupon desiring him to depart out of their Coasts, he (having dismissed the
man who desired to be with him, and upon refusal, preached throughout Decapolis
what things Jesus had done for him) returned by ship unto the further side, and
so to Capernaum his own City.

66. And it came to pass, that when Jesus was returned, the People gladly
received him; for they were all waiting for him. And being by the Seaside, he
answered the Disciples of John, inquiring why his Disciples fasted not, seeing
they, and the Disciples of the Pharisees fasted often. Whilst he spoke, he was
besought to heal the only daughter of Jairus; and as he was going down, a
woman that had had an issue of blood twelve years, was by touching the hem of
his garment made whole. Passing thence, he cured two blind men, whom he charged
with threatening to say nothing of him; but in vain. As they passed away, a man
possessed with a dumb Devil was presented unto him, whom he healed, the company
admiting, and the Pharisees blaspheming. Then going about to all the Towns, he
taught and healed, and coming into his own Country was contemned again by his
Countrymen, as he taught in the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, they calling him
Carpenter, though they admired him. Going about the Villages he taught, and
pitying the multitude because the Harvest was great and the laborers few, he
bade his Disciples pray for laborers into the Harvest. Then sent he out his
twelve Disciples two and two, commissionated with power to preach and heal.
Having made an end of commanding them, he went and preached in their Cities:
and the twelve went about the Villages, teaching and healing every where. Now
about this time was John Baptist beheaded, through the procurement of Herodias,
which being told unto Jesus by his Disciples, who buried him, after the return
of his own, he went with them by ship into a desert place called Bethsaida. The
multitude hearing of it, got thither before him, where he taught and healed
them. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there sat with his Disciples, and
the Passover was nigh. It being late, he having compassion on the multitude,
fed the number of 5000 men (besides women and children) with five barley loaves,
and two small fishes, whereof twelve baskets full of fragments were taken up.
When they would come and take him by force to make him a King, he caused his
Disciples to pass over to the other side opposite to Bethsaida, and toward
Capernaum, Having prayed in a mountain apart, he came toward his Disciples,
and vvalking upon the Sea, when they had now towed 25 or 30 furlongs, and
were troubled with a contrary vvind. They being affrighted at him, he made
known himself, and saving Peter (who had desired he would bid him come to him
on the water) when he was sinking, he passed over with them. Coming into
the Land of Genesa^et, they brought all sorts of diseased persons to him,
desiring they might touch but the hem of his Garment, which as many as touched
were made whole. The day after his passage came the people which he had left
on the further side to Capernaum to seek him, where in the Synagogue he
preached concerning the bread of life, asserting himself to be it against the
murmuring of the Jews. Many now of his Disciples departed from, and vvalked no
more with him. And though the 12 refused to depart, yet he declared that one
of them was a Devil, meaning Judas Iscariot, who should betray him, being one
of the twelve.

The third Passover.
67. After the third Passover of his Ministry, the Scribes and Pharisees that
were come from Jerusalem came to him, and complained that his Disciples are
with unwashed hands, to whom he answered concerning their abolishing God's
commands by their Traditions, and taught the multitude what he declared to his
Disciples, that not what enters in, but what comes out defiles a man.
Departing into the Coasts of Tire and Sidon, he cast the Devil out of the
daughter of the Syrophaenician woman, because of the greatness of her faith.
Passing thence to the Sea of Galile through the midst of Decapolis, he healed a
dear man, who had an impediment in his speech, and ascending into a Mountain
healed many. In those days a great multitude having stayed with him three
days, he fed them to the number of 4000 men, besides Women and Children, with
seven Loaves, and a few little fishes; and seven baskets full of fragments were
taken up. Taking ship presently he came into the parts of Dalmanutha, or the
Coasts of Magdala. The Pharisees aching a sign, he sighed deeply in his spirit
for that these Hypocrites could discern the face of the sky, and not the signs
of the times; and refusing to give them any other sign than that of Jonas, he
left them, and returned by ship to the further side. His Disciples having
forgot to take bread, and brought but one loaf with them, he bids them beware
of the Leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod; and expounds his meaning to be
of the Leaven of Doctrine. Coming then to Bethsaida, he cures a blind man by
degrees without the Town. Passing thence into the Towns of Caesarea-Philippi,
he asked his Disciples concerning the opinion which men had of him, and then
what they themselves thought, to which for themselves Peter answered, that he
was the Christ, which thing he forbade them to declare, foretold his death and
resurrection, called Peter Satan for checking him about his sufferings, and
foretold his transfiguration, which after some six days was fulfilled. The day
following coming down, he cast out a Devil out of the Lunatic, which his
Disciples could not eject. Passing thence, they journeyed through Galile, which
he would not have known, and taught his Disciples that he must die, and rise
again, which they understanding not were troubled, and afraid to ask him. Being
arrived at Capernaum, the Lord paid Tribute-money, and taught his Disciples
humility by the example of a little Child, speaking also against offending
one's weak brother, and forgiving one another seventy seven times by the
Parable of the Kings two debtors. John telling him that they had seen one
casting out Devils in his name, he said he was not to be forbidden, and again
spoke against offending weak ones, and bade them beware that no Member offended
them. After these things Jesus walked in Galile, for he would not walk in Jury,
because the Jews sought to kill him. Now the Jews feast of Tabernacles (the
Scenopagia) was at hand. His brethren, or Kins-men willed him to go up that his
Disciples might believe in him; but he refused to comply with them therein who
themselves believed not, and went up after them, not openly, but as it were in
secret.

68. When the time was come that he should be received up, he steadfastly, set
his face to go to Jerusalem. The Samaritans not receiving him he checked his
Disciples, who would have had fire called down from Heaven upon them. Several
in his passage desiring to follow him, he gave answer to them all. After these
things he sent out 70 Disciples before his face, two into every City and place
where he would come. And in the midst of the feast when the multitude was busy
in inquiring about him, he came, and taught in the Temple. Some were sent to
lay hold of him. On the last, and great day of the Feast, when he spoke of
faith in himself, a great difference arose, and the Messengers that were sent
to apprehend him, with Nicodemus, defended him against the Pharisees. Departing
into the Mount of Olives, he returned early in the morning, and refused as a
Judge to condemn the woman taken in Adultery. In the Treasury he spoke much
concerning many truths, concluding with before Abraham was I am; whereupon the
Jews took up stones to cast at him; but he hid himself, and passed away through
the midst of them. Passing by, he saw, and cured a man that was born blind, who
for vindicating him was cast out of the Synagogue. He then preached concerning
the true shepherd, Sheep, and Door, as also of Thieves and Mercenaries, which
caused a dissension amongst his hearers. The 70 then return with joy, and a
certain Lawyer asking him what he should do to inherit eternal life, he sends
him to the Law, and to declare who is our neighbor, speaks the Parable of
the man that fell amongst Thieves. After this he was entertained in the house
of Martha, which ministered to him, while her sister Mary hearing his word was
preferred before her. And it came to pass that after he had done praying in a
certain place, one of his Disciples desired him to teach them to pray, as John
also taught his Disciples, therefore he prescribed the second time the same
Lords prayer, adding arguments for constancy and firmness of faith. He cast
out a Devil which was dumb, and proved against the blasphemers that he did it
not by Beelzebub. While he said these things a certain woman said, Blessed is
the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck, to which he
answered. The multitude gathering about him, he said, that Generation sought
for a sign, but no sign, but that of Jonas the Prophet should be given it,
saying, that the Queen of the South, and the Ninevites should condemn it in
judgment. Dining with a Pharisee who had invited him, and wondered that he
washed not, he spoke against their Hypocrisy, and denounced also woes against
the Expositors of the Law. He bade his Disciples beware of the Leaven of the
Pharisees (Hypocrisy) and not fear those that could kill the body. He refused
to be a Judge betwixt a man and his brother about the inheritance, and thence
took occasion to speak against anxious cares of the World, bidding them be
ready against the uncertain time of their Lords coming.

69. There being some that told Jesus of the Galileans, the blood of whom
Pilate mingled with their sacrifice, he took thence occasion to press
repentance, and spoke the Parable of the barren Fig Tree. On a certain Sabbath
healed a woman that had a spirit of infirmity 18 years, which act he defended
against the ruler of the Synagogue, and compared the Kingdom of God to a Grane
of Mustard seed, and to Leaven. Journeying toward Jerusalem to the Feast of
the Dedication he taught through the Cities and Villages, and answered that
question whether few shall be saved? To certain Pharisees, who bade him be
gone for fear of Herod, he gave a courageous answer. Being invited to eat in
the house of one of the chiefest Pharisees, he healed one of the Dropsy,
defended it, and spoke the Parable of those that were invited to the feast,
instructing the Pharisee who had invited him. One of the Guests, saying, that
Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God, he took occasion to
speak the Parable of the great Supper, and the excuses of such as were invited.
To the multitude following him he preached concerning the denial of life it
self for his sake, propounding the Parable of one who was to build a Towr, and
the King going to battle. Upon the Publicans and sinners their coming to hear
him, the Pharisees murmured, and he spoke to them the Parables of the lost
sheep, the groat, and the Prodigal Son. To his Disciples he also spoke that of
the unjust Stuward, which applying, the Pharisees who were covetous derided
him, whereupon preaching against them, amongst other things he spoke the
Parable of the Rich-man and Lazarus. Speaking to his Disciples against
offenses, he also teaches that we must forgive our offending brother. The
Apostles desiring him to increase their faith, he speaks of the power of that
Grace, and by the Parable of the servant shows, that when we have done all we
can we are unprofitable servants, having done but what we ought. Passing
through Samaria and Galile, toward Jerusalem, he healed the ten Lepers,
whereof one only returned and praised God. To the Pharisees asking him when
the Kingdom of God should come, he answers, and declares to his Disciples,
that the day of the son of man should be like to those of Noah and Lot, but he
must first suffer many things. To encourage his Disciples to pray, he spoke the
Parable of the unjust Judge, and to some that thought themselves righteous and
despised others, that of the Pharisee and the Publican.

70. At the Feast of Dedication, when it was Winter, Jesus walking in Salomons
Porch, to the Jews, who bade him tell them plainly whether he was Christ or
not, he answered, that He and his father are one, whereupon they taking up
stones to throw at him, he defended his Divinity by his works, and the
Scriptures, and escaped when they sought to take him. Passing beyond Jordan
into that place where John baptized, he taught and healed, many believing on
him, and answered the Pharisees, tempting him, that it is unlawful for a man
to put away his wife, except for Adultery. Now admitted he Infants, though his
Disciples rebuked such as brought them, and as he was passing thence to come
into the way, he answered the young Rich man that asked him what he should do
to inherit eternal life, and bade him sell all he had, and give it to the poor,
then to follow him. Hearing that Lazarus was sick, he abode in the place where
he was two days, and then coming to Bethany, after he had been dead four days
raised him from the dead. Hereupon Caiphas Prophesying that he was to die for
the people, they resolved to put him to death, which he understanding, went
into the City Ephraim, and there taught. Ascending toward Jerusalem, he went
before his Disciples, who were amazed and afraid. He now told them of his
sufferings, which they did not at all understand; and the sons of Zebede asking
to sit on his right, and left hand in his Kingdom, he gave them a repulse, and
improved it to the teaching of them all humility. Coming near to Jericho he
healed a blind man. In Jericho he called, and was entertained by Zachaeus, and
passing thence restored sight to two blind men, whereof one was Bartimaeus;
when they drew near to Jerusalem, they thinking that the Kingdom of God was
near, he spoke the Parable of the King, who going a journey committed ten
Talents to his servants to be improved till his return. The Passover being now
at hand, many went up to Jerusalem to purify themselves, and Jesus six days
before it came to Bethany, where they made him a Supper. Lazarus sat at Table
with him, but Mary anointed his feet, and wiped them with her hair. Many of the
Jews came not only to see him, but Lazarus also, upon whose account, for that
many believed on him, the Chief Priests consulted also to kill Lazarus. Going
toward Jerusalem, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany, at the Mount
of Olives (on the 29th of March) he sent his Disciples for the Asse's Colt
whereon he rode to Jerusalem. When he came near the City he wept over it,
foretelling its final destruction. Out of the Temple he cast buyers and
sellers, where the Children cried Hosanna, and many believed on him, the great
ones studying how to kill him. Certain Greeks who were come to the Feast
desiring to see him, he preached concerning his passion, and had a voice from
Heaven answering his prayer, which some thought to be of an Angel, and others
of Thunder. It being late, he went to Bethany with the 12. Notwithstanding, the
multitude had seen so many works, yet they believed not, that the saying of
Esaias might be fulfilled. Yet many of the Chief Priests believed on him, but
durst not confess him for the Pharisees. Jesus cried, and spoke concerning
faith in himself.

71. The next morning as he returned he hungered, and cursed the barren
Fig Tree. He cast buyers and sellers again out of the Temple, and suffered
nothing to be carried through it. Whilst he taught concerning Faith in himself,
the Chief-Priests consulted how to kill him, fearing the People. At evening he
went out of the City, and returning in the morning, they found the Fig Tree
withered; whereupon he took occasion to preach concerning the power of Faith.
As he taught in the Temple, the Chief-Priests, and Pharisees, and Elders, asked
him by what authority he did these things? to whom he answered, with another
question concerning John's authority, spoke the Parable of the two sons, asking
them, whether did the will of his father? and that of the husbandmen, who
killed the heir of the vinyard, applying them to these men, who now studied how
to apprehend him, but feared the People. Again, he spoke to them the Parable of
the marriage of the King's son, and the excuses of the invited, with the want of
the wedding garment. Then the Pharisees sent some to entrap him in his talk,
who asking him whether it was lawful to give tribute to Caesar? admired his
answer, and left him. On that day the Saduces asked him concerning the woman
married to seven husbands, whose she should be at the resurrection? to which
having answered, and asserted the resurrection, a Lawyer tempted him, asking
him which is the greatest Commandment? Having answered him, he asked the
Pharisees whose son Christ is? and no man could answer him any thing, nor durst
thenceforth ask him any more questions. Then speaking of the Scribes and
Pharisees, he pronounced eight woes against them, and upbraiding Jerusalem with
her cruelty and obstinacy, foretells her destruction. Sitting over against
the treasury, he saw a poor widow cast in two mites, and going out to his
Disciples, who admired the structure, he foretold it is ruin. His Disciples
asked him on the Mount of Olives when these things should be, concerning the
sign of his coming, and the end of the World, he answered largely, advising
them to watch, for they knew not what hour their Lord would come, illustrating
his doctrine by the Parable of the Ten Virgins, and the talents committed to
the servants to traffic. And he described the last Judgment by a severing of
goats from the sheep. By day he taught, at night he went to the Mount of
Olives, and all the People came in the morning to hear him in the Temple. When
he had ended these sayings, he said to his Disciples, You know that after two
days is the Feast of the Passover, and the son of man is betrayed to be
crucified. The great ones assembling in the house of Caiphas the High Priest,
consulted how to kill him; but they said, not on the Feast Day, lest there be
an uprore amongst the People. Jesus being in Bethany in the house of Simon the
Leper, a woman poured ointment upon his head, which he defended against his
Disciples, foretelling his burial. Then entered Satan into Judas, who offered
himself, aed covenanted for money to betray him.

72. In the Fourth Passover Jesus himself, Our Passover, was offered, and an
end thereby was put to all Sacrifices, The Fourth Passover wherein Christ the
true Passover himself was offered.
which were but types of this. Some think that he did not this time eat the
Paschal Lamb, but only unleavened bread, and bitter herbs, such as were used
by those that could not come up to the Sacrifice, being in another Country. For
a Grotius Annot. in Matthew. c. 26.
learned man distinguishes betwixt (...) and (...), which later was performed
by those that were a far off, in memorial of the thing, it being unlawful to
kill the Lamb any where out of Judaea. Now Christ would not sacrifize, because
he himself was now to be offered. That he did not do it, appears, because as
soon as he came into the house he sat down; and this many of the ancient Greek
Fathers did believe. These words of Christ, with desire I have desired to eat
this Passover with you before I suffer, the same learned man expounds as
meant, that he hasted to that Supper because the time of his death was at hand,
which would take from him the liberty of celebrating the (...). It being
granted that he kept the Passover a day before the Jews observed it, Vossius
de sacrae coenae dominicae Symbolis Disp. 1.
another contendeth that Christ kept it on the true day, and that the Jews
receding from the Law, put it off till the following day, or the 15 of the
month Nisan, being the Sabbath, lest they should be debarred of working for
two days together. But the other opinion is more probable, which holds that
he anticipated it, being as the true Passover, to be offered up on the true
day of killing the Passover, which fell out on the day preceding the Sabbath,
and not on the Sabbath day. It clearly appears in Scripture, what things our
Lord did and suffered for unworthy sinners, after he had eaten this Supper,
though the order of the former passages concerning his preaching be obscure,
and therefore we have more largely described them. Being betrayed by Judas into
the hands of the Chief-Priests, and by them delivered up to Pilate the
Governor, he being convinced of his innocence and their malice, sought how to
deliver him, till they told him, that if he did it he was not Caesar 's friend;
whereupon fearing to be accused to Tiberius, A. D. 33. Ol. 202. an. 4. V. C.
787.
of protecting one who affected the Kingdom, he condemned him, and delivered
him to the Soldiers to be crucified. This was about the sixth hour, or a little
after noon, at what time a great darkness arose, for that the Sun was
obscured, and continued till the ninth hour, or three of the clock. Then Christ
to show the bitterness of his torment cried (yet) with a loud voice, Eli Eli
Lamasabachtani, and receiving the vinegar, after he had commended his soul into
the hands of his Father, gave up the ghost. Thus he who was in the form of God,
and counted it no robbery to be equal with God, made himself of no reputation,
and suffered death, even the (most ignominious) death of the Cross for
ungrateful men.

73. Some think that the darkness which hapened at our Savior's Passion, was
only in the Land of Judaea. But others, finding that the Evangelists mention
(...), Mat. (...). Marc. and Luc.
the whole Earth, conclude that this Eclypse was Ecumenical or Universal, Luke
expressly saying, that the Sun it self (the eye of the whole World) was darkened.
Some conceived that the Sun was darkened by the interposition of the body of
the Moon, The miraculous Eclypse at our Savior's death,
whereof Epist. 7.
Dionysius the Areopagite (as he calls himself) was an eye witness, at what
time he and Apollophanes the Philosopher being at Heliopolis, observed the Moon
suddenly to cast her self before the Sun (though it was not the time of
conjunction) and again from the ninth hour to the evening, opposing her self to
the middle line of the Sun. If so, it was an extraordinary miracle, the Moon
being now at the full (as De Civitat. Dei l. 3. c. 15.
Augustine observes it to have been ever at the Passover) and consequently at
the greatest distance from the Sun, out of which respect others seem to have
held, that the Sun was darkened, not by the interposition of that luminary, but
the retention of his beams. That the darkness was universal, appears from
the records of Heathen Writers, which, as Lib. 7. c. 4.
Orosius says, besides the Evangelists, mentioned the greatness of the
Eclypse. And Apologet. c. 21.
Tertullian writing to Pagans says, You cannot make this wonder suspected,
seeing your own Calendars have remarked it, and your selves retain the
testimonies thereof in your own registers. Amongst Greek Authors, Phlegon A ud
Eusebius. in Chronico, and Orig. contra Celsum. l. 2. and in Matthew.
Trallianus the Freed-man of Adrian the Emperor, Recorded by the Heathen.
in his Work of Olympiads or Chronicle, which consisted of sixteen Books,
clearly spoke of this Eclypse, writing in his thirteenth Book, that in the
fourth year of the 202 Olympiad, the greatest Eclypse hapened that ever was
known; for, at the sixth hour of the day it was night, so that the Stars were
seen in the Heavens.

74. That Christ was put to death in the reign of Tiberius by Pontius Pilate
Annal. l. 15. c. 44.
Cornelius Tacitus writes, an Author guilty of Ethnic ignorance, and
prejudice. But Antiq. l. 18. c. 4.
Josephus the noble Jewish Historian gives him an honorable testimony,
writing, that At the same time there was one Jesus a wise man, The testimony of
Josephus concerning Christ.
if it be lawful to call him a man. For he was a worker of wonderful works, and
a teacher of those which willingly receive the truth. He had also many
followers, not only Jews but Gentiles: and he was believed to be Christ. And
whereas by the malice of our Princes, Pilate condemned him to be crucified, yet
notwithstanding they who first loved him have persevered. For he appeared to
them alive the third day; the Prophets having foretold in their writings,
these, and many other wonderful things concerning him: and to this day the
People from him called Christians has not ceased. This he relates, after he
had spoken of that Sedition which hapened because of Pilate his bringing in of
Caesar's Images. Some from amongst our selves have not given credit to this
relation, thinking it to be foisted in by some Christians, for the greater
honor of our Religion. But as the piae frauds supposed to have been used by
the Primitive Christians, are rather increased than otherwise, by some, who
either pedantically, and out of ostentation seek for applause from the
prejudice of their own cause (as one has done of late in reference to the
matter in hand) or as out of a melancholic and distrustful humor question the
evidence of the truth; so is there no reason that this testimony should be
condemned amongst them. For Josephus makes mention of John Baptist, giving him
large commendations, and relates also that he was beheaded; though he
assigns the cause to have been but of jealousy of him, and lest he should
make some commotions through his popularity, which likely enough might be some
cause, especially the malice of Herodias considered, which woman would not be
wanting to fill his head with suspicion, although the main reason was his
reproving of the incest. He also makes mention of James the brother of
Alphaeus, whom he calls the brother of Jesus Christ, how he was put to death
at Jerusalem, saying, that all good men were sorely troubled at it, and clearly
expresses himself dissatisfied in it, writing, that Ananus, who commanded the
murder to be done, did ill, and this he says not only because the Judicial
power was taken away from the Jews, as is evident from the course of his words.

75. It is hence clear enough, that Josephus was not in the number of those
whom Herod Agrippa could have pleased in the killing of the other James the
brother of John; Defended to be true and not feigned by Christians.
and truly amongst the Jews, such as were not extremely malicious against
Christ, were something inclining to him, if we consider the temper of that
People. It cannot therefore be said, that Josephus was so inveterately
despightful against Christ and Christians, that, as some have thought, he
utterly passed over the story of Christ upon that account. This Principle would
have induced him to rail rather than to be silent, to bespatter the Christian
generation, rather to say nothing, or rather to seem displeased at their
sufferings. It Is true, he was with the younger Agrippa, but almost a Christian,
and therefore we rather follow the translation of Jerome, which rendereth his
words credebatur esse Christus, than to take them as Eusebius and Rufinus have
them, and as they are found in the present copies, (...), Christus hic erat.
But some there were amongst the learneder sort of Jews, who knew not really
what to blame as to Christ, nay they believed in him, only they desired still
to Acts 15. Galat. 1.23.4, 5.
keep the Law, such were their tenaciousnesse as to it. It Is true, they
stumbled at the meannesse of his outward condition, and expected a Messiah to
reign at Jerusalem. But Josephus lived to see Jerusalem utterly destroyed, and
thereby an occasion for such an advantage taken away; and affliction makes men
more seriously to consider things; so that he might be favorable enough
toward Christ himself, though as to the Law he might still be pertinacious, as
many of them were. Eusebius writes, that the Verses of Sibylla were accounted
by some as feigned by the Ecclesiastics, but not a word of this matter.

76. The Jews had great expectations of the coming of the Messiah, at that very
time when the Lord Jesus was upon Earth. They knew that the Prophecies of old
respected that season: they understood well enough the weeks of Daniel, and
that the Scepter was departed from Judah, Percrebuerat Orient toto vetus and
constans opinio, esse in fatis, ut eo tempore Judaea profecti rerum potirentur.
Sueton in Vespas.
when they had no Judiciary power as to life and death left amongst them. This
expectation was so great, that it possessed the whole Eastern part of the
Empire, though it was understood in the same sense only, as by the carnal sort
of Jews, amongst whom how many counterfeits do we read of, which at that time
presumed upon it? Hereupon, though Christ came in an humble way, yet his
Miracles caused a reverence and esteem of his person, nay they durst not but
think well of him as the Messiah (how long do thou make us to doubt?) till
confounded by the spiritualnesse of his preaching, offended at his opposition
of their Traditions, and Pharisaical Tenants (as contrary to their Law, which
they thought must necessarily endure for ever) and especially moved (the
greatest of them) by their corrupt interests of profit and applause (which made
them deny him, though they knew the resurrection, and to sin against their own
consciences, and the holy Ghost) they rejected, and put him to death. That
saying amongst the Talmudists, and ascribed to the house of Elias (whom some
will have to be John Baptist) is commonly known, viz. that the World should
continue 6000 years, whereof 2000 belong to Tohu or Inane (that is the void
space of time betwixt the Creation and the Law) 2000 to the Law, and 2000 to
the Messiah; that then it should be destroyed. Now as the first division
lights well, if the Tohu be taken as ending at the birth of Abraham, the
father of the faithful (or those in Covenant with God) so the second ends
much about the birth of our Savior (reckoning as to both those accounts the
years of the Patriarchs, according to the Hebrew Text) and points out the
time of the Messiah. Suidas mentioned out of Theodosius a noble Jew, that
before Christ did rebuke the Scribes, they marvelling at his wise answers and
questions made him one of the Priests, and entered his name, (...), Jesus the
son of God and of Mary, otherwise he being of the Tribe of Judah could not have
been suffered to preach at Nazareth and Capernaum as he did.

77. But (that we may improve those things as to Josephus) it does appear, that
not only before Christ gave them offense, and that before he died, some had
honorable thoughts of him, but also after his death they accounted him the
very Messiah, though they would not part with their old way of worship. Their
Babylonian.
Talmud, like to Augeas his stable, is full of filth, amongst which but a few
Granes of Corn do appear. It was not finished in less time then 100 years,
being written with this design, to contain all the sayings of their Elders
which were not expressed in Scripture, and was completed (such a Fardel as it
is) about 500 years after Christ. Yet speaking of that place of Zechariah
(Chap. 12. verse. 10. Cap. 5. fol. 52. Videsis Jacobum Cappellum. In Hist. sacra
and exotic. ad A. M. 3670.
) And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, after it has reprehended
a certain exposition of it, adds, Peace be to him who has said that these
things are to be understood of Messiah the son of Joseph, who is slain. There
is nothing in the whole Talmud more worthy of observation. For so we have him
whom both the blessed Virgin her self, and Nathaniel calls the son of Joseph,
and whom the Jews put to death, to be the true Messiah, and to have been born
about the 4000 year of the World.

78. There are not wanting Testimonies concerning the truth of Christ, and his
Doctrine from the Heathen. Testimonies from the Heathen.
Rhodiginus and Volateran deliver it as a matter of credit, that there was an
Altar in Egypt Dedicated unto a Virgin that should bring forth a Child, and
Postellus, that there was another entitled Primogenito Dei, to the first
begotten of God. Upon the Star which appeared at his birth (which some think
the same mentioned by Pliny, and called Stella crinita sine crine) many
meditating turned to the truth, as Chaeremon amongst the Stoics, and
Challadius amongst the Platonists, who thereupon went into Judaea, and became
Jews. It is also reported that the Romans called their Temple which they had
built to Bacchus for victory, Templum pacis aeternum, the everlasting Temple of
peace, because the Oracle at Delphi told them it should stand dum peperit
virgo, till a Virgin brought forth a Child; The Oracles silenced.
but as soon as Christ was born it fell. Lib. de defectu Oraculorum.
The Oracles generally fell in the reign of Tiberius, when the time of Christ
his preaching was come, who was the eternal word of his Father. Plutarch of
this subject wrote a Tract, searching much as a Philosopher what the cause of
this strange change should be. After his acute search after sundry causes, and
accurate Philosophical disputes, he refers it partly to the absence of the
Demoniacal spirits, which he thinks might die, or remove from place to place,
either banished by others more potent, or upon some other dislike; and partly
unto the alteration of the soil wherein Oracles were seated, which yielded not
exhalations of such Divine temper as in former times it had done; for, without
a certain temperature of exhalations, or breathing of the earth, he thought
that spirits could not give their Oracles, more than a Musician can play
without an Instrument. Accordingly he expected, that Oracles should either come
in use again in Greece, or else burst out in some convenient soil. But where
have they thus burst out? Christianity chased them away wherever it came, and
put those spirits to silence, which were afraid of the Christians in the
primitive tirmes, so, as those holy men could make them confess they were
Devils, and chase them out of such bodies as they had possessed, for the truth
whereof Tertullian in his Apology appealeth to the consciences of the heathen
themselves, and therefore he would not in so public a defense produce an
untruth which must have been notoriously known. Therefore the silence of the
Oracles was not from any of those causes (which to one that has opportunity
are in themselves easy to be confuted); the truth was, the time was come
wherein the strong man's house was to be entered, his goods spoiled, and himself
bound; now the Prince of this world was to be cast out: Satan fell like
lightning from Heaven upon the approach of that true light which lightneth
every man that comes into the world.

79. That notable story which Plutarch brings for confirmation of his
opinion, concerning the Mortality of those Daemoniacal spirits, makes
exceeding much for our purpose; if we consider the time thereof. Thamous the
Egyptian Master, as he sailed, was requested by an uncouth voice uttered three
times from land, to proclaim the news of Great Pan's death as he passed by
Palodes. The great Pan that died was Christ the true shepherd.
Thamous, whose name was unknown to his Passengers, till he answered to it at
the third call, was resolved to have let all pass as a fancy or idle message,
if the wind and tide should grant him passage by the place appointed: but, the
wind failing him on a sudden, at his coming thither, he thought it but a little
loss of breath to cry out aloud unto the shore, as he had been requested,
Great Pan is dead. The words, as Plutarch relates, were scarce but of his
mouth, before they were answered with a huge noise, as it had been of a
multitude, sighing, and groaning at this wonderment. Now, if these spirits had
been by nature mortal, as the Philosopher thought they were, the death of their
Chief Captain could not have seemed so strange: but that a far greater than the
greatest of them, by whose power the first of them had his being, should die to
redeem his Enemies from their thraldom, might well seem a matter of
astonishment, and deep sorrow unto them. The circumstance of the time will not
permit us to doubt, but that under the known name of Pan was intimated the
great shepherd of our Souls, who had then laid down his life for his flock; not
the feigned son of Mercury and Penelope, as the Wisemen foolishly resolved
Tiberius, who having had the truth of the story confirmed to him by
ear-witnesses, called a convocation of wisemen to resolve him who this great
Pan lately deceased should be. The Scriptures set forth unto us the true cause,
why both the wild goatish Pan, and all the rest of that Hellish crew should at
that time howl and mourn, seeing by our great shepherds death they were become
Dead in Law; no more to breath in Oracles, but quite to be deprived of all such
strange motions as they had seduced the ignorant World with before. All the
Antic tricks of ^annus, the Satyrs, and such like Creatures were now put down;
God had resolved to make a translation of his Church; and for this cause the
Devils were forced to dissolve their old Chapels, and seek a new form of their
Liturgy or Service. These passages are pregnant enough, though we allege not
what Nicephorus reports, that the Oracle at Delphi (perhaps not just then
extinct) said that this Pan was (...), an Hebrew Child; and though we omit what
Suidas writes, that Augustus sending to Pythia to inquire who should succeed
him, had answer, that an Hebrew Child, Lord of the Gods, had commanded him to
be gone down again to Hell, and therefore he must no more enquire there.
Whereupon Augustus erected an Altar in the Capitol Primogenito Dei, To the
first born of God.

80. But amongst other testimonies of the Heathen concerning Christ, that of
the Sibyll's must not be omitted. The Testimonies of the Sibylls.
These women were endued with extraordinary gifts of Prophecy, as certain
previous pledges, that the Gentiles should also drink of the true, heavenly,
and eternal Fountain. Like to those was Balaam the Midianite, an Idolater, yet
called a Prophet by the Scriptures, who amongst other things foretold that a
Star should rise out of Jacob, and a Scepter from Israel. There were many of
these Sibyll's as we have already shown, and several of them Prophesied of
Christ. Their sayings were made much use of by such ancient Christians as had
to do with Pagans, and Heathen Philosophers. I^ Paraenet. p. 16, etc, ad 37.
vide.
Justin Martyr tells such, that the old, and very ancient Sibylla, of which
Plato, Aristophanes, and others have made mention, spoke of one God, and
against Idolaters, as also of the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, plainly,
and manifestly, and of his works. Strom. l. 6.
Clemens also writes of Hydaspes an ancient King of the Medes, who clearly
foretold that the son of God should come. Concerning the Verses of Sibylla
Erythraea many have written, and many of them are produced by Eusebius in the
Oration Cap. 18.
of Constantine to the Clergy, the Acrosticks whereof make up these words.
(...), etc.
(...), etc. Jesus Christus Dei Filius, servator, crux, and foretell the last
Judgment and Authority of Christ. There are others also cited by L. 14. c. 18.
Lactantius, which speak of Christ his (...), etc.
coming into unjust hands, his being stricken on the head, and wearing a Crown
of Thorns; the giving of him Vinegar, the renting of the veil of the Temple,
and his being dead three days. Now some were of opinion of old, that these
were feigned by Christians, as appears by what Constantine (or Eusebius for
him) subjoyneth. But there are many that give no credence, says he, thereunto,
although they confess that Sibylla Erythraea was a Prophetess: yea, they
suspect that some of our religion not ignorant in Poetry, made these Verses,
and that they are falsely inscribed, and reckoned among the Oracles of Sibylla:
seeing they contain very profitable sentences, both to restrain the
licentiousness of immoderate pleasure, and so persuade to a modest continency
of life. Constantine confuteth such as accounted them forged.
But the truth of this matter does manifestly appear, for our men have with
great study so accurately compared the times, that none can suspect that this
Poem was made, and came forth after Christ's coming, and therefore they are
convinced of falsehood, who blaze abroad that these Verses were not made by this
Sibylla. For it is manifest that Cicero, having read this Poem, did translate
it into Latin, and joined it to his works, who was afterward put to death by
the Triumvir Antonius, and Antonius was overcome by Augustus, who reigned six
and fifty years: Tiberius succeeded Augustus, in whose reign our Savior came
into the World, and the mystery of religion began to flourish, and the people
were changed. Of which I suppose the chief of the Italian Poets has thus sung.

81. He means Virgil, Eclog. 4.
whose Poem he recites concerning the Golden days foretold by Sibylla Cumaea
(by which name the Romans called all the Siybills, because of the old Cumana or
Cumaea, whose Verses were burnt in the Capitol, in the 671 year of the City,
and were supplied by other fetched from Erythrae, and elsewhere) as also
concerning a Child that was to be born. He ascribes to this Child such Divine
things, as none can doubt, but that he must be above a man, whom Sibylla
described by such expressions. Now that such Verses could be feigned by
Christians none can affirm, but the grossly ignorant, who know not that Virgil
died several years ( viz. 18) before Christ was born. Neither can it be thought
he feigned it on his own head, although we cannot say with Constantine or
Eusebius, that he did thus mystically involve, and cover the truth, lest the
Emperor should be offended with him for writing that which was contrary to
their Laws, and Statutes established, concerning their Gods; or that we do
believe that he foresaw the happy and glorious mystery of our Saviors coming:
but that he might avoid their cruelty, and speak his audience in the accustomed
manner. Some of late also have rejected the Poems ascribed to these women as
feigned by Christians, because they seem to speak more plainly of Christ, than
the true Prophets do, and exhibit rather an history of Christ already come,
than a Prophecy of his coming. They think it contrary to the Word of God, to
think that these profound mysteries should be more clearly propounded to the
Gentiles than to the Jews. Some of late have also questioned them.
This also much moves them (for we will confess the utmost) that they
perceive many of the ancients in the most primitive times, to have counted it
the choicest work they could perform, to help the heavenly truth by their
fictions, whereby the new doctrine might more easily be admitted by the Pagan
wise men. And as they cannot but most grievously reprehend this thing, so not
sufficiently can they admire the judgment of those Fathers, who with such
facility received these writings, and as doubt not to produce testimonies from
them, to underprop the heavenly truth.

82. But it is answered by way of utter denial, that there were many in the
Primitive times, who sought to establish the truth by fictions and lies, and by
challenge made for them to produce any one lie or fiction made or used by the
most ancient Fathers, though for a good end. Certainly they which in their
disputations with the Pagans, appeal to the testimony of the Sibylls, deserve
great commendations for their prudence. And hence may it be proved, that those
testimonies were not forged, because they in all conflicts more willingly had
recourse to them than to any other. For, can we imagine them fools, with whom
these Fathers had to do? They were as cunning and knowing as the best; they
were Philosophers, Rhetors, Professors of Arts, Statesmen, and most commonly
such as enjoyed the greatest honors. Where is it objected by any of these in
the most Primitive times, But in vain.
that these testimonies were feigned by Christians? This answer would have been
easy and ready; and such as would instantly have stopped the mouths of
Primitive Saints. But the wisest and bitterest of the Enemies of Christians, do
not make any such reply, in the most ancient times, knowing well enough these
Oracles, to which the Romans had ever recourse, and which were known
sufficiently to the whole World, through which it ran for current, that in the
Books of the Sibylls was held forth, that one should reign who came out of the
East. The clearness of these testimonies concerning Christ, can make nothing
against them; for Esa^as spoke not more evidently of Christ than Balaam, who
said, that a Star should rise out of Jacob. Who dare prescribe to God a manner
of prophesying? as if it were not free to him to speak plainly or obscurely to
Jew or Gentile, or as if there were not in the Scripture most clear predictions
concerning Christ. But grant that the Sibylline Oracles are clearer. Ought not
those things which are predicted to the Gentilles corcerning Christ to be
clearer, because they wanted Moses, and the rest of that learning, which should
direct them unto him, that what here was wanting might be supplied by the
perspicuity of these Oracles? Although we ought not to judge of these Oracles,
by that light which at present appears. For what things are most evident to
us after the accomplishment, were most obscure when they were predicted. If any
one had feigned them, he would have made them industriously more obscure, that
they might seem written before the things were done, and like to those
Prophecies which are contained in the Scriptures. These Heathen Prophets spoke
some times clearly, according to the intention of God, who overruled them; but
often abruptly. It Is thought they prophesied as of old Balaam's Ass spoke, and
not otherwise did Hydaspes and the Sibylls speak clearly of the coming of
Christ, the Holy Spirit moving them, and governing their tongues. It appears
In Apolog. 2. p. 82. totius operis.
from Justin Martyr that it was forbidden upon pain of death to read Hydaspes,
Sibylla or the Prophets, lest the People should attain to the knowledge of good
things. To these Strom. l. 6.
Clemens brings in St. Paul himself referring the Greeks: Take ye also the
Greek Books, acknowledge Sibylla that she manifested one God, and things to
come. Take ye also Hydaspes, read him; and you shall find the Son of God more
clearly and openly described.

83. To omit what might be (and by others has been) produced out of Vide
August. de Civit. Dei. l. 10. c. 23. and Lud. vivem in Locum. Tertul. Apollog.
c. 21.
Heathen Writers concerning the blessed Trinity (for we may easily admit, that
God, who was ever the God of the whole World, and designed to do the Gentiles
good also in the knowledge of himself, might give to them such hints of the
truth, as afterward might be improved for their welfare) we shall come to the
last testimony concerning Christ, and that such an one, as will reduce us to
the course of our design. After that Christ was risen from the dead, Pilate
made report unto Tiberius of the Person and Works of Christ.
and had sent his Disciples about to preach and work miracles for the
conversion of the World, Pilate who then governed in Judaea, reported his
Passion and Resurrection to Tiberius and the Senate, with the miracles done by
him, or by them in his name, and how the multitude of believers daily
increasing, he was accounted a God. Tiberius hereupon reported the matter to
the Senate, with his favorable suffrage, that Christ might be accounted a God.
But the Senate because they were displeased that they had not first moved it,
refused to canonize him, and by an Edict commanded that Christians should be
banished the City; especially by reason that Seianus the great minister of
State most obstinately contradicted this Religion. But Tiberius by another
Edict threatened death to the accusers of Christians. These things thus related
by Lib. 7. c. 4.
Orosius, are also witnessed by Ecc. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Eusebius, Tertullian, and Justin Martyr, whereof, the testimonies of the two
later are incontrolable; for in their Apologies they durst not mention such
things, and cite such testimonies as they must needs know would be easily
confuted.

84. Apologet. c. 5.
Tertullian writes, that Tiberius referred it to the Senate, with the
prerogative of his own suffrage, but they having not approved the thing,
refused it. Caesar notwithstanding remained firm in his resolution, and
threatened such as should accuse the Christians. This he openly asserteth in his
Apology to the Pagans, writing also in another Cap. 21.
place of the same excellent Work, that Pilate, who in his heart believed in
Christ, at the same time wrote all the History of him to the Emperor Tiberius,
whereupon the Caesar' s themselves had worshipped our Master, if their
Government in so doing had been consistent with the men of this World, and
Christians permitted to have been saluted Caesar's. He gives another reason,
why Christ was not at first worshipped as a God. There was an ancient Law that
forbad introducing new ceremonies into Religion, as worshipping strange
Deities, unless approved by the Senate; and this was an unviolable and
unalterable Law, to which the Prince himself was subject. He instanceth, that
Marcus Aemilius would have had divine honors rendered to his Idol, called the
god Albarnus, but could not obtain it. As for Justin Martyr, he makes it more
evident, telling plainly the Pagans in his second Aplogy, that they may know
these things thus to have been, in the Acts which were written under Pontius
Pilate, and again, that they might know, that Christ wrought such miracles,
from the Acta (or Acts) made under Pontius Pilate. Now the word Acta signifies
sometimes the Journal Book of the Senate, then called Acta Senatus, and
otherwhiles the Records of the People, or of the Public, then named Acta
Publica, De Actis consulant omaino Tirones Justum Lipsium in Comment. ad Taciti
Annal. lib. 5.
Diurna, and Urbana. In the former sort was contained whatsoever was done or
said by the Fathers. In the later things concerning the People, as Public
Judgments, punishments, Assemblies, buildings, nativities, the death of eminent
persons, marriages, and divorces. These afforded matter for Historians to digest
and adorn. Now Justin Martyr either means those Acta Publica, wherein might
be recorded what notable things happened in the Provinces; and set under the
administration of the several Deputies or Governors: or rather those Acta
which Pilate himself composed in his Province. For we cannot but imagine, that
care would be taken for the recording of things memorable, as well in other
places as in the City it self. The Provinces had their Subcensors and their
Tables. And the Presidents and Deputies not only certified by letters
occasionally what happened, but, as we may easily apprehend, did refer in Acta
all memorable things; which were sent to Rome, and there, it is probable, either
transcribed into, or laid up with, the Acta Publica. But, thus much of the
testimonies of Jews and Heathens concerning Christ.

85. the Lord Jesus having risen the third day from the dead, and after his
resurrection given commission and instructions to his Disciples, whom he
ordained his Ambassadors to the whole World; forty days after he arose,
ascended into Heaven, The Ascension of Christ.
and sent down the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, according to his promise, for
the furnishing of them to the Work, ten days after his ascension. Many being
converted to the Faith, the Church increased, and living in Love and Unity
together, they had all things common, none calling any thing his own which he
possessed. About the end of the year, as is rationally computed, the Greeks or
Hellenists (Jews which living out of Judaea spoke Greek in a peculiar dialect,
which is called Hellenistick, and used the Scriptures in their Synagogues in
that language) murmured against the Hebrews (or those who both read and spoke
Hebrew) for that their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.
Hereupon the Apostles committed it to the number of the faithful, to choose
seven men who should take care of what was gathered for the poor, The seven
Deacons made.
and these Ecclesiastical Writers call Deacons. About this time James the
Apostle the son of Alphaeus (who is also called the brother of the Lord, and
was surnamed Just) was created the first Bishop of Jerusalem. For thus Clemens
wrote in the sixth Book of his Hypotyposewn, as he is cited by Eusebius. Peter,
and James, and John, though they were preferred, after the ascension of the
Lord, contended not amongst themselves for glory and honor; but with one
consent appointed James the Just Bishop of Jerusalem. The same Clemens in his
first Book, distinguished thus concerning the two which bore the name of James.
There were two James, James the first Bishop of Jerusalem.
the one termed Just, who was thrown down headlong from the pinnacle, and
brained with a Fullers club, the other beheaded. Of him that was called Just,
Paul made mention, saying: I saw none of the Apostles save James the brother of
the Lord. In the year following Christ's resurrection, a great persecution was
raised by the Jews against the Church, wherein Stephan one of the seven Deacons
and the Protomartyr was stoned to death, by the procurement especially of Saul
a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia. But in this same year as this Saul was journying to
Damascus to make havoc of the Church, he was converted, and called to the
Apostleship, A. D 33. Ol. 203. an. 1. V. C. 787.
after which he went from Damascus into Arabia, as he himself testifies in his
Epistle to the Galathians. Saul converted.

Pilate making a slaughter of the Samaritans,


Eusebius in his Chronicon places the conversion of Saul (afterward called
Paul) in the nineteenth year of Tiberius.

86. About this time it happened, that a certain man who sought by all means
the favor of the multitude, Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 5.
drew the Samaritans to Mount Gerizim (which they accounted holy above all
other mountains) promising to show them there the holy Vessels buried in a
certain place by Moses. Many had gathered themselves to the foot of the hill,
where staying for more company that they might ascend all together, Pilate
prevented them, and killing some, took many, dispersed the rest, and put to
death the chief of those he had taken. Hereof the Senate of Samaria complained
to Vitellius President of Syria, who sent Marcellus his friend to take charge
of Judaea, and commanded Pilate to go to Rome, there to answer before Caesar
what should be laid to his charge. Hereupon he departed, after he had governed
Judaea ten years, but ere he reached Rome, Is sent to Rome to give an account
of it.
Tiberius was dead. About the same time that these things happened in Samaria,
the Jews were banished Rome by the Emperor upon this occasion. A certain Jew
flying his native Country for breaking of the Laws, came to the City, where he
professed himself an expounder of them, and drew to him two or three no less
reprobate than himself. They made a Proselyte Fulvia the wife of Saturninus an
honorable person, and persuading her to send some Purple and Gold to the
Temple of Jerusalem, converted it to their own use. The Jews banished Rome.
Saturninus complaining of this to Tiberius, he thereupon commanded all Jews to
depart Rome. Of these the Consuls chose out and listed 4000 men, whom they sent
into Sardinia, and punished many that refused to bear arms, upon no other
account, than because they would not transgress the Ordinances of their
Country.

87. About two years after the deach of Christ, died Philip the Tetrarch, son
to Herod the Great, a man of a modest and quiet disposition, whose
Principality, Philip the Tetrarch dies.
for that he died without issue, Idem ibid. and cap. 6.
Tiberius laid unto the Province of Syria. By this time Artabanus King of
Parthia prospering against his neighbors was much puffed up, and despising the
old age of Tiberius, Tacitus Annal. l. 6. c. 31.
when his son Artamas was dead made his other son Arsaces King of Armenia in
his stead. The Parthian King revileth and dispirseth Tiberius.
He also reviled Tiberius by Letters, objecting paricide, murders, Sueton in
Tiberio c. 60.
laziness, and luxury to him, and willed him by a voluntary death to satisfy
the most just hatred of his subjects, as soon as possible. But many Noble men
of Parthia, to escape his cruelty came to Rome, and desired a King from
Tiberius, who thereupon gladly named Phraates the son of Phraates that had been
of a long time Hostage at Rome, and he dying in Syria, he commended to them
Tiridates. Mithridates brother to Pharasmenes King of the Hiberi was also
ordered to get Armenia, who breaking into it joined the Albanians to him, and
procured the death of Arsaces; for the Parthians were easily overthrown, being
discouraged by a false rumor of the death of Orodes their Captain, another of
Artabanus his sons. Artabanus having before this attempted Cappadocia, sent
also to demand the Treasure which Vonone* had left in Syria and Cilicia, and
that had been seized by Tiberius, Idem in Tib. c. 49.
who with great perfidiousnesse killed the owner at Antioch; and he further
demanded the ancient Borders of the Persians and Macedonians, bragging that he
would invade whatsoever had been possessed by Cyrus and Alexander. But
Vitellius the President of Syria having drawn many of his subjects from their
trust, his mind so changed, Tacitus ut supra cap. 41. Dio l. 59.
that he fled away cowardly with a few to the confines of Scythia. Vitellius
taking the opportunity carried Tiridates into the Kingdom, but he by delaying
to seize on the chiefest places, and hastening his Coronation, gave occasion to
some of the great ones again to fly unto Artabanus, who coming on, the other
fled as fast back into Syria; so that he recovered his Kingdom, with Armenia,
and resolved to set upon Syria.

88. Tiberius hereupon wrote to Vitellius to make a peace with him. Vitellius
about this time was come to Jerusalem after the expulsion of Pilate, where he
celebrated the Passover, remitted to the Citizens the Impost upon such fruits
as were sold, Caiphas deposed.
and deposed Joseph, surnamed Caiphas, Josephus Antiquit. lib. 18. cap. 6.
from the High Priesthood, to which he promoted Jonathan the son of Annas. He
met with Artabanus upon a bridge built over the River Euphrates, where they
concluded a peace, and afterward they were feasted by Herod the Tetrarch.
Darius the son of Artabanus was sent an Hostage to Rome with many presents. But
Tiberius died before, Sueton ut supra cap. 73. etc. Tacitus Annal. l. 6. c. 50.
( March 16) having since the death of Seianus cruelly raged against many,
Tiberius dies.
and lived dissolutely from his retirement to the Island Capreae, whence he
never returned to the City, though he was twice on his way. The people ran up
and down, overcome with joy upon the report of his death. Some would have had
his body cast into Tiber, and others prayed that no other place might be
assigned him now dead than amongst the wicked. He reigned 22 years, A. D. 38.
Ol. 204. ann. 1. V. C. 790.
seven months and odd days, and died in the 78th year of his age, and the 790
of the City, Cn. Acerronius Proculus, and C. Pontius Nigrinus being Consuls.

CHAP. II. From the death of Tiberius to that of Nero, the last Emperor of
Caesar's family, containing the space of 20 years.
1. TIBERIUS left behind him a Grandson of his own name by his son Drusus, yet
he preferred before him Caius the son of Germanicus, either for some reason
fetched Josephus Antiquit. l. 18. c. 8.
from Astrology to which he was much given, Caius the son of Germanicus
succeeds Tiberius.
or through the means Sueton in Caligula c. 12. Tacitus Annal. l. 6. c. 50.
of Macro his Freed-man, and greatest favorite, who being a loose and vile
person, Caius insinuated himself into his favor by the procurement of his
wife. With her Caius was wantonly familiar, and promised her marriage by an
Oath, and under his hand, if he could compass the Empire, wherewith Macro was
well pleased, if so be he could but therewith purchase greater preferment. It Is
reported that he helped his Master forward by stifling him in the bed-cloths.
Others have thought Sueton ut prius.
that a slow-working poison was given him by Caius; some that meat was denied
him, and others that when he demanded his Ring which they had pulled off from
his finger, they choked him with the Pillow. However it came to pass, Caius
succeeded him, and some Xiphilinus ex Dione.
judged him willing that so it should be, because he knew he would prove a very
bad man, and hoped that thereby the faults of his own reign might be something
covered. Josephus ut supra.
He was received with great applause by all men. By the Army, for that he had
been brought up continually amongst them. Some say he was born in the Camp;
it is certain that the surname of Caligula he had for that reason, because he
was wont Sueton ut prius.
to wear that habit of the ordinary Soldiers. By the people he was gladly
entertained out of their affection to Germanicus, and commiseration of his
family so grossly used by Tiberius, whose cruelty he escaped merely by his great
dissimulation, and taking in good part every thing; so as it was said truly of
him, that never was there a better servant, nor a worse Master than Caligula.

2. Caius, within a few days after the sumptuous funeral of Tiberius, Josephus
Antiq. l. 18. c. 8.
made Agrippa King of that Country whereof Philip had been Tetrarch. This
Agrippa was the Grandson of Herod the Great by his son Aristobulus whom he put
to death, Prefers Agrippa.
being begotten of Berenice the daughter of Salome. Having run through many
straights for want of money by reason of his great profuseness, he became at
length very dear to Caius, who restored him to liberty (being imprisoned by
Tiberius for wishing his death, that Caligula might succeed him) and then set
the Diadem on his head. He had a sister named Herodias, married to Philip
Herodes (not Philip the Tetrarch) his, and her Uncle, and brother to Philip
Antipas on the father's side, his mother being daughter to Simon the
High Priest. This woman Herod Antipas was so taken with, that though he had
already to wife the daughter of Aretas King of Arabia Petraea, yet he divorced
this, and married her, upon which account Aretas made War upon him, and
defeated his forces, which Idem ibid. cap. 7.
was taken by the people as a judgment of God upon him for putting to death
John Baptist. Now Herodias envying exceedingly the promotion of her brother
Agrippa, importuned her husband to go to Rome and beg, or buy the title of
King. Idem ibid. cap. 9.
Agrippa smelling out their design beforehand, wrote to Caius, and accused him
of having heretofore been of Seianus his conspiracy, and of favoring at
present the party of Artabanus King of Parthia, whereof he said his Magazines
could testify, being furnished with Provisions for 70000 men of War. Herod
Antipas banished to Lions.
This furniture he could not deny, and therefore Caius banished him to Lugdunum
(now Lions) in Gall (whither Herodias would needs accompany him) and gave his
Principality and estate unto Agrippa. Thus were these two punished for the
death of John Baptist; and so was Pilate for that of Christ. For, Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 7. and Orosius l. 7. c. 5.
being also banished by Caius to Vienna, two years after he killed himself
(whereof the Gracians are witnesses, Pilate kills himself.
says Eusebius, who commit to memory in their Histories the Olympiads of
times) and so became the revenger of his wickedness upon himself, as he who
betrayed Christ into his hands had been before.

3. Sueton in Calig. Capp. 15, 16, 17, etc. Josephus Antiquit. lib. 18. cap. 9.
Though the disposition of Caligula was from his Childhood tending to
intemperance and cruelty, yet at his first coming to the Government he used much
moderation and equity, as well toward public as private persons. He would not
hear any accusations, though said to be for his own safety, permitted free and
ancient Jurisdiction to Magistrates, attempted to bring in again the Comitia,
and restore the privilege of suffrages to the people, paid the Legacies given
by Tiberius, Caligula begins well.
though his will was nulled, and those given by Livia also, though her son
would never discharge them: he remitted part of the Taxes to Italy, relieved
the necessities of such as received losses by fire, and to such Kings as he
restored, he gave the Tributes collected in their absence. At first he appeared
a great Patron of virtue, but degenerated into a Monster, so that as far as a
man could go in luxury and cruelty he seemed to proceed, But turns a Monster
of men.
which made Seneca De Consolat. ad Albinam cap. 9.
say, that nature seemed to have brought him forth to show what the greatest
vitiousnesse backed with the greatest power could be able to do. We may be more
favorable to this opinion, if we consider that the greatness of his estate
made him so far surpass the limits of all modesty, as challenging to himself
the title of Divinity, he governed all things in contempt of God.

4. He thought at first to have taken a Diadem, Sueton ut supra cap. 22. etc.
and changed his Principality into a Kingdom, till by his flatterers he was
told, that he was above all such titles. Assumeth divine honors.
At length he began to take to himself Divine honor. For he caused the images
of their Gods to be brought to Rome, whereof the heads being taken off, the
image of his own was placed upon each in their stead. He would offer himself to
be adored amongst his brother gods as he called them, and ordained Temples and
Priests with sacrifice of no commoner things than Peacocks, Turkies, and
Pheasants, which were to be offered every day; and he invited the Moon to his
embraces. He could not endure to be accounted the offspring of Agrippa,
because of his ignobility; but gave out that his mother was conceived of the
incest of Augustus with his daughter Julia. He himself committed incest with
all his sisters, and spared not the chastity of either Sex. So imperious he
was, that he would make persons of greatest rank run by his Chariot, and stand
girt with Towels when he was at meat. His Vices.
So cruel, that he killed his Grandmother Antonia by unkindnesse, he murdered
his brother Tiberius, though he had adopted him, with all his kindred except
his Uncle Claudius, whom he preserved for a laughing stock; and he forced Macro
and Ennia to kill themselves. As for others, he made havoc of them, causing
some to be knocked in the head with Clubs, if he were but disturbed in the
shows. He would cast old men, or infirm, to wild beasts, and shutting up the
Barns and Storehouses proclaimed a famine. Many of quality being first
stigmatized he condemned to the Mines, or to repairing of Highways, shut them
up like beasts in a Den, or sawed them asunder; and that for no greater matters
than if they had not high thoughts of his gifts and shows, or had not sworn by
his Genius.

5. He forced Parents to be present at the death of their Children. Idem ibid.
Capp. 27, 28, etc.
To one that excused himself by sickness, he sent a Litter to carry him. A
certain Knight whom he cast to wild beasts, crying out that he was innocent, he
caused to be taken out, and his tongue to be cut out of his head, after this to
be cast in again. Demanding of one whom he had recalled out of banishment what
he did all that time? upon answer that he prayed for the death of Tiberius, and
that he might succeed him, supposing that all whom he had banished prayed also
for his death, he gave command that they should all be killed. He would suffer
none to be put to death but by degrees, that so as he said they might feel
themselves die. He sorely afflicted the order of Knights, and being incensed
against the multitude for favoring a party against him, he wished that the
People of Rome had but one neck. He was wont openly to complain of the
condition of his time, because not signalized by any public calamity, and how
by the serenity thereof he should be buried in oblivion (his being herein
contrary to the disposition of Phalaris) in so much as he would wish for some
overthrow of the Armies, some Famine, Pestilence, Fire, or Earthquake. He
purposed utterly to destroy the works of Virgil and Livy, and take away the
Law. He took away honor from families, and when he met with any beautiful
person made them as deformed as he could. He was so prodigal that he would
drink most precious Pearls dissolved in Vinegar, and invent all sorts of
delicacies, by which course he spent infinite sums in the space of three years,
which Tiberius had hoarded up; and to recruit his Coffers raised unheard of
Tributes. Amongst other means for increasing his revenue he set up stews in his
Palace, and some were sent about to invite all sorts of men to them, such as
came being commended for increasing Caesar's revenues. He purposed to depart to
Autium and thence to Alexandria, but first to kill all the chief both of the
Senatorian and Equestrian rank; and answerably hereunto were there found after
his death two Books, whereof the title of one was Gladius, or Sword; and the
other Pugio, or Dagger, wherein were written the names of such as he intended
to murder. A great chest also was found full of diverse poisons, which being by
Claudius his appointment cast into the Sea, the water is reported to have been
so infected, that the fish was therewith killed, and was cast up by the tide
upon the shore. These things are reported by Suetonius, concerning which Author
yet it is observed by some, that he wrote the lives of the Emperors with as
great liberty as they lived them.

6. Many desired to have an hand in removing him, Josephus Antiq. l. 19. c. 1.
yet durst not attempt any thing. But Cassius Chaereas the Captain of his Guard
being grievously affronted by him (for ever when Caius gave him the watchword,
it should be some effeminate or obscene name, He is slain by Cassius Chaereas
the Captain of his Guard.
and he continually charged him with cowardice) fully resolved to kill him, and
broke the business to others, whom he thought to have the same desire with
himself. They killed him as he returned from the games of the Palace to refresh
himself, Chaereas giving him the first wound. His guard of Germans (which loved
him exceedingly, because of the profit they reaped from the execution of his
cruel commands) in a great rage killed all they could meet in the Palace, and
with much ado were kept from putting thousands to death, that were now
assembled in the theater. Nay the common People allured by his shows and
largesses, endeavored to find out the authors of his death, to whom Valerius
Asiaticus (who had been Consul) coming forth whilst they were in an uproar, and
every one inquired who had done the deed, O, said he, I wish I had done it.
Being once advised to beware of a Cassius, he suspected Cassius Longinus the
Proconsul of Asia (of the same family with Cassius one of the murderers of
Julius Caesar) and sending for him, put him to death, never thinking that
Chaereas had also that name. Having reigned three years and ten months with
eight days, and lived 29, he thus died, A. D. 42. Ol. 205. an. 1. V. C. 794.
on the ninth before the Calends of February, in the 794 year of the City, and
the 42 after the birth of Christ, he himself the fourth time, and C. Sextius
Saturninus being Consuls.

7. The Senate now, as Josephus tells us, thought of resuming the ancient
form of Government, though it was utterly impracticable, Saturninus the Consul
especially stickling for it. But the Soldiers rightly judging, Vide Joseph.
Antiq. l. 19. c. 2, and 3. Sueton in Claudio c. 10.
that such an Empire could not be ruled in a Popular way, and especially
looking at their own advantage, resolved the contrary. Tiberius Claudius
Drusus, brother to Germanicus Caesar, and son to Drusus (by Antonia the
younger, the daughter of Antony the Triumvir and of Octavia the sister of
Augustus) was yet living. Him they judging most fit to succed his Nephew,
pulled him out of an hole where he had hid himself to save his life, Claudius
his Uncle succeeds him.
and straightway declared him Emperor. He was at first discouraged by the
messages of the Senate, but again took heart, at the counsel and directions of
King Agrippa, so that the Senators despairing of success, gave over their
enterprise, but not without (some of them) seeking the Sovereignty for
themselves, which would have produced as great slaughters and desolations as
ever, had any of them obtained liberty to prosecute their desires. The People
were for Claudius his preferment, envying the Senate it is ancient power, and
making account by the Sovereignty of one to be sheltred from it is avarice.
Hereby also they thought to avoid such Civil Wars as fell out amongst the great
ones in the time of Pompey. The wiser sort knew that it was impossible the
Commonwealth should subsist but under Monarchy: some one they were sure would
establish himself, and that through desolations, confusions, and slaughters,
they must come to it at last. Self-preservation therefore and public interest
easily led them to the next heir, who by his birth could challenge an interest.
For hereditary Monarchies, by preserving due reverence, excluding emulations
and contests amongst equals, by preventing numerous pretensions, and the
extravagant grandeur of diverse families, can only secure the Peace and
prosperity of their Subjects.

Puts to death Chaereas.
8. Idem c. 11.
Claudius promised the Soldiers a donative upon their taking an oath to defend
his person and authority. Then put he to death Chaereas and others that killed
Caius, as a means to secure his own person; but in reference to the Senate
buried all things in oblivion, and behaved himself moderately and civilly. He
confirmed Agrippa in his Kingdom, and enlarged his dominions by an addition of
Judaea and Samaria, which heretofore belonged to his grandfather. And he
further bestowed on him Abila, and the Principality of Libanus, which had
belonged to Lysanias; Josephus ut supra c. 4, 5.
moreover upon his desire he granted to his brother Herod the Kingdom of
Chalcis, Inlargeth the Dominions of Agrippa.
and at the request of both, published favorable Edicts in behalf of the Jews,
who groaned under the persecution of Caius. This Agrippa (called also Herod by
St. Luke) laboring all manner of ways to gratify the Jews, killed James the
brother of John, and shut up Peter in prison, Act. 12.
intending to bring him forth to the People after the Passover, but he was
miraculously delivered by an Angel. A just punishment from God overtook Agrippa
not long after: For having begun to build the walls of Jerusalem, when upon
complaint of Marsus President of Syria, he was forbidden by Claudius, he
descended to Caesarea, there to celebrate games in honor of Caesar. Being
clothed with a robe of silver, which glittered exceedingly by the reflection of
the Sunbeams, he rejected not the flatteries of those who ascribed to him
divine honors, and was presently seized by a pain in his guts, Whom vengence
overtaketh for the death of James.
and being eaten with worms, gave up the ghost within five days, after he had
reigned seven years in all, A. D 45. V.C. 797.
and three over Judaea. His Kingdom was not committed to his son by reason of
his youth (for he was but seventeen years old) and therefore Cuspius Fadus was
sent to govern it.

9. Claudius restored also Mithridates the Iberian to his Kingdom, whom Caius
had imprisoned. On another Mithridates (descended from Mithridates the Great
King of Pontus) he bestowed the Kingdom of Bosphorus (giving one part of
Cilicia to Polemo in requital) and another part of this Country to Antiochus
with Commagena; Claudius restores several Princes.
for he had also been deprived of this his Kingdom by Caius. But the Lycians
and Rhodians he deprived of their liberty. The former, for that they had raised
a Sedition, wherein some Romans had been slain, and the later, because they had
crucified some of them. About this time the Britains were very tumultuous, The
Britains tumultuous.
for the reducing of whom to obedience, he sent A. Plautius in his second year,
with an Army out of Gall.

10. Since the time of Julius Caesar, the Romans had attempted nothing upon
Britain. Augustus seems of purpose to have neglected it, Lege Cambdenum.
counting it policy to keep the Roman Empire within it is bounds; to wit, the
Ocean, the Rivers Ister and Euphrates, limits set by nature, to the end it
might be a State Adamantine (for so he himself speaks in Julian) or
invincible, and not miscary through it is too great bulck and burden. This
Island from Julius Caesar his Expeditions, untouched by the Romans.
Strabo is of opinion, that he despised it, seeing no cause to fear, nor hope
of much profit from the Britans; and yet it seemed that no small danger would
be presented from other Nations lying about the said Island. But at length he
departed from Rome with a purpose to transfer the War into Britain; but when he
was come into Gall, the Britains pacified him by Ambassadors, and having
obtained his amity, dedicated presents and oblations in the Capitol. They
brought the Island now familiar to the Romans, and endured taxes and imposts,
which says Strabo, are now nothing grievous to them, being raised out of such
merchandise and commodities as are shipped to and fro out of Gall and Britain:
those be Ivory works, bits and bridles, chains and wreathes, Vessels of
Electrum and glass, with other base and common wares of like sort. And
therefore there needs no Garrison for that Island. For it would require one
Legion at least, and some Horsemen, if tributes were to be levied from thence,
and the said tributes would but countervail the charges of maintaining a
Garrison there; Augustus was diverted from it.
for of necessity, by imposing a tribute, the revenues coming by tollage and
poundage, and such like imposts, would be less: and if any violent course were
used, some peril or other must be expected. The year following also Augustus
intended a second Expedition into Britain, because there was some variance
about the Covenants: but by occasion of some insurrections made in Spain by the
Cantabri and others, that journey was stayed.

11. Tiberius nothing transported with an inordinate desire of enlarging the
Empire, seems to have rested in that counsel of Augustus; For he brought out
a Book written with Augustus his own hand, wherein was contained the whole
wealth and estate of the Commonweal, what number as well of Roman Citizens as
Allies were in Arms, how many Navies, Kingdoms, and Provinces, what tributes
and imposts belonged to the State, with a resolution annexed thereto of
containing the Empire within the same bounds. Which advise and resolution of
Augustus contented him so well, that, as Tacitus reports, Tiberius neglected
it.
he would attempt nothing in Britain, nor maintain any Garrison or Deputies
there. For, whereas Tacitus reckons up the number of Legions, and what Coasts
and Countries they defended at that time, he makes no mention at all of
Britain. And yet it seems, that the Britains entertained amity with the
Romans. For when as at the same time Germanicus sailed the Ocean, some of his
Company being by force of Tempest driven to this Island, were by the Princes
thereof sent back again. That Caius Caesar cast in his mind to enter this
Island is certain: but by his shittle brain, sudden repentance, and wonderful
attempts against Germany it came to nothing. For to the end that he might
terrify Britain and Germany (over which he hovered) with the same of some
mighty piece of work, he made a bridge between Baiae and the Piles of Puteoli,
three miles and 600 paces in. length. Caius his rare exploits
But having achieved no greater exploit, than received to grace Adminius the
son of Cynobelliuus King of the Britans (who being by his Father banished, had
fled over Sea with a small power and train about him) he sent magnificent and
glorious letters to Rome, as if the whole Isle had been yielded up into his
hands: warning and wishing the Posts to ride forward directly into the Forum
and Curia, and in no wise to deliver the said missives unto the Consuls, but in
the Temple of Mars, and that in a frequent Assembly of the Senate.

12. After this to the Ocean he marched, as if he minded to translate the War
over into Britain. There upon the shore he embattelled his Soldiers: he himself
took Sea in a Gally, and having lanched forth a little from the Land, returned
again. Then mounting an high scaffold, he sat him down, and gave his Soldiers
the sign for battle, And great achievement.
and commanding the Trumpets to sound, on a sudden charged them to gather
Cockles, Muskles, and other small shelfishes. Having gotten these spoils he
waxed proud, as if he had conquered the Ocean: and having rewarded his
Soldiers, he brought some of these shelfishes to Rome, to show the booty he had
gotten. In token and memorial of this great achievement, he caused to be built
a brave high Turret, out of which as from a watchtower, there might blaze all
night long lights, and fires, for the better direction of Seamen. The ruins
hereof are some times seen at a low water on the shore of Holland, Britenhuis.
by the People inhabiting thereabouts, called Britenhuis, that is, the British
house, who also find oftentimes stones engraven with letters: of which one had
these characters, C. C. P. F. which they expound thus, Caius Caligula Pharum
Fecit, that is, Caius Caligula made this Pharus ( or Watchtower) so called, I
suppose, from that notable one, and one of the Worlds wonders, built by Ptolomy
Philadelphus in the Island Pharos, from which Vives in Aug. de Civit. Dei l.
16. c. ult.
some would have the ancient Kings of Egypt called Pharaohs. It is probable,
that this Watchtower afterward being repaired by Septimus Severus, became a
Granary for reception of Corn, which was brought out of Britain, whence it
might take it is name of Britenhuis. For Zozimus writes, says Cambden, that
Corn was wont to be brought out of Britain by ships to this place, and thence
with barges and boats haled up the Rhene against the stream, to serve the Roman
Garrisons: seeing that Julian the Emperor built Garrisons, as Marcellus says,
wherein might be inned and kept the Corn, that the Britains usually transported
thither.

13. But, afterward the inland parts of Britain wasted rather with Civil Wars
and Factions than by the force of the Romans, came by little and little
subjected to them. Some making choice of their protection swore allegiance to
them, and practiced by all means to subject their Native Country unto their
government. The principal of these fugitives was one Bericus, who moved, and
persuaded Claudius to give the attempt upon Britain, which none assayed to do
since the time of Julius Caesar, and which then was up in a broil and
commotion, for that the said Fugitives were not rendered again unto them.
Claudius sends Plantius into Britain.
Claudius therefore in his second year ordered A. Plantius the Praetor to pass
over out of Gall, who having by the means of Narcissus quieted the Soldiers
that refused to make War without the compass of the World, overthrew several
times the sons of Cynobellinus. His Lieutetenant was Flavius Vespasian, who
behaved himself very gallantly in the service. But Claudius in his fourth year
being very ambitious of a triumph (as not contenting himself with triumphal
Ensigns decreed to him by the Senate) without a just cause pitched upon Britain
as yet seditious, because their Fugitives were not restored. Sailing from
Ostia, he was twice in danger of shipwreck, once near Liguria, and again near
the Islands Staechades (four or five in the French Sea near Languedoc and
Provence) wherefore from Massilia (now Marseils in Provence) he went by Land as
far as Gessoriacum (now Bologne) and thence passing into the Island subdued
part of it, Passing thither himself subdueth part of it.
and amongst other Towns Camalodunum (now Maldon) the regal seat of
Cynobellinus, with the Orcades. Dio vvriteth, that at his first landing he
defeated the Barbarians in battle. But Suetonius says, he performed these acts
without a battle, and the loss of one drop of blood. Sueton ut supra cap. 17.
Having been diverse times saluted Imperator (a thing directly says Dio against
the Roman custom; for lawful it is not in one War to assume that title oftener
than once) he disarmed the Britains, and committing as well the government of
these, as the War with the other (not yet subdued) to Plantius he hasted to
Rome in the sixth month, sending before him Pompey and Silanus his sons-in-law
with tidings of the victory.

14. So great a matter it was, and of such consequence to have Conquered even
so small a parcel of Britain, that the Senate thereupon decreed in honor of
Claudius, yearly Games with triumphal Arches, both at Rome, and also at
Gessoriacum in Gall, and a most honorable and stately Triumph. To the
beholding hereof Governors of Provinces, Extraordinary expressions of joy at
Rome.
and some banished persons also were permitted to come to the City: a naval
Crown was fixed on the loover of the Palace, as the Ensign of the British Sea
subdued by him: the Provinces brought in Crowns of Gold, and Gallia Comata one
above the rest weighing nine pounds: and the hither part of Spain, another of
seven pound weight. He mounted up into the Capitol by the stairs on his knees,
supported, and heaved up by his sons-in-law on either side. He entered in
Triumphing wise the Adriatic Sea, embarked in a Vessel more like some
exceeding great house than a ship. Unto his wife Messalina was allowed the
highest place to sit in, as also to ride in a Carroch or hanging Coach. After
this he set forth triumphal plays and Games, being made Consul for that
purpose. The solemnities were exhibited at once in two Theaters, and many times
when he was gone aside from the fight, others had the charge thereof. Horse
races for the prize he promised as many as those days would admit. Howbeit,
above ten there were not; for between every course of Horses Bears were killed,
Champions performed their duties, and choice boys sent for out of Asia, danced
the warlike dance in Armor. Upon Valerius Asiaticus, Julius Silanus, Sidius
Geta, and others, in regard of this Conquest, he heaped triumphal Ornaments. He
suffered Licinius Crassus Frugi to follow after himself in this triumph,
mounted upon a trapped Courser with a rich caparison, and arrayed in a Robe of
Date-tree work. Upon Posidius the Eunuch he bestowed a spear staff without an
head: upon C. Gavius chains, bracelets, hors-trappings, and a Coronet of Gold;
as is to be seen in an ancient Marble at Taurinum.

15. In the mean time Aulus Plantius went on with the relics of the War in
Britain, and sped so well, that Claudius passed a decree that he should enter
Rome in Ovant Triumph: Plantius
and when he was entered into the City, he himself went to meet him, giving him
the right hand all the way. Vespasian, Sueton in Vespasian.
partly under Claudius, And Vespasian prosper in Britain.
and partly under Plantius, fought thirty battles with the Enemy; subdued also
two most mighty Nations, and above twenty Towns, together with the Isle of
Vectis or Wight. For those exploits he received triumphal Ornaments, and within
a short space two Sacerdotal Dignities, with a Consulship which he bore the two
last months of the year. Idem in Tito.
Titus also served in quality of a Tribune under his father with exceeding
commendations for his industry and valor (for he valiantly delivered his
father when besieged) and no less repute of his modest carriage say some, as
appears by a number of his images and titles to them annexed, throughout the
Provinces of Germany and Britain. Orosius lib 7. cap. 6. Plin. l. 2. c. 87. A.
D. 46. V. C. 798.
About this time a new Island appeared in the Aegean Sea named Thia near to
Hiera, which 110 years before it first also sprung up: And both of them lay
betwixt Thera and Therasia, which in like manner 130 years before the Original
of Hiera were first seen amongst the Cyclades.

Claudius animadverteth upon his wife Messalina.
16. Two or three years after this, Claudius being certified that his wife
Messalina (the most unchaste of all women) had openly married C. Silius, Lege
Tacit. Annal. l. 11. c. 26. etc.
he animadverted upon her and her minions. About the same time Herod the King
of Chalcis dying, he bestowed that Kingdom upon Herod's Nephew Agrippa the
younger, for Judaea his father's Kingdom was still governed by Deputies.
Tiberius Alexander, who succeeded Fadus, Josephus Antiquit. lib. 2. Capp. 3, 4.
Orosius lib. 7. cap. 6. Sueton ut supra cap. 25. Tacitus Annal. l. 12. c. 1.
etc.
now gave place to Cumanus, under whom the Jews, being affronted at the
Passover by impudent and saucy Soldiers, mutined, but now, as ever, came to
the worst: and not long after their Contrymen that dwelt at Rome were
expelled thence by Claudius, and under their name as many think the Christians
also. In the nineteenth year of his reign he married Agrippina his own Neice by
his brother Germanicus, Marries Agrippina his Niece.
through the persuasion of Pallas his Freedman, which woman presently as soon
as she perceived her strength procured his daughter Octavia to be given in
marriage to Domitius Nero her son by her former husband Cn. Domitius
Aenobarbus. The maid was formerly contracted to L. Silanus an eminent young
man, but he accused by Vitellius was put out of his Praetorship, and the match
was broken betwixt him and the Princess, whereupon he shortly after killed
himself. And a year after was Claudius persuaded by Pallas to adopt Nero his
wive's son, though he had a son of his own, by name Britanicus, but two years
younger. Pallas was so high flown in favor, Felix sent Governor into Samaria.
that he procured his brother Felix to be sent Governor into Samaria, and
afterward got his power extended to Judaea, Galile, and Peraea, where he acted
the part of a Tyrant, and having married several great Ladies, obtained also
Drusilla sister to Agrippa. The Parthians now again at variance amongst
themselves, and wearied with the Tyranny of Gatarzes, asked a Prince from Rome.
Claudius sent them Meherdates the son of Vonones, Stirs in Parthia.
and Grandson of Phraates; but he was presently betrayed into the hands of
Gotarzes. At this time also the Britains rebelled.

17. Now was P. Ostorius Propraetor there, Tacitus Annal. lib. 12. Capp. 31,
32. etc.
upon whose first coming the Britains grew confident, The Britains rebel.
as contemning him for his want of experience. The Winter being begun they made
excursions into the Territories of the Allies of Rome. He knowing that the
first event would either encourage or amate them, set upon, and scattered them,
then went about to disarm all such as he had reason to suspect; but the Iceni
(inhabiting those parts now called Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgshire, and
Huntingtonshire) a strong Nation, refusing to submit, drew others in to them,
and pitching upon a very convenient ground gave battle to the Romans, who by
reason that they despaired of pardon, had much ado to overcome them. By this
foil of the Iceni, others before unsettled were contained in obedience, and
Ostorius led his Army against the Cansi (a people living toward the Irish Sea)
and wasting their grounds had passed on well nigh to the Irish Sea, when he was
recalled by the discord of the Brigantes (people inhabiting the North part of
that now called England) the Ringleaders of whom, when he had taken off, the
rebellion was extinguished. But the Silures (inhabiting Southwales) would by no
means be either allured or discouraged from waging War, trusting to the
strength of Caractacus the greatest Prince amongst the Britains, who excelling
as well in policy as the knowledge of the Country, transferred the War into
the Territories of the Ordovices (now Northwales) as more convenient for him by
reason of the Mountains and Rocks. Here he made a speech to his Officers,
putting them in mind how their Ancestors had repulsed Caesar the Dictator, and
willing them to behave themselves at this time as the beginning of their
liberty or eternal slavery. Are reduced.
Till they came to strokes the Romans had the worst of it; but afterward
breaking into the Rampires they easily routed the Britains, and got a great
victory, wherein the wife and daughter of Caractacus being taken, his brethren
yielded themselves.

18. Caractacus committing himself into the hands of Cartismunda, Idem ibid.
cap. 36. etc.
Queen of the Brigantes, Caractacus betrayed is carried to Rome.
was treacherously bound, and delivered up to the Conquerours in the ninth year
of the War, wherein he had got himself an exceeding great name. Being carried
to Rome, the people was called together as to some famous show, and the
Praetorian bands were placed along for the reception of him. The prayers of the
rest were by reason of fear, base, and nothing savouring of Nobility: but
Caractacus, neither hanging down his head, nor craving any mercy, when he stood
before the Emperor's Tribunal spoke to this purpose. If my moderation in
prosperity had been as great as my Nobility and Fortune, I had come rather as a
friend into this City, than a Captive: neither would you have disdained to
receive me with Covenants of peace, being a Prince descended of Noble
Progenitors, and a Commander over many Nations. His speech to the Emperor.
My present state is, as to me dishonorable, so to you magnificent. I have had
horses, men, armor, and wealth: What marvel if against my will I have lost
them all? For if you will rule over all men, it follows that all men must
abide servitude. If presently I had yielded, and been delivered into your
hands, neither had my Fortune nor your glory been very remarkable: and oblivion
would have followed my punishment. But if you save me alive, I shall be an
example of your clemency for ever.

He is pardoned.
19. Upon those words Caesar pardoned him, his wife, and brethren. And they
being all unbound did their reverence likewise unto Agrippina (who sat aloft
not far off in an high seat to be seen) giving her the like praises, and in the
same degrees of style as they did the Emperor himself. Surely a strange
precedent without any example, says the Historian, that a woman should sit and
command the Roman Ensigns. But she carried her self as a fellow and associate
in the Empire gotten by her Progenitors. After this the Senate was called
together, and the Fathers made long and glorious discourses, as touching the
Captivity of Caractacus. Neither was this less honorable, as they affirmed,
than when Pub. Scipio showed Siphax, L. Paulus, Perses, or whosoever else
exhibited Conquered Kings to the view of the People. As for Ostorius, it was
decreed he should be honored with triumphal Ornaments. But his Fortune soon
changed, either for that he grew secure upon the Captivity of so considerable a
man, or the Enemy was highly moved to revenge it. For a party left to awe the
Silures was encompassed by the Britains, The Britains again are up.
and if help had not presently come in from the adjoining Villages and
Fortresses, had been utterly cut off, besides, that the Commander in Chief with
eight Centurions, and many others were slain. Not long after such as went to
gather forage, and several Companies sent in to their aid, were also routed,
and the Enemy was hardly restrained at length by the help of the Legions. After
this happened many skirmishes, as they met by chance, or were desirous of booty,
and two Auxiliary Cohorts were intercepted, with the spoils of which other
Nations were drawn to revolt, and not long after Ostorius spent with care and
pensiveness died. To his place Claudius preferred A. Didius, who found things
but in a bad condition, Subdued.
through the boldness of the Silures. But the Britains falling out amongst
themselves were several times overthrown, and then kept under.

20. Claudius, the twelfth year of his reign ending, Jopeph. Antiquit. lib. 20.
cap. 5. Tacitus Annal. lib. 12. Capp. 64, 67, 68.
bestowed on Agrippa the Tetrarchy of Philip, as also that of Lysanias, taking
Chalcis from him after he had governed it 4 years. After this he restored the
Rhodians to their former liberty upon their repentance, and eased the
Inhabitants of Ilium of all charges and tributes, as being the Authors of the
Roman race. Nero pleaded the causes of both Cities, whose mother Agrippina now
began to be discovered to her husband. He chanced in his drink to say that it
was fatal to him first to endure, and then to punish the wickedness of his
wives, and he repented of his folly in preferring her son before his own. She
bethinking her self how to escape the danger, first gave him poison in
Mushrooms his beloved meat, Claudius poisoned by Agrippina his wife.
but it passing through him, A. D. 55. V. C. 807.
she used the skill of Xenophon the Physician, who as it were to help him to
vomit put something down his throat dipped in a most violent poison, and so he
died, who within a small time upon a very small account had put to death 35
Senators and 300 Knights. Sueton in Claudio.
He was a man that before his coming to the Government was despised by his
relations as some imperfect thing, and afterward was but counted blockish,
and despicable by others, yet sometimes he would judge very vvisely and
circumspectly, and so far profited in liberal studies (which he very much
plied) that he vvrote diverse things, and amongst the rest a learned defense of
Cicero in answer to the books of Asinius Pollio. He was fearful above
measure, His Character.
so that (amongst other demonstrations) when Camillus, who attempted a
Rebellion, sent to him a reproachful, and menacing Letter, vvilling him to lay
down the Government, he was in doubt, and seriously consulted whether he
should not do it: and this made him put many to death upon idle and malicious
accusations. He was the very slave of his Freedmen (whereof Narcissus and
Pallas were chief) who rather reigned than he; for, they managed all things
according to their pleasure or lust, bestowing favors upon whom they pleased,
and killing any, though never so worthy, or nearly allied to him. He excused
his anger and peevishness by a public Declaration. He was so forgetful that
he would several times ask for such as he had put to death. He would eat and
drink at any time, or in any place: he was a great player at Dice, of which
Art he set forth a book. He died on the third before the Ides of October, in
the 64 year of his age, when he had reigned thirteen years, eight months, and
twenty days, in the 807 year of the City, the 55 after the birth of Christ,
M. Asinius Marcellus and M. Acilius Aviola being Consuls.

21. Now that we may note briefly such Ecclesiastical matters as fell out in
the reign of Claudius. Ecclesiastical matters in his reign.
In his first year James the brother of John was, as we said, put to death by
Agrippa, and Peter being cast by him into prison was delivered by an Angel. In
his second, Paul returned out of Arabia to Damascus, whence he came to
Jerusalem to see Peter. Hence he went to Tarsus, and not long after to
Antioch, being sent for by Barnabas, who had been sent thither by the
Apostles. In his third year Paul preached for a whole year at Antioch,
together with Barnabas. In his fourth, Paul carried the Alms of the faithful
from Antioch to Jerusalem, because of the Famine foretold by Agabus. Thence
returning to Antioch, he was sent with Barnabas to preach the Gospel in Asia.
In this fourth then, and the fifth year of Claudius he preached Christ in
Cyprus, Pamphylia, Pisidia, Iconium, Lystra, and D^rbo, and returned to
Antioch. In the sixth he was sent from Antioch to Jerusalem to the Council
with Barnabas, whence returning to Antioch he reprehended Peter, who came
thither a little after him, for his dissembling, and not long after went with
Silas into Asia to confirm the Churches he had founded. In the seventh of
Claudius he preached Christ in Crete, and through Pisidia, Pamphylia, and
Phrygia, visited the Churches, converted the Galatians to the Faith. In the
eighth he came to Troas, and thence into Macedonia, where at Philippi, as also
at Thessalonica, at Beraea, and then at Athens he preached the Gospel. About
the end of the ninth year he came to Corinth, where he found Aquila and
Pricilla, with whom he stayed half a year preaching the Gospel, and thence
wrote both his Epistles to the Thessalonians. In the eleventh year he came from
Corinth to Ephesus with Aquila and Priscilla, whom there leaving, he went to
Jerusalem to the Feast. Thence he returned to Antioch and Ephesus through
Phrygia, Galatia, and the higher parts of Asia. Being at Ephesus in the twelfth
year, there he continued two years till the tumult raised by Demetrius. Hence
he wrote his Epistle to the Galatians; the former also to the Corinthians, and
to Titus, but about the end of the following year; as also the first to
Timothy. About the end also of the thirteenth year, or the beginning of the
following, he came into Macedonia and Achaia, to receive the collections to be
carried to Jerusalem. And hence (from Corinth) being to pass into Asia, he
wrote his Epistle to the Romans about the end of the following year. About the
end also of the fourteenth year he was imprisoned at Jerusalem. And being
carried to Caesarea was there kept prisoner by Felix for two years. Concerning
the Chronology of these accounts, Ludovicus Cappellus is by Students to be
consulted, in his Historia Apostolica Illustrata.

22. St. Peter the Apostle is reported in the second year of Claudius to have
come to Rome, having been formerly Bishop of Antioch, in which Sea he was
succeeded by Evodius one of the 70 Disciples, of whom also Paul makes mention:
some say that he continued Bishop at Rome 25 years, viz. twelve under Claudius,
Of St. Peter his being at Rome.
and thirteen under Nero. Perhaps he might come to Rome at this time, but that
he stayed there 25 years is but to be taken as a fable. For we read that
Claudius banished all Jews from Rome, and he being a Jew, must needs give
place, or abide the danger. We do not find he had any trouble, and this was by
reason of his absence. It Is probable that he went away when Aquila and Pricilla
departed Rome, and met St. Paul at Corinth. Eusebius indeed often mentions
his being at Rome, and writes, that he suffered Martyrdom together with Paul
under Nero. This might be at his second return unto Rome, so that we may count
25 years from his first coming under Claudius unto the end of his Martyrdom
under Nero; it being, to say truth, better thus to reconcile Writers, than
flatly to deny all, or to say, he never was at Rome. Here he met with Simon
Magus again, and confounded him, as it is reported. Act. 8. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1.
This man being a Samaritan of the Village Gitton, was baptized by Philp the
Deacon in Samaria. He would have bought of Peter the gift of the Holy Ghost;
and thence of him arose the word Simony. He came to Rome in the time of
Claudius, where calling himself a God, he was honored with an Image, having
this inscription, Simoni Deo Sancto. He had to his yoke-mate one Helene, Idem
c. 12, 13, 14. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 20. Epiphan. l. 1. tom. 2. haeres. 21.
by Irenaeus called Selen, a Witch and a common Harlot, whom he called the
Principal understanding. He said unto the Samaritans that he was the Father,
unto the Jews, that he was the Son descended from Heaven, and unto the
Gentiles, that he was the Holy Ghost. Peter foiled him in Samaria, whence for
shame he fled, and leaving Samaria and Judaea, he sailed from East to West, and
came to Rome, under Claudius, where Peter met him. Peter it is said had much to
do with him in the presence of Nero. Some write that he had three conflicts
with him, and in the end Simon seeing himself foiled, and his witchcraft not at
all to prevail, told them he would leave their City, and fly up into the
Heavens whence he came. Whereupon at a certain day appointed, he climbed up
into the high Capitol, whence he took his flight by the means of witchcraft,
and the spirits that bore him up in the air. The People at the sight hereof was
amazed. But Peter fell down and prayed God that his witchcraft might be
revealed to the World. He had no sooner spoke, but down came Simon Magus, and
was broken to pieces, so that he there miserably died. Now again to the course
of our History.

23. The death of Claudius was kept private by Agrippina, Tacitus Annal. l. 12.
c. ult.
till such time as the Empire could be secured to Nero her son, who then, at
noon time of the day, the doors of the Palace being opened suddenly,
accompanied with Burrhus Captain of the Guard, went to the watch, by which at
the instance of the Captain, he was received with lucky acclamations. Being put
into a litter, he was thence carried to the Camp, where speaking as the time
required, and promising a donative to the Soldiers, after the example of his
Predecessors, he was saluted Emperor, and presently owned by the Senate, and
in the Provinces. Claudius his testament he never published, lest the People
should be moved by the injury offered to Britanicus, Nero succeeds Claudius.
to whom his father was so superlatively unnatural, as to prefer his wives son
before him. Indeed some of the Soldiers at first paused, and looking back,
asked for Britanicus; but finding no body to stir in his behalf, Sueton in
Nerone c. 7.
joined themselves to the multitude. Nero came to the Government, being
seventeen years old, six years after he had been adopted by Claudius.

24. Nero at first carried it exceeding well toward People and Magistrates,
Idem c. 10.
governing according to the pattern of Augustus, whose prescript he professed
he would observe. He omitted no occasion of showing liberality, clemency, and
mildness, insomuch that Trajan himself admiring his first five years, All
Princes came short his first five years.
averred, that All Princes came short of them. Aurelius Victor.
Heavy tributes he either took off or lessened, distributed money to the
People, gave annual stipends to impoverished Senators, and to the Praetorian
hands Corn every month freely. Being desired to subscribe to the execution of
a condemned person, Oh, said he, I wish I knew not letters. But this good
beginning is rather to be attributed to Burrhus and Seneca (the later of whom,
after his adoption, was his Schoolmaster) who being in power mutually helped
each other. Tacitus Annal. l. 13. c. 1, etc.
Agrippina thought by virtue of his name to rule indeed, and at the beginning
poisoned Silanus Proconsul of Asia, and made away Narcissus; without his
knowledge the former, and the later without his consent; and had gone further,
but that Burrhus and Seneca interposed. Not long after, jealousies arose
betwixt them, for he falling in love with Act a Freed-woman, and distasting
such as she leaned upon, removed Pallas her Minion from public employment,
which so far exasperated her, that she upbraided him with Britanicus, as most
fit to enjoy his Fathers seat. This seat she told her son he now enjoyed by her
means, His Mother and he fall at ods.
and not sparing to lay open all the evils, as she said, of their unhappy
Family, her own marriage and sorcery; she took it as happy for the gods and her,
that Britanicus was living, and protested she would go with him to the Camp.

25. This, Idem ibid. c. 15.
together with Britanicus his frowardness (who being fourteen years old, began
to be sensible of his condition, and to move compassion toward himself) made
Nero resolve to dispatch him out of the way, and for that he could not do it
openly to his brother, he procured poison to be given him, which working
downwards without any great incommodity, he caused to be boiled to that height,
that it instantly killed him the second time, whilst he himself sat at supper
with him, He poysoneth Britanicus.
as knowing nothing. He made him be buried the same, though a very rainy,
night, his mean funeral being provided beforehand. Agrippina very much troubled
that her refuge was gone, was shortly after accused to her son, as intending by
a marriage with Rubellius Plautus (who was as near to Augustus as Nero himself)
to invade the Sovereignty. Being something gone in drink when he heard of it,
he would have had her killed out of hand, which being hindered by Burrhus, the
next day she stoutly denied any such design, and the wound of jealousy for the
time was skinned over. After two years, Idem ibid. c. 25.
Nero began to discover what his Nature prompted him to. Begins to discover
himself.
Disguising himself in a servile habit, he ran about the City by night to
Taverns and Stews, accompanied with such as himself, where taking away things
by force, as also cutting and slashing such as they met, he himself came into
danger of life.

26. A little before those things, Josephus Antiquit. l. 20. c. 7.
he sent Porcius Festus into Judaea to succeed Felix, who being out of his
office, was accused at Rome by such Jews as dwelt at Casarea. Nero pardoned him
through the intercession of his brother Pallas, Festus succeeds Felix.
who was as yet in favor. About the same time happened a great dissension
betwixt the Jews of Casarea and the Syrians, which there inhabited with them,
about the right and privilege of the City. They pretended that Herod the
founder of it was a Jew, and those answered, that ere he named it Caesarea, it
was called the Tower of Straton, at what time none of the Jews inhabited it:
and the Syrians by a great sum of money procured Beryllus (who had been Nero's
Schoolmaster) to get them the Emperors letters, whereby was abrogated that
Privilege which the Jews had formerly enjoyed with the Syrians. Herewith the
Jews incensed, were still seditious till the beginning of the War. Great
motions at this time fell out in the East. The Parthians had set upon Armenia,
Tacitus ut supra c. 34, etc.
having driven away Rhadamistus nephew to Mithridates, whom Claudius had set
over that Kingdom, and who was killed by the other, that he might succeed him.
Nero sent to preserve that Country Domitius Corbulo, who for two or three years
had little to do, because the Parthians deferred the War. But now Tiridates
brother to Vologesus the Parthian being resoled to fight for the Diadem, the
Armenians also inclining to him, Corbulo prospers in the East.
Corbulo took several Forts, and besieged Artaxata the Metropolis, which,
though the Inhabitants opened the gates, and for this were spared, yet because
it could not be held for the greatness of it, was burnt and razed. Nero for
these things was saluted Imperator, passing great honors were decreed to him,
and a far greater stir was made by the flattering Fathers than was convenient.

27. The same year that these things were done by Corbulo, being the fifth of
his reign, Nero fell in love with Poppaea Sabina, the daughter of P. Ollius,
though she named her self after her Grandfather by the mother's side, because
more eminent. Now falls in love with Poppaea, which incenseth him against his
mother.
He came first acquainted with her by the commendations of Otho her husband,
who also had been too familiar with her in the days of her first husband Rufus
Crispinus: She incensed him more against his mother, because she feared, that
as long as she lived, he would not dismiss Octavia and marry her self.
Sometimes she laid at him by diverse criminations, as otherwhiles jeered him as
a Pupil, who not not only wanted command and authority, but also liberty. Some
have suspected, Tacitus Annal. l. 14. c. 1, 2, etc.
that Agrippina sought to commit incest with her son. How true soever this was,
he now began to be absolutely weary of her, to shun her company, and within a
while resolved to make her away, though solicitous how to do it. Sueton in
Nerone c. 34.
At length Anicetus his Freed-man and General of the Fleet at Misenum,
acquainted him that a ship might be so framed, as to break into pieces and let
her fall into the Sea. This ship was thus made, and she brought into it by her
son, under color of doing her honor, but the upper part of the ship falling
chanced to miss her, though it killed one of her attendants. One of her maids
knowing nothing of the design, cried out, that she was Agrippina, hoping
thereby to save her self, and was thereupom killed by the Oars; but she her
self being silent, escaped them, and swom to Land. Her escape struck Nero with
great consternation, who called up Burrhus and Seneca to give their advice.
Whether they knew of the thing before or no is uncertain. Some say, Seneca
asking Burrhus whether the Soldiers should not be commanded to kill her, he
answered, they would do no such thing to the daughter of Germanicus, and that
Anicetus rather should perform his promise of dispatching her. This he readily
undertaking, accompanied with two others, went to the Village where she lay.
One of them first bruised her head with a club, another drawing his sword, she
stretched out her belly and bad him strike that, and so died of many wounds. He
causes his mother be made away.
Some report, that her son viewed her dead body exactly, and passed his
judgment upon every part. A. D. 60. V. C. 8^2.
She had been a very lewd and ambitious woman, and now reaped the fruit
thereof, according her own desire. For consulting on a time about the fortune
of this her son, the Chaldaeans told her, that He should reign, but kill his
mother, to which she answered, Occidat modo imperet: Let him kill me so he but
reign. After this wicked fact he was continually tormented in his Conscience,
confessing often, that he was haunted by the Furies, which did beat him with
firebrarnds.

28. He excused himself to the Senate, laying great loads of heavy accusations
upon her. But the Fathers not only excused but commended the deed, nay to such
sordidnesse of spirit was both Senate and People degenerated, The Senate and
People flatter him.
Tacitus ut supra c. 12, 13.
that returning to the City, they met him with as great Pomp, as if he had
come from some notable victory; for the several Tribes, and the Senate received
him, their Wives and Children being placed according to their Sex and Age.
Hereupon he grew excessive proud, as Lord over so many slaves, and presently
unmasking himself, without any care of his actions, fell into such disorders,
as he appeared rather a Devil incarnate than a man. He became a Stage Player,
learning that art, and exercising himself therein in public continually. His
enormities.
He ordained Games to be solemnized at Rome every fifth year, in imitation of
the Greeks, and called them Neronia; persons of all sorts, and degrees, being
constrained to be actors. These being continued night and day, most horrid
things were committed, Prince, Senate, and People, either through affection or
fear, not only giving way, but compelling to such filthiness. Corbulo
prospers in Armenia.
Corbulo at this time prospering in Armenia had Tigranocerta yielded to him,
and then placed in that Kingdom, Tigranes Grandson to Archelaus King of
Cappadocia, with whom having left a Guard, and settled matters, he departed
into Syria to succeed Vinidius the Governor. The year following, being the 814
of the City, wherein Caesonius Paetus and Petronius Turpilianus were Consuls,
the Romans received a sad defeat in Britain.

29. Consule Tacitum ubi supra Capp. 29, 30, 31. and Xiphilin. in Excerptis ex
Dione.
Of late the Lieutenants of this Province had made but small progress in their
Conquests; A. Didius Avitus the Successor of Plantius contenting himself with
what was done before, and Verannius, who followed him, making only some
excursions upon the Silures; for he was prevented by death from any further
service. But now Paullinus Suetonius the Aemulator of Corbulo for Military
glory, had the chief Command, and sought to equal the acts of the other in
Armenia, by chastizing and taming the Britains. He set upon the Isle Mona (now
called Anglesey) peopled with strong Inhabitants, Suetonius in Britain subduing
the Silures.
and the receptacle of all Fugitives, where he was received with multitudes of
men on the shore, and with women running about like furies with firebrands in
their hands, having their hair spread about their shoulders; the Druides also,
the ancient Seat of whom that Island was, pouring out plenty of curses. The
Soldiers something terrified at first, being exhorted by their General, easily
broke through, and dissipated this furious Company: then placed he a Garrison
in the Island, and cut down the Groves where they were wont to offer man's
blood, and consult their Gods by the entrails of some Captive. But whilst
these things were adoing, news came to Suetonius of the revolt of his Province.
His Province revolteth.
For, Prafatagus King of the Iceni, that his Kingdom and family might be freed
from molestation, left Caesar his Heir, together with his two daughters. But it
happened far otherwise, A. D. 62. Ol. 210. ann. 1. V. C. 814.
his Kingdom being wasted by Centurions, and his house by Slaves: his wife
Boadicia (otherwise called Boodicia, Boudicia, Vondica, and Bunduica) was
whipped, his daughters defloured, his chiefest subjects spoiled of their Goods
and Lands, and his kindred counted no better of than slaves. Provoked by these
things, and fear of worse when they should be reduced into the form of a
Province, they took Arms, stirring up the Trinobantes to rebellion. Others also
joined with them, having heretofore combined to recover their liberty out of
hatred to the old superannuated Soldiers, who being planted as a Colony at
Camalodunum, committed grievous outrages against them, and these were rather
cherished by the Army than otherwise, in hope of the like liberty for the time
to come. But this Colony not being fenced by any fortifications, the founders
having rather looked at the pleasantness of the situation than commodiousnesse
of the ground, the Britains accounted it no great matter to destroy it.

30. The Camalodunians being terrified by several prodigies, Tacitus ut supra
Capp. 32, 33. etc. and Sueton. in Narone cap. 39.
desired aid of Catus Decianus the Governor in Suetonius his absence. He sent
them but 200 men, and those but meanly Armed, and they neglected still to raise
any fortifications, their Counsels being confounded by such as were engaged in
the plot. Being then beset round by the Natives, all things were burnt and
destroyed, Camalodunum the Colony destroyed,
and Petilius Cerealis coming to their relief with the ninth Legion was utterly
defeated, all the foot being cut in pieces, and the horse with himself glad to
run away to the Camp; whereupon Catus passed over into Gall, having by his
avarice been the great cause of this defection. The same defeat was given to
Verulamium (out of the ruins of which rose St. Albans) a Town free of the City
of Rome; And Verulamium.
for the Britains passing by Castles and places of defense, set upon such as
were most obnoxious to their fury. At both places were massacred 70000 persons,
none being taken or sold after the custom of War, but either put to the sword,
hanged, burnt, or crucified as Malefactors. Suetonius passed through the midst
of his Enemies to Londinium (now London) a Town not then notable in respect of
the Colony, but for multitude of Merchants, and plenty of Traffic very famous.
Perceiving it but badly provided of Soldiers, although he once thought to make
it the seat of the War, he left it, being not prevailed with to stay either by
the prayers or tears of the Inhabitants. For, resolving with the loss of one
Town to preserve the rest, he took all along with him that could go, and all
others, whom either Sex or Age, or the pleasantness of the places detained
were destroyed by the Enemy. Having got together an Army of 10000 men, he
resolved to venture a battle with all expedition; and for that purpose made his
choice of convenient ground. Boadicia carrying her two daughters in the Chariot
with her about to the Companies, told them it had been usual before for the
Britains to fight under the conduct of women, but she was now in another
capacity than her Ancestors, being not to fight for a Kingdom, but as one of
the ordinary sort to revenge her lost liberty, her own stripes, and the
violence offered to her daughters. As for her self she said she was resolved to
win the field, or die; as for men, they might live if they pleased, and be
slaves. Suetonius on the other side considering the weight of the Enterprise,
was not silent.

31. The Romans, though far inferior in number, Tacitus ut prius Capp. 37, 38.
yet in Military knowledge and Discipline far exceeding the Britains, put them
to the worst, and made of them great slaughter by reason of the difficulty of
flight; for those having brought their wives to behold the battle, Suetonius
defeateth the Britains in battle.
and be eyewitnesses of their valor, they had placed them in Wagons about
the Army. Some reported that scarcely fewer then 80000 of the Conquered were
slain, and of the Conquerors about 400. and Boadicia ended her life by poison.
Afterward, the Army being increased by a great supply sent over by Caesar,
wasted the Country with fire and sword, which was also sorely oppressed by
famine; for being intent upon the War, the Britains had neglected the sowing of
Corn, hoping also to enjoy the Provisions of the Enemy. For all this they were
not forward to ask Peace, being encouraged by Julius Cassilianus, who being
sent to succeed Catus, disagreed so far with Suetonius, and so illed him to
those at Rome, that he wrote they must not expect an end of the War till some
one was sent to succeed him, attributing all mishaps to his unfitness, and all
success to the good Fortune of the Commonwealth. To view then the condition of
Britain, was Polycletus the Freed-man of Nero sent over, who coming in with a
great train seemed terrible to the Roman Soldiers, but ridiculous to the
Britains, who burning with affection to liberty, and as yet ignorant of the
power of such, wondered that the General and Army (which had put an end to such
a War) would obey slaves. Suetonius was commanded to deliver up his Army to
Turpilianus, Turpilianus succeeding him is slothful.
who was even now out of the Consulship, and neither provoking nor being
provoked coveted slothful idleness, as Tacitus tells us, with the specious,
and comely name of Peace.

32. The year after was Albinus sent into Judaea to succeed Festus, who died in
his Government. Albinus succeeds Festus.
Josephus Antiquit. lib. 20. cap. 8.
About the same time Agrippa (who had power after his Uncle of Chalcis to
bestow the High Priesthood on whomsoever he pleased) gave it to Ananus son of
that Annas or Ananus, who beyond example having himself enjoyed the Office, had
five sons, who every one of them executed the same. This young Ananus being a
Sadduce, as also very bold and cruel, conceiving he had got a convenient
opportunity ( Festus being dead, and Albinus not yet arrived) called a Council,
and condemned James the brother of Jesus Christ, James the Just killed by the
procurement of Ananus the High Priest.
as Josephus writes, with some others, as guilty of impiety, to be stoned.
This act displeased, says the Historian, A. D. 63. V.C. 815.
all good men, and especially such as were most studious of the Law, who
desired of Agrippa that he would command Ananus to forbear the like for the
time to come: some going also to meet Albinus, told him that the High Priest
had no authority to call a Council, whereupon he wrote to him very angrily, and
threatened him, upon which account Agrippa the King removed him from his Office
after the third month. Burrhus dies.
At this time died Burrhus at Rome, Tacitus Annal. lib. 14. capp. 51, 52, etc.
not without suspicion of poison, and Seneca's power was weakened by the loss
of that conjunction, whereby they had mutually strengthened the hands of each
other. Seneca was now backbited, and by Nero slighted, of whom he desired
leave to withdraw himself, having been with him fourteen years, and he offered
to give up his great estate into his hands (for that had brought him so far
into envy;) but Nero having learnt, and practiced dissimulation, under color
of respect denied his Petition. Nero marries Poppaea.
Now did Nero marry Poppaea, whom all this while he had kept as his Concubine,
and dismissed Octavia loaded with accusations of barrenness and greater
Crimes; and when the people troubled at it grew seditious, he caused her to be
put to death in that fatal Island Pandateria. The same year also as it is
believed he poisoned the Chief of the Liberti or Freed-men, Peryphorus, because
he was against his marrying Poppaea, and Pallas, for that living very long, he
had scraped together a vast sum of money.

33. At this time were the stirs renewed in Armenia. Tacitus Annal. lib. 15.
capp. 1. 2, 3, etc.
For Vologeses seeing his brother thus beaten off, and Tigranes set up in his
stead, had invaded the Country to revenge the injury offered to the line of
the Arsacidae. Corbulo, though very warily, yet resisted and repelled him, when
Cesennius Paetus was sent to defend that Country, who by his ignorance in
Military matters and rashness undid all. The stirs in Armenia renewed.
Being besieged, he was glad to Covenant for his preservation to quit Armenia,
and remove the Garrisons thence, which done, Nero was to be sent to. Yet so
ridiculous and degenerate were they at Rome, as to erect Trophies over the
Parthians, though they knew nothing of the success, either one way or other.
The Parthian Ambassadors came to Rome to desire that (as they hinted) which had
been gotten by force, but without effect, for War was decreed against them to
be managed by Corbulo; yet were they dismissed with gifts, so as there might be
hope, that, if Tiridates himself would entreat for the Diadem, it should not be
in vain. Corbulo again invaded Armenia, at which the Parthians affrighted came
to a Treaty, wherein it was agreed that Tiridates laying down his Diadem at the
feet of Nero's Statue should not receive it without his leave. Nero now growing
now worse and worse, broke out into most horrid impieties, well nigh beyond all
belief.

34. The next year being the 817 of the City, Idem ibid. capp. 37, 38, etc.
the 65th after the birth of Christ, and of his own reign the 10. C. Lecanius
Bassus, and M. Licinius Crassus being Consuls, acting the common Stage Player,
and giving up himself to all luxury, and unheard of pollutions, Sueton in
N^^urone cap. 38.
amongst the rest he married himself as a woman to one of his filthy crew,
called Pythagoras, all things being provided and celebrated as at a marriage.
He made himself also the husband of Sporus, from whom he took as much of the
Male as possible, and ordered him to be brought to him in a Veil as a Bride.
Nero's wickedness.
Being offended at the deformity of the old buildings, and the narrowness of
the streets, or else to feed his cruel eye with so sad a spectacle as he had
read to have happened at the siege of Troy, he caused the City to be set on
fire, which burning six days and seven nights, of the fourteen divisions four
only remained whole, A. D. 65. V. ^. 817. Idem ibid. cap. 16. Tacitus ut supra
cap. 44.
the other being wasted, or defaced, with the fury of the flame. He beheld the
fire from the Tower of Maecenas, and very merry at the beauty of it, as he
termed it, in a Player's habit sung the destruction of Ilium. This calamity
being generally attributed to him as the cause, he accused the Christians
thereof, Setting Rome on fire, he accuses and persecuteth the Christians.
and raised the First Persecution, torturing them with most exquisite kinds of
punishment. About this time he sent Gessius Florus into Judaea to succeed
Albinus, who desiring to gratify them of Jerusalem, for all the mischief he
had done, ere his departure, brought out all the prisoners, whereof those that
were committed for any capital offense he put to death, but the rest he fined
only and dismissed; whereby all the Gaols being thus emptied, the Country was
filled with thieves more than before. The year following was discovered a
conspiracy against Nero, which gave him occasion further to indulge his cruel
humor.

35. Who was the Author of it is uncertain, as also upon what particular
grounds it was hatched, though all the persons bore him malice, Idem ibid. c.
49, etc.
as they thought they had reason. But Lucan the Poet (who wrote the Civil Wars
betwixt Caesar and Pompey, A conspiracy against him.
and was nephew to Seneca by his brother Annaeus Mela) was aggrieved that Nero
envied him the glory he had got by his Verses; and several others joined with
them out of love to Cn. Piso the head of the party. It was discovered by
Milichus the Freed-man of Sceninus, who had commanded him to scour his dagger,
and provide necessaries for wounds; whereupon some would have had Piso to have
gone to the Rostra, and laid open the Tyrant to the People, to obtain their
help; but he refused. A. D. 66. V. C. 818.
The next after him that was put to death was Annaeus Seneca the Philosopher
and Nero's Schoolmaster, Seneca his Schoolmaster put to death.
not being convicted of any treason, though accused by one Natalis, as it is
thought, to please Caesar, such an earnest desire his Scholar had to dispatch
him, having formerly without effect attempted it by poison. Being commanded to
dye, he did it very cheerfully, though he was forced to seek for death several
ways. For, he had so starved himself with abstinence, that he could not bleed,
and poison would not work upon him; but at length entering into a bath he was
stifled with the fume of it, having all this while discoursed, even to his
last, according to his wonted elegancy, such excellent things, as being then
taken from his mouth, came afterward abroad. Such was the end of this
excellent Philosopher, concerning the character of whom, Students are rather to
trust to Cornelius Tacitus than to Dio, if Justus Lipsius be a competent Judge.
Dio accuses him of extortion, adultery with Agrippina, and what not? He makes
him a Sodomite, and to have taught his Scholar that wickedness, Lipsius his
Apology for him against Dio.
as also the cause and procurer of the death of Agrippina, and a cart-load of
other Calumnies, says Quam consule in Comment. ad Taciti Annal. l. 14. and
omnino ad l. 15.
Lipsius, does the idle man heap upon him, contrary to the belief and mind of
all men. What cause was there of this hatred? or what reward had he for lying?
for Seneca lived so long before him, that he neither could injure him nor
oblige him. I believe, says he, it was a certain perversity of judgment and
manners, which also set him keen against Cicero and all good men. I desire that
youth may take heed, and so to gather the flowers of Antiquity from these
fields, that they do not also gather poison. But as for what concerns the
riches and galantry of Seneca, see Reader, and read his excellent Treatise De
vita beata, which he wrote with no other design, than to stop the mouths of
these Calumniators, especially from the seventeenth Chapter. Thus has Lipsius
prevented us in our Apology for this excellent person, in whose vindication
much might be said.

36. Pompeia Paullina the wife of Seneca (Dio calls her a most noble woman,
perhaps the daughter of Pompeius Paullinus, to whom Tacitus gives the title of
Consularis, and who was set over the public customs or imposts) cut also her
veins, that she might die with him, but Nero bearing her no malice as it
happened, sent some to stop the bleeding, and recover her. Seneca had another
brother besides the father of Lucan, who was also put to death. This was
Annaeus Novatus, otherwise called Junius Gallio from his adoptive Father, being
also mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, and then Governor of Achaia. Their
Father was M. Annaeus Seneca a Rhetorician of Coruba in Spain, whose Suasories
and Controversies are yet extant, joined to his sons Works. Nero proceeded in
his madness and cruelties. Acting the Stage Player still he was reviled at his
return home by Poppaea his wife, for which he kicked her great with child, and
thereupon she miscarried. Then raged he against many of greatest note, Nero
kills Poppaea.
amongst whom was Mela the father of Lucan (who had formerly perished for the
conspiracy) and this allaied the grief which was conceived for the death of
many others, by the pestilence that now raged, because they seemed thereby well
delivered from the fury and rage of the Prince, who now neither used choice nor
measure in his slaughters. Being puffed up with the success of his cruelty, he
said, that None of his Predecessors knew their power, hinting also, that he
meant to destroy the remnant of the Senators. It was believed he had a great
desire to deliver up quick men to be devoured of an Egyptian, a monstrous
eater of raw flesh, or any other thing that was given him.

37. Neither was there wanting to him luxury and effeminatenesse, suitable to
his cruelty, nor any other vice, whereby the truth of that saying of Domitius
his father might appear, who hearing of his birth, said, that Of himself and
Agrippina could proceed nothing but accursed, detestable, Vide. Sueton. in
Nerone c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and to the damage of the Commonwealth. For in him seemed to meet and be
conjoined not only all the vices of his own family (which of late had been too
pregnant of them) but all the corruption of his Country, from the beginning to
his very time. The height of his wickedness.
He lengthened his feasts from Noon to Midnight, accounting no use of riches
but in the abuse of them. Such he thought to be sordid and base, as took
account of their expenses, and he extolled and admired his Uncle Caius, for
spending in so short a time so vast sums, as had been hoarded up by Tiberius.
To Tiridates that came to Rome to take the Diadem from his hands, he allowed an
incredible sum for his daily expenses, and as profusely gratified him at his
departure. He put on no garment twice, played for vast sums at dice, fished with
a golden net, when he journyed any whither, he never had less than 1000
Caroches in his train, Idem ibid. c. 31, and 32. Tacitus Annal. lib. 15. c. 42.
and he caused his mules to be shod with Silver. But his house exceeded all
belief, having built it out of the ruins of the City. For length, for
pleasantness of groves and fish ponds it was incredible, garnished also with
Gold and precious stones. To the madness of this expense he was encouraged by
one that made him fair promises of discovering a vast treasure in Africa, which
Dido the Queen flying out of Tire should thence bring with her. But being
deceived, as was likely, with so foolish a project, he took such courses as
became Nero to recruit his coffers.

38. When Tiridates was departed into Armenia, he went into Greece, there to
act Tragedies, to sing, and run races in the Chariot. Running in the Olympic
Games, although he fell from his Chariot, yet he was rewarded with a crown as
Victor. He took from Apollo the Cyrrhaean Territory, and defaced the place
whence they were wont to receive Oracles, killing men at the hole whence the
blast came. He attempted to cut through the Isthmus of Peloponnesus, digging
first himself, and carrying out the first basket of Earth upon his shoulders:
but with the same success as others had before him. When he was in Achaia news
came from Cestius Gallus President of Syria concerning the rebellion of the
Jews. Being long vexed with the injuries of the Deputies and Governors, they
could no longer contain themselves. Christ's blood lying heavy upon them, and
crying for vengeance, they themselves executed part of it. The Jews rebel.
For such robberies in the Country, A. D. 67. V. C. 819.
such and so many murders in the City were committed, and such delusions by
false Prophets prevailed amongst them, as after a wonderful manner turned their
estate upside down, drew upon them the malice of their enemies, and
demonstrated the high displeasure of Almighty God. The particular occasion of
their rebellion was from Florus their Governor, Vide Josephum de bello Judaico
l. 2. c. 13.
who through the insinuations of his wife into Poppaea having procured that
Office, carried himself as worthy of such a Master. He flew to that height of
impudence and wickedness, as by a public Crier to give free leave to rob and
steal through the whole Country, The occasion thereof.
on condition that he might have part of the booty. It was his design to
provoke them to rebel, that his impieties might thereby be covered. After he
and the Townsmen of Caesarea had grievously abused such Jews as there lived, he
came to Jerusalem with an Army, rifled the Forum, plundered the houses, killed
the Inhabitants, whipped and hung up several, who, though Jews born, were made
Knights of Rome, and all under pretense that some had reviled him for his
cruelty. Not content herewith, he persuaded the People of Jerusalem to go out
to meet, in a courteous manner, certain Soldiers that were coming thither, to
whom he sent, that they should not return their civility, that so they might be
offended, and give out words, which advantage he commanded them to take, and
fall upon them. This was performed, and many perished, whom the Chief-priests
and others with lamentable entreaties had persuaded to go forth, hoping thereby
to please the Tyrant, and prevent the mischief. From this violence sprung the
War, in the twelfth year of Nero's reign, the seventeenth of Agrippa, the
second of Florus his Government, the 819 of the City, and 67 after the birth of
Christ, C. Suetonus Paullinus and L. Pontius Telesinus being Consuls.

39. Some of those that were most eager after rebellion, Idem ibid. c. 17, 18.
assaulted a Castle called Massada, and killing the Romans placed therein a
Garrison of their own. And in the Temple Eleazar the son of Ananias the
High Priest Captain of the Guard and a forward young man, persuaded the People
no more to offer the sacrifices which were wont to be offered for the good of
the Romans. The Chief-Priest and Nobility dissuaded them all they could from
rebellion, but profiting nothing, besought Agrippa and Florus to come and
suppress the sedition betimes. Florus glad to hear such news, gave no answer.
Agrippa sent 3000 Horse, which being received into the upper part of the City,
the Rebels took the lower part with the Temple, and after some ado brake also
into the upper quarters, burnt diverse Palaces and public houses, and then
besieged the Tower of Antony, which having taken within two days, they put the
Garrison to the sword. After this they laid siege to the Kings Palace, whither
Agrippa's Soldiers being retired, upon their desire they were dismissed. But
the Romans yielding upon the Faith of Eleazar, were all cut in pieces contrary
to his word, except Metilius their Captain, who begging hard for his life,
promised to be circmucized and turn Jew: and this was done on the Sabbath Day
in September. On the same day were all the Jews of Caesarea massacred by the
inhabitants, Great slaughters of them in several places.
to the number of above 200000, not one being left alive; for those that
escaped were taken by Florus, and brought out bound to the People. Throughout
all Syria the slaughters of the Jews were renewed. At Alexandria also a
sedition being raised, 50000 Jews were slain in one day by two Roman Legions.

40. Cestius Gallus as soon as he heard of these motions, came with an Army
into Judaea, wherein taking some Towns he sat down before Jerusalem, at the
Feast of Tabernacles. But though he might easily with a little patience have
taken the City, yet raised he his siege, having neglected many opportunities.
He departed to Antipatris, losing many of his men by the way, that were cut off
by the Jews who followed him close in the rear. With this success the Jews
being elevated, created two Commanders to govern the City, viz. Joseph the son
of Gorion, and Ananus the High Priest: and they sent several Captains and
Governors into the Country, They choose themselves Captains.
amongst whom was Joseph, who wrote the history of this War. He fortified the
several Towns of Galile, and endured as great a conflict as to his own person,
with diverse, both there and at Jerusalem, (who envying him the honor of his
command, would have had him turned out) as he did afterward with the Romans.
But Cestius sent to Nero then in Achaia, as we said, to let him understand the
state of affairs, laying all the blame of the rebellion upon Florus.

41. Nero deliberating whom he should send into Judaea, wanted Corbulo whom he
had killed. At length he pitched on Vespasian, who having been trained up in
Martial matters all his youth, he thought him only capable of such a charge,
though a little before grievously offended at him, for that he little regarded
his singing (either departing from off the stage, or sleeping if there) he
forbad him not only his presence, but also publicly to salute him. Hereupon
he withdrew himself, and lurked out of the way in fear of his life; but Nero
having now need of him, and not fearing him, because of the meannesse of his
birth and name, gave him this employment. Vespasian dispatched away his son
Titus to Alexandria, thence to bring forces into Judaea, Vespasian sent against
them.
and he himself passing the Hellespont into Syria gathered together the Roman
Soldiers with supplies from the Princes, and came to Ptolemais, where Titus
reached him sooner than was expected for the Winter season. Nero returning
toward Rome in Triumphant manner, after he had been two years in Greece, C.
Julius Vindex a Gall by birth, but of Senatorian degree amongst the Romans,
incensed his Contrymen against him, for that they groaned under his
intolerable exactions, yet striving not for the Principality himself, he
offered it to Ser. Sulpicius Galba an old Soldier, and now Governor of the
Tarraconian Province in Spain, Vindex and Galba conspire against Nero.
who, as well for his own safety, as to gratify ambition, accepted of it. Nero
being come to Naples heard of the conspiracy on that day he had killed his
mother, and was then little moved at it; but seemed rather to rejoice for the
occasion that was thence offered to spoil the rich Provinces of Gall. For
though the Mathematicians had told him that he should be forsaken, yet he
interpreted it of the losses sustained in Britain and Armenia; and some also
promised him, though in this condition, the Empire of the East, and some by
name the Kingdom of Jerusalem; but most affirmed that things would go well at
this time. He took nothing so ill in all the opprobrious speeches of Vindex, as
to be called an unskilful Musician, and, after the name of his family,
Aenobarbus; yet at length terrified by many messages he returned to Rome. Now
had he most horrid projects in his head, as of killing the Captains and
Governors of Provinces, with all the Exiles, and all of Gallish Original at
Rome; of poisoning the whole Senate in feasting, burning the City, and letting
loose wild beasts upon the people, thereby to hinder the quenching of the
flames. From these things he was thought to be terrified more by despair of
accomplishing them, than out of any repentance concerning his purpose. In
preparing for his expedition his especial care was for the choice of carriages
wherein to convey his Concubines and instruments for the stage.

42. When he heard of the revolt of the rest of the Armies, in a great rage
taking some poison with him in a Golden box, he left his house, and sending
some of his trustiest servants to Ostia to make ready some ships, moved the
Tribunes and Centurions of his Guard about flying with him; but some staggering
at it and hanging backwards, others flatly refused it. Then he considered
whether he should not fly to the Parthian, or in an humble manner to Galba; or
whether going to the Rostra in a mourning habit, he should not there ask pardon
in as doleful a manner as he could for what was past? but he was fearful to
be pulled in pieces ere he could reach the public meeting place; and put off
those thoughts till the next day. At night finding his Guards withdrawn, he
started out of his bed, and sending his friends about to their Lodgings, went
also himself; but none would answer; so that he returned to his Chamber, whence
his attendants also were now fled, having taken away the furniture, and removed
out of the way the box of poison. Then desired he that some one would kill him,
but none attempting it, Then, says he, I have neither Friend nor Enemy, and
run down as to throw himself into Tiber. But stopping ere he came there, he
desired some lurking hole wherein he might recover his spirits, and Phaon his
Freedman offering him his assistance, he went with him to a Village four miles
distant in a disguise, hearing as he passed the prayers of the people for his
destruction. A. D. 69. Ol. 211. ann 4. V. C. 821.
Here being called on to rid himself out of the way, and prevent the abuses
which else would fall upon him, he ordered things to be prepared for his dead
body, weeping, and adding, Qualis Artifex per^^? How excellent an Artist do I
die? Understanding at length that he was declared an Enemy by the Senate, and
how he was sought for to be punished, more majorum, or after the custom of
their Ancestors, and upon his enquity hearing that this kind of death was to be
stripped, and having his neck made fast in a Pillory to be whipped to death, he
called for two Daggers, the points of which he only felt, and put them up
again, pretending that his fatal hour was not yet come: He bade Porus lament
and weep, and wished that some would help him by their own example to kill
himself, He kills himself.
chiding also himself for his backwardness. Certain hors-men now drawing near
to fetch him alive, he at length effected it by the help of Epaphroditus his
Freed-man, on the fourth of the Ides of June, having reigned 13 years, seven
months, and 28 days, in the 32th of his age, and the 821 of the City, An.
Dn. 68. C. Silius Italicus, and M. Valerius Traehalus being Consuls. Vespasian
asked Apollonius what was Nero 's overthrow? He answered, Nero could touch and
tune the Harp well (noting his excessive delight in that Instrument) But in
government sometimes he used to wind the pins too high, sometimes to let them
down too low. The unequal, and untimely Enterchange of power Pressed too far,
and Relaxed too much, destroys authority above all things.

Ecclesiastical matters in his time.
43. About the later end of Nero's second year St. Paul was sent bound to Rome
by Festus, where he continued in durance two years. In his third year living at
Rome in free custody, he wrote to the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and
Philemon. Consule Lud. Cappellum in Histor. Eccles. Illustrata. Tacitum Annal.
l. 15. c. 44. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 25. and l. 3. c. 1.
About the end of the fourth he seems to have been set at liberty, and thence
to have returned into Greece and Asia, where for five or six years he
established the Churches he had founded. In the eleventh year of Nero he is
said to have suffered Martyrdom at Rome. For, Nero having set the City on
fire, accused the Christians, as Tacitus writes; and exposed them to
ignominious deaths. Some he caused to be covered with the skins of wild beasts,
that they might be devoured of Dogs, others to be Crucified, and others burnt
alive, and that in the night, that they might give light to passengers. He
offered his own Garden for this show, and celebrated the Circensian Games
amongst the common sort in the habit of a Chariot driver, who could not have
raged against Christianity as Tertullian observes, but that some excellency
was in it. In this First persecution, besides Paul, who was beheaded, and many
others, Peter also was Crowned with Martyrdom; being Crucified as it is reported
with his head downward, which kind of death himself desired, because he would
die in a more dishonorable sort than his Lord and Master. But some will have
St. Paul and Peter to have suffered Martyrdom in the last year of Nero's reign,
and that on June the 29. insomuch that Chrysostom says, that the day of Paul's
death was more known than that of Alexander.

44. After the Martyrdom of James surnamed Just the First Bishop of Jerusalem
(whom Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
from Clemens reports to have been thrown down from a Pinnacle of the Temple,
and brained with a Fuller's Club) who governed that Sea thirty years, Simon
Idem l. 3. cap. 11.
Cleopas the Lords Cousin German, one of the 70 Disciples, and which saw Christ
with his eyes, was chosen into his place by the Apostles, and Disciples
themselves, being gathered together for this purpose. After the Martyrdom of
Peter, Idem l. 3. c. 2, 13, 19. and in Chron.
Linus one of the 70 Disciples, of whom Paul made mention, succeeded him in the
Sea of Rome, where he continued Bishop twelve years, though some place his
Martyrdom also in the last year of Nero, and the ninth before the Calends of
October. Evodius one of the 70 Disciples, whom St. Paul remembered in his
Epistles, was Bishop of Antioch, being by Eusebius said to be the first known
to govern that Church. Him succeeded Ignatius Idem l. 3. c. 19, 32, and in
Chron. Tritem.
the Disciple of John, who wrote as they say to Mary the Mother of Christ, and
Mary unto him again. He wrote unto John the Evangelist, and to Polycarpus his
Disciple. Besides, he wrote sundry other notable Epistles, yet extant, and in
the eleventh year of Trajan was brought to Rome, and torn in pieces of wild
beasts, as will be shown. Eusebius writes that he was the second Bishop by
succession after Peter in the Church of Antioch. When Nero had reigned the
space of eight years, Lib. 2. 24.
says the Historian, first after Mark the Evangelist, Anianus took the
government of the Church of Alexandria, a man both virtuous, and renowned in
all respects.

CHAP. III. From the death of Nero to that of Domitian, the last of the family
of Vespasian, the space of 27 years.
1. GALBA after the death of Nero obtained the Principality, yet not long;
Galba succeeds Nero.
for being Emperor, Tacitus Histor. lib. 1. Sueton in Galba.
he maintained not the opinion which had been conceived of him whilst a
private man; for that he gave way to a cruel and covetous humor, acting all
things according to the will and lust of three men whom the people thence
called his Schoolmasters. But his severity toward the Soldiers, especially
that speech Legi a se militem non emi, procured his ruin, who upon the revolt
of the Armies in upper Germany betrayed him to M. Salvius Otho, notwithstanding
he had adopted Piso. He was murdered by them in the Forum near the place where
Curtius rode into the hole, Is murdered by his Soldiers.
and his head being cut off, for some time was carried up and down on a spear,
till his Enemies had with the sight satisfied their flouting appetite, and then
it was buried with the body. He died on the 17th of the Calends of February, in
the 73th year of his age, having reigned seven months.

2. Otho seized on the Empire by the help of his Soldiers, having resolved it
after he saw Piso preferred before him. Otho seizes on the Empire.
Idem ibid. Tacitus Histor. lib. 2. Plutarch. in Othone.
He was Nero's great friend and companion, and now refused not to be called by
his very name, suffered his Images and Statues to be restored, as also his
Officers and Freed-men to their several places, and the first thing he
subscribed to was for money to finish his golden house. But A. Vitellius was
shortly after saluted Emperor in Germany by the Army there, being son to L.
Vitellius, who governed Syria. Being sent into Germany by Galba, he denied
nothing to the Soldiers, but granted them their wills, with impunity in all
things, and for that was rewarded with this Election. Hereupon Otho desired the
Senate that they would send to him, to acquaint him with his Election, and to
persuade him to be quiet; but he himself by Letters offered to be only partner
with him in the Sovereignty, and to be his son-in-law. The Enemy drawing near,
the Praetorian bands stood very faithfully to him, Being opposed by Vitellius,
even so far, that with much ado, and with the slaughter of some of their
Officers, were they kept from destroying the Senate, which they suspected to be
false to him. His interest was to draw out the War in length, having the Enemy
at advantage, who was straightned both for necessaries, and by reason of the
narrowness of the passage: But he rashly and imprudently resolved on a battle,
either for that Vitellius was not yet come, or urged by the earnestness of the
Soldiers. They had four engagements, whereof in the first three he had the
better, but in the last at Bebriacum (a Village in Italy betwixt Cremona and
Verona, now called Labemein) was worsted; yet so as he might without difficulty
have recovered himself, though taken at unaware, and deceived by pretense of a
parley. But being ashamed to seek his own establishment with the hazard of so
many men's lives, He kills himself.
rather than out of any desperation, he killed himself. He was much extolled
for his generous death (as it was accounted) which rendered him so much more
desirable than his life had done, that many thought him to have killed Galba,
not so much out of the desire of rule, as to restore liberty so called to the
Commonwealth. He died on the 12th before the Calends of May, in the 38th year
of his age, and the 95th day of his Empire.

3. Otho being dead, though Vitellius was detested by those at Rome, yet when
they heard how things went they began to flatter, Tacitus Histor. l. 2. c. 3.
Sueton in Vitellio.
and gave him the title of Emperor. The Army of upper Germany which first
mutined against Galba turning to him, Vitellius owned as Emperor.
he gladly received the surname of Germanicus, but deferred the title of
Augustus, and utterly refused that of Caesar. When yet in Gall he heard of the
event of the battle at Bebriacum, he presently cashiered the Praetorian bands,
as giving a bad example of revolt, and 120 which had demanded a reward of Otho
for killing Galba, he commanded to be sought, and put to death. Hereby he much
commended himself to the People, and gave hopes of an excellent Prince; but
carrying on all things afterward according to his natural inclination and
former course of life, he deserved to be ranked amongst the worst of Governors.

4. He returned to Rome in a triumphant manner, and gave up himself to luxury
and excess, wherein he also tolerated his family and Soldiers, as in all
manner of wickedness. Coming through the fields where the Armies fought, when
many loathed the noisomnesse of the carsseises, he stuck not to say, Is very
vicious,
Optime olere occisum hostem, and melius civem; that A slain Enemy smells well,
but sweeter a Citizen. He drunk much wine in the place before them all, to
prevent any hurt that might proceed from the stench, and caused this liquour to
be distributed to the Soldiers, with the like vanity and insolence. Entering the
City as into a field with trumpets sounding to the charge, with colors flying,
and in his coat armor, he fell more and more into the neglect of all Laws,
divine and humane. He made himself Perpetual Consul, and that it might be seen
after whose pattern he meant to govern, in the Campus Martius attended by a
number of Priests he sacrifized for the Soul of Nero; and at a solemn feast
commanding a Musician to sing something of Domitius, he leaped up and applauded
the beginning of Nero's songs. He governed State matters at the will and
discretion of the vilest Player and chariot driver, especially of Asiaticus his
Freed-man. He gave himself over to such luxury as he had been accustomed to in
the days of Caius and Nero; especially to gluttony, the abominable excess
whereof turned him into a very Monster. For, he would eat four or five meals a
day, which that he might be able to bear, he used frequent vomiting; and
inviting himself to the houses of his friends, he would, as Nero did, put them
to incredible expenses. At his coming to Rome his brother made him a feast,
wherein were served up 2000 several dishes of fish, the daintiest that could be
found, and 7000 sorts of fowl. But he far exceeded this preparation at the
Dedication of the Great Platter, which he called Minerva's Target, in which
were mixed together the livers of Guilt-heads, brains of Pheasants and
Peacocks, with the tongues of Phaenicopters, and the small guts of Sea-Lampries
fetched as far as the Carpathian Sea and the Straights of Gibraltar. He would
also eat meat taken from the hearth in time of sacrifice, and fetched from
Victualling houses, either smoking, made ready the day before, or half eaten.

And cruel.
5. He was prone to the killing of any person and for any cause whatsoever:
Noblemen, his School-fellows and contemporaries, he deceitfully made away by
degrees. To one in a Fever, desiring a draught of cold water, he gave poison
in it with his own hands. He scarcely ever spared any of his creditors or
others that asked him the money he ought. One of them saluting him, he sent
away to be put to death, and presently again calling him back (for which the
bystanders commended his clemency) he caused him to be killed before his eyes,
saying, that he would satiate his eyes with the slaughter of him; and another
that interceded for him, he put to death with his two sons. A certain Knight
whom he commanded to be slain, to save his life, told him he had made him his
heir, whereupon he commanded his will to be produced, in which finding that the
man's Freedman was made coheir with him, he caused them both to be put to
death. He was most cruel toward Mathematicians, because they foretold his
reign would be but short. And to complete all, he was suspected to have killed
his mother. These vices only seemed to put him in mind of his condition, for
else so great a stupidity had seized on him, that if others had not known him
to be the Prince, he himself would quickly have forgot it. He accounted all
sharp that was wholesome, liking of nothing but what was pleasant; and
fortifying himself only with mirth and sottishness against all dangers, he
forgot all things past, and regarded nothing present or to come: not a word of
War proceeded from him, Vespasian put upon seeking the Empire.
the rumor and talk of which was forbidden in the City. But he was within a
short time rouzed by the coming of the forces of Vespasian, who was by others
put upon seeking the Empire, being then Judaea.

6. Vespasian (that we may now prosecute the History of his actions in that
Country) after Titus had brought the Army to Ptolemais our of Egypt, His acts
in Judaea.
Josephus de bello lib. 3. c. 5. etc.
with his forces united set upon Galile, and at the first onset took Gedara,
which was burnt and destroyed. Thence removing to Jotapata, on the 21 day of
May he took it by storm after 40 days, though stoutly defended by Joseph the
Historian. Joseph was taken and kept to be sent prisoner to Nero; but desiring
to speak with Vespasian, foretold him that he should loose him out of
captivity, but as Emperor. After this, bestowing his Army at Caesarea and
Scythopolis, to refresh the Legions, he himself went to Caesarea Philippi,
where he was entertained by Agrippa the King for twenty days. Then went he
about to subdue Tiberias and Tarichaea, whereof the former yielded, and was
spared at the request of the King, Idem l. 4. c. 1, 2, etc.
but the later was taken by force and destroyed. After this were Gamala,
Giscala, and the Hill Itaburium taken, and all Galile being reduced, Vespasian
and Titus returned to Caesarea.

The Jews fall out amongst themselves.
7. The Jews were now imbroyled in civil dissentions, whilst some desired Peace,
and others would not hear a word of it. Idem ibid. c. 5, 6.
Parties were made and fought in every City, and rash young men prevailed every
where against the grave and elder sort, who foresaw the calamity. At first they
robbed one another singly; but at length turned thieves, in whole troops
committing such cruelties, as equalled the misfortune received from the Romans.
At last the thieves loaded with plunder brake into Jerusalem, where they not
only consumed the provisions of the People, but filled the City with
slaughters, rapines, and dissentions. They cast the principal of the Citizens
into prison, and then put them to death unheard, pretending that they intended
to betray the City to the Romans; yet for all this wickedness they boasted of
zeal for the Law of God, and customs of their Country, and thereupon were
called Zealots. Horrid outrages committed by the Zealots.
The People being about to rise against them, they betook themselves to the
Temple, where they made one Phanias an ignorant fellow High Priest, though he
was not of the order of Priests; but they were opposed by Ananus, who procured
the People to rise against them, and beat them into the inner part. Hereupon
they sent to the Idumaeans, accusing Ananus of an intention to betray their
Counntry, and forasmuch as they fought for the liberty thereof, and now were
besieged, they implored their assistance. Twenty thousand came, and being let
into the City, together with the Zealots, committed horrid outrages against the
Inhabitants. They slew 8000 the first night, and afterward other 1200 of the
chiefest, (amongst whom was Ananus) besides an infinite number of the common
sort: then at length the Idumaeans perceiving the wickedness of the Zealots,
and that they had falsely accused the Nobility, set at liberty 2000 which they
had imprisoned, and returned home. After their departure the Zealots renewed
their slaughters, and raged more cruelly than ever, especially against such as
they had found attempting to fly to the Romans.

8. But they presently after fell out amongst themselves, Idem l. 5. c. 3, 4,
5, 6, etc.
by reason of one John, who with a seditious party holding Giscala, pretended
to receive the conditions given him by Titus, and stole away to Jerusalem.
There becoming the great Incendiary, he now affected sovereign power; but he
was withstood by such as before this had been equal to him. Though they thus
disagreed, yet herein they consented, to spoil the People; and Jerusalem being
thus filled with tumults, those that were without the City had liberty to rob
and spoil, and those whose Towns were hereby destroyed, assembled together in
the Wilderness, and uniting, brake into other Temples and Towns; so that there
was no place in Judaea, All Judaea languisheth in an unheard of manner.
which did not languish in an unheard of manner together with the mother City.
Vespasian excited by the seditious, and entreated by the fugitives to save
their Country, prepared for the siege of Jerusalem, and that he might not leave
an Enemy at his back, took in Gadara (where 13000 were put to the Sword) and
all other places beyond the River, except the Castle of Macheron. He built
Castles at Jericho and Adida, and made all things ready for the siege; but
hearing of Nero's death, and the succession of Galba, he deferred the
Expedition, and sent Titus to know Galba's pleasure. But as Titus sailed by
Achaia he heard of his end, and Otho's advancement, whereupon he returned to
his Father. Uncertain what would ensue, and who should be Emperor, they
neglected the War against the Jews, Vespasian subdueth all, except three
Castles and Jerusalem.
for they feared their own Country, and therefore thought it an unfit time to
assault strangers. Yet he drew out his Army from Caesarea, and subdued all
forts of Judaea save three Castles, Herodium, Massada, and Macheron, which were
kept by the thieves. Besides these Jerusalem only remained to be conquered.

9. Vespasian hearing of Otho's death, and having compassion on the State,
thought of freeing the Commonwealth from the tyranny of Vitellius; but for that
it was now Winter, and he was at a great distance from Rome, he strove to
conceal that indignation which he had conceived. But Mucianus President of
Syria persuaded him to it very earnestly: certain Soldiers also who were
removed out of Syria into Maesia, giving him large commendations, the three
Legions which proceeded as far as Aquileia to help Otho, resolved to proceed,
notwithstanding his death, and put Vespasian's name into their Colors. First
of all others, Tiberius Alexander Governor of Egypt, Tacitus Histor. lib. 3,
and 4. Sueton in Vitellio, and Josephus de bello Judaico l. 5. c. 10, 12, 13,
14.
on the first of July swore the Legions to him, and two days after the Army in
Judaea, compelling him with threats to take the Government upon him, took the
oath. The Armies in the East declare for Vespasian.
The Armies then in several Provinces declaring for him, he sent Mucianus with
forces into Italy, and went himself to Alexandria, to make sure of Egypt. The
Maesian Legions hearing of Mucianus his coming, chose Antonius Primus an
excellent Soldier (who had been banished by Nero, and restored by Galba) for
their Captain, and hasted for Italy, that they might have the plunder of the
Country. Caecina (otherwise called Allienus) the General of Vitellius, made
haste and got to Cremona before them; but considering the effeminatenesse of
his Army, he hearkened to the friendly advice sent him by Antonius, and
persuaded his Soldiers, by laying before them the weakness of Vitellius, and
the force of his adversary, to revolt. They accordingly swear fealty to
Vespasian, but presently repenting, cast bonds upon their General as a traitor,
and exhorted even Antonius to embrace the quarrel of Vitellius; then coming to
blows, though they wanted a Leader, maintained a most sharp fight, both parties
being possessed with such fury, as night it self could not sever them. They
knew and talked to one another, nay intermitting the fight for some time, gave
victuals one to another, and yet after their repasts fell to it again. But in a
morning the Soldiers of the third Legion saluting according to the fashion, the
rising Sun, Vitellius his men thought Mucianus was arrived, and thereupon
betook themselves to Cremona, where loosing Caecina, they procured him to make
their Peace, and the Maesian Army entering the Town made great disorder.

10. Vitellius hearing of this was amazed, and not knowing what to do, became
ridiculous unto all men; for his affairs went down the wind in all places.
Vitellius is to seek what to do.
He covenanted then with Flavius Sabinus the brother of Vespasian for his own
safety, and presently after at the stairs of the Palace, before many Soldiers,
professed he would give up the Empire, which he had unwillingly taken upon him.
But the Soldiers crying out against it, he deferred the thing, and in the
morning went to the Rostra in a mourning habit, where with many tears out of a
paper he uttered the same words he had before spoken to the Soldiers, who again
interrupting him, the People bad him be of good cheer, and promised him their
assistance. Taking courage hereat, he forced Sabinus (who was Governor of the
City) with others into the Capitol, which setting on fire he suppressed them,
Sabinus being put to death, whose nephew Domitian (afterward Emperor) was hid
by the Priest of Jupiter's Temple and escaped. Then would he have had the
Senate send Ambassadors to the Enemy with the Vestal Nuns to beg Peace, or at
least so much time as to consider what was to be done. But Vespasian's Soldiers
enraged at the report of the besieging of the Capitol, made haste. Petilius
Cerealis being sent before with a thousand Horse set upon the City, but was
forced to retreat. Antonius Primus coming on with the rest of the Army, many
skirmishes happened, till such time as the Guards being beaten from off the
bridge Vespasian's men entered the City with great fury, wherein they committed
grievous outrages. Vitellius was pulled out of an hole in the Palace where he
lurked, at first unknown; but being discovered, he desired he might be kept in
prison, for that he had something to reveal, which concerned the safety of
Vespasian. But his hands being tied behind him, Is killed.
and an halter cast about his neck, A. D. 70. Ol. 212. an. 1. V. C. 822.
he was dragged half naked into the Marketplace, and abused in the way, both
by many words and deeds, was killed with many blows, and cast after the fashion
of Traitors into Tiber. This happened in the 57th year of his age, after he had
held the Government eight months, and five days. The day following Mucianus
entered the City, Vespasian ere his departure from Egypt orders his son Titus
to besiege Jerusalem.
and the Soldiers being hindered from any further slaughters, the Empire was by
the Senate decreed to Vespasian, who hearing these things at Alexandria,
receiving congratulatory Embassies from all quarters, and having settled
affairs in Egypt, ere he set forward for Rome, ordered his son Titus to set
upon Jerusalem, and finish the War in Judaea.

11. Whilst Vespasian and Vitellius were yet disputing the controversy,
Tacitus Histor. lib. 4.
great commotions happened in Germany, Commotions in Germany.
the Batavians (now Inhabitants of Holland in the Low Countries) rebelling
first at the instigation of Claudius Civilis, the most eminent amongst them,
who having been sent prisoner in Chains unto Nero, and dismissed by Galba, came
into danger again under Vitellius, the Army requiring that he should be put to
death. He drew into the conspiracy, besides the Caninafates (a more
inconsiderable people inhabiting the same Island) by secret messages the
Auxiliaries of Britain, and the Batavian Cohorts, which then quartered at
Mogontiacum, now Mentz. They cast out, or destroyed the Roman Garrisons,
overthrew Aquilius Captain of the Vantguard, and after him Mumius Lupercus the
Lieutenant. Herennius Gallus also endeavoring to hinder the march of the
Batavian Cohorts was worsted by them. Civilis after the coming of the Cohorts,
to color the matter, swear his Soldiers to Vespasian, and besieged such as
refused in the old Camp. After this the Romans mutining against Hordonius, the
command was given to Vocula, and Herennius Gallus was made his Lieutenant:
Vocula in his first engagement with Civilis had the worst, but at length by
good hap overthrew him, the Vizard of his friendship to Vespasian being drawn
of.

12. The report of Vitellius his death through Germany and Gall doubled the
War. For now Civilis without any pretense of friendship to Vespasian, Idem ibid.
carried himself as an Enemy to the Romans, and Vitellius his Soldiers rather
wished for external servitude than his Government: the Galls also took heart,
interpreting the burning of the Capitol to presage the destruction of the
Empire. The Treviri therefore (now Inhabitants of Triers) and the Lingones (now
of Langres) revolted, when all Gall was in a tottering condition, and what was
worse, and unheard of, the Legions proved unfaithful, and were corrupted. For
Vocula being slain, they took an Oath for the Empire of Gall, and to them other
Legions in several places joined themselves, some being besieged upon
necessity, and afterward cut in pieces by Civilis as they had deserved. In the
mean time Julius Sabinus one of the revolters taking on him the name of Caesar,
led a great and disorderly Company against the Sequani (inhabiting the Country
now called La Franche Conte) who not refusing battle routed the multitude, and
put him to flight. These things being reported at Rome rather with improvement,
all things seemed there to be lost, whereupon Domitian the son of Vespasian,
and Mucianus, addressed themselves to the War, and four Legions were presently
dispatched away toward Germany.

13. By this time the Galls by the means especially of Julius Vindex, began to
consider of the power of the Romans, and at length approved rather of a servile
peace than a dangerous War; Petilius Cerealis also gave the Treviri a great
overthrow, and most of the revolters returned to obedience. After this he
accepted of battle from Civilis and Classicus his companion, in the beginning
whereof he had the worst, for the Legions began to be broken, the horse was put
to flight, and the bridge over the River Mosella gained by the Enemy; Composed
by Petilius Cerealis.
but though he had now lost even all for want of heed, yet he restored all by
his diligence, so as on the same day he took, and destroyed the Enemie's Camp.
Domitian and Mucianus heard of the success ere they came to the Alps, and
Mucianus persuaded Domitian against marching further, knowing his ambitious and
naughty humor, which he had already betrayed whilst at Rome; but his advice
succeeding not, he went with him out of compliance to Lions, whence, as it is
said, Domitian wrote privately to Cerealis to deliver up the Army to him, that
he might therewith seize on the Empire. But perceiving he was despised for his
youth, he betook himself to such courses whereby he thought that his designs
might best be covered. During these stirs Vespasian was yet at Alexandria.
Afterward both Civilis recruited his Forces through Germany, and Cerealis also
doubled his strength, whereupon followed several fights, the effect of which
was a Peace. For the Batavians were so chastized, as glad they were to accept
of it, as Civilis of pardon, both of which were offered by the Roman General.

The invasion of the Sarmatae.
14. With the aforesaid revolt of the Germans, at the same time, says De bello
Indaico lib. 7. cap. 23.
Josephus, agreed the boldness of the Scythians. For those that are called
Sarmatae, in great multitudes having privily passed over Ister, being violent,
and most cruel, through the suddenness of their invasion killed many of the
Romans whom they found in Garrisons, with Fonteius Agrippa the Lieutenant (who
valiantly resisted them) and wasted all the adjacent Countries with fire and
sword. Vespasian hearing of this, and the wasting of Maesia, sent Rubrius
Gallus to chastize them, by whom many being slain, such as escaped returned
home in great fear. The War being thus ended, the General taking care for the
future, fortified the places with stronger Garrisons, that the passage might be
utterly impassable to the Barbarians. These first eruptions of the Barbarous
Northern Nations are therefore more to be noted, because at length they
overran and destroyed the Roman Empire. Now return we to the affairs of the
Jews, and the War managed by Titus.

The Zealots fall out amongst themselves.
15. During the former transactions in the West, Josephus de bello Judaico lib.
5. cap. 9. and l. 6. c. 1.
a faction was raised against the Zealots by one Simon the son of Giora, who
getting together a company of Thieves and Murderers that were assembled on the
Hilly Country, fell upon many Villages and Cities, brought all Idumaea into
his power, wasted Judaea, pitched his Camp against Jerusalem it self, and
became a great terror to the poor Inhabitants, who were most cruelly oppressed
by the Zealots within. In the mean time such Idumaeans as had of late fled into
the City, and were become of John's party (whom the Zealots had now chosen
their Captain) fell at odds with him, detesting his cruelty, and killing many
of his men, forced the Tyrant out of his Palace into the Temple; but he, and
the Citizens fearing that by night he might fall out upon the City, they let
in Simon, and then set upon the Temple, but in vain. After this Eleazar, who
once had been chief amongst the Zealots, envying John his power, withdrew some
Soldiers from him, and kept the inwardst part of the Temple, whereby John was
forced to fight, both against Simon and him. Hereby all things about the Temple
were burnt up, and Provisions destroyed, which might have served them a long
time, and for want whereof they were oppressed with famine in the siege.

Titus besieges the City.
15. But Titus in prosecution of his fathers orders came from Alexandria to
Caesarea, Idem Ibid. and capp. 2, 3, 4.
where gathering together some forces with aids from the Neighboring Kings, he
appointed the rest to follow him, and marched toward Jerusalem, accompanied
with Tiberius Alexander, (who now began to be in principal favor) and Joseph
the Jew being for the truth of his prediction now released out of bonds. He
sat down within six or seven furlongs of the City, a little before the Feast
of the Passover, and therein shut up an infinite multitude, which according to
the custom flocked to that solemnity; and hereby all Provisions were consumed
in a short time. The three factions upon sight of his great Army agreed to
oppose it, and issuing out, made great disorder, forcing the Romans to forsake
their Camp, and fly to the Mountains; but they were repelled by the great care
and industry of Ti^us. But on the day of unleavened bread (April the 14)
Eleazar, who kept the inward part of the Temple, opening the Gates to the
people, which was desirous to sacrifize, John sent many of his party in amongst
the rest with swords hid under their Clothes, who killing Eleazar, and many of
his faction, seized also on that part of the Temple, Idem ibid. and Tacitus
Hist. l. 5. c. 12.
and thereby the number of the factions was reduced to that of two. That under
John consisted of 8400. and the other under Simon of 10000 fighting men besides
5000 Idumaeans. Notwithstanding the Enemy was at the Walls, and to oppose him,
they a little joined together; yet did they break out the one upon the other,
and the poor people miserably suffered under both.

16. The City being fortified with three Walls on every side, Josephus de
bello l. 6. c. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
but where it was fenced with deep Valleys, Titus having with much opposition
placed his Engines, battered the uttermost of them, and breaking, on the third
of May into the City, Breaking into it.
possessed all the North part as far as the Tower of Antonius, and the Valley
of Cedron. Five days after, he brake within the second Wall, though the
besieged made diverse sallies. They beat him out again, but the fourth day after
he recovered the place, and prepared for the battery of the third Wall. Yet he
sent Joseph the Historian to them, who exhorting them with many words to yield,
was entertained only with scoffs and reproaches. The people thinking to escape
out of the City, John and Simon stopped up all passages; yet the famine
increasing many came out, whom being taken Titus caused to be Crucified to such
a vast number that room was wanting for Crosses, and Crosses for persons. On
the 12th of May he began four Mounts whereon to place his battering rams: two
near to the Castle Antonia, where he hoped he might take the Temple, and other
two near the Monument of John the High Priest, where he thought he should with
most ease break into the upper part of the City. But John, whose part it was
to oppose the Romans in the former place, cast down, and burnt them two; and
two days after Simon did as much by the other, though seventeen days had been
spent in making them all. He destroyed also many rams and engines, and brake
into the very Camp of the Romans; but was repelled by Titus from Antonia, who
in a Council of Officers resolved now to compass the whole City with a trench,
which with incredible diligence and celerity was finished in three days, with
thirteen forts to hinder the flight of the besieged, and hinder the conveyance
of relief into the City.

17. The seditious were nothing herewith moved, though the famine not only
raged amongst the common sort, but themselves also were pressed by it. A
certain Noble woman sod her child to eat it, and such a mortality ensued, that
from the fourteenth of April to the first of July were carried out to be buried
at the public charge 115080 carkeises of the poorer sort, Famine rages.
as Titus was told by one Mannaeus, who was appointed to pay the money. Diverse
Noble men that fled to him, certified him also that 600000 of the ordinary sort
were cast dead out of the gates, and others that were dead besides, were
innumerable; for because they could not carry all out, they laid them up in
houses. A bushel of corn was sold for a talent, sinks and holes were raked to
find old dung of Oxen to eat, which much moved the Romans to compassion, but
the seditious were hereby nothing changed. For Simon not obstaining from
murders and rapines, notwithstanding this lamentable condition, killed Matthias
the High Priest, by whom he had been let into the City, with his three sons,
and sixteen others, pretending that they purposed to fly to the Enemy. Judas
one of his own Officers hereupon weary of his cruelty, attempted to betray a
certain Tower, whereof he had the charge, to the Romans; but being discovered,
was put to death with ten others of his accomplices. John also being driven by
necessity, converted the Golden Vessels of the Temple with the sacred Money to
profane uses, and was constrained to divide the Wine and Oil, ordained for
Sacrifices, to his Soldiers.

18. Titus cut down all the groves within a great distance of the City, Idem l.
7. c. 1, etc.
and causing more mounts or scaffolds to be erected within 21 days, on the
first of July began to batter the wall of Antonia, John that opposed him being
beaten back, and on the fifth day broke into the Castle. At this time many false
Prophets suborned by the seditious, told the multitude they must expect
assistance from God, and therefore though Titus often exhorted them to yield,
^et the deluded defendants refuse to yield.
they flatly refused, boasting that they would rather endure all miseries. The
contest was earnest about the Temple. The wall of the inward part thereof was
too strong for the battering rams, and the defendants valiantly resisted at the
top: the foundation of the gates could not be undermined, and therefore Titus
was constrained to set them on fire. Yet was it his intention to save the
Temple, but on the tenth of August, a certain soldier without any command, (nay
against the command of his General) moved as by an instinct from above, cast
fire into the buildings on the North side, which catching the flame imparted it
to the Temple it self, notwithstanding all that Titus could do to quench it,
The Temple burnt.
on the same day of the same month that it was formerly set on fire by the
command of Nebuchadnezar. The Temple thus burning Titus was saluted Imperator
by his Soldiers, and the Tyrants with their companions fled into the City. They
now desired a parley with the General himself, who checked them much for their
obstinacy, but promised them life if they would yield. But refusing to commit
themselves to his fidelity, they required to depart the City with their wives
and children, wherewith being greatly angered, he commanded to be proclaimed by
a Crier, that They should not look any longer for mercy.

19. He permitted his Soldiers to plunder and burn the City, Idem ibid. c. 14,
15, 16, 17, 18.
but the seditious wretches got to the King's house, where many had deposited
their wealth, and thence repelled the Romans. They also killed of their own
Country People to the number of 6400, and rifling the money got them into the
upper and strongest part of the City, called Sion, where for all this danger
they still most cruelly tyrannized. Titus having considered the strength of the
place, provided engines to batter the walls, and began so to do it on the
seventh day of September. Part of the wall being broken down, the Tyrants were
seized with great fear and amazement, not knowing what to do. Some said the
East part of it was broken down, others that the Romans were entered, and that
they saw them out of the Towers; so that the power of God appeared in the
overthrow of these wretches; for they forsook the Towers which were their only
strength, and in vain seeking to escape, hid themselves in caves and privies.
The Romans entering, put all to the Sword, and burnt the houses with all that
fled to them for safeguard. Titus commanded both the Temple and City to be
utterly razed by a plow brought over them, Titus commands the Temple and City
to be utterly razed.
according to the custom; only the West part of the wall with three Towers for
their strength and beauty he preserved, A. D. 71. Ol. 212. an. 2. V. C. 823.
to bear testimony of the stateliness of the City to posterity. They would
have crowned him as a Conqueror for this work, but he refused the honor,
denying he was the author of it, for that he only served God herein, who by it
demonstrated his wrath against the Jews. To such an end came this famous City,
on the eighth day of September, in the second year of Vespasian, he and Titus
his son being Consuls, 38 years after the death of Christ, the Blood of whom
now fell heavy upon them. It had been taken in all six times; by Asochaeus or
Shishack King of Egypt, Nebuchadnesar, Antiochus Epiphanes, Pompey, Herod and
Sosius, and now by Titus; but twice only was it destroyed, viz. by
Nebuchadnezar and Titus. It was first built, says Josephus, by Melchisedeck
King of Salem, and afterward enlarged by David. It was destroyed by the
Babylonians 1468 years and six months after the founding of it, and 477 years
and six months after it had been taken by David from the Canaanites. By Titus
Vespasian it was destroyed 1179 years after David took it, but from it is first
founding to it is last destruction intervened 2177 years.

20. John and Simon having hid themselves were taken, and the former being
condemned to perpetual prison, the other was reserved for a Triumph. The rest
of the thieves and seditious were discovered, one telling of another, and were
all slain. Of those which during the whole War were taken captives the number
amounted to 97000, and of those that perished in the siege to 1100000. 'o heavy
was the guilt which lay on them for the death of Christ, and such were the
horrid enormities committed by them, that we have reason to agree with
Josephus, who thought, Lib. 6. c. 16.
that if the Romans had delayed to come against them, the City would either
have been swallowed up of the Earth, or have perished by some Deluge, or else
by Thunderbolts and Lightning have undergone the punishments of Sodom, whose
Inhabitants they exceeded in wickedness. A year after was Lucilius Bassus sent
Lieutenant into Judaea, Idem l. 7. c. 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31.
who taking the Army of Cerealis Vitellianus took the Castle of Herodian and of
Machaerun beyond Jordan. Not long after Vespasian wrote to Liberius Maximus the
Governor, to sell all the Land of the Jews, upon whom wheresoever they lived
he imposed a yearly tribute to be paid into the Capitol, it being that they
were wont to pay into the Temple at Jerusalem. The War finished by Sylva.
About a year after Publius Sylva succeeded Bassus then dead, and finished the
War, taking the strong Castle of Massada from Eleazar, who held it with 960
hacksters, who upon his motion set fire on the Castle and all their goods, and
then killed themselves. Many such as these flying out of the Country came to
Alexandria in Egypt, where they solicited the Jews to revolt, but were by
them delivered up to the Romans, and those of them that then escaped were
afterward taken. Vespasian hearing of their attempt, gave order to Lupus
Governor of Alexandria, The Temple of the Jews in Egypt destroyed.
to demolish the Temple of the Jews (built in Egypt in times past by Onias
brother of the High Priest) which he neglecting to do, only spoiled it of some
consecrated things, and shut it up. But Paulinus his Successor utterly bereaved
it of all, and so shut it up, that he made it inaccessible, and without any
show of Religion, 343 years after it was first built by Onias.

21. But the Jews of Cyrene were also infected with a distemper of madness.
There one Jonathan a Weaver led many of the simple sort into the Wilderness,
promising to show them signs and wonders; but by the chiefest of the Jews the
matter being discovered to Catullus Governor of those parts, A sedition of the
Jews in Cyrene.
he sent Soldiers who slew most of them, and not long after Jonathan himself
was taken. Catullus a covetous man procured him and others to accuse many
unjustly, whom having slain and seized on their estates, he carried him to Rome,
where following the same trade, Joseph the Historian was also accused; but
Vespasian having found out the deceit, caused Jonathan first to be whipped, and
then burnt alive. Catullus at present escaped through the mildness of the
Emperor, but not long after fell into grievous anguish of mind, imagining he
saw the ghosts of those he had slain, and his bowels rotted away from him, that
he died miserably. Thus far has Josephus communicated to us the affairs of the
Jews, Vide Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 9, 16.
who being kindly entertaind by Vespasian, was honored with a Statue, and his
Books were thought worthy of the public Library. For the truth of his History
concerning the Wars, he had the testimony of the Emperors, King Agrippa, and
others. Titus would have the certain knowledge of these Wars delivered unto the
World by his Books only, The end of Josephus his History.
Josephus contra Apionem lib. 1. and Antiquit. l. ult. c. ult.
commanding them to be published with the privilege of his own hand. And King
Agrippa wrote 62 Epistles, wherein he testified of the true History delivered
by him. But his Jewish Antiquities he finished not till the thirteenth of
Domitian, when he himself was 56 years old, as he testifies at the end of that
Work.

The Lex Regia renewed in behalf of Vespasena.
22. To Vespasian was renewed the Lex Regia, and the same power that Augustus,
Tiberius, and the rest enjoyed was confirmed to him as hereditatr. A fragment
of this Law (which evinceth that absolute power we formerly proved to have been
in the Emperors) is yet extant after this manner. Let it be lawful for him to
make a League with whom he pleases, as it was lawful to Divus Augustus,
Tiberius Julius Caesar Augustus, and Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus
Germanicus, The Lex Regia renewed to Vespasian.
etc. As also to hold the Senate, make report, dismiss, and make Senatus
Consulta by reporting and separation, as it was lawful to Divus Augustus, Tib.
Julius Caesar Augustus, Tib. Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus. Moreover,
when as by his will, authority, Ex tabula aenea in basilica Lateranensi alta
palmos 9. lata 5, digitos 3 crassa. in Inscrip. Gruteri page 242. Et ex Antiq.
Epigrammatum libro apud Hottomannum l. de Legibus Romany.
command, or mandate, or he being present the Senate shall be assembled, it
shall be effectual to all ends and purposes, as if the Senate had been
assembled or held by Law. Moreover, whomsoever he shall commend to the Roman
Senate and People that stand for any Magistracy, power, command, or charge, or
to whomsoever he shall give or promise his suffrage, let them be considered
beyond the usual form in the Comitia. As also it may be lawful for him to
enlarge the Pomaerium if he think it convenient for the Commonwealth, so as it
was lawful for Tib. Claudius Caesar Germanicus. Moreover, whatsoever he shall
think useful for the Commonwealth, or agreeable to the Majesty of all things
divine or humane, public or private, let him have right and authority to act
and do, so as it was lawful for Divus Augustus, and Tiberius Julius Caesar
Augustus, and Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus. Moreover, from what
Laws and Plebiscita it was ordained, that Divus Augustus, Tiberius Julius
Caesar Augustus, and Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus should be
loosed, from those Laws and Plebiscita, let the Emperor Caesar Vespasian be
loosed. And what things soever, by what Law or asking soever Divus Augustus,
Tib. Julius Caesar Augustus, and Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus
ought to do, let it be lawful for the Emperor Caesar Vespasian Augustus to do
them all. Moreover, what things soever before the asking of this Law were
acted, done, decreed, or commanded by the Emperor Caesar Vespasian Augustus,
or by any other, by virtue of his command or mandate, let them be held as just
and valid, as if they had been done by command of the People or Commons.

The Sanction.
If any one by virtue of this Law has done or shall do any thing against the
Laws, asking of Laws (rogationes) Plebiscita or Senatus Consulta, or shall not
do what he ought to have done according to any Law, asking, Plebiscitum or
Senatusconsultum, and that by virtue of this Law, let no damage thence light
upon him; neither let him owe any thing to the People for this matter, neither
let any have an action against him, neither let any one judge him, nor permit
the matter to be debated before him.

23. In the fourth year of Vespasian, Caesennius Paetus President of Syria,
Josephus de bello Judaico lib. 7. c. 27.
accused Antiochus King of Comagena and Epiphanes his Son, as holding
correspondence with the Parthian, whereupon order was given him to prevent what
might ensue. Paetus then invaded Comagena, which Antiochus quitted, Paetus
gains Comagena.
being loath to fight, and fled into Cilicia. His sons also, after they had made
some opposition, went to Vologesus into Parthia. But Paetus procured Antiochus
to be taken and sent to him bound toward Rome, yet Vespasian caused him to be
loosed, and stay at Lacedaemon, where he allowed him a revenue to live like
himself, and he afterward sent for both him and his sons to the City, where
they were magnificently entertained. About this time the Alani, who being
Scythians inhabited about Tanais and the Lake Meotis, consulted with the King
of the Hyrcanians who was Master of the Straights to invade Media, which they
entered and sacked at their pleasure, Pacorus the King being forced up into a
strong hold, and glad to redeem his wife and concubines with 100 Talents. The
Alani invade Media and Armenia.
From Media they passed into Armenia, and wasted the Country. Tiridates the
King opposed them, but was near being taken alive in batttel, for with his
sword he cut in pieces the rope that was cast about his neck, as they were
therewith drawing him amongst his Enemies, and escaped. But they enraged at his
opposition wasted the Kingdom, and carrying great booty out of both Countries
returned home.

Several acts of Vespasian.
24. Vespasian took away liberty from Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Sueton in
Vespasiano.
Byzantium, and Samus, reducing them into Provinces, as also Thrace, Cilicia,
and Comagena, the King whereof he sent for to Rome, as we said before.
Cappadocia now began to be overrun with barbarous Nations, to restrain whom he
added Legions, and placed one of Consular dignity over it in room of a Knight.
Orosius l. 7. c. 9.
At length all Wars and tumults being suppressed both at home and abroad, he
shut the Temple of Janus the sixth time from the foundation of the City. It was
his principal care first to setle and establish the afflicted and tottering
condition of the Empire, and then to adorn it. Whereas the City was very
deformed by reason of the burning of it, he permitted any to build upon old
plots, if the owners would relinquish them: he also re-edified the Capitol. As
to his personal quality, he was of much temper and clemency, His character.
easily passing by and forgetting injuries. The meannesse of his former
condition he sought not to hide, but sometimes would profess it openly. He
took not the Tribunitial power, nor title of Father of his Country for some
time. If any innocent person were punished it was sorely against his will, and
for want of knowledge. He passed by the treason of many that had plotted his
destruction, saying, They were fools, and knew not what a weight and trouble
the Empire was: he weeped and groaned at the punishment of an offender. To
Vologoses King of Parthia who wrote to him thus: Arsaces King of Kings to Fl.
Vespasian, Xiphilinus ex Dione.
without any reproof he directed his answer thus, Fl. Vespasian to Arsaces King
of Kings. The only vice reprehended in him was covetousness, and yet to that
seeking earnestly for money, he was constrained through the necessities of the
State. It Is certain he used it well however gotten, being very liberal in
feasting, relieving impoverished Senators, and others of desert. He encouraged
learning, and gave the first stipends out of the Exchequer to the Professors
thereof. He was Consul eight times (besides once before he was Emperor) and in
his last Consulship died of a flux, His death,
in the 69 year of his age, the tenth of his reign being completed; in the 832
of the City, A. D. 79, he himself the ninth time and Titus Caesar the seventh
being Consuls. He was the first Emperor whose successor was his own son. In
his time flourished Pliny the elder and writer of the Natural History. Who also
the same year that he died, whilst he went to see what might be the cause of
the burning of the hill Vesuvius, was stifled with the smoke thereof, and died,
as Pliny Junior his nephew writes in his Epistle Lib. 6. ep. 16.
to Trajan. And that of Pliny.
Now also Quintilian and other learned men were famous.

Titus succeeds him.
25. Titus his eldest son succeeded him (by whom Jerusalem had been taken, and
destroyed) on the eighth of the Calends of June. He was born that year wherein
Caius was slain, Sueton in Tito. Eutrop l. 7. Orosius l. 7. c. 9. alii.
and brought up with Britanicus the son of Claudius, being instructed in the
same things by the same Masters: he was thought also to have drunk some of the
poison which Nero gave to that Prince, and that this was the cause of his want
of health some conjectured. He performed the Office of Tribune both in the Wars
of Germany and Britain with great commendations, and after that, being
Quaestor, A. D. 79. V. C. 832. Titi 1.
came to have the command of a Legion in Judaea. After his father came to the
Government he was suspected by some, when he was yet in Egypt, as intending to
establish himself, whereupon he hasted to Rome to cut off all jealousies.
Taking then part with his father in the public cares, he triumphed with him
over Judaea, executed with him the Censorship, Tribuneship, and seven
Consulships; nay taking as it were all upon him, he dictated letters in his
fathers name, published edicts, spoke in the Senate, and that in the room of
the Quaestor, and took on him the Government of the Palace, which never had
formerly been discharged but by some Roman Knight; and this Office he executed
with such rigor, that he contracted much envy, and was accounted cruel. He was
suspected of luxury, for feasting with voluptuous persons till midnight; of
incontinency also, being (amongst other arguments) too familiar with Berenice
the sister of King Agrippa, to which Lady he is also said to have promised
marriage, but performed it not, because of the distaste of the People. Moreover
rapacity was laid to his charge. He was both accounted and openly talked of as
another Nero, and scarcely did any ever came with more fear or less favor to
the Government.

26. But so contrarily to expectation did he behave himself, that his former
carriage did but set him off with the greater luster; and so free was he from
all vice, His admirable virtues.
and adorned with so many virtues, that he became the Love and delight of
mankind, and by an happy exchange was so called. His temperance he showed in
the moderation of his diet, the choice of his companions, and putting away
Berenice: his moderation by abstaining utterly from other men's goods, and
refusing often ordinary benevolences, although no man ever exceeded him in
munificence. He was the Mirror of courtesy, being wont to say, that no man
should go sorrowful from the presence of the Prince; and on a day having done
no courtesy for any man, he said, Amici diem perdidi, My friends I have lost a
day. Several sad accidents happened in his little time; so great a Pestilence as
seldom had been known. So great a fire there was in Rome, and kindled from
Heaven, that it burnt three days together. Several calamities in his time.
Vesuvius also the hill in Campania burst forth with great flames, and
destroyed all round about it; all which miseries he lessened as much as he
could, neither sparing cost nor pains to relieve the distressed. At the same
time another War arose in Britain, wherein Cn. Julius Agricola harrazed all the
Country of the Enemies, and first of all the Romans that we know of, says Dio
Apud Xiphil. in excerpt. l. 66.
, knew that Britain was compassed about by the sea. For certain Soldiers in a
Sedition having killed their Centurions and Tribunes fled to their ships, and
lanching out, sailed about that part of Britain which lies toward the West,
being carried by waves and wind: when they had done this, and by chance light
upon the other Camp of the Romans on the other side, Agricola sent out others
to hold the same course, from whom he also knew that it was an Island. These
things being done in Britain, Titus was saluted Imperator the fifteenth time.
Agricola passed the rest of his life in ignominy and poverty, because he had
done greater things than were suitable for a Praetor; and for that cause he was
afterward put to death by Domitian, though by the permission of Titus he had
triumphed. But concerning these things Tacitus is rather to be consulted in the
life of Agricola.

27. Titus put down informers, usually tolerated before. His mercy was too
great; for he vowed he had rather perish than destroy another, as according to
the judgment of some it came to pass. Amongst others that plotted his
destruction, he not only spared his brother Domitian, but had him in the same
respect as from the beginning, and owned him as his partner and successor;
only betwixt them two he besought him with tears at length to relent to Love
and Unity. He was a man of excellent parts, both outward and inward
accomplishments; but to the great loss of mankind, was presently taken away,
He dies.
whether by the treachery of his brother or no, is uncertain. In the beginning
of his sickness he is said to have looked up to Heaven, as taking it ill he
should dye so soon, being not conscious to himself of any sin, save one, which
as he did not express, so it is altogether unknown. He was with good reason
sadly lamented throughout the Provinces. He died in the same Village his Father
had ended his days, near the Country of the Sabines, in the 42 year of his
age, when he had reigned two years, as many months, and twenty days; in the
834 year of the City, A. D. 81. M. Plautius Silvanus, and M. Annius Verus being
Consuls.

Domitian his brother succeeds him.
28. Domitian (so called from Domitilla their mother) succeeded Titus, Sueton
and Eutropius.
being more like to Nero, Caligula, or Tiberius, than either father or brother.
His youth he passed disgracefully enough. Doubting upon the death of his
father, whether he should not give a double donative to the Soldiers to obtain
their good will, he never feared to boast that he was left partner in the
Empire by his father, but that his testament was corrupted. He never ceased to
plot against his brother secretly or openly, A. D. 81. V. C. 834. Titi 3.
and ere he was quite dead commanded him to be carried out as such. In the
beginning of his reign he restrained himself; for his cruelty was then employed
upon flies, which privately in a room he was wont to catch and prick with a
bodkin, so that one asking whether any body was within with Caesar? it was not
unfitly answered by Vibius Crispus, At his beginning dissembleth his Vices.
No not so much as a fly. But though at present he strove to allay the fury of
his vices by some forced virtue, yet within a while he let fall also this
vizard, and became in appearance what inwardly his disposition inclined him to
be.

29. He undertook several Expeditions, Sueton in Domitiano. Eutropius ut supra.
Orosius lib. 7. c. 16.
as against the Catti and Sarmatians (People inhabiting the Northern parts of
Europe) who had cut off a whole Legion. Great difficulties in his time,
The Dacians also put him to much trouble, and grievously afflicted the Roman
State, under conduct of Diurpaneus their King; for they overthrew first Oppius
Sabinus a man of Consular dignity, and next Cornelius Fuscus Captain of the
Guards, in several sore and bloody battles, insomuch that the Historians of
those times, have thought fittest to pass over in silence the number of the
slain; Yet at length he triumphed over them all. He was also struck at by a
Civil War raised by L. Antonius President of upper Germany, whom he had
incensed by the odiousness of his vices, and especially by uncivil language.
Which yet he overcomes.
This he finished absent with admirable felicity; for, that very hour the fight
was to be, the Rhine swelled so high, that it hindered the Auxiliaries which
were sent to Antonius from joining with him. In the second year of his reign
Agricola defeated the Ordovices in Britain, Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
and took the Isle Mona about Autumn, and that upon his first coming into the
Island. So that the years of the Expeditions which Tacitus afterward relates,
are rather to be reckoned from the Kalends of January of the former year, as
Jacobus Cappellus hinteth. Though Dion Cassius, as appears from Xiphilin,
referred the discovery of that Britain an Island to the reign of Titus. Yet
others unto the time of Domitian, who at length envying Agricola that great
glory he had got in reducing Britain, recalled him under pretense of sending
him into Asia; and he died two years after, on the tenth of the Calends of
September in the 56 year of his age, Pompeius Collega and Cornelius Priscus
being Consuls. Whether he died of poison or not, though there wanted not
suspicions, Tacitus his son-in-law dares not affirm.

His cruelty.
30. Domitian having suppressed the rebellion of Antonius, grew extraordinarily
cruel, putting men to death upon small and trivial accounts. Those of any note
that were of his party he tortured to death by ways unheard of, and confounded
the cause of the innocent with that of the guilty, raging against the
Christians with a second persecution. He arrived at that horrid arrogance, that
he sticked not to say in the Senate, that he gave the Empire to his father and
brother, who did but restore it to him; and (what was worse than this) he would
be called our Lord and God. Being hereby rendered terrible and hateful unto
all, he wrought his own destruction, which fearing, and being foretold it by
the Chaldaeans, he grew timorous out of measure, and was ruined with the least
suspicion. Hence did he cause the place where he was wont to abide to be beset
with the stone Phengites, that he might see if any one came behind him; and
though he was sufficiently ambitious, yet did he refuse an extraordinary honor
offered him by the Senate, viz. that when he bore the Consulship, Knights
should go before him with spears amongst the Sergeants. Hence also he put
Epaphroditus his Secretary to death, because it was believed that he had helped
Nero in dispatching himself; and he killed Flavius his Uncle, though he had
openly owned his two sons as his Successors, whereof the one he called
Vespasian, and the other Domitian; His death.
which hastened his destruction. Eight months after he was slain by his own
servants, of whom Parthenius the chief of his Chamber was principal, Domitia
his wife being drawn in to the conspiracy, A. D. 96. V. C. 849. Domitiani 15.
for that she feared to be poisoned for her kindness to Paris. Longinus
Proculus then in Germany is said to have foretold the very day of his death,
and Apollonius Tyanaeus a famous Magitian (who being convented before him
vanished out of fight) spoke of it that very hour, exhorting Stephanus as it
were to strike him home. The people took his death indifferently, the Soldiers
heavily, which they shortly after revenged upon the murderers; but the Senate
as it were triumphed, and ordered the memory of him to be abolished. The best
thing we find concerning him was, that though he was no Scholar himself, he
took care for repaiting of Libraries. He was murdered on the fourteenth before
the Calends of October, in the 45th year of his age, and the 15th of his reign,
in the 849 year of the City, A. D. 96. T. Fulvius Valens, and C. Antistius
Vetus being Consuls. In his time flourished Statius Papinius, who begins the
fourth book of his Sylvae with the celebration of his 17th Consulship, which
fell in with the 14th of his reign. Juvenal and Martial also flourished at this
time; whereof the later was of Equestrian rank, though ever poor, as Sum fatcor
semperque fui Callistrate pauper.

Sed non obscurus nec male notus eques.


he himself witnesses.

31. Now must we give a short account of Ecclesiastical affairs according to
the course of time and matter. Ecclesiastical matters in his time.
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. L. 4. c. 22.
Dionysius the Areopagite being by St. Paul, (who converted him to the faith)
made Bishop of Athens, governed that Church in the time of Nero and afterward.
There are extant several works under his name, but suspected; and sundry
Epistles, whereof one to John the Evangelist then in the Isle Pathmos, and
another unto Polycarpus. Linus the Bishop of Rome, being Crowned with Martyrdom
on the ninth of the Calends of October, Bishops.
in the last year of Nero, according to Damasus, Cletus or Anacletus succeeded
him in that Sea. Some next unto Linus do place Clemens, then Cletus, and then
Anacletus. But Irenaeus, Eus^bius, and Epiphanius rank them thus: Peter, Linus,
Cletus, or Anacletus, Clemens; for he whom Irenaeus and Eusebius call
Anacletus, is by Epiphanius and Damasus called Cletus. This Cletus according to
Damasus died in the 2 year of Domitian, on the sixth before the Calends of May,
and was succeeded by Anacletus. But Lib. 3. c. 14.
Eusebius makes Anacletus to have been Bishop twelve years, and in the 12th of
Domitian to have been succeeded by Clemens, whom St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Philippians, calls his fellow labourer. In the fourth year of the reign of
Domitian Idem ibid. c. 13.
Anianus the first Bishop of Alexandria (having continued there 32 years) died,
to whom succeeded Abilius. As for the Bishops of Byzantium afterward called
Constantinople, we have them in this order from Vide Joseph. Scaliger in
Eusebianis page 313.
Nicephorus the Patriarch. The first was Andrew the Apostle, who having
preached the word at Byzantium, and built an Oratory in Arg^ropolis ordained
Stachys to be Bishop, of whom Romans 16.9.
St. Paul makes mention. Stachys governed 16 years, after him succeeded in the
year of our Lord 55 Onesimus, who governed 14. then Polycarpus ruled 17. and
Eleutherius 7. who came to the Chair A. D. 85. in the second of Domitian.

32. Domitian having raised the second persecution against the Christian faith,
St. John the Apostle, who having continued at Ephesus 27 years, was in the
ninth of his reign banished into the Island Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 18.
Pathmos one of the Cyclades, St. John banished to Pathmos.
where he wrote his Revelation. In this work he shows both Christ's and his
own hatred of the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans; for several Heresies had by this
time sprung up, as St. Paul had forewarned. Lib. 2. c. 13.
Eusebius makes Simon Magus the first Author of Heresies, concerning whom we
have already spoken, but as to his Heresies particularly, 1 He affirmed that he
himself was Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that he was worshipped of all
people by diverse names. Haereticks. 1 Simon Magus.
2. That Christ did suffer no hurt from the Jews; for he was Christ. 3. That
any man might ly with any woman, for this was no sin. 4. That the World was
made by Angels, and that an Angel redeemed mankind. 5. He denied the
Resurrection. 6. He thought that the gifts of the holy Ghost might be bought
with money, and therefore that sin of him is called Simony. Clemens Alexandr.
Strom. l. 3. and Eusebius. l. 3. c. 29.
Nicholas the Patron of the Nicholaitans was one of the seven first Deacons. 2
Nicholaitans.
He having a fair wife, and being accused of jealousy, permitted any to marry
her, at which fact others taking occasion, thought it lawful for any man to
have the company of any woman whom they themselves could like. Lib. 2. Tom. 2.
Haer. 25.
Epiphanius writes, that they taught Venery to be so necessary, that those men
who used it not every week on Friday could not be saved. Besides these
Heretics, 3 Corinthians.
about the year 69 sprung up the Heresy of the Corinthians. Irenaeus
Epiphanius Eusebius. l. 3. c. 28. l. 4. c. 14.
Cerinthus was a Jew by birth. He taught that the World was made by Angels. 2.
That Jesus our Savior had for his Parents indeed Joseph and Mary, and that at
his baptism Christ descended on him, who (says he) is called the holy Ghost,
by whom he did all his miracles; Philastrius.
when Jesus was to be crucified of the Jews, then Christ left him, and returned
into Heaven. 3. That Christ's Kingdom after the resurrection should be an
earthly Kingdom, and men then should live in all fleshly lusts and pleasures
together for 1000 years. 4. He denied the Divine nature of Christ, and said,
that he had only an humane nature; and that he was not yet risen from the
dead, but should rise hereafter. 5. He affirmed that the old law, and all the
old Commandments and Precepts belonging to it were to be kept, together with
the new Law or Gospel, and that therefore Circumcision was necessary for every
one that would be saved. Epiphanius writes, that certain Haereticks called
Alogi, affirmed Cerinthus to have been the Author of the Revelation.

Menander.
33. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 26. etc. Irenaeus, Epiphan. August. Philastr.
About the beginning of Domitian arose also the Heresy of Menander a
Samaritan, and the Scholar of Simon Magus. He taught first, that the World was
made by Angels, and that these Angels could be overcome by no means but by Art
Magic. 2. He denied Christ to be true man. 3. He affirmed himself the Savior
of the World, and that he came from Heaven to save mankind, and that all who
would be saved must be baptized in his name. Out of his Doctrine (that we may
speak of these Heretics briefly) budded that of Saturninus of Antioch, who not
long after in like manner taught, 1 That the world was made by seven Angels,
without the knowledge of God the father. 2. That Christ was but the shadow of
a man, for he had neither the true Body nor Soul of a man, and thus he
fulfilled the mystery of our redemption. 3 He said moreover that marriage and
procreation was of the Devil. Basilides.
Basilides, of whom were named the Basilidiani, agreed in several points
with Simon, Menander, and Saturninus. He taught, that Christ did not suffer
but Simon of Cyrene; that Christ taking the form of Simon laughed them to
scorn. 2 He turned men away from Martyrdom, affirming that it was no sin to
deny Christ in time of persecution. 3. That the Angels made 365 Heavens, Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 7.
and that these Heavens made the World. He vvrote 24 books upon the Gospel, and
feigned to himself Prophets, whom he called Barcabas and Barcoph. He commanded
silence to his Scholars for the space of five years, after the manner of
Pythagoras.

Carpocrates and the Gnostics his Scholars.
34. Irenaeus vvriteth, that in the time of these two Carpocrates lived, the
father of the Heresy held by the Gnostics, who thought good not to make
known the Sorcery of Simon privily but openly, glorying of charmed
love-drinks, of Devilish, and drunken dreams, of assistant and associate
spirits, with other like illusions. They taught further, that who so would
attain to the perfection of their mysteries must work such facts though never
so filthy, otherwise could they not overcome (as they termed them) the secular
Potentates, unless every one played his part after the same secret operation.
These were the most vile Heretics in filthiness of all others. They held 1.
That the Soul was made of the substance of God, and that brute beasts have
reason as man has. 2. That there are two Gods, a good and an evil one, and
that this evil God was the Creator of all things. Carpocrates also taught 1
That Christ was a mere man born of Joseph, and not of the blessed Virgin, that
he was a good man, and therefore after he was Crucified his Soul went up into
Heaven, but his body is still in the Grave. 2. That the World was made by
Angels. 3. That there is no resurrection. 4. He rejected the Old Testament as
not Canonical. Besides these, at this time arose the Heresy of the Ebionites,
Ebionites.
so called from Ebion. He taught, that Christ was but a mere man. 2. That when
Jesus was 30 years old there descended on him, and dwelt in him another person
called Christ, and thus Jesus and Christ dwelt, and were united together. 3. He
agreed with Cerinthus in the rest of the Heresies, touching Circumcision, and
keeping all the Law of Moses. He denied the Epistles of Paul, accusing him that
he fell from the Law. The Jewish Sabbath, and other Ceremonies he observed
together with the Jews, only the Sunday he celebrated as we do in remembrance
of the resurrection. It Is reported that St. John hearing Ebion was in the Bath
refrained his company, Epiphan. Haeres. 30. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 21.
and having seen and allowed the three Gospels published by the other
Evangelists, wrote his own to confute the Heresies of him, Cerinthus and
Menander.

CHAP. IV. From the death of Domitian to that of Pertinax, and the exposing of
the Empire to public sale by the Soldiers, the space of 97 years.
1. IT is reported of Domitian, that not long before his death he dreamed,
Sueton in Domitian. Eutropius. Xiphilinus ex Dione.
that a golden neck and head was grown up on his shoulders, and that he was
fully assured, Golden days after Domitian.
that after him were thereby portended golden days to the Commonwealth. This
truly came to pass through the abstinence, moderation, and excellent
government of the six succeeding Princes, during the reign of whom the Roman
Empire (for temporal respects) enjoyed more happiness, than ever before or
after, Strangers affording that, which the Natives of Italy would not
contribute to their own Country.

2. Cocceius Nerva, an old man, and born in Crete (say some, Aurelius Victor.
though others make him a native of Narnia in Italy) after the death of
Domitian had the Empire put upon him, Nerva succeeds him.
by the Legions which then quartered amongst the Sequani in Gall. After his
assuming the Government, a strong rumor went abroad, that Domitian was yet
living, which somewhat perplexed him, till by Parthenius, and Petronius,
Captains of the guards, he was put out of doubt; and afterward his election
was confirmed by the Senate. He took down the golden and silver Statues erected
to Domitian, whereof was raised a great sum of money, and forbad any to be set
up to himself. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 21.
He recalled such as his predecessors banished, and amongst others the
Christians, so that St. John the Apostle returned out of Pathmos unto Ephesus.
Calpurnius Crassus by vast promises attempted to draw the Soldiers from him;
but being happily discovered, he only banished him to Tarentum. He eased the
Commonwealth of the grievous impositions laid upon it, and having conjoined
these two things, in the times of some of his Predecessors insociable, viz.
Soverainty and Liberty, although he had kindred of his own, yet he adopted M.
Ulpius Trajanus, a Spaniard born, who then ruled Germany, Tacitus in Agricola.
preferring herein the public good before private respects. Adopteth Trajan
and dies.
He lived with him but three months. For falling out with one Regulus a
Senator, he was in so great a passion, that it drove his natural heat into a
Fever, whereof he died on the sixth before the Calends of February, having
lived 65 years, and reigned one year, four months, and nine days, in the 851
year of the City, A. D. 98, he himself the fourth, and Trajanus Caesar the
second time, being Consuls.

3. Trajan succeeded him, Orosius l. 7. c. 12.
and took the Ensigns of the Empire at Agrippina a Colony in Gall. He presently
reduced all Germany beyond the Rhine into it is wonted condition, Trajan
succeeds him.
brought under also several Nations beyond the River Danubius. But Diurpanes
(or Diurpanis, Decebalus, or Decibalus, for he has several names) King of the
Daci, A. D. 98. V. C. 851. Trajani 1.
who had formerly forced Domitian to pay tribute, held him stiffly to it for the
space of five years, with the expense of so much blood, that there wanted
linen to bind up the wounds of the Soldiers, His Wars.
and the Emperor tare his own robe to supply the defect thereof. But at length
he brought them under, and planted Colonies in that Country. He reduced
Armenia, having killed him that seized on it, conquered Parthia (whence he was
called Parthicus) and passing over Tigris and Euphrates, invaded Persia and
Assyria; and got into his hands Seleucia, Ctesiphon, and Babylon. Considering
Trajan as an Heathen Prince, in excellency of Government he was second to none.
He extended the Empire further than any of his predecessors; so that now it
reached from the Irish Ocean beyond the River Tigris: from the Atlantic Sea to
the Persian Gulf; He extends the Empire further than ever.
from the Mount Atlas to the Calidonian Forest: as also as far as the River
Albis, and beyond Danubius. He had in his intention to invade India with a
Fleet, which he ordered to be provided in the Red Sea. He was saluted Optimus
by the Senate. His moderation was exceeding great, being backed with such a
confidence of his own innocence, that giving a dagger to Saburanus according to
the custom, when he made him Captain of his Guard, A moderate person in civil
matters,
he bade him use it in his behalf if he did well, but employ it against him, if
he found him to transgress the bounds of Law and equity, for as much as he
that ought to look to others, should most of all look to himself. He so used
his Subjects as he himself (he said) would desire his Prince should use him,
were he a private person. Though he was not learned himself, yet he much
favored humane and secular Learning, conversing very familiarly and often with
the Professors thereof, whom he also preferred to public Offices.

4. Humane and Secular Learning he favored, and that only. For he raised the
third persecution against the Heavenly Doctrine and the Church of Christ, But
persecuteth the Church.
to which cruelty the worldly wise men seem most of all to have contributed.
Being puffed up with the Victory he had obtained over the Daci and Thracians
(after the ending of the second Dacian War, in the ninth year of his reign,
Decebalus having killed himself) as he was maching against Osroes or Chosdroes
the Parthian King, and the Armenians, having commanded all that would not
worship his false gods to be put to death, Jgnatius the Scholar of St. John the
Apostle, and Bishop now of Antioch, was brought before him, whilst he lay (in
his passage) in this City. Ignatius standing in his presence, he said, who art
thou Devil (Cacodaemon) who make haste to transgress our Commands, His
discourse with Ignatius Bishop of Antioch,
and perswadest others to destroy themselves? Ignatius answered, No body
calls Theophorus a Cacodaemon, for Devils fly from the Servants of God. But
I know thou so call me because I molest them. For I confess I have Christ
the heavenly King; and dissolve their councils. Trajan demanded who is
Theophorus? Ignatius replied, He who has Christ in his breast. Trajan said,
Do not thou think we have the Gods in our breast which assist us against our
Enemies? Ignatius answered, In that thou esteemest the Devils of the Gentiles
to be gods, thou errest. For there is one God, who made Heaven, and Earth, and
Sea, with all that are in them; and he has one only begotten Son Jesus
Christ, whose friendship I have obtained. Trajan then said, Thou speak of
him that was crucified by Pontius Pilate: Ignatius replied, Of him who
crucified sin and the inventor of it; and who approves not of him that serves
Idols, but who in his heart wisely understands this. Trajan added, Do thou
they carry Christ in thy self? Ignatius said, Yea, for it is written, I will
dwell and walk in them. Trajan concluded thus, I award that Ignatius, who
says, he bears in himself the Crucified, be conveyed in bonds by Soldiers to
the great City Rome, there to be devoured of beasts for a show to the People.
This was accordingly executed upon the most holy Marty, on the 20 of December,
as it is recorded in his Acta or the Memorials of him collected by Philo, Whom
he causes to be cast to wild beasts at Rome.
Gaius, and Agathopes, who followed him from Syria to Rome; concerning which,
as also three Epistles which go under his name, the Dissertations of the most
Reverend and Learned Archbishop of Armagh are to be consulted.

5. Ignatius being vexed by a tedious journey, that his constancy might be
shaken, when he came to Troas (or new Troy, Consule usserium in notis ad Epist.
Ignatii ad Philadelphenos.
built not far from the place where that of Priamus stood) understood that
Peace was restored to his Church of Antioch. This came to pass whilst Trajan
stist continued there, consulting about the Parthian War, as appears from
Malela the Historian of that City. Tiberianus his letter to Trajan.
For Tiberianus the President of the chief Nation of Palestine, moved the
Emperor to moderation by this letter: I am wearied with punishing and putting
to death the Galilaeans (who come before us under the name of Christians)
according to your Commands, yet they cease not to reveal themselves for the
slaughter. And although I have labored both by exhortation and threatenings,
that they might not dare to make known themselves to me as professors of that
doctrine; yet being prosecueed, they do not cease. I desire therefore that what
your pleasure is in this kind, your Majesty would please to certify me. In
voce (...).
Suidas mentioning also this message of Tiberianus unto Trajan, Mitigateth the
Persecution.
adds, that the Emperor forbad all his Subjects to punish the Christians.
Yet that this indulgence was not so universal, but that it most especially
concerned Palaestine, Syria, and other parts of the East, where the Emperor
then resided, appeateth from Ignatius his deprecation, that the persecution
might cease, when he was even to be brought into the Amphitheatre; as the Acta
or Memorials concerning him relate. But besides this Letter of Tiberianus,
there is extant another of Pliny the younger, who was moved to write to the
Emperor upon the same occasion, and for the same end.

6. For being Propraetor of Bithynia, the variety of cases in those that were
accused troubled him; As also the letter of Pliny Junior.
although, Plin. Epist. 97. l. 10.
to comply with the iniquity of the times, he declares, that such as stood out
his threatenings thrice, he commanded to be led to punishment. He signifies,
that out of such as had formerly been Christians, but now worshipped the Images
of the Emperor, and the gods, and blasphemed Christ, he could not get any
confession of any other fault or error, than that they were wont on a day
appointed, before it was light, to meet together, and sing an hymn to Christ;
and bound themselves by a Sacramentum or religious oath, not for any
wickedness, but that they should not commit robbery, theft, or adultery, that
they should not break promise nor cheat. Which being done, they were wont to
depart, and meet again to eat, promiscuously but innocently. To get out the
truth he tortured two women servants, but could not find any thing justly
chargeable, though through his Ethnic pravity and desire to please the
Emperor, he terms the faith Superstitio prava and immodica, or a naughty and
immoderat superstition. He adds, that it seemed to him a thing worthy of
serious consideration; especially for the number of those that were in danger:
for many, says he, of every age and order, and of both Sexes, are brought, and
will be brought into danger. For not only has the contagion of this
superstition gone through Cities; but also Villages, and fields, which as it
seems might be stopped and corrected. To be sure, it is clear enough, that the
Temples which were almost desolate begin to be frequented, and the sacrifices
of long time intermitted to be restored, beasts for that is use now going off,
which till now scarcely any would buy. Whereby it is easy to guess, what a
multitude of men might be reclaimed, if there were but place for repentance:
Thus Pliny, to whom Trajan answers (that we may only repeat the sum) that
Christians are not to be sought for, but if accused and convicted, except they
recant, to be punished; concerning the absurdity and injustice of which
Sentence, Tertullian excellently argues in his Chap. 2.
Apology, most worthy to be read of all Christians.

7. In the reign of Trajan died St. John the Apostle, the time and manner of
his death being uncertain, The death of St. John the Apostle.
though all agree as to the place, which was Ephesus. In Jovinian. l. 1.
Jerome refers his death to the 68 year after the Passion of Christ, which
fell in with the third of Trajan, and the 27 of December, on the first Feria.
Arabica Kirstenii apud Jacob. Cappellum ad A. D. 103.
Others place it in the 71 after Christ's Passion, and the sixth of Trajan.
Dorothaeus Bishop of Tire (in his tract written concerning the lives, ends, and
Martyrdoms of the Prophets, Apostles, and 70 Disciples) writes, that being 120
years old, yet living (the Lord would so have it) he buried himself. Ut supra
and in Mat. c. 20.
Jerome alleged out of Tertullian, that in the time of Nero (though others say
in the reign of Domitian) he was thrown at Rome into a tun of hot boiling oil,
yet thereby took no harm, but came out after this trial purer than he went in.
In John tract. 124.
Augustine calls him a Martyr by will: Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus (as Lib.
3. c. 31.
Eusebius allegeth) sticks not to call him a Priest, a Martyr, and a Doctor.
But that which Ubi supra.
Augustine writes of his end, is strangest of all, and let the credit thereof
rest in the choice of the Reader. How John caused at Ephesus his grave to be
made, and in presence of diverse went in alive, and being no sooner in and to
their seeming dead they covered him. Which kind of rest says he, is rather to
be termed a sleep than death. For that the earth of the grave bubleth or
boyleth up after the manner of a Well, by reason of John's resting in it, and
breathing: a sign of his slumbring therein. Though he died at Ephesus, yet was
not the succeeding Bishop, much less any other, Heir of that Authority, which
for so many years he had obtained in the Church, as having many years outlived
the rest of the Apostles. For to the Apostles succeeded not Apostles nor
universal Messengers of Christ, of which sort John was for many years, and he
alone, but Bishops, every one circumscribed within his own limits. In the days
of Trajan, and this third persecution was Crucified Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 32.
Simeon Cleophas Bishop of Jerusalem, being 120 years old. Justus a Jew
succeeded him, after whom some place Zachaeus, Tobias, Benjamin, and John in
the 19th. and last of Trajan. In the eleventh of his reign was Euaristus Bishop
of Rome Crowned with Martyrdom on the sixth of the Calends of November, and
Alexander succeeded him, who also being Martyred in the 19th year, on the fifth
before the Nones of May, Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 35.
Cistus had his seat according to Damasus. And we must not forget that Heroes
succeeded Ignatius in the Sea of Antioch.

Gods judgments upon Trajan for his persecuting Christians.
8. The persecution of the Christians drew down heavy judgments upon the Empire
in the time of Trajan. In the later end of his reign happened most grievous
Earthquakes in several places, by which four Cities in Asia, three in Greece,
and three in Galatia were overturned. Antioch also whilst he wintered there
was grievously shaken, whereby multitudes, which for his sake had flocked
thither, perished by many sorts of deaths. He himself was by an unknown hand
drawn out of a window, and continued in the open air till the Earthquake
ceased, not daring to venture himself in any house for many days. He was now
marching toward the East, and not being removed from his purpose, proceeded,
crossed Tigris, subdued Adiabene, and peirced as far as Ctesiphon and Babylon:
Orosius lib. 7. cap. 12. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 4.
but presently it came to pass through the sicklenesse of such as had revolted
to him, that he, who had already devoured the whole East, was forced to retreat
to defend his own. For the Jews 1 supposing him entangled in an inextricable
War. 2. Persuading themselves that by the Earthquake was portended the ruin
of the Roman Empire. 3. Thinking that from the first of Cyrus to this present
had but passed 483 years, and consequently but one of Daniels weeks to be
unfulfilled, entered into a conspiracy, and made incredible slaughters of the
Romans, using in several Countries several Captains, The Jews rebel.
whereof yet Barcocab was chief. The fury of this rebellion fell upon Egypt,
Cyrene, and Cyprus. The manner of the outrageous Massacres they practiced both
upon Greeks and Romans was as heinous as the facts themselves; though these
heinous beyond all belief, if not related by most credible, and most impartial
Writers. Dio l. 68.
They ate their flesh, besmeared themselves with their blood wore their skins,
sawed them asunder, cast them to wild beasts, made them kill one another, etc.
Besides the particular butcheries which they committed throughout Egypt; about
Cyrene they slew 200000. and in Cyprus 250000. Trajan resolving to pursue them
throughout his Dominions, not as Enemies or Rebels of the Empire, but as
Creatures noxious to humane society, with revenge suiting their former
outrages, sent Marcus Tubero with a great power, both by Land and Sea.

9. He neither in a short space, nor without long, and cruel hostility finished
the War; but he slew many Myriads of the Jews. Partly for the better security
of the Cyprians in time to come, partly in memory of their former misery, and
the infamy of the Jews it was publicly enacted: That no Jew, though driven by
Tempests thither, should presume to set foot within their Coast, upon pain of
present execution, as already condemned by his very appearance on that soil,
which had been tainted with the deadly venom of his Contrymen. Their
carriage in the West made the Emperor suspect their brethren in Mesopotamia,
whereupon he commanded L. Quintius to banish them that Country, and he joining
battle with them slew also a great number. In the time of Trajan was Nero's
golden house burnt, and also the Pantheon by Thunder; not the Pantheon of
Agrippa, as Scaliger and Cappellus note, but perhaps that of Jupiter Ultor or
Minerva Medica. At length Trajan died in Cilicia of a flux in August, Trajan
dies.
having reigned 19 years, six months, and 15 days, in the 64th year of his
age, the first of the 224 Olympiad, of the City the 870. A. D. 117. Quintius
Niger, and T. Vipsanius Apronianus being Consuls. He was first of all Emperors
buried in the City, being so beloved, that in succeeding times the people in
their acclamations to their Princes would wish them the felicity of Augustus,
and the goodness of Trajan. In his time flourished Plutarch, Eusebius. in Chron.
Lucian first a Christian, and then an Atheist; Plinius Secundus, Suetonius, L.
Florus, Cor. Tacitus, and others.

Hadrian.
10. Aelius Hadrianus, or Adrian, succeeded Trajan, being the son of his Cousin
German, and born also in Spain, in the City Italica, near to Civil, the
birthplace of Trajan. Xiphilinus ex Dione.
He was more engaged to Plotina the Empress than to her husband for his
succession; for she, ere his death was published, signed the Testament whereby
he was made Heir; and the Soldiers standing to him, he took upon him the
government in Syria, where he was President. At his first beginning he cut off
all he suspected, Aurel. Victor. Spartianus. Festus Rusus.
and restored Discipline to the Army. He crossed the Seas into Britain, where
he reformed diverse things, and caused a Wall 80 miles in length first to be
made to sever the Barbarians from the Romans. He took the greatest pains of any
Emperor in visiting the Provinces, for coming into Britain out of Gall and
Germany, he also went into Spain; then did he visit Mauritania, Parthia, Asia,
and Greece; and by Sicily returned to Rome. After this he went into Africa
again, and thence returning into the City, once more into Greece, thence into
Arabia, and so into Egypt. He ever traveled on foot, and without any thing on
his head, either in heat or cold. For this traveling Florus the Poet twitted
him, to whom he as wittily answered.

11. He overthrew the Sauromatae (or Sarmatae inhabiting the Countries now
called Russia and Tartary) but the greatest contest was with the Jews. The
principal cause of their rebellion was, for that he built a new City, and
therein a Temple to Jupiter Capitolinus, where Jerusalem stood, and called the
place after himself Aelia Capitolina, and he forbad them to be Circumcised. The
Jews again rebel.
They were confirmed in their sedition by one who pretending he came down to
them as a light from Heaven to save them from slavery and bondage, saying, he
was the Star foretold by Balaam, whence being called Barcocab, he was first
worshipped as the Messiah, and anointed at Bitter, a City in Africa, but
afterward proving to be an Impostor, they called him Barcozba, or the son of a
lie. Dio wrote, Lib. 69. p. 793.
that the whole World was in a manner shaken with this Commotion of the Jews.
Hadrian sent the best Captains he had against them, whereof the chief was
Julius Severus, who at this time governed Britain. Albeit in the end he had the
victory, yet would he not have wished for many Triumphs at the same rate. For
very many of the Romans fell; insomuch that Adrian writing to the Senate, used
not that beginning which other Emperors were wont: Si vos liberique vestri
valetis, Been est; Ego quidem and exercitus valemus. But the extraordinary
strength which now appeared in the Jews was given them for their destruction.
The greater danger their mutiny had occasioned to the Empire, the greater was
the Emperors severity in punishing their rebellion past, the greater his care
to prevent the like in time to come. In battles and skirmishes were slain of
them 580000. besides an infinite number consumed with famine and diseases,
during the time of this lingering War, protracted of purpose by the Romans, not
willing to try it out in open field with such a forlorn desperate multitude.
Dio, who lived not long after this time emphatically notes, that they were left
few in number, their Land laid waste, fifty of their strongest Munitions
utterly razed, and 985 of their Chief, and most populous Towns sacked, and
consumed by fire. Adrian after this strange desolation, by Public Decree
ratified by the Senates consent, prohibited any Jew to come within the view of
Judaea. Before this overthrow they had manifest signs foreshewing their
desolation. Solomon's Sepulcher which they held in greatest honor, says Dio,
a little before this War fell asunder of its own accord; Wolves and Hyaenaes
howled throughout their streets, and devoured them in the fields. Such Jews as
Adrian took Captive, he banished into Spain his own Country (this was their
10th Captivity says John Chron. Hisp. A. D. 137.
Vasaeus) where they had their Synagogues, till the time of Ferdinand and
Isabel, and Emanuel King of Portugal.

12. The State of the Jews from this time until the expiration of the Roman
Empire cannot easily be gathered from any Roman vvriters, who seldom vouchsafe
the Jews or Christians any mention, unless enforced thereto by some famous
war or mutiny, or by some other event redounding to the Roman glory. Judaea
after this time was not famous for any tumult till the ruin of Romes
greatness; the Jews wanted strength, and the Christians willing minds to
procure the Emperors glory by Seditions. Hereupon whatsoever calamity either
of them suffered by the Romans, was passed over by Roman vvriters, as private
wrongs not worthy registring in their Annals. Upon this account it is no wonder
they took no notice of our Savior, or his Acts, all tending to Peace and
Loyalty. For as Tacitus notes, Judaea was most quiet in Tiberius his time,
which was the best news the Romans cared to hear thence. Yet the general estate
of the Jews between Adrians and Honorius his time, as Dr. Jackson B. 1. Chap.
27. page 114. upon the Creed.
one observes, may be gathered out of the reverend Fathers of the Primitive
Church; who usually stopped the mouths of Heathens, or blasphemous Atheists, by
proposing their condition, then known unto all the World, for such as our
Savior had foretold it. Thus much of the Jews until the series of time and
affairs reduce us to them.

13. Adrian, if we look at his natural disposition, was as it were compounded
of vice and virtue, Adrians Character.
yet so as he seemed to have the command of them, and may be reckoned amongst
good Princes. He was much addicted to studies, and well seen in most of the
liberal Arts; here was his fault, that he desired to comprehend all, and did
not reserve himself for the most worthy, being one of the most curious men that
ever lived. And in him that saying was sufficiently demonstrated, Non est
curiosus quin idem sit malevolus. For he was so envious that he mortally hated
all better Scholars than himself, and consequently the greatest Professors in
all Sciences; but such as were unable for their Profession he would dismiss
with great rewards. He killed Apollodorus the Architect for showing him
something freely the errors in his buildings. The Captain of his Guard was
Similis, who as Dio writes, getting leave to retire, and live quietly in the
Country his last seven years, commanded this Inscription to be set on his
Tomb: Here lies Similis, whose life consisted of many (or 67) years, yet he
lived but 7. His cruelty toward his later end we may in charity impute to his
peevishness contracted by the Dropsy with which he was sore vexed in every
part. In his time the Church was under some persecution; for Xistus Bishop of
Rome was Crowned with Martyrdom in the tenth year of his reign, on the eighth
of the Ides of April, to whom succeeded Telesphorus, according to Damasus; but
this was rather from the malice of others, and the wicked custom then on foot,
than out of his inclination. Being something satisfied with the Apologies of
Quadratus and Aristides, two learned men, he wrote a Letter to Minutius
Fundanus Proconsul of Asia, which Justin Martyr has exemplified in his second
Apology, and from him as it seems, Eusebius in his History, after this manner.

14. The Emperor Caesar Aelius Adrianus to Minucius Fundanus. I received a
Letter from Serenius Granianus, His Letter in behalf of the Christians.
that right worthy man thy Praedecessor, the occasion whereof I cannot with
silence pass by, lest thereby men be troubled, and a gap left open to the
malice of Sycophants. Wherefore if your Provincials can prove ought against the
Christians whereof they charge them, and justify it at the Bar, let them
proceed, and not impeach them only for the name with making outcries against
them. For it is very expedient that if any be disposed to accuse, the
accusation be thoroughly known of you and sifted. Therefore if any accuse the
Christians that they transgress the Laws, see that you judge, and punish
according to the quality of the offense. But in plain terms, if any upon spite
or malice in way of cavillation complain against them, see that by all means
you chastise and punish him according to his malice. Adrian at length by
vomiting blood in great quantity contracted a Dropsy (if Dio writes Physician
like) which so tormented him, that he desired death, He dies.
but could not have it (according to the prayer of Severianus, whom, though he
judged him worthy of the Empire, of late he had put to death) but at length by
an ill kind of diet accelerated it, yet saying, Multi Medici Regem sustulerunt,
and enquiring Animula vagula blandula hospes comesque corporis, Quae nunc
abibis in loca Pallidula rigida nudula, Nec ut soles dabis jocos?
of his Soul whither it meant to go. He died on the fourth of the Ides of July,
having lived 62 years, and reigned 21 with 11 months, in the 891 year of the
City, A. D. 138, Sulpitius Camerinus and Quintius Niger Magnus being Consuls.
In his time flourished Ptolomy of Alexandria, that great Astronomer, Aulus
Gellius or Agellius, Justin who epitomized Trogus Pompeius, and others.

15. Adrian first adopted L. Verus, who died the year before him, on the first
day of his second Consulship, and the Kalends of January. He had a son named
Lucius, and was commanded to adopt Marcus, but they being both young, Hadrian
adopted Pius, and commanded him to adopt Lucius and Marcus. Antoninus Pius.
F. Au^elius Fulvius Antoninus for his goodness surnamed Pius, the son of
Aurelius Fulvius, and born in Gall within the Alps, succeeded Adrian. There
was little stir in the Provinces during his reign; only something was done in
Britain against the Natives by Lollius his Lieutenant, and some bickering with
the Jews, the last and weakest struglings of a dying Nation. Now was another
wall of turf made in Britain, and for the Victories obtained by Lollius
Urbicus, the Emperor was saluted Britanicus, who as In Arcadicis.
Pausanias tells us, fined the Brigantes part of their grounds, because they
had fallen with War upon the Genunii, the Allies of the Roman People. And at
this time says Cambden, as we collect out of Jabolenus, Seius Saturnius was
Archigubernus of the Navy in Britain. But whether by this title he was an
Admiral of the said Navy, or a principal Pilot, or the Master of a ship, I
would have the Lawyers to tell. Antoninus ruled with such care, moderation, and
humanity, that he was called another Numa, all things flourishing in calmnesse
and tranquillity. He repaired several Cities that had been overturned with
Earthquakes, in which and other respects Pausanias gives him large
commendations. He was excellently learned; a subtle and deep Philosopher. He
was rendered favorable to Christianity by the Apologies of Justin Martyr, and
the supplications of others in behalf of the faithful in Asia, which were
grieved with all sorts of contumelies practiced against them by their
Provincials. He graciously sent a constitution in their behalf unto the body of
Asia, which was read at Ephesus in the audience of this great Assembly, and yet
is preserved to our sight in the end of Justin Martyr his second Apology, and
by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, according to this tenor.

16. The Emperor Caesar, Titus Aelius Adrianus Antoninus, Augustus Pius,
Pontifex Maximus, fifteen times enjoying the power of Tribune, four times
Consul ( not thrice, as it is corruptly written in Eusebius) Father of the
Country, to the People of Asia Health. I know the gods are careful to disclose
hurtful persons. For they punish such as will not worship them more grievously
than you do those whom you bring in trouble, confirming that opinion which they
have of you to be wicked and ungodly men. It Is their desire in Gods quarrel,
His edict in behalf of the Christians.
rather to die than live. So that they become conquerours, yielding their lives
unto the death, rather than to obey Edicts. It shall seem very necessary to
admonish you of the Earthquakes, which have and do happen amongst us, that
being therewith moved, you may compare our estate with theirs. They have more
confidence to Godward than you have, you during the time of your ignorance
despise other gods, contemn the Religion of the immortal God, banish the
Christians which worship him, and persecute them unto the death. In the behalf
of these men many of the Principal Presidents have written heretofore unto our
Father of famous memory, whom he answered in writing again, that they were not
to be longer molested, unless they had practiced treason against the Roman
Empire. And many have informed us of the same matter, whom we answered as our
Father did before us. If any therefore hereafter be found thus busied in other
men's affairs, we command that the accused be absolute and free, though he be
found such an one, I mean as faulty, and that the accuser be grievously
punished. That this Edict was proclaimed at Ephesus in the hearing of the great
Assembly of Asia, witness is Meliton (says Eusebius) Bishop of Sardis (who
flourished at that time) in his profitable Apology for our doctrine, delivered
unto the Emperor Verus. But Antoninus died on the Nones of March, after he had
reigned 22 years, seven months, and 26 days, in the first year of the 235
Olympiad, the 914 of the City, A. D. 161. In his time flourished besides many
excellent Lawyers, and Justin the Christian Philosopher (the son of Priscus
Bacchius, and born in Flavia a new City of Palaestine, as he says himself)
Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, Galen that excellent Physician, and Aelian Writer
of the natural and various Histories.

17. In the first year of Pius died Telesphorus Bishop of Rome, on the Nones of
January; Bishops.
the Sea was vacant seven days (both the terms being excluded) and then
Hyginus the ninth Bishop succeeded on the Ides of January, and the first feria.
In the fifth of Pius died Hyginus, on the third of the Ides of January, and
Pius succeeded him, when Sex. Erucius Clarus and Cn. Claudius Severus, as
Damasus will have it, were Consuls, which if it be true, the Sea was vacant
four years. In the thirteenth of Pius, Damasus.
died Pius the Bishop, on the fifth of the Ides of July, and his seat being
vacant fourteen days, Anicetus the eleventh succeeded him on the 25 of July,
the first feria. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 5, 6.
From the Passion of our Savior till the eighteenth year of Adrian there were
fifteen Bishops in the Church of Jerusalem all Jews. In the which year after
the utter overthrow, the siege and conquering of the City under the said Aelius
Adrianus Jerusalem was called Aelia, and began to be inhabited of strange
Nations. Until Idem l. 4. c. 22.
wellnigh this time this Church was called a pure and uncorrupted Virgin, for
till about the year 110 there was no false doctrine sown there. Of the Gentiles
Idem l. 4. c. 6. and l. 5. c. 11.
Marcus was the first Bishop of Jerusalem. After Abilius, Idem l. 3. c. 21.
Cerdo was Bishop of Alexandria in the first year of Trajan, where he continued
thirteen years. Him succeeded Primus, who continued in the Sea twelve years.
After Primus was Idem l. 4. c. 4, 5.
Justus Bishop of Alexandria, where he continued eleven years. After Justus,
Idem l. 4. c. 5, 11.
Eumenes was Bishop, and so continued thirteen years. He was succeeded by
Marcus, who governed that Church ten years. Then followed Idem l. 4. c. 11, 20.
Celadion, who continued fourteen years. And in the Sea of Antioch (that we may
still continue the series of Bishops formerly began) after Heroes (who succeeded
Ignatius) Idem l. 4. c. 20.
Cornelius was Bishop about the twelfth of Adrian.

Heretics.
18. After the Bishops and Fathers of the Church, it is convenient to continue
the series of Heretics formerly laid down. About the year 110, Eusebius. l. 4. c.
22.
Thebulis was the first Heretic in the Church of Jerusalem. It Is said, that he
fell from the Faith because they would not choose him Bishop after Simeon. About
the same time were certain Heretics called Ophitae, who worshipped a Serpent,
and thought that the Serpent which deceived Adam and Eve was Christ: they kept
a living Serpent, which with opening of the chest and charming of the Priest
came forth, licked the bread upon the altar, Epiphan. haeres. 37. August. l. de
haeretib.
and wrapped it self about it. Their manner was to kiss the bread, and so to
eat, believing verily that the Serpent had consecrated it. They defended
themselves that the Nicolaitans and Gnostics delivered them this service.
About the same time there were certain Jews, which believing in Christ, called
themselves Nazarai of Nazareth. Epiphan. haeres. 29.
In confessing Jesus Christ to be the Son of God they contraried the Jews. But
they erred in Christian Religion, in that they addicted themselves wholly to the
whole Law. Idem haeres. 38. Aug.
There were other Heretics which honored Cain, and took him for their Father,
whence they were called Cains. They highly esteemed of Esau, Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, with the Sodomites. They called Judas the Traitor their Cousin, honored
him for betraying of Christ, affirming that he foresaw how great a benefit it
would bring to mankind. They read a certain gospel written, as they said, by
Judas: they reviled the Law, and denied the Resurrection. There were others
called Sethiani, who derived their pedigree from Seth the son of Adam, whom
they honored, and called Christ and Jesus; they held that in the beginng of
the World he was called Seth, but in the latter days Christ Jesus. Epiphanius
says, Epiphan. haeres. 39. Aug. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 10, 11. Epiphan. haeres. 41.
that he disputed with some of them in Egypt, and that the last of them were
in his time. Cerdon the Heretic came from Syria to Rome when Hyginus was
Bistop there. He taught that God preached by the Law and Prophets, was not the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. He said, that Christ was known, the Father of
Christ unknown. He denied the Resurrection, and the Old Testament, he held
other things with the Manichies; and Marcion was his Scholar.

19. In the time of Hyginus, Valentinus the Heretic came to Rome, lived under
Pius, and continued till Anicetus. He taught 1. That Christ brought his flesh
with him from Heaven, Tertullian contra Valentinianos. Epiphan. haeres. 31.
Philastrius.
and took no flesh of the blessed Virgin, but passed through her as water
through a conduict-pipe. 2. That there are two beginnings of all things,
Profundum, i. e. the Deep: and Silentium, i. e. Silence: these being married
together, had issue Understanding and Truth, which brought forth 300 Aenoae or
Ages, and of these were the Devil and others born, who made the World. In the
reign of Antoninus Pius, Marcion also the Heretic began to teach, living in
the time of Justin Martyr, who wrote against him. He was native of Pontus,
first a Stoic, then a Christian, he followed Basilides, Cerdon, and
Valentinus, in their Heresies. Meeting Polycarpus, he said, Know thou us?
Polycarp answered, I know thee for the first born of Satan. Epiphanius writes,
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 11, 14. Epiphan. haeres. 42. Theophyl. Hieron. cont. Jovinian,
Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4, 29.
that being a Bishops son, when he had defloured a Virgin, he was by his own
Father excommunicated, and afterward flying to Rome, because they there
admitted him not into the Church, he began to preach detestable doctrine. He
taught, that there were three beginnings, Good, Just, and Evil: that the New
Testament was contrary to the Old. He denied the Resurrection. He baptized such
as died without Baptism, saying, that Paul bade him do so. He taught that
marriage was unlawful, and that it was a great sin to marry. That Cain, the
Sodomites, and all wicked men were saved, because they met Christ when he
descended into hell, but the Patriarchs and Prophets are still in hell, for not
meeting Christ; for they thought (said he) that Christ came to tempt them.
Under Anicetus also came to Rome Marcellina, a woman which infected many with
the Heresy of Carpocrates, who called himself (...). She is said to have kept
and offered incense to the Statues and Pictures of Christ (which the Gnostics
said, had been made by command of Pilate) as also to others of St. Paul.

20. About the nineteenth year of Antoninus Pius, the beginning also of
Montanus his Heresy is placed by Epiphanius; but from Eusebius, Cappellus
would gather, that the original of it was fifteen years before, because the
Historian writes, that Apollinaris wrote against Miltiades, Haeres. 48.
and Montanus the Heretics, under the Proconsulship of Gratus, who seems the
same with him, whose Consulship is by Cassiodorus cast into the fourth of Pius.
He thinks therefore, that in the nineteenth year some new thing might be
attempted by Montanus; as he might this year institute his Prophetesses. These
were his two Country-women, Priscilla and Maximilla, born at Pepuza a City of
Phrygia, upon which account he called Jerusalem by that name. Cappellus
further observes, that of such things as are attributed to Montanus, some were
truly his, some after his death were added by the Montanists, and some falsely
ascribed to them. Montanus really held, that the promise of sending the Holy
Ghost was deferred till his time, and in himself fulfilled, because the Church
heretofore could not bear the yoke of more severe and holy discipline, which he
endeavored to bring in, by appointing the eating of dried meats, fasting, and
Monogamy, or single marriage. The Montanists, after their number was increased
did those things which Hierome mentions, viz. they appointed themselves
Patriarchs, 2 Cenonae, which word seems of Phrygian Original, and 3 Bishops.
That is falsely imputed to them, Ad Marcellum tom. 3. cp. 9.
which Jerome says others did attribute, but he would not believe, viz. that
they pricked an Infant, and with his blood made up the Eucharist. If this
opinion may be attributed to any Haeresie, or if this prejudice did not arise
from the imputation of this kind of cruelty by the Heathen to Christianity it
self, the Carpocratians rather than the Montanists were guilty of it. But
because both sorts were called Gnostics (as swelling with an opinion of
knowledge) what was acted but by one, might easily be attributed to the other.
So because Montanus, as full of the Holy Ghost called upon men in the name of
the Father, he was believed to confound the persons of the Trinity into one,
which was the invention of the Sabelliani 100 years after. It Is further said of
him, that he baptized the dead, and not allowing of second marriages permitted
married persons to be separated when they themselves would. That he took away
repentance, affirming that sinners could never have their sins pardoned by
repentance. And that the Apostles and Prophets understood not any thing they
had written, but were Arreptitii. Now to return to civil matters.

21. Pius being dead on the Nones of March, Marcus the son of Annius Verus
succeeded, M. Aurelius, Antoninus, Philosophus, and L. Verus.
who was first adopted by Catilius Serenus his great Grandfather on the
mother's side, the second time by Lucius Commodus, and the third by Pius. He
made Lucius the son of Lucius Commodus, by whom he was adopted the second time,
partner with him in the Empire, as his brother, and six months after having a
son born to him on the Calends of September, named him Commodus, after his said
adoptive father. Marcus and Lucius were the first two that ever jointly, and
with equal power and authority ruled the Empire, being very contrary in
disposition, though through the goodness and prudence of the former they
maintained concord betwixt themselves. Marcus notwithstanding his public place
was so in love with the liberal Sciences, that he would frequent the Lectures
of Philosophers: Lucius having little capacity, and less affection for such
matters, gave himself up to luxury and idleness, only so far restraining
himself as his interest compelled him to comply with his Colleague, although he
might have been diverted from such courses by the Wars. For Vologesus King of
Parthia brake into Armenia, Cappadocia, and Syria, laying all waste before him,
overthrew the Roman Army, and put to flight Attidius Cornelianus, who at that
time governed Syria. Against him Lucius was sent, and by his Captains did very
great things, not only for the recovery and relief of those places, but also
in Assyria. For, he therein took Seleucia, situate upon the River Hidaspes with
400000 persons, for which he triumphed with his brother. But after they had
reigned eleven years Lucius died of an Apoplexy as he rode with his Colleague in
the same Chariot.

22. As for the disposition and carriage of Marcus, both as a (Heathen) Man,
and a Prince; he scarcely ever had his Superior in goodness and virtue. Being
extraordinarily learned (upon which account he was surnamed Philosophus) he
abounded according to the dictates of right reason, with moderation, justice,
and clemency. For the maintenance of his Wars, that he might not be burthensom
to his subjects, he sold several things to raise money. The head of Avidius
Cassius, who having rebelled against him was slain in the East, being sent to
him, he caused it presently without any insulting language to be buried. Marcus
gives the freedom of the City to all.
Aurel. Victor tells us that in his time the freedom of the City was
promiscuously given to all; so that Cambden seems mistaken, who writes that
by the ordinance of Pius, as many as were in the Roman World became Citizens of
Rome. This freedom of the City was wont to be given either with privilege of
suffrage or without. The first that had it without suffrage were the Caerites.
We understand, says Gellius, Lib. 16. cap. 13.
that the Caerites were first made Municipes without the right of suffrage: and
that it was granted to them, that they should receive the honor of the Roman
City, but be freed from business, and burdens, for that they received, and
kept the sacra (or idols) in the Gallick war. Freedom of the City various.
Paterculus also tells us, that in the Consulship of Sp. Posthumous and
Veturius Calvinus, Campanis data est civitas partique Samnitium sine suffragio,
and in the same place M. Curio and Rufino Cornelio Coss. Sabinis sine suffragio
data civitas. What Municipium was, and who Municipes, is worthy of
consideration. In the time of Gellius it appears from him that those words were
much in use, but nothing understood. For such as were of Colonies would call
both themselves and their Countrymen Municipes, which, says he, is far
distant from reason and truth. Even so what Muncipi are, and how much they
differ from a Colony, we are ignorant, and we think that Colonies are in a
better condition than they.

23. Of this opinion so full of error Adrian the Emperor learnedly discoursed
in his Oration which he made in the Senate concerning the Italicenses, or
Inhabitants of Italica in Spain, (as they were called) from whom he himself
descended. He wondered that the Italicenses and other ancient Municipia (amongst
whom he named them of Utica) when they might live according to their own
customs and laws, were tickled with a desire to be changed into the condition
of Colonies. He said that the Praenestines earnestly desired of Tiberius to be
altered from the state of a Colony to that of a Municipium, and that the
Emperor granted it, in consideration that under the Walls of their Town he had
recovered from a deadly disease. Municipes therefore (so Gellius concludes)
are Roman Citizens of the Municipia, using their own freedom and Laws, only
partakers of honorable employment (Muneris honorarii) with the Roman people,
from undertaking which employment (a quo munere capessendo) they seem to be
named, being bound by no other necessities, nor by any Law of the Roman people,
for as much as their Land never belonged to it. Then proceeds he to
distinguish in the matter of the Caerites, betwixt such Municipes as had right
of suffrage, and not, for if there had been no such distinction he would never
have said, The first Municipes we understand to have been made without right of
suffrage were Caerites. For a more clear discovery of the relations of other
places unto Rome, we shall observe this fourfold distinction of privileges.
There was 1 Jus Civitatis, The several sorts of Privileges.
2 Jus Municipii, 3 Jus Coloniae, 4 Jus Latii. Jus Civitatis was freedom of the
City, and we find in Paterculus that it was cum suffragio and sine suffragio.
Jus Civitatis and Jus Municipii.
Jus Municipii we find in Gellius to have also been freedom of the City, for
Municipes were also called Cives Romani, and were named Municipes, a muneribus
capiendis, or capessendis; there was also as appears from Gellius Jus
Muncipii cum, and sine suffragio, Jus Civitatis therefore and Jus Municipii
seem to have differed little; the former was larger, respecting single persons
sometimes absolutely considered without relation to any place that was related
to Rome as a Municipium. For single persons (Ambassadors or others) have had
the freedom of the City bestowed on them primarily without respect to any
place at all, who perhaps could not be called Municipes, because such seem to
have been proper, and only Freemen of Municipia, and not otherwise than
mediately to have been free of Rome. The power or right of suffrage will not
suffer us to imagine that, because Gellius calls the employment of the
Municipes, munus honorarium, therefore it was but titular. For by the right of
suffrage they had power to assemble in the Comitia, and Vote in their Tribes,
Centuries, and Curiae, as the occasion required: and hence doubtless were
capable of honorable Offices. And the word it self, though sometimes it may be
expounded Titular, as the Consuls after Constantines time (or rather
Consulares, as they are called in Lib. 6. epist. 20.
Cassiodorus, and their Office Consularitas) are termed Consules Honorarii,
being but Titular Consuls; yet it also respects authority and power as well
as mere Title, in that the Law of the Praetor (whereof we have formerly spoken)
is called Jus Honorarium.

24. As for the Jus Coloniae, it is so termed by Tacitus also in those words:
Atin Italia vetus oppidum Puteoli Jus Coloniae and Cognomentum a Nerone
adipiscuntur. Gellius distinguishes it from the Jus Municipii, after this
manner. But of Colonies there is another relation or alliance (necessitudo.)
For they do come extrinsically into the City, Jus Coloniae.
neither do they stand on their own roots; but are as it were begotten by the
State, and have Laws and Institutions, not of their own, but those of the Roman
people. Yet this condition, although it be more obnoxious and less free, is
accounted better and more excellent, for the amplitude and Majesty of the Roman
people; whereof these Colonies seem to be certain Images and resemblances: and
also because the rights of the Municipia are obscure and obliturated, which by
reason of ignorance the owners cannot use. Lib. 1. c. 14, 15.
From this it appears that Colonies were free of the City, in which respect
Paterculus giving us account of the several Colonies that were planted till the
time of Marius, mixeth with them such places as to which freedom was given,
making it as it were the same thing. If it had been otherwise, there would not
have been any comparison as to privilege betwixt Municipia and Colonies, and it
would have saved Gellius the labor of proving against the common belief that
the Jus Municipii was greater. Now as for the Jus Latii, Cap. 47.
Suetonius distinguishes it from Jus Civitatis, for speaking what Augustus did
to several Cities, he has this expression amongst the rest: Latinitate vel
civitate donavit. Spartianus in the life of Adrian says, Latium multis
civitatibus dedit. And Tacitus (coming up to our Term) says of Nero: Annal. l.
15. c. 32. Jus Latii.
Eodem anno Caesar nationes Alpium maritimarum in Jus Latii transtulit. The
Latins were ever counted of the kindred of Rome, the Romans having descended
from them, and upon this account there was a stricter League and Alliance with
them than any other people, which enjoyed not the freedom of the City.

25. The Latins envying the rising fortune of Rome their Colony, labored to
suppress it, but still were worsted, and ever forced to submit. Servius
Tullius the sixth King of Rome breathing after glory in future times, in
imitation of the Council of the Amphyctiones in Greece, and other public
conventions (as we have formerly said) persuaded both Nations to build at Rome
a Temple or Asylum out the common expense, Dionys. Halicarn. lib. 4.
where the Cities meeting yearly, should sacrifize, hold a fair at certain
times, and if any contention happened amongst them, it might be composed in a
religious manner by their fellow Cities. Gathering money he built the Temple of
Diana in the Aventine Mount (the most eminent in the City) and wrote down the
conditions of the League, with the manner of observing the Feast and Mart. And
that they might not be abolished by the injury of time, he ingraved the Decrees
of the Council in a pillar of brass, The strict League and Alliance betwixt
the Romans and Latins.
and the Cities which were partakers of this society, which pillar continues
till our age, says Dionysius, dedicated in the Temple of Diana, inscribed with
such Characters as Greece anciently used, which is no light argument that Rome
was not built by Barbarians. Tarquinius the last King, and Successor of
Servius, renewed this League, and taking in the Hernici and Volsci, appointed
another place in the midst of all those Nations, viz. a Mount near to the
Albanians, called also Mons Albanus, where yearly Feriae (or a Festival) were
to be celebrated, and for that time, in respect of the religion of the place,
and the Law made for that purpose, they were all to abstain from all manner of
violence, and in common sacrifize to Jupiter Latialis and Feast together; it
being appointed how much each people should contribute and receive. Of these
Feriae, and this sacrifice were partakers 47 people, and in our age, says the
Historian, the Romans observe these Ferlae (called Feriae Latinae) and some
contribute Lambs, some Cheese, some a certain quantity of Milk, and others
Cakes or Wafers made up with Milk. The sacrifice is one Bull for all, of whose
inwards a certain portion is given to every people. They sacrifize for all in
general, and the Romans preside at the sacrifice. Those Feriae at first
consisted but of one day, which Tarquinius appointed. After his banishment the
people added another. And about six years after, when Peace was composed
betwixt Patritians and Plebeians, after the Creation of the Tribuni Plebis and
Aediles, a third was added; at what time the League was also renewed with the
Latins, because that after the Peace made with them at the end of the War with
Tarquinius (whose part they took) they had continued peaceable and faithful to
the Romans during their confusions and seditions.

26. Lib. 6.
Dionysius mentioning the renewing of this League, gives us the substance of
it, by which description our design is accomplished as to the Jus Latii. The
Contents of the League.
These things were contained in the League; Let there be mutual Peace betwixt
the Romans and Latins, as long as the Heavens and Earth keep the same Station:
and let neither make War upon the other, nor procure others to do it, nor give
free passage to such as would, but to the utmost help each other infested by
War, and equally divide the prey and spoils. Concerning private contracts, let
the controversy be judiciarily decided in the Forum of that People where the
contract was made. Let nothing be added to the conditions of the League, nor
taken away, without the consent of the Romans, and all the Latin People. To
this purpose a League was established betwixt the parties, and sworn to by all
sacred things. This near confederacy is to be taken as explanatory of the Jus
Latii, including such a strong alliance as was not made with any, but
afterward according to this prescript. In process of time the Latins came to
have the freedom of the City. When this freedom was given to them is somethimg
obscure. Dionysius so relates the story of Cassius (in whose second
Consulship, according to him, this League was renewed) as if at the same time
was given to them the freedom of the City; for Cassius to curry favor with the
Hernici gave them the same league, and when he would have in his third
Consulship the Agrarian to pass, he caused the Latins and Hernici to be
present at the Comitia, to carry it by the greater number of voices. But if any
such thing were, it was done rather by his over forwardness to gratify them,
and without the consent of the State, as those Privileges were which he
bestowed upon the Henrici. However, it appears that they had not the freedom
till this time; Dionys. l. 8.
for Cassius in his flattering speech to the multitude concerning the excellent
acts performed by them in his three Consulships, says, that in his third the
sedition being appeased, the Commons were reduced home: the Latins kinsmen of
the Romans, but emulators for glory and Empire, were received into friendship
and into the City, that afterward they might esteem Rome as their Country, and
not as an adversary. Though formerly there was a League with them, yet it
seems they were not received into the City till now, and that rather by
Cassius his flattery, so that neither they not the Hernici retained this
privilege, and we do not find that they were admitted into any Tribe, or gave
thenceforth their suffrages in the Comitia. This confirms what we say, that
L. 1. c. 14.
Florus declares the cause of their revolt afterward, to have been an
emulation for Empire and Magistrates, and that contemning the Romans after the
burning of the City, they required Jus civitatis amongst other things.

27. This they did not now obtain, being subdued and reduced by War to
obedience, and punished several ways. However the ancient League seems to
have been renewed; at least with most of them, who were still called Socii
nominis Latini. Often the Jus Civitatis was promised them, but still deferred
and put off by the Fathers, who alone knew the secret of Empire, till at length
they broke out into the Social War, and yet then were they subdued again, and
brought under by force, and then was given to them conquered, what they could
not obtain by strong hand. After this, the hedge being broken down from about
the Roman State, and through the variety of the interests of Roman Citizens
parties and factions arising, Freedom came to be given to other places, one
after another, though when, to whom, and by whom, we now must not inquire.
Augustus was very sparing in the grant thereof; but succeding Princes spread
this privilege far and wide, till at length Antoninus Philosphus communicated
it to the whole body of the Empire, it being now nothing material, seeing that
the multitude met not together in the Comitia, to give their suffrages, which
had by variety of interests, humors, and inclinations confounded all things.
Now again to our matter.

28. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, like a good Patriot, or rather Pater Patriae,
did not satisfy himself in providing for the public good for his own time
only. For he took special care for the good education of his son Commodus,
committing him to the most eminent men he could obtain for money to be educated
in good literature and manners. To Lucius rather than him, is to be imputed the
fourth persecution, The fourth persecution.
which in their time raged throughout the Provinces. Herein suffered Polycarpus
that famous Bishop of Smyrna, as is testified in the Epistle written by his
Church unto the brethren in Pontus. He was ordained Bishop by St. John and
other Apostles, with whom he conversed, and his Scholar he was, as Tertullian,
Irenaeus, and several of the Ancients do testify, and had served Christ 86
years, for he was older by much than thus, as Reverend Quem consule de
Polycarpo in Dissert. de Scriptis illius and Ignatii.
Usher has evinced. He caused meat to be set before those who apprehended him,
and with wonderful alacrity and resolution underwent his Martyrdom by fire, on
the seventh of the Calends of April, the ninth of M. Aurelius Antoninus, and
the 169 of the ordinary Era of Christ, which was the same wherein Lucius died,
as some Inscriptions of Gruterus do testify. Now suffered also Justin Martyr,
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15, 16, 17. and l. 5. c. 1.
who after he had published his second Apology for the Christians, through the
malice of Crescens the Cynick (whom railing against Christianity he had taxed
for his filthy kind of life) as he even foretells in his Apology. The
Churches of Lugdunum and Vienna in Gall were especially exercised in this fiery
trial, as is to be seen in the History of Eusebius.

29. It may without curiosity be observed, that usually the persecutions of
Gods People were followed with judgments upon the adversaries, Orosius l. 7.
c. 15. Eutrop. l. 8.
as it now through Gods providence came to pass. For so great a Pestilence
fell upon the Provinces, that Villages, Towns, and fields in Italy, were left
without Inhabitant or Tiller, and Galen the Physician ran away from it from
Rome home to Pergamus. This was followed by a War with the Marcomanni, which
could not be carried on without new levies, which for three years together the
Emperor made at Carnutum (now Chartres) in Gall. For besides the Marcomanni (a
People inhabiting that now called Merhern) the Quadi (whom some will have the
same with the present Austrians, others with the Saxons and Silesians) the
Vandalls (inhabiting in the now Kingdom of Sweden) Sarmatians, and Suevians,
and almost all Germany were up in arms, and invaded Pannonia. The Roman Army
resisting these motions, Vide Tertul. Apolog. c. 5. Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 5.
and in Chron. Orosium ubi supra. Paul. Diacon. l. 8. Xiphil. ex Dione Julium
Capitolinum.
peirced into the borders of the Quadi; but there were beset by their
adversaries, and encountered by a greater Enemy, being all ready to perish by
thirst. At this time the Soldiers of the Legion called Melitina being
Christians, fell upon their knees in presence of their fellow Soldiers, and in
the name of Christ so far prevailed with Almighty God, that presently abundance
of rain fell, and the Enemy was defeated by Thunder and Lightning. This Legion
was thence called Fulminatrix or Thundering, and the Emperor confessing the
Victory to have proceeded from the prayers of Christians, was thenceforth
favorable to such, and owned the deliverance in a public instrument or letter
to the Roman People and Senate. Herein, after he has related the story, and
improved it in the behalf of Christianity, he commands such as accuse
Christians merely as such, to be burnt alive, and no constraint to be used
toward the faithful. This his constitution he would have confirmed by a
Senatusconsultum, and proposed to be seen and read in the Forum of Trajan. He
orders Verasius Pollio to take care that it be sent into all the Provinces,
and that any one that pleases may take a copy of it.

The Emperor's letter in behalf of Christianity.
30. This letter is published at the end of Justin Martyr's second Apology,
together with those of Antoninus and Adrian. It could not be added by Justin
himself, for ere this time he had suffered Martyrdom. Perionius thinks, that
only that of Adrian was added by him, and the other two by some other, who saw
them pertinent for the place. But Eusebius in his History mentions that of
Antoninus as well as that of Adrian, in the Lib. 4. c. 25.
words of Melita Bishop of Sardis, who wrote an Apology to the Emperor, and
also C. 13.
exemplifieth the Epistle it self. This letter also of M. Antoninus
Philosophus, is extant in the most ancient Copy of the Vatican library, in the
end of Justin Martyr's works, added by some studious and well-affected person,
first translated into Greek out of Latin, and again into Latin out of Greek
most accurately, as we are informed by Sy^burgius in his Annotations upon
Justin Martyr. But the Emperor being called into Pannonia for the finishing of
the War there, and passing into Sarmatia, fell sick. Hereupon seriously
bethinking himself what might happen to the Empire in the minority of his son,
these parts being not fully reduced to obedience, especially in case he should
degenerate from the worth of his ancestors, and give himself up to luxury and
cruelty, he called his friends together, and seriously commended him unto them,
to be advised and assisted for the best. After this he lived but one day and a
night, to the grief of all men. He died at Vendebona the 17 of March, in the 58
year of his age, M. Aurelius dies.
and of his Empire the 19, the 932 of the City. A.D. 180. Arrius Praeseus the 2
time and Aelius Gordianus being Consuls.

Commodus.
31. Herodianus l. 1. Olymp. 239. an. 4. V. C. 932. A. D. 180.
Commodus his son (for whose sake Dio makes the Physicians to have killed him)
succeeded him, having two years before been made a Consul, through a
dispensation with the Lex Annaria, as Lampridius writes, although it seems
something strange, that this Law could take place upon those, to whom the title
of Augustus was not denied. Being owned by the Army, for some time he governed
according to the direction of his Father's friends, but being obnoxious to
flatterers by reason of his youth, who sought to make their own ends out of
him, he shotly after, contrary to the judgment of his best Counselors, made a
dishonorable Peace with the Enemy, and away he went to enjoy the pleasures of
Rome, where he was joyfully received for his fathers sake, his beatuty also
much commending him to the eye. For a time he here also harkned to his fathers
friends, but making one Perennius an old Soldier Captain of his Guards, he
being excessively covetous, allured him at first by pleasures to idleness and
neglect of business, then governing all himself, he falsely accused them and
others of the richer sort, that he might seize on their estates. This his
design was furthered by Lucilla the Emperor's sister, who grudging that
Crispina Commodus his wife should take place of her, entered into a conspiracy
against her brother, and engaged one Quadratus a young Noble man therein, who
persuaded Quintianus to kill Commodus. His difficulties.
But he meeting him, had no power to do the deed, only showing his dagger,
said, The Senate sends thee this, and so was apprehended and put to death with
his accomplices. These words concerning the Senate thus foolishly spoken, never
went out of the Emperors mind, but made him suspect all the Fathers, which
advantage Perennius took, and persuaded him to kill all the chiefest of them.
This being performed, this man affected the Sovereignty, but was in good time
discovered, both he and his sons, whom he had sent into Illyricum to draw the
Legions to revolt, and received their reward.

32. Commodus to prevent the too great power of one man, put two into his
place, Cleander and Niger, for the time to come; and yet presently after had
more plots laid for his life. There was one Maternus, who practicing the trade
of robbery, got a great company of Highway-men together, and making himself
Captain of a considerable Army, wasted Gall and Spain, and thence repelled,
resolved to venture for the Sovereignty it self. Having but little hope to
obtain it by force, because of the People, and the Pretorian bands, he betook
him to his wits. At that time the Annual solemnity was kept in honor of the
mother of their gods, wherein it was lawful for Soldiers or any other to
imitate Magistrates or their Officers. Taking this opportunity, he sent some of
his Soldiers privily armed to get amongst the Sargeants and Officers of the
Emperor, and so to kill him; but being betrayed by his own party, he and his
plot both miscarried. After this succeeded a terrible Pestilence, accompanied
with a Famine, which Cleander a Phrygian, one who from a slave came into
greatest power, made an occasion to advance himself. He bought up all the Corn,
thinking by a largess thereof to purchase the Empire of the Soldiers and
People, but these rising against him, as the cause of the Dearth and Plague
too, after that with great difficulty, by reason of his power, the matter was
revealed to Commodus, he also received his reward. These things caused the
Emperor to be jealous of all men, to cast off all care of State affairs, and
giving ear to every back-biter, to kill any. Hence also no persons of worth
being admitted into his presence, he was ruled by dissolute companions, and
fell more and more into disorder.

33. He turned chariot-driver, Idem ibid. Orosius l. 7. c. 16.
and spent his time in killing beasts with darts, and other unworthy exercises.
He was the best markesman that ever was known, scarcely ever missing any mark
he aimed at. He publicly killed multitudes of wild beasts upon the theater,
amongst the rest a Panthere, which just being about to devour a man, he hit and
slew in the nick of time, as she was about to seize on him. In stead of
Commodus the son of Marcus, he commanded himself to be called Hercules the son
of Jupiter. Casting off the usual Robe of Princes, in compliance with that
name, he would lie on a Lions skin, and have a club in his hand; yet he would
wear purple garments and cloth of Gold. His carriage.
To his former title he added Amazonian and Conqueror; Rome he stilled
Immortal and Fortunate, and the World His Colony. A great fire hapened in the
City, which burned that excellent Library gathered by his Praedecessors, with
the Temple of Peace, and other buildings, which accident as the People
accounted an ill omen, so they laid the guilt upon him, knowing well his
practices, which he never strove to conceal. Though his throwing of darts upon
the theater much derogated from the Imperial Majesty, they were indifferently
pleased with it; but when he came naked upon the stage and acted the common
fencer, it seemed intolerable. At length at the Feast of Janus resolving not to
proceed from his Palace as Emperor, but as a Fencer from the fencing School,
attended with such like to the view of the People, this occasioned his end.

34. For, this his resolution being known to his Friends, Martia his beloved
Concubine, Laetus his General, and Electus his Chamberlain, labored with all
entreaties to divert him from so shameful a thing. He herewith extremely
displeased, betook himself to his Chamber, where in a roll he wrote down the
names of such as he would have killed, and amongst them those three in that
order we mention them had the first places; them followed a great number of
Senators, the goods of whom he intended to distribute amongst the Fencers and
Soldiers, to purchase mirth and jollity from them, and defense from these. This
writing he laid upon his bed, where he did not suspect that any would come at
it. But a little boy with whom he was wont to play, coming thither, took it up,
and went out with it in his hand, whom Martia meeting, and taking up in her
arms, Lege Herod. ubi supra. Eutrop. l. 8. Xiphil. ex Dione. Aurel. Victor.
fearing it might be something of consequence, read it, and thereby discovered
the matter, which she presently imparted to the other two. They all concluding
that haste was to be made, Martia gave him poison, and when that succeeded not,
they hired one Narcissus to strangle him. So Commodus died, who by his
Lieutenants overthrew the Moors and Dacians, and bridled Pannonia, Germany, and
Britain, which would have thrown off the yoke. He died on the last day of the
Julian year; the 32 of his age, when he had reigned almost 13 years. A. V. C.
945. He is murdered.
A. D. 192, he himself the seventh and Helvius Pertinax the third time being
Consuls.

35. The Conspirators did not make known his death, till they had made means
for a Successor, and then gave out that he died of an Apoplexy, which was
easily believed, because of his voluptuous life. Herodian. l. 2.
He upon whom they pitched was Helvius Pertinax, an old Soldier, who had done
good service in Britain, where he was near killing by his Soldiers, but
severely corrected their insolence. He had been thrice Consul, yet being thus
delivered from the danger he was in by Commodus, considering the meannesse of
his birth, he would have declined the burden, Helvius Pertinax.
but it was put upon him by the Senate, and the Army acknowledged him. He gave
great hopes of an excellent Prince, behaving himself modestly and suitably
toward all men. Olymp. 242. an. 4. V.C. 445. A.D. 192.
He restrained Promoters, took away diverse tolls and gabells lately imposed,
and restrained the rapines and insolence of the Soldiers. This troubled the
guards exceedingly, who being so much the more sensible of the change brought
upon them by strict discipline, as they remembered the liberty given them by
Commodus, resolved to make trial of another, and an end of Pertinax. In the
strength of this resolution they set upon and killed him, though he had like so
excellent a person gravely and stoutly admonished them of their duty. He died
in the 85 day of his reign, and the 69 year of his age. Q. Sosius Falco, and C.
Julius Erucius Clarus being Consuls.

36. Now, that we may briefly carry on the series of Ecclesiastical matters,
Bishops.
whence we left them. In the second year of M. Aurelius Philosophus died
Anicetus the Bishop of Rome and Soter being the 13th of this Sea succeeded him,
according to Damasus. In his 10th year Soter died, and was succeeded by
Eleutherius. In the 6th of Commodus died Eleutherius, on the 7th before the
Calends of June, Maternus and Bradua being Consuls, in which year Commodus and
Cleander to overturn the power of the Consulship created 25 Consuls, for which
Cleander was afterward punished, being carried to Rome amongst the worst sort
of slaves. In the following year Eleutherus was succeeded by Victor an African,
Commodus the fifth time, and Glabrio being Consuls. Touching the purity of the
Church of Rome at this time Aegesippus thus wrote. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 22.
When I came to Rome I stayed there till Anicetus was chosen Bishop, whose
Deacon was Eleutherius, whom Soter succeeded, and after him Eleutherius. In all
their successions, and in every one of their Cities its no otherwise than the
Law and the Prophets, and the Lord himself preached. Irenaeus also wrote: Now
Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 6.
Eleutherius was the 12th Bishop from the Apostles, after the same order, the
same Doctrine and Tradition of the Apostles truly taught in the Church at this
day continued in our time. From Marcus the first Bishop of Jerusalem from
amongst the Gentiles, some reckon 13 Bishops unto Narcissus, of whom are many
things reported. He Idem lib. 5. cap. 11. lib. 6. c. 8, 9.
was accused of an heinous crime, and although he was innocent, yet left he his
Church, and fled into the Wilderness, where he continued a long time. In the
mean while his accusers were wonderfully plagued from above to the example of
all perjured persons. After his departure Dios was Bishop unto the reign of
Severus, as is gathered from Epiphanius. After Cornelius was Idem lib. 4. c.
20. 24.
Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, he wrote of Elemental Institutions, and
dedicated them to Autolycus. Also against the Heresy of Hermogenes and
Marcion. After him followed Maximinus, and then Idem lib. 5. c. 19. 22.
Serapion. After Celadion in the Church of Alexandria, L. 4. c. 20. l. 5. c. 9.
Agrippas was Bishop about the 8th year of Marcus, and governed 12 years. Him
succeeded L. 5. c. 9. 20.
Julianus in the first of Commodus, and governed 10 years. Then followed L. 5.
c. 22. l. 6. c. 26.
Demetrius, who continued 43 years.

37. During the reign of Commodus were several Synodes or Councils held against
the Heresy of Montanus, and about the Celebration of Easter. Because before
this time Councils were but few, Councils.
we would not give any account of them in a scattered manner; but now shall
briefly recite from the first of all such as hapened until the end of
Commodus. The Acts 1.
Apostles immediately after the ascension of our Savior returned from Mount
Olivet to Jerusalem, and there assembled together for the election of one to
succeed in the room of Judas the Traitor, where they chose Mathias. This is the
first Council. The Acts 6.
second was summoned of the Apostles and Disciples at Jerusalem, about removing
the tumult risen betwixt the Graecians and Hebrews about their Widows, wherein
they chose seven Deacons as they are called by Ecclesiastical Writers. The Acts
15.
third was held by the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren at Jerusalem, concerning
circumcision and observation of the Law, where it was resolved, that the
faithful should abstain from blood, from that which is strangled, and from
fornication, the which they published by their Letters unto the Churches of
Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia. The fourth was held by James Bishop of Jerusalem,
Paul, Acts 21.
and the Elders at that City also, where for removing of suspicion, and
winning of the brethren, it was decreed, that Paul should clear and purify
himself according to the Law, yielding for some time to the Ceremonies of it.
After the death of James the Apostles from every quarter Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 11.
gathered themselves together at Jerusalem for the Election of a Bishop, and
chose Simon Cleopas. In an assembly of the Apostles, certain Canons were agreed
on, and published by Clemens as it is said. But Council. tom. 1.
those that now go for them are corrupt, the corruption of the Apostolical
constitutions, and of Ignatius his Epistles having proceeded from the same
hand, as reverend Usher shows in his Dissertation concerning the said
Epistles, who as to this matter is therein most worthy to be consulted. About
the time of Nerva the Emperor were two Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.
Synods summoned in Asia for reformation of the Churches, and Consecration of
Bishops, where St. John the Apostle being sent for was present. About the
beginning of Marcus Antoninus was a Synod at Idem l. 5. cap. 16.
Ancyra in Galatia, where the figments of Montanus were confuted by
Apollinarius. And there were held in Asia sundry Synods in which Montanus was
excommunicated, and his Heresy condemned. The brethren in Lib. 5. c. 3.
France also assembled together, and censured the opinions of Montanus, writing
to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, that he would maintain the Peace of the Church
there against such Heretics. Lib. 5. c. 19.
Serapion also Bishop of Antioch held a Synod there about the middle of
Commodus his reign, where together with many other Bishops he condemned the
Montanists, or their Heresy called the Phrygian Heresy, because Montanus was
of that Country. Not long after was held a Council at Idem l. 5. cap. 23.
Rome by Victor the Bishop about the Celebration of Easter, in Palaestine also,
in Pontus and Gall were Synods called about the same matter.

Controversy concerning Easter.
38. This controversy about Easter is mentioned by Eusebius not till the last
year of the 243 Olympiad, which fell in with the fourth of Severus; but
^appellus thinks it first arose in the first of the 242 Olympiad, and the
tenth of Commodus, wherein this feast was celebrated by the Jews, and the
Churches of Asia Minor, at a wrong time, as Theophilus Bishop of Caesaraea
thought, viz. by the Jews on the fifteenth of Nisan, March 20. but by the
Christians of Asia on the fourteenth of Nisan, March 19. on the fourth Feria,
three days before the Vernal Aequinox. Beda de natura rerum cap. 28. 46. and
de Aequinoctie.
Theophilus supposing that the Aequinox happened on March the 25. and that so it
ever did, and for this cause that the Sun was on that day created, and that
Christ arose again the same day, as also that the Lords Supper was instituted
on the 22 of March, contended that is was utterly against reason to prevent the
Epoche of the Aequinox so many days, and the day whereon the Lords Supper was
instituted. Wherefore he procured the Fathers of Palestine assembled in a
Synod, to make these Canons. 1. That never, except after March 21. 2. That
never but after the fourteenth Moon. 3. That never after April 24. 4. That
never except on the Lords day Easter should be celebrated; on that day which
next followed the fourteenth Moon happening next after March 21. Hereby he hoped
it would come to pass, that Easter would ever be observed within the month of
Aries. In the Synod of Palaestine where these Canons were made, the aforesaid
Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea, and Narcissus of Jerusalem presided. Of that at
Rome, Victor the Bishop was President. In that of Pontus, Palmas, as the most
ancient did govern. In that of the Bishops of Gall, Irenaeus presided. There
was another of the Bishops throughout Ostroena, and the Cities therein
contained; and especially held by Bauchillus Bishop of Corinth with many
others; all which says Eusebius with one and the same sentence and judgment
ordained the same Decree. With those also consented Cassius Bishop of Tire, and
Clarus Bishop of Ptolemais. They affirmed that it was the Apostolic tradition
and custom as yet retained, that the fasting days should be broken up on no
other day than that wherein our Savior arose from the dead. And the Church of
Alexandria celebrated Easter on the self-same day with them.

39. But all the Churches throughout Asia, as of an ancient tradition thought
good to observe the high-feast of Easter in the 14th Moon, on which day the
Jews were commanded to offer their Paschal Lamb. As much as to say, that upon
what day soever in the week that Moon fell, the fasting days were finished and
ended. Polycrates of Ephesus, chief of these Bishops, in his Epistle to the
Church of Rome, shows the custom of Asia observed unto his time, in these
words. We observe the unviolated day of Easter, neither adding any thing
thereto, neither taking any thing from it. For notable pillars of Christian
Religion have rested in Asia, which shall arise at the last day when the Lord
shall come home from Heaven with glory, and restore all the Saints to joy.
Philip, one of the twelve Apostles now lying at Hierapolis, and his two
daughters, who kept themselves Virgins all the days of their lives, the third
also after the end of her holy conversation rested at Ephesus. John also, who
lay on the Lord's breast, and wore the Priestly Attire, both a Martyr and a
Doctor slept at Ephesus. Moreover, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and a Martyr.
Thraseas an Eumenian, both a Bishop and a Martyr slept at Smyrna. What shall I
speak of Sagaris, both a Bishop and a Martyr lying at Laodicea? Also of blessed
Papirius and Melito an Eunuch, who was led and guided in all things he did by
the holy Ghost, and now rests at Sardis, waiting the message from Heaven when
he shall arise from the dead. All these celebrated the Feast of Easter,
according to the Gospel, in the fourteenth Moon, swarving no where, but
observing the rule of faith. To be short, and I Polycrates the meanest of you
all do retain the tradition of my forefathers, of which also I have imitated
some. For there were seven Bishops before me, and I am the 8th which always
have celebrated the Feast of Easter on that day in which the people remove the
leaven from amongst them. I therefore (my brethren) who now have lived 65 years
in the Lord, have conferred with the brethren throughout the World, and have
read, and overread the holy Scriptures, yet will not be moved at all with those
things which are made to terrify us. For my Ancestors and Elders have said
that we ought rather to obey God than men. Afterward he speaks of the
Bishops that consented, and subscribed to his Epistle, after this manner: I
could repeat the Bishops that were present, whom you requested me to assemble,
whom also I have assembled together, whose names if I should write would grow
unto a great number; they have visited me a simple Soul, and a man of small
account, and have consented to this Letter. They also know that I bear not
these gray hairs in vain, but always have had my conversation in Christ Jesus.

40. Immediately upon this, Victor Bishop of Rome went about to sever from the
unity in the Communion all the Churches of Asia, together with the adjoining
Congregations, as savoring not aright, and inveyed against them in his
Epistles, and pronounced flatly all the brethren there for excommunicated
persons. But this not pleasing all the Bishops, they exhorted him to seek after
those things which concerned peace, unity, and love between brethren. Their
words are at this day extant (says Eusebius) that sharply reprehended Victor.
Victor Bishop of Rome sharply reprehended.
Of which number Irenaeus in the name of all the brethren in Gall that were
under his charge, wrote, and allowed the same sentence, viz. The Mystery of the
resurrection of our Savior to be celebrated on the Sunday only. Yet as it was
very meet he put him in mind at large of his duty, that he should not estrange,
or cut off all the Churches of God, which retained the tradition of old custom.
He told him, that there was not only a controversy about the day, but also
the kind or manner of fasting, that this variety began long before their time;
yet for all this they were at unity one with another, for this variety of
fasting, says he, commends the unity of faith. He told him, that his
Predecessors in the Sea of Rome, Anicetus, Dius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, and
Xistus, neither did so observe it themselves, neither left any such commandment
unto posterity, and yet they were at unity with them which resorted to them
from other Churches, and did observe the same. Polycarpus being at Rome in the
time of Anicetus, they varied between themselves about trifling matters, yet
were they soon reconciled, and not a word of this matter. Neither was Anicetus
able to persuade Polycarpus that he should not retain that which he had always
observed with John the Disciple of our Lord, and the rest of the Apostles with
whom he had been conversant: neither did Polycarpus persuade Anicetus to
observe it, but told him he ought to keep the ancient custom of the Elders whom
he succeeded. These things being at this point, they communicated one with
another. And in the Church Anicetus granted the Eucharist unto Polycarpus (or
as Ruffinus understands it, granted the ministration of the Communion to him)
for the reverence he owed him, and in the end they parted in peace; and all
such as retained contrary observations throughout the whole universal Church
held fast the bond of Love and Unity. Thus Irenaeus, not degenerating from the
Etymology of his name, and passing all others in the gift of reconciling the
brethren, practiced for Ecclesiastical peace. He wrote not only to Victor, but
also to sundry Governors of diverse other Churches, in several Epistles
concerning the said Controversy.

41. Thus do we see the first controversies about this Feast of Easter.
Although the hypotheses of Theophilus concerning the Aequinoctial will not
abide trial, yet doubtless, those had more reason on their side, who intending
to celebrate the resurrection of Christ, refused to do it, but on that day he
rose from the dead; the other practice seeming to have risen from a custom of
keeping the Passover at that time, by such as were originally of the Jewish
Nation. Notwithstanding they differed about time and manner, yet before the
government of Victor, we see they agreed in brotherly love. And it appears
that the custom of observing this Feast, was most ancient, even in the Apostles
days, as appears from what is said by Polycrates, and by Irenaeus, in behalf
of Polycarpus. Though they differed in the manner about keeping it, yet we do
not find that any denied it was to be kept at all, although they were also for
the true and spiritual observation of it, and against abuses, as all good
Christians have reason to be. But (that we may conclude this controversy) in
process of time both they of Asia and others, leaving their own customs,
admitted of the Paschal Canons, made by the Orientals, especially by those of
Palaestine and Alexandria. At length few dissenters remaining, a necessity of
obedience was imposed by Constantine, who herein followed the judgment of two
Synods, viz. that of Arelatum or Aries, A. D. 314, and the other of Nice, A. D.
325. But (that we may note thus much by way of Anticipation) The ancient
British Church as it seems submitted not to those Decrees, observing Easter
from the fourteenth to the twentieth Moon, which computation, says Eccles.
Hist. Ang. l. 2. c. 2.
Beda, is contained within the Circle of 84. years. And for this, when they
would not comply with Augustine the Monk (who had been sent from Gregory the
Great Bishop of Rome to convert the Saxons, and was made by him the first
Archbishop of Canterbury) who sought to draw them to uniformity, 1200 Monks of
Bangor were put to the sword (whether through procurement of Augustine or no, I
shall not now determine) by King Ethelfrid, A. D. 603, the Scots also then
inhabiting Ireland observed Easter at the same time as the Britains did, to
whom therefore Laurentius the Successor of Augustine in the Sea of Canterbury
wrote, to drive them from their singularities. But how much be hereby profited,
the present times do yet declare, says Ubi supra c. 4.
Beda, who lived A. D. 700.

42. And being thus occasionally brought to Britain, we must observe in behalf
of our native Country, that the thick mists of superstition being scattered,
When Britain received the Christian Faith.
in the reign of Commodus (not under M. Aurelius and L. Verus, as Beda writes)
when Eleutherus was Bishop of Rome, the heavenly light and brightness of
Christianity, by the means of King Lucius shone upon this Island. This Prince
admiring the holy life of Christians, made petition unto Eleutherus by
mediation of Elvan and Meduan, Britains, that both himself and his Subjects
might be instructed in the Christian Religion. He sent forthwith Fugatius and
Donaitanus, two holy men, with letters, which at this day, says Cambden, be
extant, and, as very many be persuaded, not forged, but Authentical, as bearing
date when L. Aurelius Commodus the second time, and Vespronius were Consuls.
This Vespronius was Vespronius Candidus, whom Onuphrius and Baronius make the
Colleague of Commodus in the first year of his Fathers reign, though an
Inscription of Gruterus mentions Aurelius Verus; so that to the very first
beginning of Commodus the preaching of these men is to be ascribed. These holy
men instructed the King and others in the mysteries of Christian Religion.
Hereupon Ninnius writes: King Lucius is surnamed Lever Maur, that is, a Prince
of great glory, for the Faith which in his time came. Now such as call the
being of this King into question, for that they think there was at this time no
King in Britain, which was wholly and fully reduced into a Province before;
Cambden wishes to remember, That the Romans had by ancient custom in their
Provinces, Kings, as the instruments of their bondage, that the Britains even
then refused to obey Commodus, and that they themselves possessed and held
freely those parts of the Island, which were beyond the aforesaid wall, and had
there Kings of their own, and that Antoninus Pius a few years before, having
put an end to War, permitted Kingdoms to be ruled by their own Kings, and
Provinces by their own Comites. He cites Tertullian, who much about this time
wrote, that Those places amongst the Britains which yielded the Romans no
access, are now subdued unto Christ. Britain is enclosed within the compass
of the Ocean. The Nation of the Mauri, and the barbarous Getulians are beset by
the Romans, for fear they might pass beyond the limits of their Countries.
What should I speak of the Romans, who with Garrisons of their Legions fortify
their Empire? neither are they able to extend the power of their Dominion
beyond these very Nations. But the Kingdom and Name of Christ reaches further
still, it is believed in every place, and is worshipped of all those People
above named, etc.

43. But our Ecclesiastical Writers (thus Cambden proceeds) who have employed
both time and diligence in the consideration of this point, endeavor and
labor to prove, and that out of ancient Fathers of credit, that before this
time, in the very dawning and infancy of the Church, Britain had received
Christian Religion: and namely that Joseph of Arimathea, a Noble Senator,
sailed out of Gall into Britain, and that Claudia Rufina the wife of Aulus
Pudens (which woman as is credibly thought St. Paul names in his later Epistle
to Timothy) and whom the Poet Martial so highly commends, was a Britain born.
They cite the testimony of Dorotheus, who commonly goes under the name of the
Bishop of Tire, who in his Synopsis has recorded, that Simon Zelotes having
traveled through Mauritiana, was at last slain and buried in Britain, as also
that Aristobulus, whom St. Paul mentions in his Epistle to the Romans, was
made Bishop of Britain (to which Nicephorus inclines) notwithstanding he
speaks of Britiana and not of Britania. They report likewise upon the
authority of Simeon, that great Metaphrast, and of the Menology of the Greeks,
that St. Peter came hither and spread abroad the Light of Gods Word: out of
Sophronius also and Theodoret, that St. Paul after his second imprisonment in
Rome, visited this our Country. Whereupon Transiit Oceanum and qua facit insula
portum Quasque Britannus habet terras quasque ultima Thule.
Venantius Fortunatus wrote of him, (except he speaks of his Doctrine) if he
may be believed as a Poet. But to this purpose, says our Author, makes
especially, that which ere-while I alleged out of Tertullian, as also that
which Origin records, how The Britains with one consent embraced the Faith,
and made way themselves to God by means of the Druidae, who did always beat
upon this Article of Belief, That there is but one God. And verily of great
moment is that with me, which Gildas writes, after he had mentioned the
rebellion of Boodicia, and treated of the revenge thereof. In the mean while,
says he, Christ that true sun shining with his most glittering brightness
upon the universal World, not from the temporal sky and firmament, but even
from the highest cope of Heaven, exceeding all times, vouchsafed first his
beams, that is to say, his precepts and doctrine, in the time, as we know, of
Tiberius Caesar, unto this frozen Island full of ice, and lying out as it were
in a long tract of earth remote from the visible Sun. Chrysostom likewise, to
note so much by the way, writes of the Christian Religion in this Island as
follows. The British Islands seated without this Sea, and within the very
Ocean, have felt the power of the Word (for even there also be Churches
founded, and Altars erected) of that Word I say, which is planted in the Souls,
and now also in the lips of all People. And the same Chrysostom in another
place: How often have People in Britain fed of man's flesh? but now with fasting
they refresh the Soul. Likewise St. Hierome: The Britain divided from our
World, if he proceed in Religion, leaving the Western parts toward the Suns
setting, will seek Jerusalem, a City known to him by form only, and relation
of Scriptures.

44. As for Heretics which lived in the time with the forementioned Bishops,
Heretics.
and the reigns of Marcus and Commodus: There were the Secundians, called so
from Secundus, who together with Epiphanes and Isidorus taught the same with
Valentinus. In life they were beastly, all women among them were common: they
denied the resurrection of the flesh. Ptolomaeus of whom were named the
Ptolomaei, Epiphan. August. de haeresibus. Eusebius.
taught the heretical opinions of the Gnostics and of Valentinus, adding
thereunto of his own certain heathenish doctrines out of Homer. Marcus of whom
the Marcosii, Colorbasus of whom the Colorbasii, and Heracleon of whom the
Heretics were called Heracleonites, sacrifized with witchcraft; to amaze their
auditory they pronounced Hebrew words. Many women coming to Church, under
color of receiving the power of Prophecy from them, confessed they were abused
by them. Marcus ran away with another man's wife. They poured oil and water upon
the head of the deceased, hoping so to redeem them. They said, that the life
and generation of man consisted in seven Stars: that Christ suffered not
indeed, and that there was no resurrection of the flesh. Alcibiades refraining
the use of Gods Creatures, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 3.
was reformed by Attalus the Martyr. Archonitici, Heretics in Palestine,
referred all things unto man's powers. They said, the Sabbath was the God of the
Jews, and the Devil the son of the Sabbath. L. 4. c. 27.
Tatianus the Scholar of Justin Martyr gave original to the Encratitae, so
called from continency. For they abhorred marriage, forbad the use of living
creatures, offered water instead of wine in the Sacrament, and denied that Adam
was saved. Severus of whom were named the Severians, added to the opinions of
Tatianus, reviling Paul, rejecting his Epistles, and the Acts of the Apostles.
He said, that a woman was of the Devil, that man from the middle upwards was of
God, and beneath of the Devil. Apelles, Pontinus, and other Marcionites, about
this time also disturbed the Peace of the Church.

45. Epiphan. Aug.
There were also certain Heretics of Galatia and Cappadocia called Pepuzians,
as also Quintiliani and Priscilliani, because they said, that Christ in form of
a woman being the bedfellow of Quintilla or Pricilla, revealed unto her Divine
Mysteryes. Women were Priests amongst them, and their sacrifices were alike to
the Montanists, of which Sect they seem to have been, seeing also his
Prophetesses were of the Town Pepuza. Artotyritae were Heretics which offered
bread and cheese in the Sacrament. Alogi denied Christ to be the Word,
condemned John's Gospel, and said, that Cerinthus the Heretic wrote the
Revelations. Theodotus a Montanist through Sorcery took his flight toward
Heaven, but down he fell and died miserably. Adamites devised a Church after
the fashion of an hot-house, to keep them from cold for the space of an hour or
Service time: they were all naked men and women: Virgins preached unto the
rest: their Church they called Paradise, and themselves Adam and Eve. Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 14, 19.
Florinus and Blastus fell from the Church, and taught at Rome, that God was
the Author of evil, whom Irenaeus confuted. L. 5. c. 28.
Theodotus a Tanner denied the Divinity of Christ: he was the first Author of
the Heresy of Artemon, for which cause Viator Bishop of Rome excommunicated
him. Artemon his disciple accounted Christ but a bare and naked man. He lived
in the time of Victor and Zephyrinus. His companions were Asclepiodorus and
Natalius, who repented and fell at the feet of Zephyrinus Bishop of Rome for
absolution. Lib. 6. c. 12.
Marcianus the Heretic maintained an heterodox opinion, out of the pretended
Gospel of Peter, whom Serapion Bishop of Antioch confuted. Epiphan. haeres. 57.
Noetus denied there were three Persons, saying, All three were one. He called
himself Moses, and said, Aaron was his brother. He said, the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, suffered in the flesh.

CHAP. V. From the death of Pertinax, and the exposing of the Empire to sale,
to the death of Maximinus the first elected Emperor without consent of the
Senate, the space of 45 years.
1. THE Soldiers having murdered Pertinax, got them to their Camp, Herodian. l.
2.
and set the Empire to sale, proclaming, that they would prefer him that should
offer most. Two there were found who bade money for it: first Sulpicianus a man
of Consular dignity, Governor of the City, and Father in Law to Pertinax, and
Didius Julianus of the same degree, a great Lawyer, and exceeding rich. The
Soldiers being jealous lest the former should have an intention to punish them
for the murder of Pertinax, accepted the offer of Julianus, who promised what
they would ask, having, as he said, treasures of Silver and Gold. Didius
Julianus purchases the Empire.
Being by a ladder received up to the wall, and so into the Camp, he promised
to restore the honors and statues of Commodus, to grant them what liberty they
enjoyed under that Prince, and to give them more than they cold ask or expect,
he was carried into the Palace, the people by the way cursing and upbraiding him
with his purchase. Having thus invaded the Empire, he gave himself up to all
Luxury, but being unable to perform his promise to the Soldiers, lost their
favor, and fell into the contempt of all men, the people desiring another
Prince. At this time Pescenninus Niger was Governor of Syria, who as well for
the greatness of his place (his Province containing all from Phoenicia unto
Euphrates) as for his popularity, was most eminent: him did the People extol,
and they implored his assistance. He being glad of this opportunity, easily
persuaded his Soldiers to accept of him for their Emperor, and entertained
Ambassadors which now had recourse to him as the lawful Prince. But then giving
himself up to idleness, he neglected to setle and confirm his estate by going
to Rome, and (what was more) by drawing the Army in Illyricum to his side, and
so lost all.

2. At this time governed both the Pannoniaes L. Septimius Severus an African
born, a man forward and crafty, who seeing the Roman Empire thus obnoxious to
every man's catch, resolved to venture for it amongst the rest, especially in
regard that of those two who had seized on it, the one was negligent and
secure, the other hated and despised. Being also encouraged by some dreams, he
first of all inveighed against the Praetorian bands which had killed Pertinax,
whom knowing to be much beloved by his Soldiers, he highly extolled him, and
easily persuaded them to revenge his death, who once was Lieutenant of the
forces in Illyricum. Then presently (though he pretended he sought it not) was
he saluted Emperor, and took upon him the name of Pertinax, which he knew was
acceptable to all. After this he marched with great speed to Rome, the Italians
(who ever since the days of Augustus had not been used to War) receiving him
in all places, and Julianus his Soldiers very slowly providing for resistance,
though he had now distributed to them all the money he could by any means
compass. Severus conveyed his Soldiers in a disguised manner into the City,
which was full of them privily armed ere Julianus or the People were aware;
whereupon Julianus wrote to him, to signify he was willing to receive him into
participation of the Empire, and afterward desired he might resign it. For the
Senate seeing him so timorous, and the other now at hand, being called together
according to the ancient custom by the Consuls, decreed death to him, and the
Empire to Severus. Julianus held the dignity seven months, having purchased
death at an excessive rate.

Severus obtains it.
3. Severius having thus obtained the Empire, that he might not at first crack
his credit by falsifying his word, got those Soldiers into his power that had
slain Pertinax, and making them be stripped of their Military Clothes, banished
them 100 miles from the City. Then entering the Court, Olymp. 243. ann. 1. V.C.
946. A. D. 193.
he promised great things to the Senate, professing his intention was to govern
after the prescript of Marcus, and not only to take the name, but also
disposition of Pertinax, although there were some who so well knew him that
they could not be deceived. After this he prepared for an expedition against
Niger, but fearing to leave an Aemulator at his back, he endeavored to prevent
him. This was Clodius Albinus, who at this time governed Britain, was of
Patrician rank, and had a strong Army at his Command. He flattered him with the
title of Caesar, beseeching him, as the fittest person, to take care of the
Empire, for that he himself grew old, and his Children were Infants. Albinus
overjoyed that he should obtain what he had desired without any trouble, fooled
himself in his vain confidence, especially for that Severus had written to the
Senate in the same strain, had ordered money to be stamped with his Image,
erected him some Statues, and did him honor otherwise, to deceive him.

4. Niger much troubled at his coming toward him, Lege Herodian. lib. 3.
Eutrop. lib. 9. Aurelium Victorem. Xiphil. ex Dione. Orosium lib. 7. cap. 17.
took care for securing the passages into Asia, gathered together all the
forces in those parts, obtained aid from the Parthian and Atrenian Kings,
seized on Byzantium, and fortified the straights of the Mountain Taurus.
Severus therefore directed not his course toward Byzantium, but marched for
Cyzicus, where Aemilianus General to Niger met him, and either for that he was
overmatched, or desirous to save his Children (whom Severus, as also others of
his adversaries had got into his hands) betrayed his trust, and lost his Army.
Then did Severus invade Bithynia, wherein they of Nicomedia revolted to him;
but the Inhabitants of Nice stuck close to Niger: thence he proceeded into
Galatia, and so into Cappadocia to pass over Taurus. The passage was so
fortified and defended, that no hope there was of breaking through, till
abundance of Rainwater falling down from the Mountains broke down the Wall,
whereupon the Defendants fled. Then came Niger with an Army very numerous, but
not to be compared with the Legions of Illyricum for skill and valor, and they
met at Issus, where Darius was overthrown by Alexander. Suppresseth Niger,
Here Niger had the same fortune in a great and bloody battle, after which
going back to Antioch, and being pursued by a party of horse, his head was cut
off, having brought himself to this end by his delay and idleness. Severus
having thus removed him, now cast his thoughts toward his friend in Britain.

5. He now consulted how he might secure the Empire to his family, which could
not be done as long as Albinus continuing Caesar had some title to it, and to
whom in his absence the great ones had demonstrated their affections, as to a
man of great nobility, and far more worthy of the Sovereignty than he who at
present possessed it: he therefore resolved to remove him out of the way. By
open War he thought it not convenient to do it, and therefore at first
attempted his design by treachery, sending some who under color of bringing
Letters should make him away. Albinus having warning to beware of him, this
succeeded not, so that he betook himself to force, and with incredible
expedition returned into the West. Albinus terrified at his hasty retreat made
all possible Provision for resistance, and passed over into Gaul, where after
many skirmishes they joined in a pitched battle near Lugdunum. And Albinus.
Victory at the first so far inclined toward Albinus, that Severus cast off
his Robe, and hid himself, but by the coming in of Laetus, who designed to
destroy them both, and set up for himself, the fight was so changed, that
Albinus was routed, and flying to the City, there had his head struck off.
Then returned Severus to Rome with all his Army, which to reward, he not only
bestowed money upon them, but also such privileges, which though to him they
might procure respect and service, yet proved the bane of the Commonwealth. For
the Soldiers having formerly through the loosnesse and neglect of some
Emperors, contracted sloth and covetousness, were thence more animated to
violate the Sovereignty, to depose, and set upon whom they pleased. Now he
adding more fuel to this flame increased their allowance of Corn, gave them
license to wear Rings of Gold as Knights, and to marry and maintain wives,
which broke in pieces the Relics of the ancient Discipline, and effected that
we shall hear more of them upon very sad occasions.

6. He made another expedition into the East to be revenged upon such as had
assisted Niger. Peircing into Arabia he besieged Atrae the Metropolis of the
Atraevi; but found such entertainment as glad he was to retreat without any
thing performed, and only by chance as some say saved his reputation. For in
his return being driven by Tempests into Parthia, His success in the East.
he was constrained to land near Ctesiphon, the chief City where Artabanus the
King then resided. Artabanus struck with the suddenness of the thing fled
amain, and Severus taking the City with ease, got great Treasures, with
multitudes of Captives, and returned to Rome in a Triumphant manner, having
more by good fortune than policy achieved this Enterprise. When he had done
these great things abroad, and (considering the Princes by him defeated, and
the wonderful expedition he used at all times) had approached near unto the
greatest Military glory of the most famous Captains, he lay idle at home, or
spending his time in judicial affairs he let fall the vizard of goodness,
which in the beginning he had put on. His extraordinary covetousness increased
his innate cruelty, so that under pretense of taking off his Enemies, he put to
death unheard 43 persons of chiefest rank. His Vices.
In despite of the Senate he Canonized Commodus for a God, cast Narcissus, who
strangled him (as he had deserved) to the Lions, called himself his brother,
and to his son Bassianus, whom he made partner with him in the Empire, he gave
the surname of Antoninus. The fifth persecution.
His cruelty was also extended to the Church, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 1.
etc.
against which he raised the fifth persecution in the 10th year of his reign,
wherein perished many.

7. Severus after the overthrow of Albinus, sent first Heraclianus to seize
upon Britain, and to rule it: then Virius Lupus as Propraetor and Lieutenant
(whom Ulpian the Lawyer calls President of Britain) who being wearied with
the inrodes and insolences of the Maeatae, Coming into Britain.
sent for the Emperor himself over. He was glad of this occasion, not only
for desire of glory, but also to draw away with him his two sons from the
City, where they gave up themselves to licentious rioting, and exercised
irreconcilable enmity betwixt themselves. The Britains sent Ambassadors to him
to beg peace, but he detained them till he had made sufficient Provision for
War, and then dismissed them without granting their requests. Leaving his son
Geta (whom at his arrival he also created Augustus) in the hithermost part of
the Province (which continued in obedience) for the civil Jurisdiction and
Administration of affairs there; he himself with Antoninus went into the
further parts, where being busied in cutting down Woods, making Bridges, and
drying up the Meers, he fought no battle, but what with the Enemies
ambuscadoes, and with sickness lost 50000 men, according to Dio. Herodian
writes that the Britains found him work enough, being able to retreat where
the Romans could not follow by reason of the Fens, which the Natives easily
passed being naked, very nimble and skillful in the places, so that by
ambuscadoes laid in the Caledonian Forest, and through the unwholesomnesse of
the Meerish grounds he lost many thousands of his men; but he forced them to
Peace with delivery of a good part of their Country and their Arms. For these
victories he stamped certain pieces of money with this inscription Victoria
Britanica, assumed the surname of Britanicus Maximus, and his son Geta was also
surnamed Britanicus, as appears by his Coins, says Cambden. But shortly
after they revolted, whereupon he brake out into such a rage that he gave his
Soldiers charge to make a general Massacre of them all, and returning, though
much tormented with the Gout, against them raised a Wall 130 miles in length
cross the Island to separate betwixt the Barbarians and Romans, which
Bassianus afterward increased. When he had in some sort repressed the Rebels,
he sickned, not so much out of any bodily distemper, as for grief, and sorrow
of mind, by reason of the desperate and unreclaimable demeanor of his son
Antoninus, who once or twice gave the attempt to kill him with his own hand.
Here he dies.
These were his last words: A troubled State of the Commonwealth I found in
every place, but I leave it in peace and quietness even amongst the Britains.
He died at Eboracum, now called York (having tried as he Omnia fui and nihil
expedit.
said all sorts of lives, and condemned all of vanity) on the day before the
Nones of February, having reigned 18 years, and almost lived 66. A. V. C. 964.
A. D. 211. Q. Epidius Rufus and Pomponius Bassus being Consuls.

8. Severus his body was in a Military sort carried forth by his Soldiers to
the funeral fire, and honored with a solemn justing and running at tilt
performed by his Sons and Soldiers. He was also Canonized a god after the
ordinary manner of the Apotheosis of the Roman Emperors; which being not
formerly touched its convenient in this place to describe, as we have it from
Herodian. A custom, says he, Lib. 4. ad initium.
the Romans have to consecrate those Emperors that die, their sons or
successors surviving. And whosoever are thus honored, be canonized, and
registered in the Roll of their Divi or gods. During this complement they hold a
general mourning through the whole City, and the same mixed with a festival
solemnity. The manner of the Apotheosis of the Roman Emperors.
For the dead body they bury with a sumptuous funeral, according to the manner
of other men. But they frame an Image of wax, resembling in all points the
party deceased, and lay the same openly at the Entry of the Palace, upon a most
ample and stately bed of Ivory erected on high, and covered with Cloth of
Gold. And verily that Image lies with a pale color like unto a sick man.
About the bed there sits a good part of the day the whole body of the Senate on
the left hand arrayed in their blacks; and on the right hand certain Matrones
honorable by the Dignity of their Husbands or Parents. And there is not one of
them seen to wear any Gold about them, nor to be adorned with Jewels, but clad
in white and slender Garments they represent mourners. This they do for seven
days together: during which time the Physicians resort daily to him to feel
his pulse, and consider of his disease, and thereupon as of their Patient
judicially pronounce that he grows worse and worse. Then when he seems to
be dead, certain of the noblest, and most choice young men, as well of
Senatorian as Equestrian rank, take up the bed, and carry it through the Via
Sacra into the old Forum, where the Roman Magistrates were wont to lay down
their Offices. Here on both sides are certain steps raised in manner of stairs;
upon which on the one hand are placed a quire of boys of noblest birth and
Patritian dignity, and on the other a Company of women of noble parentage,
singing in commendation of the deceased Prince, Hymns and Sonets tuned to a
solemn and mournful note.

9. These things done, they take up the bed or hearse again, and carry it out
of the City into the Campus Martius, where in the broadest place thereof a
frame or turret apiece, with equal sides, is raised, and made in manner of
a Tabernacle, of no other matter than great pieces of Timber. Now this within
is all filled with dry fuel: but without adorned with rich hangings interwoven
with Gold wire, with diverse Ivory portraicts of Imagery, and sundry curious
pictures. Over this frame stood another somewhat less; but in form and
furniture like unto the former, with windows and doors standing open. And so a
third, and fourth Turret, smaller every one than that next beneath it, and
others like it still one after another, till you come to the last, which is the
least of all the rest. The manner of this building you may compare to those
Lanterns, or light Towers standing by Haven sides, and commonly called Phari,
which give light by fire in the night time, and direct ships at Sea in their
course to safe Harbors. The Hearse then being mounted up into the second
Tabernacle, they get together spices, and odours of all sorts, as also all the
sweet smelling fruits, herbs, juyces, and liquors, that the whole World will
affoard, and thereon pour them by heaps. For there is no Nation, City, or
State, nor any person of rank and quality, but strive every one to bestow in
honor of the Prince, these last gifts and presents. Now when there is a mighty
heap of spices raised, and the whole room is therewith filled, then all of
Knights degree first ride about the aedifice, marching in a certain measure:
and therewith in their courses and recourses observe a Warlike kind of motion
round, in just measure and number. Chariots are also driven about by such, as
sitting in them are clothed in purple, and represent all the famous Roman
Captains and Emperors. These things thus performed, he that succeeds in the
Empire takes a torch, and sets it to the tabernacle: then all the rest on every
side put fire under, and every place being filled with that dry fuel and
odors, instantly are taken with a vehement fire. Then presently from the last
and least tabernacle, as from some high turret, when the fire is put
underneath, an Eagle is let fly, which is believed to carry the Princes Soul
up into Heaven. And so from that time forward the Emperor is adored amongst
the rest of the gods.

10. Lege Herodian. l. 4. Aurel. Vict. Spartian Eutrop. l. 9. Dion. lib. 77.
Orosium l. 7. c. 8.
Severus left his two son Antoninus Bassianus (called also Caracalla from a
barbarous habit he gave to the people, as Spartianus writes) and Geta equal
sharers in the Empire. They after his death left not off their former
contentions, but increased them to that height, that they could neither live
nor reign together, but thought of parting the Empire betwixt them; but their
mother Julia (Spartianus makes her the stepmother of Antoninus, and to have
loved him better than her own son Geta, nay filthily, insomuch that she married
him afterward) by her passionate interposition hindered it. They then betook
themselves to secret conspiracies, which succeeding not, Antoninus resolved
though it were by open force to kill his brother, whom he perceived to be far
better beloved than himself, and either breaking into his brothers chamber,
Bassianus having killed his brother, cruelly rages against others.
or getting in by his mothers means, under pretense of reconciliation to be
made, killed him in her bosom. This done, he secured the Empire to him by
bribing the Soldiers, to whom he was so profuse, that in one day he bestowed on
them, what his father had been unjustly scraping together for eighteen years.
Then falling like a savage beast into cruel courses, he cut off all Geta's
friends and acquaintance, all the Senators of any considerable rank or wealth,
the Lieutenants and Governors of Provinces, with the Vestal Nuns, and set the
Soldiers to kill the people beholding the Circensian Games. After this going
into Germany, to please his Army he lived an hard and laboring life; and
thence passing into Thrace, Olymp. 247. an. 4. V.C. 965. A. D. 212. Bassiani 2.
he there imitated Alexander the Great, whom he ever much affected to talk of,
and pretended to emulate. He went thence to Ilium, were he counterfeited
Achilles, and so to Alexandria, where he made the Inhabitants dearly repent of
their rashness and folly.

11. Being naturally given to much tatling, they had formerly railed against
him for his cruelty toward his brother, and despised him, for that being a man
of so contemptible stature, he compared himself to their Alexander. Resolving
then to be revenged on them, he first entertained them very plausibly, but
afterward drawing forth all the youth by a wile, he compassed them in with his
Army, and killed them all. After this desirous to become famous by some great
exploit, he sent to the Parthian for his Daughter, and pretended that he
himself would come and mary her, whereby that King being persuaded to meet him
with a great number of people, he fell upon them and made a great slaughter,
for that they thought it needless to come armed to a wedding; and Artabanus
himself with difficulty escaped. Getting here much booty, and as he thought
much glory, he returned into Mesopotamia, where he received punishment from
above, for his manifold cruelty. There was one Opilius Macrinus an African
born, and one of his Captains, whom he unworthily used. This Macrinus receiving
a letter from Maternianus directed to the Emperor (who had commanded him to
call together the Magicians, and consult them about his end, and whether any
lay in wait for the Empire) wherein Antoninus was advised to cut him off, as
aiming at the Sovereignty, when he had ventured to open it, perceiving that
either he or his Master must dye, and therefore procured one Martialis to kill
him. This man being enraged against the Emperor, for that he had condemned his
brother without sufficient hearing, slew him as he was making water, on the
sixth of the Ides of April, after he had reigned six years, and two months, in
the first year of the 249 Olympiad, A. V. C. 970. A. D. 217, Brutius Praesens
and Extricatus being Consuls. Amongst many others Caracallus put to death
Papinianus the great Lawyer, as its said, because he would not defend his
paricide.

12. In the first year of Severus (that we may continue our method concerning
Ecclesiastical matters) died Victor Bishop of Rome, Bishops.
on the fifth of the Calends of August, and Zephirinus succeeded, the fifteenth
Bishop of that Sea, according to Damasus. In the last of Antoninus Bassianus,
Zepherinus died on the seventh before the Calends of September. The Sea was
vacant five days. Then succeeded Callistus, who therefore was elected, the day
before the Calends of September, on the first feria. After Dios Bishop of
Jerusalem whom the Bishops of the neighboring Churches had ordained after the
departure of Narcissus, Germanion succeeded, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 10.
and after him Gordius, in whose time Narcissus showed himself again, as if he
had been risen from the dead, and was entreated by the brethren to enjoy his
Bishopric, being much marvelled at for his departure, for his Philosophical
course of life, and especially for the vengance and plagues of God poured upon
his accusers. And because for his great age he was not able to supply the
place, Alexander Bishop of Cappadocia was joined with him, and governed alone
after his death. In the Church of Antioch, Asclepiades was Bishop after
Serapion, about the first year of Caracalla, and was succeeded by Philetus
about the last of that Prince's reign.

13. Upon Zepherinus Bishop of Rome falls very foul Tertullian a Presbyter or
Priest of Carthage in Africa, for that he was more severe against such, as
through fear had sacrifized to Idols, than against Whoremongers and Adulterers,
wherein not without cause truly (says Cappellus) but yet without measure he
blames Zepherinus, and the whole Roman Clergy, the manners of whom were even
now very corrupt, if we may believe Tertullian. But really not so much out of
hatred to their vices, as out of prejudice to the truth he calls the Roman
Clergy Psychicus, Tertullian.
as well in his book de pudicitia, as in that de monogamia, which he thus
begins, Haeretici nuptias auferunt Psychici ingerunt. He pretends therein
only to condemn second marriages, but indeed most of his arguments respect both
first and second, although he himself had married a wife, and retained her in
his Presbytery. But marriage which he had learnt of the Orthodox to approve, he
learnt of Montanus to despise, to whom he would have more revealed than to the
Apostles, because they as yet (or for certain the Church) could not bear the
yoke of fastings and caelibate which Montanus brought in, and he as a Montanist
would inculcate. This humor at length so possessed him, that neither content
with the title of Christian, nor that of Presbyter, he put on the Philosophic
Pallium, as a token of a more austere life, wherein he would be eminent not
only amongst Christians but also Montanists. The Africans either being amazed
or laughing at this novelty, he wrote an elegant but most obscure Book de
pallio, which before being miserably lacerated, has been of late days
restored by the most learned Salmasius. He wrote his Book de praescriptionibus
about the eighth year of Commodus, as Cappellus gathers, because in the end
thereof making a Catalogue of Heretics, he mentions Theodotus (who was
censured by Victor Bishop of Rome, for holding Christ to have been a meet man)
but not Artemon the Heretic who appeared shortly after.

14. His book de corona militis acquainteth us with the occasion of the
persecution of the Christians, in the reign of Severus. The Emperor ere he
marched into the East (in that Expedition wherein he overthrew the Parthians)
made his elder son his partner in the Tribunitial power, and by his liberality
pleased the People formerly enraged by the many punishments he inflicted. By
occasion of this liberality, as it seems, a Christian Soldier holding a
certain garland or crown in his hand, as if it were wickedness for him to set
it on his head as the rest did, was asked why he did so, and answered, that he
was a Christian. This was the occasion of the Emperors rage. About the
fifteenth of Severus he wrote against the Mancionites, whom he so impugneth, as
yet underhand he inculcareth his Mont^nism. For says he: Amongst us spiritual
reason derived from the Comforter, persuades in the Faith single matrimony.
But we must not forget, that about the fourth of Severus he wrote a most
excellent Apology for the Christian Faith. Clemens Alexandrians.
At the same time with Tertullian flourished Clemens Alexandrinus, because a
Philosopher of Alexandria, the Scholar of Pantenus, and Master of Origin.
Eusebius mentions him, and Pantaenus in the second of Severus, at which time
it is probable he wrote his Stromata; for not intending his Chronology beyond
the time of Commodus, Minutius Felix.
he seems not long after his death to have begun that Work. At this time also
lived Minutius Felix an eminent Lawyer, and the Author of that excellent Book
entitled Octavius, which, as Lactantius writes, does declare how fit an
assertor of the truth he might have been, had he applied himself wholly to that
study. This Book being intended as an Apology for Christian Religion,
acquainteth us what thoughts the Heathen at that time had thereof, as also do
the Apologies of Justin Martyr, the Books of Origin against Celsus, and
especially that of Tertullian. We have already shown the rise and increase of
Christian Religion, we have delivered the series of the most eminent Bishops
and Fathers thereof, as also of the several Heretics which from within
disturbed the peace thereof. We have also given an account of the several fiery
trials the faithful underwent. But what opinions the Infidels had of Christians
and Christianity, of what crimes they accused them, whence their hatred
proceeded, whereupon the Emperors grounded their bloody Edicts: what the
Primitive Saints did in the mean time, how they behaved themselves under these
pressures, how they carried it toward their Enemies, how they stood affected in
duty toward their Princes; in sum, what their conversations both as men and
Christians were, is most worthy to be considered, and those things in short out
of the Apologies aforenamed, and other Authors, we shall endeavor to discover.

15. The first thing that the Heathens cavilled at in Christianity was the
newness of it. Acts 17, 18.
St. Paul seemed to them to be a setter forth of new gods. And there was an
ancient Law at Tertullian Apol c. 5.
Rome which forbad introducing new ceremonies into Religion, as worshipping
strange deities, unless approved by the Senate, and this was an inviolable
Law, which binding Emperors as well as others, An inquiry into the condition
of Christians.
Tiberius could not as he desired receive Jesus Christ amongst their gods; for
the Senate would not approve of a God they did not know. This prejudice (which
yet in Idolatry often effected nothing amongst the Romans) was increased by a
misapprehension of our Lord and Saviors sufferings; his being crucified made
them despise both him and his. Hence Annal. l. 15. c. 44.
Tacitus telling the original of the Christians, will let the World know, that
Christ from whom they derived their name, was Tiberio imperitante per
procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus. And hence Trajan Acta Ignatii.
in his discourse with Ignatius, when he would mean Christ, called him
Crucifixus, the Crucified, in way of contempt. This contempt was increased into
disdain, by reason that Christ would have no other Gods (as they accounted
them) sharers with him in worship, and this disdain was heightened into rage,
when Christians preaching this saving doctrine, declaming against Idols, The
reason of the prejudice of Heathens against them.
proving the Heathen gods to be devils, and striking at the root of Paganism,
endeavored to draw even the whole World from superstition and Idolatry so
ancient and universal. You say, we do not worship the Gods, says Apol. c. 10.
Tertullian. This was accouned a crime of sacrilege, and worthy of death; much
more then to dissuade others from doing it. Quid, homines (sustinebitis enim me
impetum suscepta orationis liberius exerentem) homines (inquam) deploratae,
illicitae ac desperatae factionis grassari in Deos nonne ingemiscendum est?
says Minuc. Fael. Octav. p. 22.
Caecilius, as he is brought in by Minutius. Hereupon the Christians were
accounted (...) or Atheists, and it was a custom to cry out against them where
the Greek tongue was used Smymens. Ecclesiae epist. De S. Polycarpi Martyrio p.
16. and 20.
(...), Take off the Atheists, which words they would have had Polycarp utter
as a sign of his recantation. This by reason of the malice of Devils (who were
worshipped under the names of the several gods) did render them so highly
impious in the opinion of the vulgar, and so enraged the multitude against
them, that Tertull. Apol. cap. 40.
if Tiber over-flowed, if Nile watered not the plains, if Heaven stopped its
course, and did not power its rains here below, if there were Earthquake,
Famine, or plague, they would immediately cry out Christianos ad Leones, Cast
the Christians to the Lions, as the cause (in their opinion) of all the
calamities that arrived in the World, and all the evils that people suffered.

16. Prejudice and hatred being risen thus high invented false accusations, and
caught hold of idle surmises, nothing ill seeming incredible concerning those
that are already odious. (...) page 4. (...). Apol. c. 7.
Athenagoras says, that three things they objected against Christians:
Atheism, Thyestes his feasts, and the Copulation of Oedipus. The two later
(whereof as much as concerns Thyestes and Oedipus we have spoken above in
their due places) (b) Tertullian thus explaineth. The Crimes pretended against
us (the horror of which makes us pass for wicked in the opinion of the people)
are, that we meet together to sacrifize a Child; that after we have taken away
his life by a barbarous superstition, we devour his body, and when we have
eaten the flesh of this innocent, we commit Incests. They add, that we have
Dogs, which serve to overthrow the Candles, and doing the Office of those
infamous Merchants of modesty, make us lose all shame in taking the lights from
us, and covering our actions under the veil of darkness, embolden us to seek
the use of ungodly, and sacrilegious pleasures. Malicious slanders concerning
the manner of their worship.
Caelicius makes beginners initiated by the blood of an Infant, which they all
licking up, and dividing his Members amongst themselves, by so horrid a
Ceremony confirmed their league, and the Covenant of their mutual secrecy.
These Sacra (says he) are more abominable than all sacrilege. And as for their
feasting it is known sufficiently, all speak of it in all places; the Oration
also of our Certensis does witness it: They meet together to eat on a set day
with all their Children, Sisters, Mothers, Persons of every Sex, and every age.
There, after much eating, when the feast is now grown hot, and the heat of
incestuous lust is kindled by drunkenness, the Dog that is tied to the
Candle-stick is provoked, by casting a piece of meat beyond the length of the
string by which he is bound, to a violent leap. Thus the conscious light being
overthrown and put out, etc. so he proceeds to the same purpose, but in worse
terms. And Justin Martyr in his Conference with Page 227. B.
Tryphon the Jew demands of him after this manner. Do you also believe
concerning us that we devour men, and after meat the lights being put out, use
wicked and promiscuous Copulation? Lastly, Theophylus Patriarch of Antioch in
his third book Page 119. D.
to Antolycus against Calumniators of Christian Religion, summeth up what we
have already said, in these words. They say that our wives are common, and
accuse us that we use promiscuous Copulation. Besides, they lay to our charge
that we do not abstain from our own sisters, but rashly dare to violate those
with incestuous lust. But this is most cruel and brutish of the Crimes they
object against us, when with an impious mouth they prate, that we eat man's
flesh: neither do they cease to traduce our Religion or Doctrine as of
yesterday, and destitute of all truth, which neither we our selves, if a
controversy arise are able to defend with clear demonstrations. Further, they
say that our Doctrine is nothing but folly, and meet toys.

17. That malice which invented these impious adjuncts of Christian Religion,
found out a suitable object of worship; for the Romans had so far forgotten
their own ancient custom of serving their Gods without Images, or resemblances
(for Numa, as Plutarch tells us, and the ancient Romans for many years
admitted no Images in their Temples, because the Deity cannot be made out by
any external resemblance) that they thought it impossible for any Religion not
to be guilty of Idolatry toward some visible thing. Hence came that fable
related by Histor. lib. 5.
Tacitus (an Author guilty of malice against both Jews and Christians) that the
Jews consecrated the Image of an Ass, because (forsooth) being pressed sorely
with thirst in the deserts of Arabia, certain wild Asses showed them the
Fountains where they were wont to drink; although this Author, who says he
lies not, writes, that Pompey having taken Jerusalem, and entered into the
Temple to see the mysteries of the Jewish Religion, saw there no Image at all.
Apoll cap. 16.
Tertullian conceives, that from this tale sprung that conceit that the
Christians (the Religion of whom was drawn from that of the Jews, and succeeded
it) worshipped the Effigies of an Ass. And the object of it.
I hear, (says Cecilius) that they worship a Consecrated head of an Ass, the
most filthy of all sorts of Cattle, I know not out of what foolish persuasion;
a Religion worthy of, and descended from, such manners. But he goes further,
and relates a report, that the very object of their worship was also obscene.
Ibid.
Tertullian further writes, that some were of opinion they worshipped the
Cross, and Cecilius, from the ignominious death of our Lord, and this
instrument of it, argues to the infamy of Christian Religion in an abominable
manner. Tertullian in the same place tells us, that some with more apparent
reason believed the Sun to be their God, and sent them to the Religion of the
Persians, herein suspecting them for so doing, because when they prayed they
turned themselves toward the East. [And after an answer to this lie he adds:]
The calumnies invented to cry down our Religion arose to such excess of
impiety, that not long ago in this City, a picture of our God was showed by a
certain infamous person that got his living by exposing to the sight of the
people, wild beasts: who by a strange faculty gotten by him to avoid their
bitings, making use of his craft, showed also the aforesaid picture to all
comers, with this inscription thereon, This is Onochoetes the God of
Christians. This supposed God of the Christians pretended by him, had the ears
of an Ass, an hoof on one of his feet; carried a book, and was clothed with a
Gown: we laugh at the barbarousnesse of this name, and the extravagancy of this
figure. Such were the blasphemies of Pagans against Christian worship, and as
an argument for them they produced the secrecy of Christian meetings, which
their own cruelty and rage had made necessary. They Tertul. Apol. cap. 39
talked of nothing more than the excess of the Tables of the Christians. And
after all this they Idem ibid. cap. 42.
objected, that they were not any way profitable in the commerce of the World.

18. As to their outward demeanor they accused them of Sedition as well as
Atheism. Let Apol. cap. 10.
Tertullian speak upon what frivolous grounds: You say we worship not the
Gods; nor for the welfare of the Emperors offer sacrifices to them. They were
accused of Sedition.
The one of these two Crimes whereof you accuse us must necessarily follow upon
the neck, or in consequence of the other: for, being resolved to render no
manner of worship to your Deities, we must necessarily in like manner be
resolved not to sacrifize at their Altars, whether for our selves, or for what
person soever it be. Hereupon you conclude us guilty of Sacrilege and high
Treason. Pliny was wont, as appears from his Epistle to Trajan, to try
Christians by supplications made to the Images of the Gods, and amongst these
to the Emperor's picture, by Frankinscence and Wine. This burning incense was
an ordinary trial in all ages. They were also counted singular and factious,
for that they would not swear by the Fortune or Genius of the Emperors. This
the holy Martyr Epist. Ecclesiae Smyrnens. de S. Polycarpi Martyrio Page 20, 21.
Polycarp was bidden to do by the Proconsul a little before his suffering.
These prejudices and false opinions being heightened and irritated by the malice
of Devils, who found themselves nearly concerned therein, procured wonderful
enmity and malice in the hearts of Pagans against the faith.

19. Is it not strange (says Apol. c. 3.
Tertullian,) that the hatred wherewith this name is pursued, in such manner
blinds the minds of most men, that when they witness the probity of a
Christian, they mix in their discourse as a reproach that he has embraced this
Religion. One says, truly, he of whom you speak is an honest man, if he
were not a Christian, and his life would be free from blame. Another, Do you
know such a one, who had the reputation of a wise and discreet man? he is
lately turned Christian. [Again] These people by an extreme blindness of
hatred speak to the advantage of the name Christian, Hence wonderful hatred.
when they strive to render it odious. For, say they, How pleasant, and of
what a good humor was that woman? How sociable and jovial was that man?
It Is pity they should be Christians. So they impute the amendment of their
lives to the profession of Christianity. Some of them also purchase the
aversion they carry against the name Christian, which we bear, with the price
of what is most precious to them, rather desiring to lose the sweetness of
life, tranquillity of mind, and all sorts of commodities, than to see in their
houses that which they hate. A man who heretofore had his mind full of
jealousy, can no longer endure the company of his wife, what assurance soever
he has of her chastity, after once he perceives her to be turned Christian,
and parts from her now when her actions full of modesty have extinguished all
suspicions wherewith he was heretofore moved. A father who of a long time
endured the disobedience of his heathenish son, resolves to take from him the
hope of succeding him in his inheritance for turning Christian, when at the
same time executing his commands without murmuring. A master that used his
slave gently when his carriage gave him some cause of distrust, now puts him
far from him for a Christian, when he has most assurance of his fidelity. It Is
committing of a Crime to correct the disorders of a man's life by the motions
of an holy conversion to the Christian faith, and the good which is produced by
so happy a change works not so powerfully in the minds of men, as the hatred
they have conceived against us. Indeed this hatred is strange; and when I
consider that the name of Christian only makes it to be so, I would willingly
know how a name can be Criminal, and how a simple word can be accused? Thus
much (and enough I suppose) to discover hatred it self.

The sad effects thereof.
20. And the fruits of hatred abundantly manifested themselves. 1 In fastening
Christians to Crosses and pieces of wood. 2 Hanging them up as public
spectacles unto all men upon Gibbets. 3 Piercing their bodies with Irons. 4
Cutting off their heads. 5. Exposing them to the rage of wild beasts. 6.
Throwing them into flames. 7. Condemning them to work in Mines, and 8.
confining them to Islands; "all which sorts are expressed in one Cap. 12.
Chapter of Tertullian's Apology. In another Cap. 37.
place he thus writes. How often do those people being our Enemies, of their
own accord, without your authority, assault us with stones, or burn us? They
are verily so enraged against us, that during the furies of the Bacchinales,
they spare not even Christians that are dead, but trouble the rest of their
Graves, they violate their Sepulchers which are as Sanctuaries of the dead,
they draw forth their bodies not to be known whose bodies they are, after
mangled by them, which with extreme inhumanity they tear, and drag in the
streets. Cap. 9.
[Elsewhere;] How many are there among you, O ye people, that are this way
greedy of the blood of Christians? and also among you, O ye Magistrates, after
you appear such Justiciers by the severity you treat us with, whose consciences
I would strike with true reproaches of having procured the death of your own
Children? Yet if you did but simply put them to death, it were something; but
by a strange excess of cruelty you throw them into the water, you expose them
to the rigor of cold and hunger, and the rage of Dogs; you will not take their
lives away with the sword, because too gentle a death, and which men of the age
of discretion had rather suffer, than any other that has violence in it.

21. But, when the time of persecution drew toward an end, then especially did
the Devil rage with variety of torments against the Primitive Saints. For
besides those formerly mentioned, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 41.
Serapion was thrown down, and had his neck broken. Some having their flesh
rent in pieces with the lash of the whip were broyled upon Gridirons; others
having their skins razed, and scorched, being tied by one leg were hanged on
Trees with the head downwards. They pulled out the right eyes of others,
searing the empty place, and sawing off the left legs of others, seared their
hams, and condemned them to the mines, which usage was accounted clemency. Some
they scourged to death, cut out their tongues, and strangled them. One
Apphianus, being all disfigured with stripes, had his feet wrapped in flax,
oyled all over, which being set on fire, it ran over his flesh and consumed it,
and peirced into the marrow within the bones, so that his whole body distilled
like to melting wax. Three days he was suffered to remain in prison after this
torture, and when, by reason of his wounds he was ready to yield up the ghost,
then was he thrown into the Sea. Others were forced by buckling, justing, and
buffeting, to kill one another. Others of men's estate were gelded and condemned
to the quarries. Others were tormented grievously and chastized with
imprisonment and fetters, of which number was Pamphilus, of all my familiars my
dearest friend, a man who among all the Martyrs of our time, says Eusebius,
excelled in every kind of virtue. He had his sides mangled with sharp razors,
and then was ordered to be kept in the noisome stench of the close prison, where
the rest of the Confessors remained, till at length he was put to death, being
a Presbyter of the Church of Caesaraea, concerning whose life Eusebius wrote
three books, and for his familiarity with, and affection to him, had the
surname of Pamphilus. This variety of the torments of Christians, appears
from several passages in the seventh and eighth Books of his Ecclesiastical
History, which so far exceeds all inferior punishments, or (that I may speak
in the phrase of Lawyers) the diminutiones capitis, that we need not mention
how Christians were denied the title of Tertul. Apol. l. 36.
Roman Citizens. But one kind of punishment far more grievous than the rest
there yet was, which more tormented Christians than all other tortures put
together: and that was the loss of their chastity. This Engine battered the
fort of Origen's constancy, who chose rather to sacrifize to idols than be
abused by an Ethiopian, as Suidas writes. Apol. c. ult.
Tertullian gives us another instance, that we may enquire no further. And
indeed a few days since, (says he) you condemned a Christian maid to be
rather prostituted to an infamous corrupter of her chastity, than to be exposed
to the rage of a Lion; you acknowledge there is no punishment nor kind of
death, which is so intolerable to Christians, as the loss of their chastity.

22. Such was the entertainment Christians found in this World, now let us see
how far they deserved it, as to their demeanor, and carriage; for there is no
need to speak here to the two first objections. The Heathens Tertul. ubi supra
c. 2.
believe a man could not make profession of Christianity, without being tainted
with all sorts of crimes, without being an Enemy to the gods, to Princes, to
the Laws, to good manners, and to nature, and that a Christian could not be
acquitted, unless he denied himself to be such an one. But their carriage was
so quite contrary to all these surmises, except that concerning the worship of
Heathenish vanities, or Devils, under the name of gods, that they only were
the servants of the true God, they only were free from all sorts of crimes,
were the best friends and Subjects of Princes, of the Laws, good manners, and
nature, and truly affirming themselves Christians, might justly in this respect
have been acquitted from these accusations.

They Idem ibid. c. 39.
assembled together by troops in their prayers to God, as if thereby they would
carry by force the grant of whatsoever Prayers were presented to him, this
being a violence agreeable to him; they prayed to him for the Emperors, their
Ministers the Magistrates that had the exercise of their power, for the State,
the tranquillity of the Empire, and the retarding of the general dissolution
that must put an end to all things. They assembled together to read the Holy
Scriptures, The unblameable demeanous of Christians in their Assemblies.
and they read them according to the condition of the times; what served either
to admonish or confirm the faithful. In effect, the Scriptures nourished their
faith, lifted up, and assured the confidence they had in God, nevertheless
they ceased not to confirm their discipline by the strength of precepts they
continually repeated. In these Assemblies, (says Tertullian, for the former
are also his words) we make exhortations and threatenings, and exercise Divine
censure, which banisheth sinners, and excludes them from our Communion: we
judge them with very much circumspection, because we know that God is in the
midst of us, and sees what we do; and certainly it is a great foretelling of
the judgment that God will one day pronounce against the wicked, when the
Church moved with the enormity of their crimes, darts out upon wilful sinners
the Thunderbolts of excommunication, and deprives them of the participation of
it is prayers, it is society, and all sorts of holy commerce with it.

23. In our assemblies there are Bishops that preside, and have authority over
all the faithful committed to their charge; they are approved by the suffrages
of them whom they ought to conduct, and it is not bribes that acquire them this
honor, but testimonies given of their good life. For in the Church of God
nothing is done by the allurement of gifts; if there be among us any kind of
treasure, the money laid up makes our Religion not ashamed. And every one
contributes a little sum at the end of the month, or when he will; but it is
if he will and can; for none are constrained to give. If we get any alms it is
of good will, riches gathered in this manner are as the pledges of piety; we do
not confound them in eating and drinking with excess; we make not use of them
for the foul and loathsome exercise of gluttony: but we employ them in feeding
the poor, burying them, in comforting poor Orphans, in helping old men who have
spent their best days in the service of the faithful, in helping the poor that
have lost by shipwreck what they had, and in assisting them that serve in the
mines, are banished into Islands, or shut up in prisons, because they profess
the Religion of the true God, that during the time they suffer for the
confession of his name, they may be nourished by the stock of the Church. But
it is a strange thing, that this charity among us gives occasion to some to
blame us. See, say they, how they love one another; this astonisheth them,
because they hate one another. See say they, how they are ready to die one for
another; but as for them they are ready to kill one another. [A little after:]
As we live with the same intelligence, as if we had all but one spirit and one
soul; we have nothing in particular but our wives, of all things in the World
there is nothing but wives, whereof we reject community; and on the contrary,
among them of their wives only there is a community with other men. [Again]:
Now seeing we live together with so much charity, that all our goods are
common, why should they wonder if we make good cheer? for it is one of the
excesses you reproach us with; besides the infamous crimes whereof you accuse
our repasts, you charge it with prodigality.

24. In the same place: But you need but consider the name given to our
repasts, to know the quality thereof. They express themselves with the same
word that signifies Love with the Greeks; (...).
whatsoever the cost is that is made, it is profitable, for they gain always
in this expense, because it has piety for it is foundation. Its a sweetness
wherewith we comfort the want of the poor, but we do not treat them as you
those infamous gluttons, who glory in selling you their liberty for the price
of their good bits, wherewith they fill their bellies in the midst of a
thousand indignities. But we will have the least served with our goods, because
they we know, amongst all men, are the most acceptable unto God. Then seeing
our feasts have so honest an end, consider what our disciplne should be in the
rest of our actions, even those which more concern the duties of Religion; it
permits nothing that is dishonorable, nor far from modesty. Before we go to
table we are fed with heavenly meat, which is the Prayer we make to God; we eat
as much as is necessary to satisfy one's appetite, we drink as much as is
permitted to persons that have a care of their purity. They that sit there,
take their refection with so much temperance, as they may remember they are
obliged to worship God even at night. They entertain one another as People that
know God hears what they say. After the repast done, they have washed their
hands, and lighted the candles, they are invited to praise God and sing Psalms
taken out of the holy Scripture, or Hymns every one composeth according to the
capacity of his mind. By this it may be known, if they have committed any
excess at table; as the repast began with Prayer, so it ends; they go forth
not in diverse troops to defile their hands with the blood of men, not in
several bands running in the streets, not to do insolences; but with the same
care they had in coming in, preserve their modesty and chastity.

25. Finally, Christians retire with so much stayednesse, that we may very well
see they are not fed so much with corporal meats as the substance of heavenly
and holy discipline. Certainly, it were but reason that this society of the
Christians should be reputed unlawful, if it were like to that the Laws forbid;
it were but good reason it should be condemned, if it were not different to
that which deserves to be condemned; if one would reproach it with the same
things wherewith they accuse factious societies. But tell me, Did we ever
assemble to pro^ure the hurt of any one? we are the same in a body, as when
separated: as we are in particular, so we are in general: that is to say, in
whatsoever estate we are found, we injure no body; when any virtuous or godly
People are associated, when any pious or chaste persons assemble together, their
union should not be called a faction, but a lawful society.

Thus Tertullian, to whose words, as to the harmless carriage of the Christians
in their Assemblies, Apostates witnessed, as appears from what Pliny the
younger wrote to Trajan. As for the crimes supposed to be committed by them,
they ever challenged any witness to be produced of them, and sufficiently
confute the vain reports in their Apologies. They laughed at the fiction of the
Asses head, and such like stuff, and as for worshipping Crosses, Octavius in his
answer to Cecilius says, Cruces etiam nec colimus nec optamus. Crosses we
neither worship nor wish for. Neither did they meet for seditious ends, as for
the alteration of Governments, destruction of Princes, or changing of
Magistrates. Though they rather than any of late time might pretend to
Saintship, They were good and loyal Subjects.
yet did they not make it an advantage to raise themselves; whereby they laid
no claim to the riches, power, or dominion of the World; they did not hold that
temporal dominion was founded in grace, nor that the true and spiritual Kingdom
of Jesus Christ destroyed the right and interest of earthly Princes. They made
no insurrections, covered on rebellious designs with the name of Religion,
neither did by violence attempt a reformation; although they were so many
thousands, as in all probability they might have born down all before them;
though they filled all places, consisted of all degrees, and hereby shared in
all interests, in power and intelligence, and by their combinations might have
taken their opportunities, and easily by force of arms made way for their
designs; yet obedience to their Princes they ever held most inviolable by the
Principles of their Religion, and made use of no other weapons than prayers and
tears, though for their own safety and preservation. Hear to this pupose what
challenges Tertullian makes to such, as if he had not had truth on his side,
would have been sufficiently ready to instance wherein the Christians offended,
which they yet never adventured to do.

26. In the midst of all these outrages have you observed that these People,
who (as you think) have framed so strange a conspiracy, and on the other side
might be animated enough for revenge, by the punishments wherewith you take
away their lives, endeavored any thing against you to ressent the evil
treating they have received? Think you that they want an occasion? Tertul.
Apolog. c. 37.
when in one night only a small number of torches would be enough to satisfy
their Revenge, if with us it were permitted to render evil for evil; but God
forbid we should do so. A Religion that is all divine, ought not to revenge by
the instigation of men, and must not think it strange to suffer that which is
made use of to prove them. If we would declare against you as open, rather than
pursue you as secret Enemies, might we not have forces and troops enough? It
may be the Moors and Marcomanns, the Parthians, or whatsoever People they are
shut up in the bounds of the Country they inhabit, make a greater number of men
than they that are spread throughout all the Universe, and have no other limits
than that of the World. Our Religion is but of late, and we fill already all
that your power acknowledges, Cities, Fortresses, Isles, Provinces, the
Assemblies of the People, the Armies also, the wards and tenths of Rome, the
Palace, the Senate, and the Public places; Finally, we leave you but the
Temples. What Wars were we not able to undertake? with what readiness might we
not arm our selves, although we should be the weaker? we that suffer our selves
so willingly to be killed, if in our Religion it were not rather lawful to let
our selves be killed than to kill others, we could also make War against you
without taking up arms, by casting our selves into a revolt; it were enough not
to live with you, and to separate our selves, our divorce would print shame in
your foreheads. For if Christians, who make so great a multitude of all sorts
of persons, should abandon you to retire unto some Country of the World
dispersed from all society; truly the loss of so many Citizens, of what
condition soever, would disparage your Government, and also our retreat would
be a rude punishment to you; without doubt this solitude that would remain with
you, this silence of all things, this general astonishment of nature, even as
if all the world were dead, would frighten you; you might go seek Subjects to
command, there would remain to you more Enemies than Citizens: now you have
more Citizens than Enemies, because there are a greater number of Christians
among you.

27. Thus we see their peaceable demeanor, how their minds stood affected
toward their Princes, let Tertullian also inform us. As for us, Apol. c. 30.
in the prayers we make for the Emperors, we call upon the eternal God, the
true God, the living God, etc. [In the same place:] It is to him to whom we
Christians address our prayers, make them with hands opened and lifted up,
because innocent; the head bare, because no cause to be ashamed when we pray to
God. There are none tells us the words we are to say, because it is our heart
that acts rather than our tongue. We pray for all the Emperors, and ask of
God that he would give them a long life, that their Empire enjoy a profound
Peace, their house happy concord, their Armies be innumerable, themselves
assisted with good Councils, the People remain in their duties, no trouble
arise in the World against their authority. In conclusion, we forget nothing
the Prince can wish for, either as a man or as an Emperor. [A little after:]
Whilst we implore the grace of God for the Emperors with our hands lifted up,
and stretched toward Heaven, let irons pierce us, let us be put on gibbets and
crosses, fires consume us, knives cut our throats, beasts devour us: A
Christian while in prayer lifting up his hands to God, is in a condition fit to
receive all sorts of punishment; and therefore continue O Magistrates so
affected to Justice; ravish our Souls whilst they are in prayers for the
welfare of the Emperors, and make a crime of Truth and the Service of God. [In
the following Chapter] We entreat them who believe our Religion takes no care
of the preservation of the Emperors, to examine the Laws of our God, to read
our Books which we hide not, and which by diverse accidents fall into other
hands than ours. They will learn there, that it is commanded by a superabundant
charity, to pray to God for our Enemies, Chap. 31.
and to wish good to them that persecute us. Now have we greater Enemies, and
ruder persecutors, than those who make offended Majesty the ground of the crime
they impute unto us? Holy Scriptures content not themselves with this
commandment, they have another more precise and clearer. Pray, say they, for
Kings, Princes, and Powers, that you may live in peace in the midst of public
tranquillity. [In another place:] But why should I stay longer in making known
with what sense of Religion and Piety Christians honor Emperors? It suffices
to say, we are obliged to render them our duties, Chap. 32.
as to whom our Master has commanded us so to do.

28. As these Primitive Saints were good Christians in the exercise of their
Religion, and dutiful Subjects toward their Princes, so also good men, free
from vice, and adorned with Virtues; Chap. 44.
or if any were noted to be of contrary practice they were disowned, and the
Censures of the Church cut them off from it is society. We speak as boldly
(says Tertullian) of the Christians you put to death, for we have an
unreproveable testimony of their integrity, which we take also from your
Registers. You who are employed every day in judging those that are kept in
prisons, and who terminate their processes by the sentences you give against
them, And good men.
of all the malefactors accused before you of so many sorts of crimes, is there
any of them charged with Murder, Robbery, Sacrilege, and other faults, to whom
they impute also that he is a Christian? either, when Christians are presented
to be punished as Criminals, because they are Christians, is there any amongst
them whose life is like that of other prisoners? all the Malefactors wherewith
your prisons are so filled, that they are overcharged, are of your Religion;
they are also of your Religion that make the Mines groan under the weight of
their strokes, they are the wretched creatures of the same Religion you are,
wherewith the wild beasts fill their bellies. All those poor Criminals which
your Citizens keep to make them cruelly kill one another before a bloody
people, have the same opinion you have of the Deity. Finally, among all those
wretched creatures there is not one Christian, unless he be charged by justice,
because of his name Christian: Or if there be a Christian found attainted of
the same crime, he has no more the name Christian, because he has lost that
divine quality in losing his innocence. Chap. 46.
[Elsewhere:] But some will say, even among us there are a people that give
themselves the liberty of doing evil, that free themselves from subjection to
our Laws, from any what ever exact observation of what is legally commanded by
us. It is true there are some such, but so soon as they fall into this
disorder, we hold them no more for Christians. The fear of God, and purity of
his precepts constrained them to this holy demeanor; for opinion of men and
their rules, as this our Author observes, cannot reach the heart, not procure
that Virtue which is truly good. The admirable fruits their doctrine produced
(the knowledge whereof became public by the commerce they had in the World)
made so downright a conflict with rude incredulity, that to defend herself she
was forced to say, that their profeson had no Divine matter in it, but was
only a Sect of Philosophy, that obliged Christians to rank themselves there in
the exercise of Moral Virtues.

29. Though there was some diversity of opinions amongst them, yet as we showed
before, they maintained mutual Love; and that herein they were highly eminent
as to all pious effects, is already evident. Origin in his Work against Celsus
(wherein he especially answers to cavils raised against the Author and
Doctrine of Christian Religion) takes off that prejudice that might arise from
diversity of opinions, They were eminent for love and unity of affection.
by a comparison of this difference with the numerous (or rather innumerous)
Sects of Heathen Philosophers. Tertullian lays the great guilt of Heresy
upon such, who being animated with the spirit of Philosophy, infected the
purity of the Gospel with the corruption of their own opinions. In the same
place he acquainteth us what was the Primitive touchstone of Doctrines most
worthy now to be considered. These People (says he) that are separated from us
have violated the Faith of Jesus Christ, and we beat down their errors by this
only exception, Apolog. c. 47.
that the true rule of Truth is, that which has been taught by our Master, and
transmitted to us by those holy persons, who had the happiness to hear his
Word, and receive his Divine Institutions; we shall show in another place, that
all which is not conformable to this rule, has been invented by new Doctors,
who came not till after the blessed companions of the Son of God.

They forced Devils out of bodies, and to confess the truth.
30. All these excellent qualities in those holy persons, might have sufficed to
stop the mouths of Calumniators, and had weight sufficient to have moved the
minds of all men to the truth. But that Victory which Christians obtained over
Devils, might much more have convinced them of the power which was superior to
that of their false Gods. Christians were wont to drive away these Devils from
the bodies of men, forced them to confess that they were no other than Devils,
and that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and his way the true Religion. [As to
the former, first hear Tertullian: Apolog. c. 37.
] But if we were not near you, who would snatch you away from these secret
Enemies, whose malignant operations make so strange a confusion in your minds,
and so horrible an alteration of your healths? I have heard speak of the
possession of Devils, wherewith you are tormented, from whence we deliver you
freely, and without reward; if we had the spirit of Revenge, it were enough to
satisfy us, that these corrupted spirits might at all times seize on your
bodies, and that entrance therein were always open to them. But as you do not
think of that you ought, viz. so dear a protection, you cease not to declare a
People to be your Enemies, who do you no hurt, whose assistance is so
absolutely necessary for you. It is true, we are Enemies, yet not of men but of
their errors. [In another place: Chap. 31.
] As for Devils or Genies, we are wont to conjure them, to drive them away from
the bodies of men, whereof they are seized, and render them not the honors due
to God only, by swearing by them. [ Justin Martyr in his fifth Page 45. totius
operis.
Apology:] (...), etc. For many possessed with Devils throughout the World, and
this your City, whom many Exorcists, Inchanters, and Conjurers could not cure,
Many of our men through the name of Jesus Christ crucified under Pontius Pilate
have healed, and now also do heal, disarming and driving out of men those
Devils that had possessed them. [In his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew:] (...),
etc. For in the name of this the Son of God, Page 311.
the firstborn of every creature, and born of a Virgin, and made a man subject
to suffering, and crucified by your people under Pontius Pilate, who died,
arose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, every Devil adjured is overcome
and subdued. [In another place of this Apology:] And now we who believe in
Jesus Christ our Lord crucified under Pontius Pilate, Page 302*
adjuring all Devils and malignant spirits, have them subject under our power.
He affirms the same thing in other places.

31. That Christians constrained Devils to confess themselves such, and to
acknowledge the truth of the Gospel, in this matter hear also Tertullian: If a
man should bring before your tribunals one that were truly possessed of a
Devil, if a Christian should command him to speak, this wicked spirit will
confess that he is a Devil, Apol. cap. 23.
with as much truth as he says falsely at another time he is a god. Let them
present any one of these they believe to be wrought upon within by a deity;
that in the ceremony of the Sacrifices they offer on the altars have the virtue
of a God, in senting the smell which goes out of the Sacrifices; who with force
belch out words out of their stomachs; within breathing declare Oracles; if
this heavenly Virgin that promises rain; if this Aesculapius who teaches the
secrets of Physic, who preserves the lives of them that must lose the same
soon after, confess not by the mouths of these Impostors, the fegined
inspirations of whom deceive the World, that they are but Devils, if the
presence of a Christian takes not from them the boldness of lying, we are
willing, that in the same place you shed the blood of this Christian, and
punish him as a wicked person. [In the same Chapter:] Now seeing by our means
your gods discover to you that they are no gods, and that all the other to whom
men erect altars are none in like manner; but this at the same time they make
you know, who the true God is, if it be this only God whom we that are
Christians worship, if we must believe of him what the Christians believe, if
he must be served as their Laws ordain. When you conjure your gods in the name
of Jesus Christ, do they ask who is that Jesus Christ? do they call the History
of his life a fable? do they say he is a man of the same education as other
men? that he was a Magician? that after he was dead, his disciples took away
his body privately from the Sepulcher? and that he is now in Hell? say they not
rather, he is in Heaven? that he must descend to the terror of all the World?
with horror to the Universe? with the lamentation of all men but Christians?
and that he shall come down on the Earth full of Majesty, as the Virtue of God,
the Spirit of God, the Word, Wisdom, Reason, and the Son of God?

32. Whence Christians came to be so strong, as to wrest these confessions from
them, hear him in the same place. Whence they had this strength against them.
Now all the power we have of them, is the name of Jesus Christ who gives it
us, it is the threatening we give them of the evils God is ready to pour on
their heads, and which one day Jesus Christ must declare unto them. As they
fear Jesus Christ in God, and God in Jesus Christ, they are under the
Government of the servants of God and of Jesus Christ: so by the only touch of
our hands, and breath of our mouths, the Devils seized with fear at the sight
of the flames that environ them are forced to obey us, to come out of the
bodies they possess, in despite of them, and with murmuring to suffer this
shame in our presence. You that are wont to believe them when they lie, believe
them when they speak of themselves. None will tell a lie to get shame by it,
but rather to gain honor; one will sooner believe them that confess against
their own interest, than those that deny to their advantage. These testimonies
which we have of your gods make men to be Christians; for we cannot give a full
belief to what they say, without believing in Jesus Christ our Master. Your
gods kindle in our hearts the Faith which the holy Scripture teaches us, they
strengthen our hope, and confirm us in the assurance we have of our Salvation.
As for you, to honor them, you offer them also the blood of Christians; and if
it were permitted them to lie when Christians interrogate them, and labor to
make you know the truth by their confession, they would take good heed of
discovering your errors to you, as well for keeping the profit they have of
them, and the honors you render them, as for the fear they might have, that in
becoming your selves Christians, you drive them away as we do, from the bodies
they torment with so much rage. [In the beginning of the following Chapter:]
"We need nothing but the acknowledgement we have from your gods, when we make
them confess they are no gods, and when they answer us, there is no other God
than the only God we serve, to purge us from the crimes of high treason and
impiety to the Roman Religion.

33. No wonder then that these impure Spirits enraged at Christians, sought all
manner of ways to destroy them. But yet in their deaths they overcame them,
and in all sorts of indignities and tortures triumphed over their implacable
adversaries; for The blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church. That this
was so indeed, Tertullian also informs us, the veracity of whom, as to these
things alleged is unquestionable, because appealing to his adversaries, he must
needs in behalf of his cause produce such things as were most certain: the
contrary whereof would have Apologized sufficiently for what he labored to
confute. We shall with the last words of his excellent Apology conclude this
most delightful Subject. But do what you please, They triumphed over their
enemies in their very sufferings.
all inventions the most exquisite cruelty can advise you unto are to no
purpose; so far are they from profitting you, that contrarily they draw all the
World to our Religion. The oftener you make an harvest of the Christians, the
oftener their number increases: their blood is a seed which dies not on the
earth, but puts forth prosperously. Many among you have labored to persuade
men to suffer constantly pain and death, (as Cicero in his Tusculans, Seneca in
his Treatise against casual things, Diogenes, Pyrrhon, and Callinicus) but
Christians have better taught constancy, by the examples they have given, in
supporting patiently so many evils, than all the Philosophers with all their
discourses. This same obstinacy, wherewith you reproach us, is an excellent
mistress of truth which we believe: for who is there not that striveth with
contemplation to seek what it is? who after his search made, comes not on our
side? who having embraced the Faith of Jesus Christ, desires not to suffer for
him, that by his sufferings he may get the infinite treasures of the grace of
God, and that in the price of his blood, they may obtain the pardon of their
faults; for the remission of all our sins, is the assured recompense of our
punishments. This is the reason that when they read your sentences of death
unto us, we render you thanks; because by an happy emulation that meets between
the Judgments of God, and the judgment of men, at the same instant when you
condemn us here below, God pronounces our absolution in Heaven.

34. The Soldiers being at a stand after the murder of Antoninus Bassianus,
were without an Emperor for two days. Then hearing that Artabanus, the
Parthian, was coming to revenge the injury offered to him, they made choice of
Ardentius one of their principal Officers, but he excused himself by his age,
and the dignity was conferred on Macrinus, by the especial endeavor of the
Tribunes, Lege Herodian. l. 4.
who alone were conscious of the fact toward Antoninus. He gave battle to
Artabanus, and made incredible slaughter of men for two days, during which
time, Orosium l. 7. c. 18.
the Parthian knew nothing of his Enemies death, but on the next day being
certified thereof by Macrinus, he received the Captives with the spoil taken in
his Country, and making a League with the Roman Emperor, departed into his own
Kingdom: Xiphilin. excerpt. ex Dione.
Macrinus returning to Antioch, by letters gave the Senate an account of his
success, and endeavoring to remove all prejudice which might arise from the
obscurity of his birth, Macrinus succeeds Bassianus.
promised to rule with as much moderation as any. He was cheerfully owned, not
so much out of respect to himself, as hatred toward his Predecessor. During
the time he reigned, things were well reformed; Olymp. 249. an. 1. V. C. 970.
A. D. 217.
but lying idle at Antioch, he gave up himself to pleasures, and keeping there
the Soldiers against their inclination, thereby drew contempt and hatred upon
himself, which wrought his destruction.

35. Maesa a Phoenician, sister to Julia the wife of Severus, had two
daughters, Soaemis and Mammaea. The former had a son named Bassianus fourteen
years old, and the later one called Alexianus two years younger. Both these
boys were Priests of the Sun, in the Phoenician language called Heliogabalus,
and the elder being the chief, was also a youth of an excellent beauty, and for
it was very much admired by the Roman Soldiers. Their Grandmother Maesa hereat
took occasion to affirm (whether truly or otherwise) that they were both the
sons of Antoninus, who had been familiar with both her daughters, dwelling with
her under the same roof. Having got great store of wealth by living at Court in
her sisters time, she promised large sums to the Soldiers, in case the Empire
could be devolved upon one of them. The Soldiers gladly closing with her offer,
received them into their Camp; which Macrinus hearing of, neglected it, only
he sent Julianus with a party against the Revolters; but this party allured
with the sight of the boy and money together, cut off their Captains head, and
sending it back ^o Macrinus, were also received into the Camp. After this a
battle was fought in the confines of Syria and Phoenicia, wherein Macrinus
having the worst fled toward Italy, but was taken at Chalcedon, where he fell
sick of his journey, and his head was struck off after he had reigned about
fourteen months. He was more sharp toward his Soldiers than was suitable to
his condition, being otherwise also very severe, so as he burnt Adulterers
quick with their bodies joined together. He was slain in the 54 year of his
age, together with his son Diadumenianus, to whom he had given the title of
Caesar.

Heliogabalus.
36. Antoninus Heliogabalus succeeding Macrinus, continued still in his Office
of Priest, wearing the ornaments belonging to it, and dancing continually in
that Antic habit. He gave up himself to all filthiness, luxury, and
uncleanness, and killed many that talked against his courses. He married the
Image of Pallas (which never had seen light, except when the City was burnt,
since its bringing from Troy) unto his god, as also that of Urania (by which
the Africans meant the Moon) reported to be brought out of Phoenicia by Dido.
He built a sumptuous Temple for his god, who was brought into it in a chariot
adorned with gold and precious stones, the Priest himself leading the horses,
and going backward all the way. He painted his face though he had much natural
beauty, wore Pearls in his shoes, never supped under the rate of thirty
pounds, was drawn by Dogs in a Chariot up and down the Palace, alvvayes sat
either amongst Flovvers or svveet Odours, and when he journeyed had no less
then 600 Carriages in his train. Being told by the Syrian Priests that he
should die a violent death, he provided silken Halters, Golden Knives, and a
Turret floored with Gold and Pearl, saying, his death should be costly and
luxurious, that it might be said, No man died in such a sort. Of his mother he
was so fond, that he would do nothing without her, and carried her with him
into the Senate House. But these courses occasioned the ruin of them both.

37. His Grandmother fearing these courses would bring him into contempt with
the Soldiers, prevailed with him, though otherwise heady enough, to adopt
Alexianus his Cousin German, that all might not miscarry together with him. She
persuaded him to it, by showing how hereby he might provide for his pleasures
and attendance on his God, the other taking care of State affairs. He sought to
train up Alexianus, now called Alexander, in his own way, and Mammaea having
provided him Tutors, able men to bring him up in good literature, he either put
to death or banished the chief of them, as corrupting his son. He preferred
none but Players to public Dignities, and gave the governments of Provinces to
the filthiest amongst his slaves. By these things he drew more and more upon
him the hatred of the Soldiers, who all inclined to Alexander as a youth of
good hope, who also had money from his mother for a bait, without which all had
been nothing. Antoninus knowing this, endeavored all ways to poison him, and
this succeeding not, he gave out he was dead, to see how the Soldiers would
take it, who hereupon mutined. To appease them, he took him along with him in a
Chariot beautified with Pearl and Gold to the Camp. Here was Alexander saluted
and honored alone, no respect being given to Heliogabalus, who being incensed
thereat, went about to animadvert upon such as made acclamations; but the
Soldiers catching at this advantage, slew him, together with his mother, and
those that accompanied him, their two bodies being tumbled up and down the
streets were at length cast into Tiber. He thus died having lived 18 years, and
reigned five; A. V. C. 975. A. D. 222.

Alexander.
38. Alexander then was received as Emperor, Olymp. 250. ann. 2. V. C. 975. A.
D. 222. Consule Heredian. ubi supra. Lamprid. in Alexand. Eutropium l. 8.
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l 6. c. 28. Orosium lib. 7. cap. 18.
and ruled with great moderation and clemency, being kept from ill company by
Mammaea his mother, and otherwise of his own inclination abhorring blood, so
that in all his time not any one was put to death innocent and unheard. He
carried himself with great courtesy toward all; nay, Camillus attempting new
matters, he only thanked that he was willing to receive that burden which
good men refused. His saying was, Quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris.
What thou would not have done to thy self, do not to another. Although the
peace which Macrinus had made with the Parthian was disgraceful to the Roman
Empire, yet it pleased not the Parthians, who thought the perfidiousnesse of
Bassianus deserved much greater punishment. Thence arose dissatisfaction,
contempt, and hatred amongst the subjects of Artabanus, the issue whereof was,
that Artaxares or Artaxerxes stirred up the Persians to the recovery of their
ancient honor, and translated the Kingdom from Artabanus, and the Parthians,
upon himself, in the fourth year of this Alexander, 538 years after Alexander
the Great, or rather in the 538 year of the Seleucidae. Not content herewith,
he sent to Alexander to demand whatsoever the Romans had taken from the
Persians, and having a great ambition to recover what ever had belonged to that
Empire, invaded Mesopotamia, giving out he would reduce all Asia unto his
power. Alexander was constrained to march against him, and so repelled and
weakened him, though with great loss of his own men, that for diverse years no
more was heard of him. By his Lieutenants he prospered in the Wars of
Mauritiana, Illyricum, and Armenia, but being called for against the Germans
who wasted Gall, either because he was despised for want of success in this
expedition, for his severity, or rather for that the Soldiers loved to fish in
troubled waters, he was traitorously murdered, together with his mother, and
Maximinus was set up in his stead. Mammaea his mother was first instructed in
Christian Religion by Origin, whom she called to her at Antioch, but afterward
learnt of the Gnostics, 1. Openly to deny what she privately owned, and 2. to
keep, and worship images of Christ. She instructed her son in the same
Doctrine, who would have made a Temple for Christ, but was prohibited says
Lampridius; that is, would have made one if he could have done it with the good
will of the Romans. Ulpian the great Lawyer was his chief Justice, and was
slain by the Soldiers. Paulus also, Pomponius, and Modestinus flourished in his
time, which abounded with able men of this profession. Alexander was slain in
Gall near Moguntiacum, on the fourth before the Nones of October, having lived
29 years, and reigned 13. A. V. C. 988. A. D. 235. L. Catilius Severus, and L.
Ragonius Quintianus being Consuls.

Maximinus made Emperor by the Soldiers.
39. Maximinus by whose procurement Alexander was murdered, was born in Thrace,
his father being a Goth, and his mother an Alane. Being at first an Herds-man,
he was for the vastness of his body made a Soldier, and by degrees was
preferred in the Army. He had been set over the new raised Soldiers, to train,
and exercise them, and by his great valor, Herod. lib. 7, 8.
and enduring all labor and toil together with them, procured their favor,
and hereby his own rise. As he was a man of stupendous bulk and proportionable
diet, Capitolinus Eutropius lib. 9. Orosius lib. 7. cap. 19.
so also of avarice and cruelty, to the later whereof he was the more provoked
by a conspiracy or two, which were discovered ere they took effect. He
overthrew the Germans, and wasted their Country, threatening also to subdue all
the Northern Nations as far as the Ocean, and had his other carriage been
answerable to his valor, he might have enjoyed time and opportunity for the
performance of much. This occasion of revolt from him was first given in Africa
by his Officer at Carthage, whose rapacity so far incensed certain young men,
that they killed him, Gordianus.
and compelled Gordianus the Proconsul to take upon him the Purple, who being
of the age of 80 years, was joyfully owned both by Senate and People. But he
going about to revenge private injuries, destroyed himself, by constraining
Capellianus who governed Mauritiana to come upon him with an Army, wherewith
being worsted he hanged himself, his son having perished in the fight at the
age of 46. They scarcely enjoyed the title 36 days.

40. The Senate, that they might have some to oppose against Maximinus, Maximus
and Balbinus.
chose two Emperors, Maximus and Balbinus; but the people not being satisfied
therewith, and being desirous to have a Prince out of the stock of Gordianus,
they gave the title of Caesar to Gordianus his Grandson by his daughter, a boy
of 13 years of age. A little after it happened that two old Soldiers who had
belonged to Maximinus going to the Senate House to hearken for news, were
slain by two Senators, which thing raising a great tumult, the Soldiers in
Town set the City on fire, whereby a great part of it was burnt down, and
got them to their Camp. Balbinus was appointed to take care of Rome, and
Maximus went into Italy to raise forces against Maximinus, who now marched
fast for Rome. Finding no resistance at the Alps, he accounted himself most
sure of victory, but found so much at Aquileia as stopped his journey; for the
Inhabitants furnished by the commodiousnesse of the place with all sorts of
Provisions most stoutly defended themselves. They threw down so much scalding
Pitch and Sulphur upon his Soldiers, that they were not able to continue the
storms, and the women, it is said, cut the hair from their heads to make
Provision for bovv-strings. This unexpected opposition drove him to such a
rage, that having no power to torment the Enemy, he exercised his fury upon
diverse of his Captains whom he put to death, as if through their laziness and
neglect the Town stood out. This cruelty, together with the scarcity of
Victuals in the Camp (for the besiegers were so besieged that all Provisions
were cut off from them) induced such of the Soldiers, Maximinus killed by his
own men.
as had their Wives and Children at Rome, to conspire against him. Together
with him fell his son, such an one as himself, whom he had named Caesar, the
Soldiers crying out, that of an ill Litter not a Whelp was to be preserved. He
also persecuted the Church by the sixth persecution, commanding that Governors
only and the principal Ministers of our Savior's Doctrine should be put to
death. But to such an end came he, Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 29, and in Chron.
being the first Emperor created only by the Army without consent of the
Senate, after he had reigned three years, A. V. C. 991, A. D. 238.

41. Now to our continuation of Ecclesiastical matters. In the first year of
Alexander or the last of Heliogabalus, Bishops.
the day preceding the Ides of October, Callistus Bishop of Rome was crowned
with Martyrdom. The Sea was vacant six days, and then succeeded Urbanus the
seventeenth Bishop, according to Damasus, on the twentieth of October, and
first Feria. In the tenth of Alexander, on the eighth before the Calends of
June died Urbanus. The Sea was vacant thirty days, Damasus. Eusebius.
and then Pontianus succeeded on the eighth before the Calends of July, the
sixth Feria. In the first of Maximinus, Pontianus being banished into the
Island Sardinia, there died on the thirteenth of the Calends of December, and
Autherus succeeded him, who in the year following on the third of the Nones of
January was crowned with Martyrdom, because he had diligently gathered an
History of the Martyrs, and laid it up in the Church. The seat was vacant
thirteen days, and then was Fabianus elected on the seventeenth of January,
and the first Feria, being the twentieth Bishop of Rome, according to Damasus.
And about the Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 15, 26, 35.
eleventh year of Alexander, Heraclas who once was Origen's Usher in the School
of Alexandria was Bishop of that Sea, where he continued sixteen years.

CHAP. VI. From the death of Maximinus the first created Emperor without
consent of the Senate, to the Monarchy of Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, who reformed Religion, and translated the Imperial seat to Byzantium,
the space of 86 years.
1. THE news of Maximinus his death being brought to Rome, filled the City with
extraordinary joy, having taken Maximus as he was listing men in Italy, who
thereupon went to Aquileia, and received the Army, to which he pardoned all
things past. Then returned he to Rome, where he and his Colleague managed
matters with discretion enough, Herod. Capitol. Zozimus l. 1. Eutrop. l. 9.
could they have agreed betwixt themselves; but the one being jealous of the
other, and both endeavouting to grapple all the power into their own hands,
thereby wrought to themselves sudden destruction. The Praetorian bands hated
them both, as created by the Senate, and resolved for the removal of such an
indignity offered to the Army, to make them away, which Maximus understanding,
would have sent for the Guard of Germans, which he knew both to be faithful to
him, and able to resist the power of the other; but Balbinus suspecting that he
intended something against himself, would not suffer it; and so the Soldiers
entering the Palace haled them out, and after all sorts of indignities offered
to their persons, upon report that the Germans were coming, slew them both. Now
knowing no fit person whom they might prefer, and being assured it would be
very acceptable to the People, they made choice of Gordianus, Gordianus.
who had been formerly made Caesar. At his beginning so great an Eclypse of the
Sun happened ( April 2. on the second Feria, as Cappellus agrees with
Mulierus) that the day seemed to be turned into night, Olymp. 254. an. 2. V. C.
991. A. D. 238.
and nothing could be done in houses without candles. Sabinianus in Africa
attempted new matters, but was slain. Gordianus being yet very young undertook
an Expedition against the Persians, over whom Sapores in his third year began
to reign, having succeeded Artaxerxes their first King. By the good conduct of
Misitheus his Father-in-Law he prospered very well, but he being slain or made
away, the Soldiers not enduring the rawnesse of Gordianus, transferred the
Sovereignty unto Philip, and killed him, after he had reigned six years. Its
observed, that all those nine that slew him perished by their own hands, their
own swords, and the very same with which they destroyed him.

M. Julius Philippus.
2. M. Julius Philippus was by birth an Arabian of Trachonitis, his Father being
a notable Captain of thieves in that Country. He made his son partaker with him
in the Imperial dignity. Eutrop. l. 9. Victor. Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 34, and in
Chron.
In his fourth year fell out the the 1000th of Rome, which was celebrated with
great pomp, and all manner of Games, from April 21 to April 21 of the following
year. Eusebius reports of him, that he was the first Christian Emperor, and
that being desirous to join with the multitude in the Ecclesiastical Prayers,
he could not be admitted till he had first rendered an account of his Faith, and
joined himself with such, as for their sins were examined, and set in the place
of penitents, therefore because he was faulty in many things, says the
Historian, he willingly obeyed, and declared by his works his sincere and
religious mind toward God. The Martyrologies will have him and his son
converted by occasion of the solemnity of the 1000th year, and being baptized
by Fabianus Bishop of Rome, after confession of his sins, to have been admitted
to the Communion. But says Cappellus, if any of this had been true, would the
Senate that was so set against the Christians have reckoned him amongst the
gods? At least would not Decius have objected this as a crime against him? The
Scythians in his time infesting the Empire, he repelled by his Lieutenants.
Marinus raising a Commotion in Pannonia, he sent Decius to quiet the Soldiers,
who put the purple upon him. Philip then led an Army against this Usurper, and
they met at Verona, where the old Emperor was defeated and slain, which news
coming to Rome, his son a child of twelve years of age was murdered by the
Praetorian bands, after they had reigned about five years.

3. Quinctus Trajanus Decius, as Orosius calls him, Olymp. 257. an. 1. V. C.
1002. A. D. 249. Orosius. lib. 7. cap. 21. Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 39. Lege item
Zozimum lib. 1. Eutrop. l. 9. Pomponium Laetum.
was born in Pannonia. Decius.
According to the custom he assumed his son into participation of the Empre. He
quieted at his beginning some motions in Gaul, but raised a great one against
the Church, being Author of the seventh Persecution out of hatred to Philip, or
as others say, having conspired against Philip, out of hatred to Christianity:
by his edicts many were put to most cruel deaths. He received his reward after
a short time; for now the Goths (originally inhabitants Scanzia) invaded
Thrace, and other places, both by Land and Sea, because such of them as served
in the Wars had been defrauded of their pay. At the desire of the Senate, to
which he commended the Commonwealth in his absence, he marched against and
overthrew them in several battles (notwithstanding that he lost his son, and
Priscus Governor of Philippi revolted) and had perfected his Victory, but that
he was betrayed by Gallus Hostilianus Governor of the lower Maesia. He
persuaded him to fight in a fenny ground, and then revealed his intention to
the Enemy, by whom he was beset, and was shallowed up in a bog, so as his body
could never be found. He was courteous enough to all but Christians, and gave
satisfaction to Senate and People. He reigned two years and an half.

Gallus.
4. Vibius Gallus Hostilianus succeeded him, both in his Empire, his malice
toward Christians, and his punishnent. He clapped up an ignominious Peace with
the Goths, unto whom he promised money, a thing scarcely heard of before
amongst the Romans; and this not being long kept, Eutrop. l. 9. Pompon. Laetus.
Victor.
the Goths and Scythians made incursions into Thrace, Macedonia, and Thessaly,
and also into Asia, making great spoils in all places. Many other Nations after
their example rebelled, and made havoc of the Provinces: the Parthians also
peirced into Armenia, and thence expelled Tiridates the King. The Scythians
proceeded so furiously, that they seemed to carry all before them, till that
Aemilianus a Moor, and who commanded the Legions in Pannonia, by promises drew
on his Soldiers against them, and so repelled them, that he invaded their
Country, for which service he was saluted Emperor by this Army. Aemilianus.
Gallus hearing of this, went presently against him, but was slain together
with Volusian his son and partner in the Empire. Such was the end of him who
persecuted the Church of God, and chased away such holy men as prayed for his
peaceable and prosperous estate. Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. c. 1. Orosius l. 7. c. 21.
The persecutions of the Christians in the days of Decius and Gallus were
accompanied or followed with a most grievous Pestilence, which so vehemently
raged, that there was scarcely any Province, City or house, but was almost
wasted and ruined by it. Gallus and Volusian his son reigned little more than
one year.

Valerianus.
5. Aemilianus enjoyed the dignity not long, for another Army near the Alps
creating Emperor one Valerianus, a man of noble descent, Olymp. 258. an. 1. V.
C. 1006. A. D. 253. Laetus. Orosius ubi supra. Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. c. 10.
his Soldiers, lest they should incur any danger or trouble killed him after
three months. Valerianus then taking the Government upon him in Rhaetia, the
Senate at Rome gave the title of Caesar to Gallienus his son. He was at first
very courteous to the Christians, and so familiarly embraced them, that his
Palace was filled with Professors of the Faith; but afterward, he was persuaded
by the Master of the Egyptian Sorcerers to slay them, as Enemies to their Art,
and hinderers of it is operation in their presence; so that he raised the eighth
Persecution, wherein many perished. But God avenged the cause of his Saints
upon him; for going against Sapores the King of the Persians, he was taken
prisoner, and could not be released, notwithstanding the intercession of the
Persian's confederates, who alleged, that the Romans the more they were
overcome, the more vehemently they ever resisted. Sapores kept and used him as
a stool to tread on when he got on horseback, and at length pulling his skin
over his ears, Gallienus.
tortured him to death. Gallienus his son who all this time had reigned with
him terrified hereat, Orosius l. 7. c. 22. Eutrop. l. 9.
stopped the Persecution of the Christians; but many of the Romans who had been
the instruments of the Emperors cruelty, being to be punished as well as he,
many Nations fell like a flood upon the Roman Empire, Gallienus giving up
himself to all wantonness and luxury. The Germans overrunning Rhaetia and
part of Italy, came as far as Ravenna, the Allemans also wasting Gall peirced
into Italy. Greece, Macedonia, Pontus, and Asia, were overwhelmed with an
inundation of the Goths and Scythians. Dacia beyond Danubius was perpetually
lost, the Quadi and Sarmatae seized on Pannonia, and the Parthians having got
into their hands Mesopotamia, made incursions into Syria.

6. Gallienus neglected these motions, answering always concerning these
matters, Aurelius Victor. Pollio de 30 Tyrannis. Orosius ubi supra. Pomponius
Laetus.
as if notwithstanding them the Empire might flourish and do well enough. He
thus little minding the Commonwealth, the Soldiers almost in all places chose
them Emperors; so that at this time there were no less than thirty Tyrants.
The most notable of these upstarts was Posthumus, who reigned in Gall with
great commendations ten years; he used much moderatition, expelled the Enemies,
and recovered Provinces. All those thirty fell at length, either fighting with
one another, or with the Emperor. But Gallienus at last, being contemned, was
slain, having reigned six years together with his father, and nine by himself,
A. V. C. 1021. A. D. 268. His Successor was Flavius Claudius a Dalmatian born,
according to his own desire, Claudius.
and the will of the Senate, who killing of the Goths and other Barbarians to
the number of 330000 men, and sinking 2000 Vessels, the Senate decreed him a
Golden Shield to be set up in the Court, and a Statue in the Capitol; but to
the great loss of the Commonwealth he was slain at Syrmium, when he had
scarcely reigned two years. Orosius l. 7. c. 23.
Into his place was advanced Aurelius Quintillus his brother, Quintillus.
an excellent person; but being too good, they that set him up pulled him down,
because they could not bear his gravity and strictness, Aurelianus.
killing him the seventeenth day after at Aquileia. Then reigned Valerius
Aurelianus, born either at Syrmium or some place in Dacia, of mean parentage.
Being by Claudius appointed to drive the Goths out of Thrace, he was after his
death saluted Emperor. He was an excellent Soldier, and restored the Empire
well nigh to it is former bounds. He drove out the Goths from about Danubius;
then returning to Rome, and there punishing some Seditious persons, he marched
into the East, to reduce those parts to their former obedience.

7. In the days of Gallienus, the Persians having subdued Mesopotamia, and
invaded Syria, One Odenatus an inhabitant of Palmyra, a City of this Country,
gathering together a company of Boors, fell upon them, and so ordered his
affairs, that he beat them out of Syria, recovered Mesopotamia, Orosius.
and encamped before Ctesiphon the Metropolis. Being slain after this Conquest,
Zenobia his wife in right of her Children kept possession of the East together
with Egypt. Aurelianus now going against her, in his way, in Illyricum, Eusebius.
in Chron.
Thrace, and other places, defeated such Enemies as he met, Zozimus lib. 1.
and then entering Syria, after some trouble and danger, overthrew, and took the
Queen her self near Antioch, and then recovered all her Dominions. But after
his departure the Inhabitants of Palmyra killed his Garrison and revolted,
which calling him back, he destroyed both the City and them therein, sparing
neither Sex nor age; and after this recovered Egypt. Then returning into the
West, Victor. Orosius.
he bent his endeavors against Tetricus, who reigned in Gall. Tetricus being
vexed by his Seditious Soldiers, desired him, whom he termed Invincible, to
rescue him from such evils, and betrayed his Army into his hands. Eusebius. Hist.
l. 7. cap. 30. and in Chron.
Valerian growing proud upon such success, first of all Romans set a Diadem on
his head, and adorned himself with Gold and Pearl. He began also to persecute
the Christians; but undertaking a War against the Persians, he was slain
betwixt Byzantium and Heraclea, through the malice of his Secretary, in the
sixth year of his reign. In his first year, Agathias.
Hormisda the third Persian King began his reign, which lasted but one year.
Him succeeded Varane, and reigned three years, and him followed Narses who
continued 28. In his first year also died Plotinus the Platonist, who deriding
all religion, perished through the just judgment of God by a filthy and
painful disease, although he had chosen a pleasant and wholesome place wherein
to live in Campania. Firmicus lib. 1.
Now also flourished Porphyrius his Scholar, who of a Christian became a great
Enemy to Christianity, and wrote 15 books against it, to which Eusebius
answered in 30. of which 20 were extant in the time of Jerome, but at this day
not one.

Tacitus.
8. There was an inter-regnum after the death of Valerian for 8 months, Orosius
lib. 7. cap. 24. Eutrop. lib. 9.
the Senate and Army straining courtesy the one with the other, at length the
Senate made choice of Tacitus, a man of Consular Dignity, who in his sixth
month died of a Fever at Tarsus. The Senate desired him, that in case he
should die presently, he would not leave his Children his Successors, Fl.
Vopiscus.
but some man of approved worth and valor, as the necessity of the State
required. This man was Probus; Zozimus. Pomponius Laetus.
yet notwithstanding Florianus the brother of Tacitus invaded the Empire, but
was cut off by Probus near Tarsus, within the space of two or three months.
Probus.
Probus unwillingly receiving the burden upon him, managed the Government with
great commendation. He recovered Gall out of the hand of the Francones a people
of Germany, which now first seized on it, after many bloody battles, and after
this was engaged in Civil Wars. For Saturninus was saluted Emperor in Egypt,
who was overthrown also, and killed also against his mind, and the same
success he had against Proculus in Gall and Bonosus a Britain born. He
overthrew the Sarmatians, subdued several barbarous Nations about Thrace by the
terror of his name only, quieted all Asia, and forced the Parthian King to
desire peace, which he granted. Returning afterward into Thrace, he planted
several barbarous people within the Roman Empire, whereof some revolting, he
chastized and reduced them. Now all things flourished exceedingly through peace
and security, which made him something slight the Soldiers, who thereupon, as
he was marching through Illyricum against the Persians, murdered him at
Syrmium, though he fled for safety into a fortified Tower. That saying undid
him, Si vixero non opus erit amplius Romano Imperio militibus, a speech of
great despair for the Soldiers. Witty and sharp speeches fallen from Princes
have often given fire to Seditions. Surely, says the most learned Viscount of
St. Albans, Princes had need in tender matters, and ticklish times, to beware
what they say; especially in those short speeches, which fly abroad like Darts,
and are thought to be shot out of their secret intentions. For as for large
Discourses, they are flat things, and not so much noted.

Carus.
9. M. Aurelius Carus, of the Province of Narbon in Gall, Olymp. 265. ann. 3. V.
C. 1036. A. D. 283.
succeeded him, who, when he had created Caesar's his two sons, Carinus and
Numerianus, restrained the Sarmatians, that upon the death of Probus threatened
Italy: But going against the Persians, after he had recovered Mesopotamia, and
taken the two noble Cities of Parthia, Ctesiphon, and Cochis, he was slain by a
Thunderbolt in his Tent near to the River Tigris. Orosius. Eutrop. Vopiscus.
Of his two sons, Numerianus was with him, and Carinus was left behind to look
to Gall. Numerianus returning out of the East as Conqueror, and lying sick in
his Litter, was killed by Arius Aper his father-in-law, who gaped after the
Empire. Scarcely after some days was this wickedness detected by the stench
of the Carkase, Diocletian.
and then the Author of it being also discovered, Valerius Deocletianus, who
governed the family of Carus, was chosen Emperor, and rewarded Aper as he had
deserved. On the 15th before the Calends of December, and 10 days after, he
entered Nicomedia in Purple. From the beginning of this Diocletian the Egyptians
began a new Era, fetching its rise from the new Moon of Thoth the preceding
month ( August 29) which they called the Era of Grace for some reason or
other. Cappellus observes, that the fluctuating and vicious Chronology of
Baronius henceforth begins to be right. For thinking, says he, that he
exhibited the years both of the true, and received Era of Christ, in truth, he
exhibited neither the one sort nor the other. Beginning the Era of Diocletian
from the 284 year of our Lord, its true, and right, so that it be understood of
the received, not of the true Era of Christ: and the same is to be said
concerning the years of the following Emperors. But after this, Carinus and
Diocletian fought for the Sovereignty, and Carinus after much ado was slain by
his own Soldiers for his lasciviousness, which made an end of a bloody and
laborious War.

10. Diocletian then enjoyed the Dignity alone; but great stirs arising in
Gall, Carausius also who was set to defend the Seacoasts from the invasion of
the Franks and Saxons, rather taking part with them than otherwise, he was
constrained to create Caesar, Maximianus Herculeus. Orosius ubi supra cap. 25.
Eutrop. lib. 9. Festus Rufus.
He suppressed the motions in Gall, but commanding Carausius to be killed, this
man put on the Purple, though a man of mean condition, and seized upon Britain.
Achilleus rebelled in Egypt, Africa was in trouble, and Narses King of Persia
invaded the Eastern parts. Diocletian awakened with these dangers, promoted
Maximianus to be Augustus, and they two adopted for Caesar's Maximianus
Galerius, and Constantius Chlorus, who married Theodora the wive's daughter of
Herculeus, and by her had six sons, as the other, the daughter of Diocletian.
Carausius valiantly held Britain for seven years, and then was slain by
Allectus, who having kept possession of the Island three years, was overthrown
by Asclepiodorus. Constantius fighting against the Allemans in Gall, at first
was worsted, but afterward got a great victory, wherein 60000 of them are said
to have been slain. Maximianus Herculeus reduced Africa. Diocletian himself
besieging Achillens in Alexandria 8 months, at length slew him therein, gave
up the City to be plundered by the Soldiers, and vexed all Egypt with
proscriptions and slaughters. Galerius was overthrown by the Persian King, and
fled to Diocletian, who received him with great disdain, and made him run in
his Purple Robe for some miles before his Chariot. Galerius much moved by this
disgrace recruited his Army throughout Illyricum and Maesia, and returning
against Narses, routed his Army, took his Camp, his Wives, Sisters, and
Children, many of his Nobles, and great Treasure, wherewith returning into
Mesopotamia unto Diocletian, he was then received most honorably; for he had
taken Ctesiphon, subdued Assyria, and recovered those five Provinces beyond
Tigris, which revolted from Trajan.

11. After this were the Carpi, Bastarnae, and Sarmatians overthrown, and
diverse other Nations quieted. Diocletian now suffered himself to be called
Lord, and worshipped as a God. He in the East, and his Colleague in the West,
raised against the Christians the most heavy persecution that ever yet had
happened both for length and cruelty. The tenth persecution.
The Soldiers were first begun with, whereof all such as would not sacrifize to
Devils were cashiered; but the persecutors proceeded to such cruelty and rage
that some were Crucified, Orosius ut supra. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. c. 3.
etc.
others burnt alive, others roasted with slow fires, and others pulled in
pieces by having their limbs made fast to boughs of Trees, which being brought
together for that purpose, were afterward suffered to return to their natural
position. Some were starved to death, many slain with the sword, and many
devoured of wild beasts. Some were flead alive, others beaten to death by hot
burning iron rods, and some returned to prison after their torments, there to
languish away. Women were hung naked by one foot, and some had their breasts
feared: no Sex, no Age, no condition was spared. A terrible Earthquake followed
in Syria, which destroyed many thousands about Tire and Sidon. But in the
second year of this persecution Diocletian persuaded his Colleague, though
unwilling, that they both might resign the Empire to the two Caesar's; so that
he being seized with a fowl disease after he had almost reigned twenty years,
put off the Purple at Nicomedia, and Maximianus Herculius the same day at
Milain. The former withdrew to Salenae into his own Country, and the later
into Lucania.

Maximianus Galerius, and Constantius Chlorus.
12. The two Caesar's, Maximianus Galerius, Orosius.
and Constantius Chlorus became Augusti after the resignation of their fathers
in Law, and first of all others parted the Empire between them. To Constantius
fell Gall, Britain, Eutropius l. 10.
Spain, Italy, and Africa; to the other Illyricum, with Greece, and Asia.
Galerius created Caesar's his sister's two sons, Galerius Maximinus and Severus.
The East he appointed to Maximinus, and intended Italy for Severus, if he could
but take it from Constantius. For this purpose he kept at Rome as an Hostage
Constantine the son of Constantius by Helena a British woman as some say, which
he put away when he married the daughter of Maximianus. But Constantine made an
escape to his father, Constantine. Olymp. 271. ann. 1. V. C. 1058. A. D. 306.
who died at York in Britain not long after, on the 25 of July, in the third
year of his reign, he and his Colleague both the sixth time being Consuls, in
the 1058 year of the City, the 306 of the ordinary Era of Christ, the first
year of the 271 Olympiad ending. His son Constantine in Britain was now saluted
Emperor.

13. The Praetorian Soldiers at Rome named Emperor Maxentius the son of
Maximianus Herculius, Idem.
who together with Diocletian had resigned the Government. Against Maxentius,
Galerius sent Severus, Aureiius Victor.
who besieging Rome was betrayed by his Soldiers, and flying away was killed at
Ravenna. Now Maximianus Herculius out of desire to recover the Empire joined
with Constantine, to whom he married Fausta his daughter by Eutropia; Zozimus
lib. 2. Orosius. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. Capp. 14, 15, 16, 17.
then to obtain his design did he plot against both son and son-in-law, but
being frustrated by both, hanged himself at Massilia, now Marseils, a City in
France. Maxentius his son, and Galerius Maximinus, otherwise disagreeing joined
in renewing the persecution against the Christians, by Eusebius called the
second, which we understand of his age. But Galerius Maximianus Augustus made
Licinius his Colleague in the Empire in the fifth year after the death of
Constantius, in which year also Sapores the seventh King of Persia began his
reign. Galerius Augustus heightning the persecution of Christians by several
cruel edicts, rotted within, and was eaten with worms, which crawled out of
his belly, so that the Physicians not able to endure the stench of his body
were put to death. Perceiving the hand of God upon him, in his own and
Constantines name he recalled his Edicts, and at last miserably died. This was
the second persecution, which if it be joined with the former, both make up
about 8 years. But this rest scarcely continued 6 months; for Maximianus being
dead at Salonae, Maximinus being nothing amended by so sad an example, renewed
the persecution. His fury God chastized by putting him to flight before the
Armenians whom he had provoked, as also by pestilence and famine, wherein by
Gods Grace the humanity of Christians was as admirable as formerly their
constancy had been. Now the Roman Empire was under four Princes, viz.
Constantine and Maxentius sons of Emperors, and Maximinus and Licinius new
raised men.

14. The chief men at Rome being wearied with the Tyranny of Maxentius sent for
Constantine against him. Canstantine in his journey by the benefit of a famous
vision tasted of Christianity, being formerly inclined toward it. Eutrop. ubi
supra. Orosius.
The truth of the story he confirmed to Eusebius by an oath (as that Historian
tells us in the History of his life) and relates it after this manner: A
little past noon he beheld the sign of a Cross lively figured in the air, with
an Inscription in it, Constantine converted.
containing these words: In hoc vince. In this overcome. He said, that both he
and his whole Army did wonder at so strange a prodigy. It Is further said, that
Christ appearing to him in a dream, commanded him to make the figure of the
Cross which he had seen, and to wear it in his Colors in the field.
Proceeding against Maxentiu^, he overthrew his forces four times, although four
times larger than his own; at the later time Maxentius flying amain toward
Rome, was drowned in the River. Maximinus published an Edict against
Christians, but was forced to sing a palinode twice, although his flattery was
as unprofitable as his threats, for he died of an horrible disease at Tarsus.
Then did Constantine and Licinius enjoy the Empire together. The former after
his Victory over Maxentius was confirmed in the Christian Faith, and owned
Christ for the Author of his success. Licinius complied with him for a time in
encouraging the Christians; but afterward plotting against him, he also began
a grievous persecution against the People of God, changed the good Laws, and
laid heavy impositions on his Subjects. Constantine being hereby constrained to
make War upon him, overthrew him in Pannonia, and several times afterward,
for that he had renewed the War both by Land and Sea most perfidiously, and
given the title of Caesar to Martinianus. At length he forced him to yield his
person, and deliver up his Robe by the hand of his wife, Licinius put to death.
which was Constantine's sister, given him on purpose to oblige him. He sent
him to Thessalonica, where he afterward attempting new matters, he commanded
him to be slain.

15. Thus did Constantine obtain the Monarchy of the Roman Empire, in the
nineteenth year of his reign, the fourth of the 275 Olympiad, A. V. C. 1077,
Constantine obtains the Monarchy.
A. D. 324. Six years after, in the 25 of his reign, he repaired Byzantium, and
making it larger than ever, carried from Rome the greatest part of the
ornaments, and of Christian Senators, and calling it after himself
Constantinople, Builds Constantinople.
would have it also named New Rome, and to be head of the Roman Empire with the
same right as the other. He first of all had designed to build a City near
Sardis in Asia, Vide Ludovicum in Augustine. de Civitate Dei. lib. 5. c. 25.
Simsonium in Chron. cathol. ad A. M. 3347. Joan. Baptistam Egnatium in
Constantino l. 2. Romans Principum.
afterward begun one at Sigaeum a Promontory of Mount Ida, in the Country of
Troas. The third time the design was begun at Chalcedon, where walls were
erected; but fowls snatching up and carrying away the cords of the workmen to
Byzantium a City of Thrace, upon it the Emperor pitched. This Town was first
built in the third year of the thirtieth Olympiad; Hesychius says by a Colony
of the Argives, Ammianus by one of the Athenians, Velleius says, it was a
Colony of the Milesians, and Marcianus Periegetos of the Megarians, being so
named from Byzas their Countryman and Captain of the Colony. It stood right
over against Chalcedon in a far better soil, which made Apollo term the
founders of the later blind men, because they passed by so excellent a place.
It ran through various fortune according to that influence which Greece had
into it is affairs; as we have from time to time observed upon occasion.
Severus the Emperor almost destroyed it, but by the Soldiers of Galienus it
was brought to ruin, and now restored and augmented by Constantine.

16. This Empire being now in it is declining condition, by reason of it is old
age (for all sublunary things are subject to the vicissitude of time) and
sorely distempered by inward heats, into which want of hereditary Monarchy, and
the horrid licentiousness of a standing Army had thrown it, as also laboring
under so huge a bulk, and so great a plethora as Nature could not well govern,
Constantine by translating thither the Imperial seat occasioneth the ruin of
the Empire.
being forced as it were by Constantine to change its natural, suitable, and
native air, by so violent an alteration contracted it is mortal infirmity. For
as plants being transplanted out of their native soil, into other regions
diverse in climate and quality, retain little of their natural virtue; so humane
affairs, especially Dominions and Empires, by such great mutations lose their
vigor and stability, even also as we see it happens to several sorts of
Animals. For this cause the Senate would never consent to the Commons to depart
from Rome to Veii, though a place much more pleasant and commodious, especially
after Rome was burnt by the Galls. All great and sudden mutations as to the
body natural, so to the body Politic, are ever dangerous. But this translation
of the Imperial Seat to Byzantlum, seems also to have given some occasion to
a second error of Constantine, whereby dividing his Empire into three parts to
his sons, of one great one he made three, with a notable diminution of
authority and strength. For his sons falling out amongst themselves, they so
defeated one another, as the Empire was exhausted, and enervated amongst them.

17. For although it sometimes a little recovered under one Prince, yet
remained it so liable to divisions, How this came to pass.
that it seldom happened but it was divided into Eastern and Western, till at
length Odoacer King of the Heruli and Turingi entering Italy with a great Army,
cast Augustulus into such straights, that out of desperation he quitted the
Western Empire, which happened about the year 476. The Hunni ere this had
passed over Danubius, Alaricus King of the Vandals had taken Rome. The Vandals
first seized on Andalusia, and afterward on Africa: the Alani on Lusitania
(now Portugal) and the Goths on the greater part of Spain, the Angli on
Britain, and the Burgundians on Provence. Justinian the Emperor by driving the
Vandals out of Africa and the Goths out of Italy, did a little repair these
decays. but the effect thereof continued not long, for about the year 710 the
Armies and Heresy of Mahomet began to disturb the Eastern Empire; and in a
short time the Saracens overran Syria, Egypt, Africa, Sicily, and Spain.
About the year 735 they also seized on several parts of Gall. Thus was the
Western Empire by little and little torn in pieces and cantonized. At length by
a new title it came to Charles the Great, in whose family it scarcely continued
100 years, and then came to be Elective by seven Persons, and so continues
rather a resemblance of an Empire than otherwise unto this day. As for the
Eastern, it continued so weak, that scarcely sometimes could it defend the
Metropolis against the Saracens; much less could it afford any assistance to
the other; and after the Saracens, the Turks got ground of it by little and
little, till having for many years left the Emperors little more than an empty
name, at last Constantinople also was taken by Mahomet the Great. No more at
present by way of Anticipation, either concerning the decay of the Roman
Empire, or of those particular Kingdoms, Principalities, and States that were
cut out of it, all which are referred to the method of another Volume. But as
we said, the division of the Empire took it is original from the translation of
the Imperial Seat to Byzantium, it increased by plurality of Princes, and came
to perfection in the promotion of Charles the Great, after which there was no
communion of Government, Laws, Magistracy, or Councils, as had been before. Now
to our continuation of Ecclesiastical matters.

Bishops,
18. In the second year of Decius was Fabianus Bishop of Rome crowned with
Martyrdom on the fourteenth of the Calends of February. The Sea was vacant for
one year, and then was chosen Cornelius, whose election displeasing some,
Novatus ordained against him Novatianus. The year following Cornelius was
Martyred on the eighteenth before the Calends of October, and Lucius succeeded
him, who shortly after was banished. In the second of Gallienus was he
beheaded, and after a vacancy of 35 days, Stephen succeeded on the ninth of
April the first feria, who interceding for Basilides condemned by the
Spaniards, they defended their right against him, and condemned his usurpation
against the Africans as appears from Cyprian's Epistles, as also that the
boldness of the Roman Sea was now checked by all the Provinces. After three
years Stephen was beheaded by the command of Valerian, and Sixtus succeeded
him, who being beheaded when Laurence the Deacon was fried to death by the
command of Valerian, Dionysius succeeded. After him came Felix, and then
Eutychianus, who being martyred in the first of Carus, after nine days Caius
succeeded, December 16. Caius was crowned with Martyrdom in the twelfth of
Diocletian, and after eleven days Marcellinus succeeded, who through fear
offering incense to Idols, when he denied it, was overborn by the testimony of
a multitude of witnesses, confessed his fault, and afterward redeemed his
credit by suffering Martyrdom. Marcellus succeeded him. After Marcellus
succeeded Eusebius, and then Miltiades, then Sylvester, who was Bishop at the
time of the Council of Nice, in the twentieth year of Constantine.

19. After Alexander, Mazabanes was Bishop of Jerusalem until the reign of
Gallus and Volusianus, after him Hymeneus till the time of Aurelian. Then
followed Zambdas and Hermon, according to Lib. 7. c. 19.
Eusebius, who writes, that the Sea of Jerusalem was always honored, and the
succession continued unto his own days. After Hermon Macarius was Bishop,
Socrat. Scholast. l. 1. cap. 9, 13.
and was present at the Council of Nice. In the Church of Antioch after
Philetus succeeded Zebinus, and then Babylas, who died in prison, in the
persecution under Decius. Him followed Fabius, him Demetrianus, and him Paulus
Samosatenus the heretic, who denying the Divinity of the Son of God, was
excommunicated, and deprived by the second Synod held against him at Antioch in
the days of Eusebius. l. 7. c. 29, 30.
Aurelianus. And when he would neither depart the Church, nor avoid the house,
the Emperor was besought (the first application to the Prince in this nature
by the Christians) to interpose and command by edict, that such should have the
house as agreed in doctrine with the followers of the Bishop of Rome and Italy.
Domnus was by the Synod appointed to succeed him, after whom followed Timeus,
Cyrillus, Dorotheus, Tyrannus, Vitalis, Philogonus a Martyr, and Socrat. l. 1.
c. 9, 23.
Eustathius, who was at the Council of Nice. He fell into the Heresy of
Sabellius, who being the Scholar of Noetus, taught that the three Persons of
the Trinity were but one; but they differed, in that Sabellius said not the
Father to have suffered. He was deposed by a Council held at Antioch. Eusebius
Pamphilius Bishop of Caesarea confuted him. After his deposition the Sea was
vacant eight years. In the Sea of Alexandria after Heraclas, Dionysius the
Scholar of Origin was Bishop, in the third year of Philip. He reports in Quem
vid. l. 6, and 7. passim.
Eusebius the peril he stood in, and the persecution he suffered under Decius.
He wrote of the Alexandrian Martyrs to Fabius Bishop of Antioch; and to Novatus
the Heretic, who being a Priest of Rome fell from his order, and calling his
Sect Cathari, would not admit unto the Church such as fell after repentance,
and he abhorred second marriage. Dionysius also wrote to Hermanion, to Steven,
and Xistus Bishops of Rome, unto Philemon a Minister of Rome, and unto
Dionysius Bishop of Rome. He confuted the Book of Nepos the Chiliast, and
confounded in open disputation Coracion his disciple. Hitherto this error of
the Millenaries propagated by Papias, had many of the Fathers that adhered to
it, who yet held that Christ when he came was to do his own work, without any
prejudice to Earthly Princes in the mean time. Some observe, that Dionysius
striking at this error, traduceth the Apocalypse, as also defending the
distinction of Persons against Sabellius, seems to make three Essences. Many
betook themselves to Dionysius Bishop of Rome, that he would reclaim him, and
obtained it. After he had governed the Church seventeen years he died, and
Maximinus succeeded him, whom followed Theonas, and him Peter, who was martyred
under Diocletian. Him succeeded Achillas, and then came Alexander, who was at
the Council of Nice. He by preaching of the Trinity somewhat curiously, gave
occasion to Arius one of his Clergy to fall from the Faith, as L. 1. c. 5.
Socrates informs us.

20. In the fifth year of Philip whilst Fabianus was Bishop of Rome, Donatus
the Bishop of Carthage died, and Cyprian succeeded him by consent of all men
except Felicissimus, who, whilst the Heathens invaded his patrimony,
endeavored to deprive him of his Bishopric. Felicissimus was ordained Bishop
by Novatus, Vita and epistolae Cypriani.
who also ordained Novatianus against Cornelius Bishop of Rome. Yet Cornelius
favored Felicissimus against Cyprian, and would have taken Cognizance of their
business, whereupon Cyprian vehemently rebukes him, and denies that any one
beyond the Sea has right to pass judgment upon any matters concerning
Africa. And a little after, the pride of the Roman Sea was reprehended by all
those of the Provinces, an occasion being given about Basilides, who being
censured in Spain, complained to Stephen the Bishop of Rome. Cyprian was
several times driven into exile. Lib. 7. c. 3.
Eusebius makes him to have erred in rebaptizing Heretics. In the fourth of
Valerian died Origin seventy years old, Origin.
a man of admirable parts, most austere life, indefatigable industry, and
stupendous learning, but of impure Doctrine. Jerome shows how full of
portentous errors his book (...) is. Quem consule de Civitate Dei l. 21. c. 17.
Augustine says, he held the Devil at length should be delivered from Hell, and
associated with the holy Angels, and for this, and other things, especially for
holding alternate or successive blessedness and misery for ever, the Church
did reject him. Pamphilus wrote an Apology for him. But his works are to be
read with especial care, and especially his Commentaries upon the Scripture,
concerning some of which Theodore In Romans cap. 3. verse. 20.
Beza passes this censure: Certe hoc ausim dicere, si haec sunt Origenis cujus
titulum praeferunt, hunc hominem fuisse selectum Diaboli organum Apostolicae
Doctrinae evertendae destinatum; for he evaporateth the solid and substantial
Doctrine of the Gospel, into Allegorical, and aerie Notions.

21. But, God having exercised his people by many a fiery trial, was pleased to
preserve the bush unburned, and at length to grant them Peace by Constantine,
who proved a nursing father to the Church, taking away all penal Laws against
them, and enacting new ones, not only for their preservation, but convenience
and comfort. And as he preserved them from external violence; so he also took
care for their inward peace. This had been somewhat of late disturbed by the
Heresy of Manes, from whom his followers were named Maniches, who began to
publish his impure Doctrine in the first of Probus, in the 277 year of the
ordinary, or received Era of Christ. This fellow being a Persian, Eusebius. l. 7.
c. 28.
said that he was born of a Virgin, that he was both Christ and the holy Ghost,
and sent out twelve Disciples to preach his Doctrine, which was made up of many
old Heresies heretofore named. But his, and other gross opinions found not
such entertainment as to procure so much disturbance as that of Arius did, who
having as we said heard Alexander the Bishop of Alexandria discoursing
curiously of the Trinity, and thinking that he maintained the error of
Sabellius, in opposition to him fell to deny the blessed Trinity, and affirmed
that the son of God was like unto God in name only, and not in substance. The
Council of Nice.
His Heresy having been condemned in many Synods, Constantine in the 20th of
his reign A. D. 325. summoned a General Council to meet at Nice, where
assembled 318 Bishops. In opposition to Arianism was framed the Nicene Creed,
June 19. Hosius presided as he had done in the Synodes of Egypt, and first
subscribed the Canons. Besides the condemnation of Arius, the Sanction
concerning Easter made at Arles and in Palaestine was confirmed. Moreover,
twenty Ecclesiastical Canons were established, than which no good Author
mentions more. Now were the Temples of Idols overthrown, and Churches
Erected, the service of Devils was banished, and the worship of the true God
owned and encouraged: now faith and patience triumphed over most tedious and
exquisite persecutions, and truth dispelled the Clouds of prejudice and error.

Mr. George Herbert his Church Militant.
REligion now flourished in Greece, where Arts
Gave her the highest place in all men's hearts.
Learning was posed, Philosophy was set.
Sophisters taken in a fishers net.
Plato, and Aristotle were at a loss,
And wheeled about again to spell Christ's Cross.
Prayers chased Syllogisms into their den,
And Ergo was transformed into Amen.
Though Greece took horse as soon as Egypt did,
And Rome as both, yet Egypt faster rid,
And spent her period, and prefixed time
Before the other. Greece being past her prime,
Religion went to Rome, subduing those,
Who that they might subdue made all their foes.
The Warrior his dear skars no more resounds,
But seems to yield Christ has the greater wounds,
Wounds willingly endured to work his bliss,
Who by an ambush lost his Paradise.
The great heart stoops, and takes from the dust
A sad repentance, not the spoils of lust;
Quitting his spear, lest it should pierce again
Him in his members, who for him was slain.
The shepherds hook grew to a Scepter here,
Giving new names, and numbers to the year.
But the Empire dwelt in Greece, to comfort them
Who were cut short in Alexander's stem.
In both of these Prowess and Arts did tame
And tune men's hearts against the Gospel came,
Which using, and not fearing skill in the one
Or strength in the other, did erect her Throne.
Many a rent, and struggling the Empire knew
(As dying things are wont) until it flew
At length to Germany, still Westward bending,
And there the Churches festival attending:
That as before Empire, and Arts made way,
(For no less Harbingers would serve than they)
So they might still, and point us out the place
Where first the Church should raise her down-cast face.
Strength levels ground, Art makes a Garden there,
Then showrs Religion, and makes all to bear.
Spain in the Empire shared with Germany,
But England in the higher victory
Giving the Church a Crown to keep her state,
And not go less than she had done of late.
Constantines British line meant this of old,
And did this mystery wrap up, and fold
Within a sheet of paper, which was rent
From time's great Chronicle and hither sent.
Thus both the Church and Sun together ran
Unto the farthest old Meridian.
How dear to me, O God thy Counsels are!
Who may with thee compare?
FINIS.
READER, there being many proper names in this work, which the Printers rarely
meet with elsewhere, this has occasioned the more faults in the Impression;
yet most of them are corrected by a frequent printing of them aright,
especially toward the later end of the Book; most faults being only the
alteration of one letter in a word. Such of these, or others, that are most
notable thus correct, and pass by the rest by thy candor.

PAge 1. line 12. for eat it, read. eat of it, p. 2. marg. for Mererum r.
Mercerum, p. 7. l. 43. f. Irelan. r. Joctan, p. 11. l. 22. f. Amonite r.
Amorrhite, p. 12. l. 3. f. Clesiphon. r. Ctesiphon, p. 13. l. 14 f. Pesen r.
Resen, p. 21. l. 47 f. Judaea r. India, p. 24. marg. f. Asheu. r. Athenaeus, p.
34. l. 26. f. Damascenus. r. Damascus, p. 39. marg. f. Deuteronomy. r. Orat. p. 78.
marg f. Phicium. r. Phocium, p. 82. l. 57 f. senerity r. serenity, p. 86. l.
21. f. carried r. varied, p. 88. l. 21. f. Egyptians r. Aeginetans, p. 91 l 20.
f. Generation r. veneration, p. 94. l. 54. f. Aphutes r. Iphicles, p. 95. l.
32. f. Ganchoniathon r. Sanchoniathon, p 109. l. 51. f. law r. cave, p. 111. l.
7. f. ancient r. after, p. 116. l. 1. f. Greece. r. Crete, p. 187 l. 31. f.
Pubares r. Bubares, p. 192. l. 46. f. Mossa r. Atossa, p. 199. l. 18. f. 161.
r. 16. p. 213. f. penult. r. 490. so. p. 214. l. 10. and 17. and 18. r. 489.
and 490. p. 238. l. 16. f. Glos r. Glaus, and l. 26. p. 293. l. 4. f.
Corcyraeans r. Corinthians, p. 297. l. 1. f. Menton r. Meton, p. 362. marg.
Sordanus r. Soranus, p 364. l. 34. f. Dubares r. Bubares, p. 429. l. 30. f.
Buleo r. Buteo, p. 464. marg. Scribonianus r. Tribonianus, p. ^44. l. 32. f
Antiochus r Antigonus, p. 583. l. 51. dele self, p. 596. l. 28. f. Phaeucia. r.
Phaenicia, 646 l 38. f. took r. loose, p. 743. l. 21 f. a fight, r for flight,
p. 749. m. betwixt avus and Rex, r. Cecinna, ibid. l 45. f. induced r. endued,
ibid. ^. 5^ f Enemies r. Armies, p. 760. m. Principalities r. Provinces, p.
792. l. 16. Hypotypose^^n r. Hypotyposeon, p. 798 penult. f. Marcellus r.
Marce^^nus, p. ^00. penult. f. Cansi r. Cangi, p. 830. l. 44. f. three r. the,
p. 839. l. 10. f. Municipi r Municipia, p. 853. l. 10. f. Atraevi r. Atrevi, p.
857. l. 10. betwixt Clemens and Alexandrinus, add called, p. 866. l. 18. f.
fifth r. first.

Books printed for Henry Herringman, at the sign of the Anchor on the Lower
Walk of the new Exchange.
THe great Exemplar, the Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, by Jer. Tailor Dr.
in Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. Astrea, a Romance in 3
Volumes in Folio. Paulo Paruto's History of Venice, Translated by Henry Earl of
Monmouth. Bishop Andrews second Volume of Sermons. The Grand Scipio, an
excellent new Romance written in French by Monsieur de Vaumoriere, and rendered
into English by Gil. Havers. The History of the Commonwealth of Venice, by
James Howel, Esquire The Wall-flower, an excellent Romance, written by Dr. Baley. A
Compendious History of the Goths, Swedes, Vandals, and other Northern Nations,
written by Olaus Magnus, Archbishop of Upsal, and Metropolitan of Sweden.
Clelia, an excellent new Romance, the fifth, and last Volume. Gondibert, an
Heroic Poem, written by Sir William Davenant. Parthenissa, an excellent
Romance in five Volumes, written by the Right Honorable the Lord Broghill. The
civil right of Tithes, wherein setting aside the higher Plea of Jus Divinum,
from the Equity of the Levitical Law, or that of nature for sacred services,
and the certain apportioning by the undoubted Canon of the New Testament, the
laborers of the Lords Vineyard of the Church of England are estated in their
quota Pars of the Tenth or Tithe, per legem Terrae, by civil Sanction, or the
Law of the Land, written by C. E. Mr. of Arts. The Art of making Devises, by
Tho. Blunt. The Immortality of the Soul demostrated by the light of nature, by
Doctor Charleton. Natural History of nutrition, life, and voluntary motion,
containing all discoveries of Anatomists, and most probable opinions, of
Physicians concerning the Oeconomie of humane nature, Methodically delivered in
Exercitations Physico-Anatomical, by. Dr. Charleton. Epicurus's Morals
collected partly out of his own Greek Text in Diogegenes Laertius, and partly
out of the Rhapsodies of Marcus Antonius, Plutarch, Cicero, and Seneca, and
faithfulle Englished by Dr. Charleton. Ironodia Gratulatoria, Latin Poems, by
Pa. Fisher. The siege of Rhodes. The History of Sr. Francis Drake. The cruelty
of the Spaniards in Peru expressed by Instrumental and Vocal Music, and by Art
of perspective in Scenes, etc. all three written by Sir William Davenant. Unum
Necessarium, or the Doctrine and practice of Repentance, by Jer. Tailor, D. D.
A Collection of Offices and Forms of prayer public and private, fitted for the
needs of all Christian assemblies, by Jer. Tailor, Dr. of Divinity. A
Collection of Letters made by Sr. Toby Mathews Knight, with a Character of the
most excellent Lady Lucy Countess of Carlisle, by the same Author, to which is
added many Letters of his own to several persons of Honor, who were
Contemporary with him. Satirical Characters, and handsome Descriptions in
Letters written to several persons of quality. Poems, viz. A Panegyric to the
King, Songs and Sonnets, the Blind Lady, a Comedy, the fourth book of Virgil,
Statius Achilleis, with Annotations, A Panegyric to General Monck, by the
Honorable Sr. Rob. Howard. The Characters of the Passions written in French by
the Sieur de la Chamber, Physician to the Lord Chancellor of France, put into
English by a person of quality. Anthropologia abstracted, or the Idea of humane
nature reflected in brief Philosophical and Anatomical Collections. The Court
of Rome, wherein is set forth the whole Government thereof. The Grand
difference between France, Spain, and the Empire, with the Titles, Claims, and
pretenses to each others Dominions discussed and stated by an Impartial hand,
very necessary for the clear understanding of the present Commotions, and great
affairs of Europe. A Triumphant Arch Erected and Consecrated to the glory of
the Feminine Sex, by Monsieur de Scudery, Englished by J. B. Gent. Humane
Industry, or a History of most Manual Arts, deducing the Original Progress,
and Improvement of them, furnished with variety of Instances and Examples,
showing forth the Excellency of humane wit. ^eraphick Love written by the
Honorable Robert Boil. Certain Physiological Essays, written at distant times,
and on several occasions, by the Honorable Robert Boil. A Prospective of the
Naval Triumph of the Venetians over the Turks to Signor Petro Liberi, that
Renowned and Famous Painter, by Gio. Francesco Busenello, Englished by Tho.
Higgons, Esquire Rats Rim'd to death, or a Collection of Ballets made on the Rump
Parliament. Dr. Jer. Tailors Rules of living and dying. Sr. Walter Rawleighs
Ghost, or a Translation of Lessius de Providentia Numinis and Animi
Immortalitate, written against the Atheists and Politicians of these days. A
Devout Paraphrase on the 50th. Psalm, by Math. Kellison, D.D. A Discourse of a
Method for the well guiding of Reason, and the Discovery of Truth in the
Sciences. Musarum Delitiae, containing several pieces of Poetic wit, by Sr.
John Menuis and Dr. Smith. Poems, Elegies, and Sonets, written by the Bishop of
Chichester. All Horace his Lyricks, or his fourth book of Odes, and his book of
Epods Englished. Heroic Education, or choice Maxims and Instructions for the
most sure and facile training up of youth in the ways of Eminent learning and
virtues, a Treatise very necessary for all men, but most especially for such as
undertake the charge to govern the young Nobility and Gentry. A Treatise of
adhering to God, written by Albert the Great, Bishop of Ratisbon, put into
English by Sr. Kenelm Digby Knight. Also a Conference with a Lady about choice
of Religion. The Royal Game at Chess-Play, sometimes the recreation of the late
King Charles the first (of blessed memory) with many of the Nobility,
Illustrated with almost an hundred Gambels, being the study of Biochimo the
famous Italian. A Diarium, or Journal, divided into 12. Jornades in Burlesque
Rhyme, or Droling verse, with diverse other pieces of the same Author. Satirical
Declamations at the entertainment at Rutland house, by Sr. William Davenant. A
Proposition for the advancement of Experimental Philosophy, by Abraham Cowley.
A Discourse between the aforementioned Author and the Devil, concerning Oliver
Cromwell. The Ephesian Matron, or a Discourse upon the nature of Women. The
Roman, the Conversation of the Romans and Macenas in three excellent
Discourses, written in French by Balsac, Englished by a person of quality.
PLAYS.
The Enchanted Lovers. The Amorous Fantasm. The Noble Ingratitude. The
Guardian. Cowley. Belius and Thetis. Loves labor lost. Hamlet Prince of
Denmark. Romio and Juliet.

