Miscellanies BY The Right Noble LORD, The Late Lord Marquess OF HALIFAX. VIZ.
I. Advice to a DAUGHTER. II. The Character of a TRIMMER. III. The Anatomy of an
EQUIVALENT. IV. A Letter to a DISSENTER. V. Cautions for Choice of PARLIAMENT
MEN. VI. A Rough Draught of a NEW MODEL at SEA. VII. Maxims of STATE, etc.


LONDON: Printed for Matt. Gillyflower at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall.
1700.

Sacellum Appollinare.
A Funeral POEM TO THE MEMORY OF THAT Great Patriot and Statesman, GEORGE, LATE
Marquess of HALLIFAX.
AS HEAVEN it Self's on Empire's Axis rolled,
(For God-Head's but Dominion Uncontrould;)
So the Crowned Head, the Sublunary JOVE,
Does, in his Loyal Orb of Glory, move;
With all his Bolts of Fate, in his High-Post
Of Sovereign Power, the Weilded Thunder boast.
But, in the highest towering Flight of KINGS,
It Is the Great Statesman plumes their Eagles Wings;
They move the Great MACHINE* He Sets the Springs.
And thus, whilst Pregnant EMPIRE's Laboring Head
With some vast Offspring Teems; the Statesman's Aid,
To bring the Fair Divine Minerva forth,
Is called the Great Lucina to the Birth.
Wisdom and Counsel! It Is their Min'string Ray,
Those Bright CROWN- Genij, Cheer the Imperial Sway:
The Harmony of WORLDS is only Theirs;
Empire but Guides, it is They that Tune the Sphere:
Counsel, in Church or State, the Warmth, by Whom
Aaron's and Moses's Budding Wands both Bloom:
Thus MONARCHY, what, though She Reigns Alone,
It Is by her Argus-Eyes She Guards her Throne:
Her Lights an Hundred, though her Hand's but One.
Of those Rich Lights, Great HALLIFAX shined there;
In Powers whole Constellation, None more Fair:
In Calms or Storms, in every varying Gale,
The Furled, the Hoysted, or the Slackened Sail;
The Helm to Manage, or the Mates to Cheer,
No Pilot-Hand could ever Worthier Steer:
TRUST, the Magnetic Load-Star of his Soul;
And FAITH, and ZEAL, his Needles to the Pole.
The Studied World was his Long Theme, and All
The Politic Movements of the Mighty Ball:
Yes, the Old World He had Fathomed over and over;
Nay, had there been yet Unknown Globe's to explore,
To give that Head, that Reach, those Depths, their Due,
He had stood a Fair Columbus, for the New.
In SENATES, There, with all his Brightest Beams,
Not Michael, to the Embattl'd Seraphims,
A Mightier Leading CHIEF: Oraculous Sense!
Victorious Right! Amazing Eloquence!
All from that clearest Organ sweetly Sung:
From that bold ENGLISH CICERO's Silver Tongue,
Well might Great TRUTH, and Genuine Justice flow;
For he Looked Upward, when he Talked Below:
Up to ASTRAEA, Heavens translated Pride,
Her Righteous Balance his Great Standard Guide.
In Redressed Wrongs, and Succored Rights APPEAL,
No Hand, in the Judiciary Scale,
More Weighed and Poised, than HALLIFAX alone;
Even Half the Great Tribunal, was his Own.
But, in that more Exalted Patriot-Cause,
The Moulding of those Stamps Imperial, Laws;
Then, when the whole Divinity of Power,
In her Collective Strength, that Laboring Hour,
In her All-wise Consulting Providence,
Sits, some New Fair Creations to Commence;
In that High Work, for the Great FIAT Fixed,
No Hand like His, the Sovereign ELEMENTS mixed.
This Famed GAMALIEL in the Great State-Schools,
Thus by unerring PRUDENCE Sacred Rules,
No wonder, on that Card'nal Hinge He moved;
In Pow'r-Craft Skilled, that Bold Arts-Master proved:
The Great Performing Part He had Studied through,
And no less Learnt the Greater Duty too.
The Public Spirit, and the Active Soul,
More Lively Warmth, than e're Prometheus stole,
Those Champions both of Earth and Heaven's Just Right,
Bound by their Great Indenture Tripatite,
Their equally divided FAITH must bring,
Betwixt their GOD, their Country, and their King.
In Power and Trust, through his whole Life's long Scene,
Never did Honor wear a Hand more Clean:
He from the Israel Prophet's Copy drew;
The Suppliant Naaman for his Grace might sue.
Distress, it is true, his Succor never could lack --
But then her Laded Chariots must go Back.
No Syrian Bribe was on his Shoulders worn;
That Tainted Robe such TRUTH and VIRTUE scorn.
Thus, like the Eden Pair, Why is Truth drawn
A Naked Beauty, in Transparent Lawn?
Yes, 'till her Innocence, for Imp'ious Gold,
That Tempting, False Hesperian Apple, Sold;
It Is from that Fall, Original Blushes came;
'Twas Then She wanted Fig Leaves for her Sh^me.
A Bribe! That most loathed Thought! Even his whole Roof,
His humblest Menials, that Temptation-Proof,
(So Fair their Leading LORD's Example stands)
Oblige with Frank Full Hearts, but Empty Hands.
His Favors in that Generous Current run,
As Providence vouchsafes Her Rain and Sun.
His Favors Cheaper even than Heaven's conferred:
For, though, like Heaven, the Imploring Prayer He heard;
Yet no Thanksgiving Offerings Returned:
To his Kind GRACE, no Gumms nor Incense burned.
Ay, and 'twas Nobly Brave! What can more high,
Than an Vnmercinary Greatness fly?
If ought his Obligations must Defray,
He rather chose that Heaven, than Man should Pay:
Yes, with a Fair Ambition, Just Disdain,
Scorned less than JOVE, his Golden Showers should Rain*
And well so High, that Fair Ambition tow'r'd;
For HALLIFAX so Scorned and JOVE, so Show'r'd:
Whilst that vast Affluence Warmed his Fruitful Soil,
'Till his Rich Glebe, and Loaded Harvest Pile,
With that Increase* that Milky Canaan flowed:
Prosperity thus Reaped, where Virtue Sowed.
NATURE and FORTUNE, Here, both Rivals joined,
Which to their darling HALLIFAX, more Kind,
Should heap the Ampler Mass: Nature her more
Refined, and Fortune in her Cours^r Oar.
The World but Smiled, where Heaven had Smiled before.
Great Blessings, when by Greater MERIT shared,
(Not Providence's Gift, but her Reward,)
Are all Heaven's Fairest Blazon* Noblest Pride;
The Eternal DISPENSATION Justified.
The Righteous Distribution ought no less:
So Great it is to Deserve, and then Possess.
Nor in Proud Courts, nor States alone, that Great
Dictator! Even in the DESPOTIC Seat*
In His own narrower Domestic Sway,
His Household Sweat Penates decked so Gay;
To VICE, like Hannabal to Rome, that sworn
Eternal Foe; and VIRTUE's Champion born:
To his own Filial Nursery, so Kind
A FATHER, with those Leading Lights, He shined:
HONOR, so Lovely by that Pencil drawn,
The Early Phosphor to their Morning Dawn:
So Famed his equally Paternal Care*
TO Instruct the Great, and to Adorn the His Advice to a Daughter.
Fair.
Thus BEAUTY's Toilet spread so all Divine,
Her Cabinet Jems so Furnished from That MINE;
The Virgin, and the Bridal Coronet,
Were, by Kind HALLIFAX, so richly Set;
VIRTUE and INNOCENCE at that full View,
As even the Original Eden Lanschape drew:
All her whole Hierarchy of Graces; not
One least Enameled Heavenly Spark forgot;
Each Star in the whole Feminine Renown,
From, Cassiopaea's CHAIR, to Ariadne's CROWN.
In the Rich Furniture of that Fair MIND,
Those dazzling Intellectual Graces shined,
To draw the Love and Homage of Mankind;
Nothing could more than his firm FRIENDSHIP Charm:
Cheerful, as Bridal-Songs; as South-Suns, Warm;
And Fixed, as Northern-Stars: When e're He daign'd
The Solemn Honor of his Plighted Hand,
He stood a more than Second Pylades;
Unshaken, as Immutable DECREES.
But whilst these vast Perfections I Recount,
The Heights to which those Soaring Glories mount:
My Muse thus rapt into that Cheerful Sphere;
Is This her Wailing Dirge? her Funeral Tear?
For his Sad DEATH, to Draw his Glorious LIFE!
Paint Lights for Shades, and Ecstocies for Grief!
Are These the Melancholy Rites She brings,
Fit Ayrs to Tune the Mournful Theme She sings!
Yes, the True Mouruer's in the Historian Played:
What Is Present Grief, but Past Delight Displayed?
Counting what once was Ours, we need no more:
To Sum the Enjoyment, does the Loss Deplore.
Besides, What all our Sable Cavalcade,
To the Great DEAD, our Darkest Funeral Shade?
TO Illustrious Virtue, Grief's an Easy Debt;
Her Glorious Amulet but Cheaply Set:
She finds the Diamond, and We the Jet.
When Learning, Wisdom, Eloquence, Expire,
And the Great SOULS, (Sparks of Celestial Fire)
Back to their Elemental Sourse Retire:
To such Rich DUST, in vain we Pyramids Rear;
For Mausoloeum's are but Pageants there.
What Is a poor Short-lived Pile of Crumbling Earth,
A Mouldering Tomb, to Apollinary WORTH?
Worth, that so far from such a Narrow Bound,
Spreads a Large Field! Moves the Universal Round!
Fills every Tongue! Thus what no Vrn contains,
The World's the Casket to those Great REMAINS.
Nor let Poetic Vanity Rehearse
Her Boasted Dreams, Her Miracles of VERSE:
Think, in some poor Recorded EPITAPH,
That Shallow Page of Brass, or Marble Leaf;
Or in some more Voluminous Folio Pile,
A Davideis, or Arthur's Sweating Toil,
Some Sacred WORTHY's Deathless Fame to Enstal;
Raised by her Lyres, like the Old Theban Wall.
No; when Great NAMES never Dye That Work alone,
Is all a Fair Creation of Their Own.
True GLORY Shines by her Own Lighted Beam:
It Is not the Muses's Song, but Muse's THEME:
When in Great HALLIFAX, WIT's Pantheon fell,
And Death now hushed that Silenced ORACLE;
From Fair Eliza's Hallowed Westminster-School.
Helicon-Walls,
Methinks, I hear a Fatal Summon calls:
When, lo! the Delphick Dr. Busby, who the same same Day.
SEER, that Reverend Bard
Of Sacred Literature's rich Fount, prepared
The Expiring HALLIFAX, in Death to wait. --
No less Attendant on his Funeral State,
Fate to that ever Honored HEAD could owe:
LEARNING it self must shake, at such a Blow.
But, though with all this Mine of Learning stored;
He Lived, and Died, no Niggard of that Hoard:
Witness His own Long Pious Founded His Free School Foundations.
Piles,
Where Nurtured ARTS, by His Auspicious Smiles,
Tune their Young Voices to the Muse's Song,
Nerv'd by his HAND to Books, and Virtue, strong.
Thus, as the Old Israel Patriarch, to his once
Illustrious Twelve* HE to His Hundred Sons*
His Fruitful CHARITY's Adopted Race,
(With all his Tenderest Diffusive Grace,)
Doals, with a True Paternal Glory crowned,
His Living and His Dying Blessing round.
Yes, from that Hand, the Scattered Bread must fall;
He Furnishes those Numerous Pencils, all
To Copy from his Great Original:
Resolved, if possible, Resolved to Inspire,
To this Young Nursery, His Cherisht Choire,
His own Rich Soul, their Transmigated Fire.
But, why (if it is not a too Bold Offense,
To dare Expostulate with OMNIPOTENCE,)
Why should Prodigious Worth, from the Orb it warmed,
Snatched from the Soil it cherisht, Eyes it charmed
From its Deserted Charge, unkindly Fly,
Quit the Earth it Blessed, Impoverish Worlds, and Dye?
No, the Kind Heavens, in Mercy, to Rebate
That Mighty Loss, the too keen Edge of Fate,
Have circled Virtue in a Fence so High,
As stands so safe, it knows not how to Die;
But Founds its own Proud Immortality.
For, as some Lofty Ceder, long had stood
The Landmark of the Plain, and Glory of the Wood;
Till the Dread Voice of Fate, Heaven's Angry Blast,
The Bolt of the Destroying Thunder cast,
All the tall PRIDE lies Fallen. -- Yet still some Shoot,
Some tender Scyen from the Sacred ROOT,
By it is Nutrimental PARENT- Succors fed,
Springs, Grows, Spreads, Flourishes; till the Uprear'd Head,
Does to all its Great Original HEIGHTS improve,
A Second Perch for the Fair Bird of JOVE.
So may Great HALLIFAX Himself Survive;
Thus Fall, and thus his Deathless Virtues Live:
LIVE in his Fair SUCCESSION, ever Blessed;
Whilst Honor Builds it own Rich PHAENIX Nest.
THE Lady's New-Year's-Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A DAUGHTER.
Dear Daughter,
I Find, that even our most pleasing Thoughts will be unquiet; they will be in
motion; and the Mind can have no rest whilst it is possessed by a darling
Passion. You are at present the chief Object of my Care, as well as of my
Kindness, which sometimes throws me into Visions of your being happy in the
World, that are better suited to my partial Wishes, than, to my reasonable
Hopes for you. At other times, when my Fears prevail, I shrink as if I was
struck, at the Prospect of Danger, to which a young Woman must be exposed. By
how much the more Lively, so much the more Liable you are to be hurt; as the
finest Plants are the soonest nipped by the Frost. Whilst you are playing full
of Innocence, the spiteful World will bite, except you are guarded by your
Caution. Want of Care therefore, my dear Child, is never to be excused; since,
as to this World, it has the same effect as want of Virtue. Such an early
sprouting Wit requires so much the more to be sheltred by some Rules, like
something strewn on tender Flowers to preserve them from being blasted. You
must take it well to be pruned by so kind a Hand as that of a Father. There may
be some bitterness in mere Obedience: The natural Love of Liberty may help to
make the Commands of a Parent harder to go down: Some inward resistance there
will be, where Power and not Choice makes us move. But when a Father lays
aside his Authority, and persuadeth only by his Kindness, you will never answer
it to Good Nature, if it has not weight with you.

A great part of what is said in the following Discourse may be above the
present growth of your Understanding; but that becoming every day taller, will
in a little time reach up to it, so as to make it easy to you. I am willing to
begin with you before your Mind is quite formed, that being the time in which
it is most capable of receiving a Color that will last when it is mixed with
it. Few things are well learnt, but by early Precepts: Those well infused, make
them Natural; and we are never sure of retaining what is valuable, till by a
continued Habit we have made it a Piece of us.

Whether my skill can draw the Picture of a fine Woman, may be a question: but
it can be none, That I have drawn that of a kind Father: If you will take an
exact Copy, I will so far presume upon my workmanship, as to undertake you
shall not make an ill Figure. Give me so much Credit as to try, and I am sure
that neither your Wishes nor mine shall be disappointed by it.

RELIGION.
THe first thing to be confidered, is Religion. It must be the chief Object of
your Thoughts, since it would be a vain thing to direct your Behavior in the
World, and forget that which you are to have toward him who made it.

In a strict sense, it is the only thing necessary: you must take it into your
Mind, and from thence throw it into your Heart, where you are to embrace it so
close as never to lose the Possession of it. But then it is necessary to
distinguish between the Reality and the Pretense.

Religion does not consist in believing the Legend of the Nursery, where
Children with their Milk are fed with the Tales of Witches, Hobgoblings,
Prophecies, and Miracles. We suck in so greedily these early Mistakes, that our
riper Understanding has much ado to cleanse our Minds from this kind of Trash:
The Stories are so entertaining, that we do not only believe them, but relate
them; which makes the discovery of the Truth somewhat grievous, when it makes
us lose such a Field of Impertinence, where we might have diverted our selves,
besides the throwing some shame upon us for having ever received them. This is
making the World a Jest, and imputing to God Almighty, That the Province he
assigns to the Devil, is to play at Blindmans-busf, and show Tricks with
Mankind; and is so far from being Religion, that it is not Sense, and has
right only to be called that kind of Devotion, of which Ignorance is the
undoubted Mother, without competition or dispute. These Mistakes are therefore
to be left off with your Hanging sleeves; and you ought to be as much out of
countenance to be found with them about you, as to be seen playing with Babies
at an Age when other things are expected from you.

The next thing to be observed to you, is, That Religion does as little consist
in loud Answers and devout Convulsions at Church, or Praying in an
extraordinary manner. Some Ladies are so extreme stirring at Church, that one
would swear the Worm in their Conscience made them so unquiet. Others will have
such a Divided Face between a Devout Goggle and an Inviting Glance, that the
unnatural Mixture makes even the best Looks to be at that time ridiculous.
These affected Appearances are ever suspected, like very strong Perfumes, which
are generally thought no very good Symptoms in those that make use of them. Let
your earnestness therefore be reserved for your Closet, where you may have God
Almighty to your self: In Public be still and calm, neither undecently
Careless, nor Affected in the other Extreme.

It is not true Devotion, to put on an angry Zeal against those who may be of a
differing Persuasion. Partiality to our selves makes us often mistake it for a
Duty, to fall hard upon others in that case; and being pushed on by
Self-conceit, we strike without mercy, believing that the Wounds we give are
Meritorious, and that we are fighting God Almighty's Quarrel; when the truth
is, we are only setting out our selves. Our Devotion too often breaks out
into that Shape which most agrees with our particular Temper. The Choleric
grow into a hardened Severity against all who dissent from them; snatch at all
the Texts of Scripture that suit with their Complexion; and because God's Wrath
was some time kindled, they conclude, That Anger is a Divine Virtue; and are so
far from imagining their ill natured Zeal requires an Apology, that they value
themselves upon it, and triumph in it. Others, whose Nature is more Credulous
than ordinary, admit no Bounds or Measure to it; they grow as proud of
extending their Faith, as Princes are of enlarging their Dominions; not
considering that our Faith, like our Stomach, is capable of being over-charg'd;
and that as the last is destroyed by taking in more than it can digest, so our
Reason may be extinguished by oppressing it with the weight of too many strange
things; especially if we are forbidden to chew what we are commanded to
swallow. The Melancholy and the Sullen are apt to place a great part of their
Religion in dejected or ill-humour'd Looks, putting on an unsociable Face, and
declaiming against the Innocent Entertainments of Life, with as much sharpness
as they could bestow upon the greatest Crimes. This generally is only a Vizard,
there is seldom any thing real in it. No other thing is the better for being
Sour; and it would be hard that Religion should be so, which is the best of
things. In the mean time it may be said with truth, That this surly kind of
Devotion has perhaps done little less hurt in the World, by frighting, than
the most scandalous Examples have done by infecting it.

Having told you, in these few Instances, to which many more might be added,
what is not true Religion; it is time to describe to you, what is so. The
ordinary Definitions of it are no more like it, than the common Sign-posts are
like the Princes they would represent. The unskilful Dawbers in all Ages have
generally laid on such ill Colors, and drawn such harsh Lines, that the Beauty
of it is not easily to be discerned: They have put in all the forbiddng
Features that can be thought of; and in the first place, have made it an
irreconcilable Enemy to Nature; when, in reality, they are not only Friends,
but Twins, born together at the same time; and it is doing violence to them
both, to go about to have them separated. Nothing is so kind and so inviting as
true and unsophisticated Religion: Instead of imposing unnecessary Burdens upon
our Nature, it eases us of the greater weight of our Passions and Mistakes:
Instead of subduing us with Rigor, it redeemeth us from the Slavery we are in
to our selves, who are the most severe Masters, whilst we are under the
Usurpation of our Appetites let loose and not restrained.

Religion is a cheerful thing, so far from being always at Cuffs with Good
Humor, that it is inseparably united to it. Nothing unpleasant belongs to it,
though the Spiritual Cooks have done their unskilful part to give an ill Relish
to it. A wise Epicure would be Religious for the sake of Pleasure; Good Sense
is the Foundation of both; and he is a Bungler who aims at true Luxury, but
where they are joined.

Religion is exalted Reason, refined and sisted from the grosser parts of it:
It dwells in the upper Region of the Mind, where there are fewest Clouds or
Mists to darken or offend it: It is both the Foundation and the Crown of all
Virtues: It is Morality improved and raised to its height, by being carried
nearer Heaven, the only place where Perfection resideth. It cleanses the
Understanding, and brusheth off the Earth that hangs about our Souls. It does
not want the Hopes and the Terrors which are made use of to support it; neither
ought it to descend to the borrowing any Argument out of it self, since there
we may find every thing that should invite us. If we were to be hired to
Religion, it is able to out-bid the corrupted World, with all it can offer to
us, being so much the Richer of the two, in every thing where Reason is
admitted to be a Judge of the Value.

Since this is so, it is worth your pains to make Religion your choice, and not
make use of it only as a Refuge. There are Ladies, who finding by the too
visible decay of their good Looks, that they can shine no more by that Light,
put on the Varnish of an affected Devotion, to keep up some kind of Figure in
the World. They take Sanctuary in the Church, when they are pursued by growing
Contempt which will not be stopped, but follows them to the Altar. Such late
penitence is only a disguise for the tormenting grief of being no more
handsome. That is the killing thought which draws the sighs and tears, that
appear outwardly to be applied to a better end.

There are many who have an Aguish Devotion, Hot and Cold Fits, long
Intermissions, and violent Raptures. This unevenness is by all means to be
avoided. Let your method be a steady course of good Life, that may run like a
smooth Stream, and be a perpetual Spring to furnish to the continued Exercise
of Virtue. Your Devotion may be earnest, but it must be unconstrained; and like
other Duties, you must make it your Pleasure too, or else it will have very
little efficacy. By this Rule you may best judge of your own Heart. Whilst
those Duties are Joys, it is an Evidence of their being sincere; but when they
are a Penance, it is a sign that your Nature makes some resistance; and whilst
that lasts, you can never be entirely secure of your self.

If you are often unquiet, and too nearly touched by the cross Accidents of
Life, your Devotion is not of the right Standard there is too much Allay in it.
That which is right and unmixt, takes away the Sting of every thing that would
trouble you: It is like a healing Balm, that extinguisheth the sharpness of the
Blood; so this softeneth and dissolveth the Anguish of the Mind. A devout Mind
has the Privilege of being free from Passions, as some Climates are from all
venomous kind of Creatures. It will raise you above the little Vexations to
which others for want of it, will be exposed, and bring you to a Temper, not of
stupid Indifference, but of such a wise Resignation, that you may live in the
World, so as it may hang about you like a loose Garment, and not tied too close
to you.

Take heed of running into that common Error, of applying God's Judgments upon
particular Occasions. Our Weights and Measures are not competent to make the
Distribution either of his Mercy or his Justice: He has thrown a Veil over
these things, which makes it not only an Impertinence, but a kind of Sacrilege,
for us to give Sentence in them without his Commission.

As to your particular Faith, keep to the Religion that is grown up with you,
both as it is the bed in it self, and that the reason of staying in it upon
that Ground is somewhat stronger for your Sex, than it will perhaps be allowed
to be for ours; in respect that the Voluminous enquiries into the Truth, by
Reading, are less expected from you. The Best of Books will be direction enough
to you not to change; and whilst you are fixed and sufficiently confirmed in
your own Mind, you will do best to keep vain Doubts and Scruples at such a
distance that they may give you no disquiet.

Let me recommend to you a Method of being rightly informed, which can never
fail: It is in short this. Get Understanding, and practice Virtue And if you
are ^o Blessed as to have those for your Share, it is not surer that there is a
God, than it is, that by him all Necessary Truths will be revealed to you.

HUSBAND.
THAT which challenges the place in your Thoughts, is how to live with a
Husband. And though that is so large a Word, that few Rules can be fixed to it
which are unchangeable, the Methods being as various as the several Tempers of
Men to which they must be suited; yet I cannot omit some General Observations,
which, with the help of your own may the better direct you in the part of your
Life upon which your Happiness most depends.

It is one of the Disadvantages belonging to your Sex, that young Women are
seldom permitted to make their own Choice; their Friends Care and Experience
are thought safer Guides to them, than their own Fancies; and their Modesty
often forbids them to refuse when their Parents recommend, though their
inward Consent may not entirely go along with it. In this case there remains
nothing for them to do, but to endeavor to make that easy which falls to
their Lot, and by a wise use of every thing they may dislike in a Husband* turn
that by degrees to be very supportable, which, if neglected, might in time
beget an Aversion.

You must first lay it down for a Foundation in general* That there is
Inequality in the Sexes, and that for the better Economy of the World, the
Men, who were to be the Lawgivers, had the larger share of Reason bestowed
upon them; by which means your Sex is the better prepared for the Compliance
that is necessary for the better performance of those Duties which teem to be
most properly assigned to it. This looks a little uncourtly at the first
appearance; but upon Examination it will be found, that Nature is so far from
being unjust to you, that she is partial on our side. She has made you such
large Amends by other Advantages, for the seeming Injustice of the first
Distribution, that the Right of Complaining is come over to our Sex. You have
it in your power not only to free your selves, but to subdue your Masters, and
without violence throw both their Natural and Legal Authority. at your Feet. We
are made of differing Tempers, that our Defects may the better be mutually
supplied: Your Sex wants our Reason for your Conduct, and our Strength for
your Protection: Ours wants your Gentleness to soften, and to entertain us.
The first part of our Life is a good deal subjected to you in the Nursery,
where you Reign without Competition, and by that means have the advantage of
giving the first Impressions. Afterward you have stronger Influences, which,
well managed, have more force in your behalf, than all our Privileges and
Jurisdictions can pre^end to have against you. You have more strength in your
Looks, than we have in our Laws, and more power by your Tears, than we have by
our Arguments.

It is true, that the Laws of Marriage, run in a harsher style toward your
Sex. Obey is an ungenteel word, and less easy to be digested, by making such
an unkind distinction in the Words of the Contract, and so very unsuitable to
the excess of Good Manners, which generally goes before it. Besides, the
universality of the Rule seems to be a Grievance, and it appears
reasonable, that there might be an Exemption for extraordinary Women, from
ordinary Rules, to take away the just Exception that lies against the false
measure of general Equality.

It may be alleged by the Counsel retained by your Sex, that as there is in
all other Laws, an Appeal from the Letter to the Equity, in Cases that require
it* It is as reasonable, that some Court of a larger. Jurisdiction might be
erected, where some Wives might resort and plead specially. And in such
instances where Nature is so kind, as to raise them above the level of their
own Sex, they might have Relief, and obtain a Mitigation in their own
particular, of a Sentence which was given generally against Woman kind. The
causes of Separation are now so very course, that few are confident enough to
buy their Liberty at the price of having their Modesty so exposed. And for
disparity of Minds, which above all other things requires a Remedy, the Laws
have made no provision; so little refined are numbers of Men, by whom they are
compiled. This and a great deal more might be said to give a color to the
Complaint.

But the Answer to it, in short is, That the Institution of Marriage is too
sacred to admit a Liberty of objecting to it; That the supposition of yours
being the weaker Sex, having without all doubt a good Foundation, makes it
reasonable to subject it to the Masculine Dominion; That no Rule can be so
perfect, as not to admit some Exceptions; But the Law presumes there would be
so few found in this Case, who would have a sufficient Right to such a
Privilege, that it is safer some Injustice should be connived at in a very few
Instances, than to break into an Establishment, upon which the Order of Humane
Society does so much depend.

You are therefore to make your best of what is settled by Law and Custom, and
not vainly imagine, that it will be changed for your sake. But that you may not
be discouraged, as if you lay under the weight of an incurable Grievance, you
are to know, that by a wise and dexterous Conduct, it will be in your power to
relieve your self from any thing that looks like a disadvantage in it. For
your better direction, I will give a hint of the most ordinary Causes of
Dissatisfaction between Man and Wife, that you may be able by such a Warning to
live so upon your Guard, that when you shall be married, you may know how to
cure your Husband's Mistakes, and to prevent your own.

First then, you are to consider, you live in a time which has rendered some
kind of Frailties so habitual, that they lay claim to large Grains of
Allowance. The World in this is somewhat unequal, and our Sex seems to play
the Tyrant in distinguishing partially for our selves, by making that in the
utmost degree Criminal in the Woman, which in a Man passes under a much
gentler Censure. The Root and the Excuse of this Injustice is the Preservation
of Families from any Mixture which may bring a Blemish to them: And whilst the
Point of Honor continues to be so placed, it seems unavoidable to give your
Sex, the greater share of the Penalty. But if in this it lies under any
Disadvantage, you are more than recompensed, by having the Honor of Families
in your keeping. The Consideration so great a Trust must give you, makes full
amends; and this Power the World has lodged in you, can hardly fail to
restrain the Severity of an ill Husband, and to improve the Kindness and Esteem
of a good one. This being so, remember, That next to the danger, of committing
the Fault your self, the greatest is that of seeing it in your Husband. Do not
seem to look or hear that way: If he is a Man of Sense, he will reclaim
himself; the Folly of it, is of it self sufficient to cure him: if he is not
so, he will be provoked, but not reformed. To expostulate in these Cases,
looks like declaring War, and preparing Reprisals; which to a thinking
Husband would be a dangerous Reflection. Besides, it is so course a Reason which
will be assigned for a Lady's too great Warmth upon such an occasion, that
Modesty no less than Prudence ought to restrain her; since such an undecent
Complaint makes a Wife much more ridiculous, than the Injury that provokes her
to it. But it is yet worse, and more unskilful, to blaze it in the World,
expecting it should rise up in Arms to take her part: Whereas she will find, it
can have no other Effect, than that she will be served up in all Companies, as
the reigning Jest at that time; and will continue to be the common
Entertainment, till she is rescued by some newer Folly that comes upon the
Stage, and drives her away from it. The Impertinence of such Methods is so
plain, that it does not deserve the pains of being laid open. Be assured, that
in these Cases your Discretion and Silence will be the most prevailing Reproof.
An affected Ignorance, which is seldom a Virtue, is a great one here: And when
your Husband sees how unwill^ng you are to be uneasy, there is no stronger
Argument to persuade him not to be unjust to you. Besides, it will naturally
make him more yielding in other things: And whether it be to cover or redeem
his Offense, you may have the good Effects of it whilst it lasts, and all
that while have the most reasonable Ground that can be, of presuming, such a
Behavior will at last entirely convert him. There is nothing so glorious to a
Wife, as a Victory so gained: A Man so reclaimed, is for ever after subjected
to her Virtue; and her bearing for a time, is more than rewarded by a Triumph
that will continue as long as her Life.

The next thing I will suppose, is, That your Husband may love Wine more than
is convenient. It will be granted, That though there are Vices of a deeper dye,
there are none that have greater Deformity than this, when it is not
restrained: But with all this, the same Custom which is the more to be lamented
for its being so general, should make it less uneasy to every one in
particular who is to suffer by the Effects of it: So that in the first place,
it will be no new thing if you should have a Drunkard for your Husband; and
there is by too frequent Examples evidence enough, that such a thing may
happen, and yet a Wife may live too without being miserable. Self-love
dictateth aggravating words to every thing we feel; Ruin and Misery are the
Terms we apply to whatever we do not like, forgetting the Mixture allotted to
us by the Condition of Human Life, by which it is not intended we should be
quite exempt from trouble. It is fair, if we can escape such a degree of it as
would oppress us, and enjoy so much of the pleasant part as may lessen the ill
taste of such things as are unwelcome to us. Every thing has two Sides, and
for our own ease we ought to direct our Thoughts to that which may be least
liable to exception. To sall upon the worst side of a Drunkard, gives so
unpleasant a prospect, that it is not possible to dwell upon it. Let us pass
then to the more favorable part, as far as a Wife is concerned in it.

I am tempted to say (if the Irregularity of the Expression could in strictness
be justified) That a Wife is to thank God her Husband has Faults. Mark the
seeming Paradox my Dear, for your own Instruction, it being intended no
further. A Husband without Faults is a dangerous Observer; he has an Eye so
piercing, and sees every thing so plain, that it is exposed to his full
Censure. And though I will not doubt but that your Virtue will disappoint the
sharpest Enquiries; yet few Women can bear the having all they say or do
represented in the clear Glass of an Understanding without Faults. Nothing
softneth the Arrogance of our Nature, like a Mixture of some Frailties. It is
by them we are best told, that we must not strike too hard upon others, because
we our selves do so often deserve Blows: They pull our Rage by the Sleeve, and
whisper Gentleness to us in our Censures, even when they are rightly applied.
The Faults and Passions of Husbands bring them down to you, and make them
content to live upon less unequal Terms, than Faultless Men would be willing to
stoop to; so haughty is Mankind till humbled by common Weaknesses and Defects,
which in our corrupted State contribute more toward the reconciling us to one
another, than all the Precepts of the Philosophers and Divines. So that where
the Errors of our Nature make amends for the Disadvantages of yours it is more
your part to make use of the Benefit, than to quarrel at the Fault.

Thus in case a Drunken Husband should fall to your share, if you will be wise
and patient, his Wine shall be of your side; it will throw a Veil over your
Mistakes, and will set out and improve every thing you do, that he is pleased
with. Others will like him less, and by that means he may perhaps like you the
more. When after having dined too well, he is received at home without a Storm,
or so much as a reproaching Look, the Wine will naturally work out all in
Kindeness, which a Wife must encourage, let it be wrapped up in never so much
Impertinence. On the other side it would boil up into Rage, if the mistaken
Wife should treat him roughly, like a certain thing called a kind Shrew, than
which the World, with all its Plenty, cannot show a more Senseless, ill-bred,
forbidding Creature. Consider, that where the Man will give such frequent
Intermissions of the use of his Reason, the Wife insensibly gets a Right of
Governing in the Vacancy, and that raises her Character and Credit in the
Family, to a higher pitch than perhaps could be done under a sober Husband, who
never puts himself into an Incapacity of holding the Reins. If these are not
entire Consolations, at least they are Remedies to some Degree. They cannot
make Drunkenness a Virtue, nor a Husband given to it a Felicity; but you will
do your self no ill office in the endeavoring, by these means, to make the
best of such a Lot, in case it should happen to be yours, and by the help of a
wise Observation, to make that very supportable, which would otherwise be a
Load that would oppress you.

The next Case I will put is that your Husband may be Choleric or
Ill-humour'd. To this it may be said, That passionate Men generally make amends
at the Foot of the Account. Such a Man, if he is angry one day without any
Sense, will the next day be as kind without any Reason. So that by marking how
the Wheels of such a Man's Head are used to move, you may easily bring over all
his Passion to your Party. Instead of being struck down by his Thunder, you
shall direct it where and upon whom you shall think it best applied. Thus are
the strongest Poisons turned to the best Remedies; but then there must be Art
in it, and a skilful Hand, else the least bungling makes it mortal. There is a
great deal of nice Care requisite to deal with a Man of this Complexion. Choler
proceeds from Pride, and makes a Man so partial to himself that he swells
against Contradiction; and thinks he is lessened if he is opposed. You must
in this Case take heed of increasing the Storm by an unwary Word, or kindling
the Fire whilst the Wind is in a Corner which may blow it in your Face: You are
dexterously to yield every thing till he begins to cool, and then by slow
degrees you may rise and gain upon him: Your Gentleness well timed, will, like
a Charm, dispel his Anger ill placed; a kind Smile will reclaim, when a shrill
pettish Answer would provoke him; rather than fail upon such occasions, when
other Remedies are too weak, a little Flattery may be admitted, which by being
necessary, will cease to be Criminal.

If Ill. Humor and Sullenness, and not open and sudden Heat is his Disease,
there is a way of treating that too, so as to make it a Grievance to be
endured. In order to if, you are first to know, that naturally good Sense has
a mixture of surly in it: and there being so much Folly in the World, and for
the Most part so triumphant, it gives frequent Temptations to raise the Spleen
of Men who think right. Therefore that which may generally be called
Ill-Humour, is not always a Fault; it becomes one when either it is wrong
applied, or that it is continued too long, when it is not so: For this Reason
you must not too hastily fix an ill name upon that which may perhaps not
deserve it; and though the Case should be, that your Husband might too sowerly
resent any thing he disliketh, it may so happen, that more Blame shall belong
to your Mistake, than to his Ill-Humour. If a Husband behaveth himself
sometimes with an Indifference that a Wife may think offensive, she is in the
wrong to put the worst sense upon it, if by any Means it will admit a better.
Some Wives will call it Ill-humour if their Husbands change their Style from
that which they used whilst they made their first Addresses to them: Others
will allow no Intermission or Abatement in the Expressions of Kindness to them,
not enough distinguishing Times, and forgetting that it is impossible for Men
to keep themselves up all their Lives to the height of some extravagant
Moments. A Man may at some times be less careful in little things, without any
cold or disobliging Reason for it; as a Wife may be too expecting in smaller
matters, without drawing upon her-self the inference of being unkind. And if
your Husband should be really sullen, and have such frequent Fits, as might
take away the excuse of it, it concerns you to have an Eye prepared to
discern the first Appearances of Cloudy Weather, and to watch when the Fit
goes off, which seldom lasts long if it is let alone. But whilst the Mind is
sore, every thing galleth it, and that makes it necessary to let the Black
Humor begin to spend it self* before you come in and venture to undertake it.

If in the Lottery of the World you should draw a Covetous Husband, I confess
it will not make you proud of your good Luck; yet even such a one may be
endured too, though there are few Passions more untractable than that of
Avarice. You must first take care that your Definition of Avarice may not be a
Mistake. You are to examine every Circumstance of your Husband's Fortune, and
weigh the Reason of every thing you expect from him before you have right to
pronounce that sentence. The Complaint is now so general against all Husbands,
that it gives great suspicion of its being often ill-grounded; it is
impossible they should all deserve that Censure, and therefore it is certain,
that it is many times misapplied. He that spares in every thing is an
inexcusable Niggard; he that spares in nothing is as inexcusable a Madman. The
mean is, to spare in what is least necessary, to lay out more liberally in what
is most required in our several circumstances. Yet this will not always
satisfy. There are Wives who are impatient of the Rules of Oecomomy, and are
apt to call their Husband's Kindness in question, if any other measure is put
to their expense than that of their own Fancy. Be sure to avoid this dangerous
Error, such a partiality to your Self* which is so offensive to an
understanding Man, that he will very ill bear a Wife's giving her self such an
injurious preference to all the Family, and whatever belongs to it.

But to admit the worst, and that your Husband is really a Close-handed Wretch,
you must in this, as in other Cases, endeavor to make it less afflicting to
you; and first you must observe seasonable hours of speaking. When you offer
any thing in opposition to this reigning Humor, a third hand and a wise
Friend, may often prevail more than you will be allowed to do in your own
Cause. Sometimes you are dexterously to go along with him in things, where you
see that the niggardly part of his Mind is most predominant, by which you will
have the better opportunity of persuading him in things where he may be more
indifferent. Our Passions are very unequal, and are apt to be raised or
lessened, according as they work upon different Objects; they are not to be
stopped or restrained in those things where our Mind is more particularly
engaged. In other matters they are more tractable, and will sometimes give
Reason a hearing, and admit a fair Dispute. More than that, there are few Men,
even in this instance of Ava^ice, so entirely abandoned to it, that at some
hours, and upon some occasions, will not forget their natures, and for that
time turn Prodigal. The same Man who will grudge himself what is necessary, let
his Pride be raised and he shall be profuse; at another time his Anger shall
have the same effect; a fit of Vanity, Ambition, and sometimes of Kindness,
shall open and enlarge his narrow Mind; a Dose of Wine will work upon this
tough humor, and for the time dissolve it. Your busness must be, if this Case
happens, to watch these critical moments, and not let one of them slip
without making your advantage of it; and a Wife may be said to want skill, if
by these means she is not able to secure her self in a good measure against the
Inconveniences this scurvy quality in a Husband might bring upon her, except he
should be such an incurable Monster, as I hope will never fall to your share.

The last supposition I will make, is, That your Husband should be weak and
incompetent to make use of the Privileges that belong to him. It will be
yielded, that such a one leaves room for a great many Objections. But God
Almighty seldom sends a Grievance without a Remedy, or at least such a
Mitigation as takes away a great part of the sting, and the smart of it. To
make such a Misfortune less heavy you are first to bring to your Observation,
That a Wife very often makes better Figure, for her Husband's making no great
one: And there seems to be little reason, why the same Lady that chooses a
Waiting Woman with worse Looks, may not be content with a Husband with less
Wit; the Argument being equal from the advantage of the Comparison. If you will
be more ashamed in some Cases, of such a Husband, you will be less afraid than
you would perhaps be of a wise one. His Unseasonable Weakness may no doubt
sometimes grieve you, but then set against this, that it gives you the
Dominion, i^ you will make the right use of it. It is next to his being dead,
in which Case the Wife has right to Administer; therefore be sure, if you have
such an Idiot, that none, except your self, may have the benefit of the
forfeiture; Such a Fool is a dangerous Beast, if others have the keeping of
him; and you must be very undexterous if when your Husband shall resolve to be
an Ass, you do not take care he may be your Ass. But you must go skilfully
about it and above all things, take heed of distinguishing in public, what
kind of Husband he is: Your inward thoughts must not hinder the outward payment
of the consideration that is due to him: Your slighting him in Company, besides
that it would, to a discerning By stander, give too great encouragement for the
making nearer applications to you, is in it self such an undecent way of
assuming, that it may provoke the tame Creature to break loose, and to show his
Dominion for his Credit, which he was content to forget for his Ease. In short,
the surest and the most approved method will be to do like a wise Minister to
an easy Prince; first give him the Orders you afterward receive from him.

With all this, that which you are to pray for, is a Wise Husband, one that by
knowing how to be a Master, for that very reason will not let you feel the
weight of it; one whose Authority is so softened by his Kindness, that it
gives you ease without abridging your Liberty; one that will return so much
tenderness for your Just Esteem of him, that you will never want power, though
you will seldom care to use it. Such a Husband is as much above all the other
Kinds of them, as a rational subjection to a Prince, great in himself, is to be
preferred before the disquiet and uneasiness of Unlimited Liberty.

Before I leave this Head, I must add a little concerning your Behavior to
your Husband's Friends, which requires the most refined part of your
Understanding to acquit your self well of it. You are to study how to live with
them with more care than you are to apply to any other part of your Life;
especially at first, that you may not stumble at the first setting out. The
Family into which you are grafted will generally be apt to expect, that like a
Stranger in a Foreign Country, you should conform to their Methods, and not
bring in a new Model by your own Authority The Friends in such a Case are
tempted to rise up in Arms as against an unlawful Invasion, so that you are
with the utmost Caution to avoid the least appearances of any thing of this
Kind. And that you may with less difficulty afterward give your Directions, be
sure at first to receive them from your Husband's Friends. Gain them to you by
early applying to them, and they will be so satisfied, that as nothing is more
thankful than Pride, when it is complied with, they will strive which of them
shall most recommend you; and when they have helped you to take Root in your
Husband's good Opinion, you will have less dependence upon theirs, though you
must not neglect any reasonable means of preserving it. You are to consider,
that a Man governed by his Friends, is very easily inflamed by them; and that
one who is not so, will yet for his own sake expect to have them considered. It
is easily improved to a point of Honor in a Husband, not to have his Relations
neglected; and nothing is more dangerous, than to raise an Objection, which is
grounded upon Pride: It is the most stubborn and lasting Passion we are subject
to, and where it is the first cause of the War, it is very hard to make a
secure Peace. Your Caution in this is of the last importance to you.

And that you may the better succeed in it, carry a strict Eye upon the
Impertinence of your Servants; take heed that their Ill-humour may not engage
you to take Exceptions, or their too much assuming i^ small matters, raise
Consequences which may bring you under great Disadvantage. Remember that in the
case of a Royal Bride, those about her are generally so far suspected to bring
in a Foreign Interest, that in most Countries they are insensibly reduced to a
very small number, and those of so low a Figure, that it does not admit the
being Jealous of them. In little and in the Proportion, this may be the Case of
every New married Woman, and therefore it may be more advisable for you, to
gain the Servants you find in a Family, than to tie your self too fast to those
you carry into it.

You are not to overlook these small Reflections, because they may appear low
and inconsiderable; for it may be said, that as the greatest streams are made
up of the small drops at the head of the Springs from whence they are derived,
so the greater circumstances of your Life, will be in some degree directed by
these seeming trifles, which having the advantage of being the first acts of
it, have a greater effect than singly in their own nature they could pretend to.

I will conclude this Article with my Advice, That you would, as much as Nature
will give you leave, endeavor to forget the great Indulgence you have found at
home. After such a gentle Discipline as you have been under, every thing you
dislike will seem the harsher to you. The tenderness we have had for you, My
Dear, is of another nature, peculiar to kind Parents, and differing from that
which you will meet wi^h first in any Family into which you shall be
transplanted; and yet they may be very kind too, and afford no justifiable
reason to you to complain. You must not be frighted with the first Appearances
of a differing Scene; for when you are used to it, you may like the House you
go to, better than that you left; and your Husband's Kindness will have so much
advantage of ours, that we shall yield (...) all Competition, and as well as we
love you, be very well contented to Surrender to such a Rival.

HOUSE, FAMILY, and CHILDREN.
YOU must lay before you, My Dear* there are degrees of Care to recommend your
self to the World in the several parts of your Life. In many things, though the
doing them well may raise your Credit and Esteem, yet the omission of them
would draw no immediate reproach upon you: In others, where your duty is more
particularly applied, the neglect of them is amongst those Faults which are not
forgiven, and will bring you under a Censure, which will be much a heavier
thing than the trouble you would avoid. Of this kind is the Government of your
House, Family, and Children, which ^ince it is the Province allotted to your
Sex, and that the discharging it well, will for that reason be expected from
you, if you either desert it out of Laziness, or manage it ill for want of
skill, instead of a Help you will be an Encumbrance to the Family where you are
placed.

I must tell you, that no respect is lasting, but that which is produced by our
being in some degree useful to those that pay it. Where that fails, the
Homage and the Reverence go along with it, and fly to others where something
may be expected in exchange for them. And upon this principle the respects even
of the Children and the Servants will not stay with one that does not think
them worth their Care, and the old Housekeeper shall make a better Figure in
the Family, than the Lady with all her fine Clothes, if she wilfully
relinquishes her Title to the Government. Therefore take heed of carrying your
good Breeding to such a height, as to be good for nothing, and to be proud of
it. Some think it has a great Air to be above troubling their thoughts with
such ordinary things as their House and Family; others dare not admit Cares for
fear they should hasten Wrinkles? mistaken Pride makes some think they must
keep themselves up, and not descend to these Duties, which do not seem enough
refined for great Ladies to be employed in; forgetting all this while, that it
is more than the greatest Princes can do, at once to preserve respect, and to
neglect their Business. No Age ever erected Altars to insignificant Gods; they
had all some quality applied to them to draw worship from Mankind; this makes
it the more unreasonable for a Lady to expect to be considered, and at the same
time resolve not to deserve it. Good looks alone will not do; they are not such
a lasting Tenure, as to be relied upon; and if they should stay longer than
they usually do, it will by no means be safe to depend upon them: For when time
has abated the violence of the first liking, and that the Napp is a little
worn off, though still a good degree of kindness may remain, Men recover their
sight which before might be dazell'd, and allow themselves to object as well as
to admire.

In such a Case, when a Husband sees an empty airy thing sail up and down the
House to no kind of purpose, and look as if she came thither only to make a
Visit. When he finds that after her Emptiness has been extreme busy about
some very senseless thing* she eats her Breakfast half an hour before Dinner,
to be at greater liberty to afflict the Company with her Discourse; then
calls for her Coach, that she may trouble her Acquaintance, who are already
cloyed with her: And having some proper Dialogues ready to display her Foolish
Eloquence at the top of the Stairs, she sets out like a Ship out of the
Harbor, laden with trifles and comes back with them: at her return she
repeateth to her faithful waiting Woman, the Triumphs of that day's
Impertinence; then wrapped up in Flattery and clean Linen, goes to Bed so
satisfied, that it throws her into pleasant Dreams of her own Felicity. Such
a one is seldom serious but with her Tailor; her Children and Family may now
and then have a random thought, but she never takes aim but at something very
Impertinent. I say, when a Husband, whose Province is without Doors, and to
whom the Economy of the House would be in some degree Indecent, finds no
Order nor Quiet in his Family, meets with Complaints of all kinds springing
from this Root; The Mistaken Lady, who thinks to make amends for all this, by
having a well-chosen Petty Coat, will at last be convinced of her Error, and
with grief be forced to undergo the Penalties that belong to those who are
wilfully Insignificant. When this scurvy hour comes upon her, she first
grows Angry; then when the time of it is past, would perhaps grow wiser, not
remembering that we can no more have Wisdom than Grace, whenever we think fit to
call for it. There are Times and Periods fixed for both; and when they are too
long neglected, the Punishment is, that they are Irrecoverable, and nothing
remains but an useless Grief for the Folly of having thrown them out of our
power. You are to think what a mean Figure a Woman makes, when she is so
degraded by her own Fault; whereas there is nothing in those Duties which are
expected from you, that can be a lessening to you, except your want of Conduct
makes it so. You may love your Children without living in the Nursery, and you
may have a competent and discreet care of them, with out letting it* break out
upon the Company, or exposing your self by turning your Discourse that way,
which is a kind of Laying Children to the Parish, and it can hardly be done any
where, that those who hear it will be so forgiving, as not to think they are
overcharged with them. A Woman's tenderness to her Children is one of the least
deceitful Evidences of the Virtue; but yet the way of expressing it, must be
subject to the Rules of good Breeding: And though a Woman of Quality ought not
to be less kind to them, than Mothers of the Meanest Rank are to theirs, yet
she may distinguish her self in the manner, and avoid the course Methods, which
in Women of a lower size might be more excusable. You must begin early to make
them love you, that they may obey you. This Mixture is no where more necessary
than in Children. And I must tell you, that you are not to expect Returns of
Kindness from yours, if ever you have any, without Grains of Allowance; and yet
it is not so much a defect in their good Nature, as a shortness of Thought in
them. Their first Insufficiency makes them lean so entirely upon their Parents
for what is necessary, that the habit of it makes them continue the same
Expectations for what is unreasonable; and as often as they are denied, so
often they think they are injured: and whilst their Desires are strong, and
their Reasons yet in the Cradle, their Anger looks no farther than the thing
they long for and cannot have; And to be displeased for their own good, is a
Maxim they are very ^low to understand: So that you may conclude, the first
Thoughts of your Children will have no small Mixture of Mutiny; which being so
natural, you must not be angry, except you would increase it. You must deny
them as seldom as you can, and when there is no avoiding it, you must do it
gently; you must flatter away their ill Humor, and take the next Opportunity
of pleasing them in some other thing, before they either ask or look for it:
This will strengthen your Authority, by making it soft to them; and confirm
their Obedience, by making it their Interest. You are to have as strict a Guard
upon your self amongst your Children, as if you were amongst your Enemies. They
are apt to make wrong Inferences, to take Encouragement from half Words, and
misapply what you may say or do, so as either to lessen their Duty, or to
extend their Liberty farther than is convenient. Let them be more in awe of
your Kindness than of your Power. And above all, take heed of supporting a
Favorite Child in its Impertinence, which will give Right to the rest of
claiming the same Privilege. If you have a divided Number, leave the Boys to
the Father's more peculiar Care, that you may with the greater Justice pretend
to a more immediate Jurisdiction over those of your own Sex. You are to live so
with them, that they may never choose to avoid you, except when they have
offended; and then let them tremble, that they may distinguish: But their
Penance must not continue so long as to grow too sour upon their Stomachs,
that it may not harden in stead of correcting them: The kind and severe Part
must have their several turns seasonably applied; but your Indulgence is to
have the broader mixture, that Love, rather than Fear, may be the Root of their
Obedience.

Your Servants are in the next place to be considered; and you must remember
not to fall into the mistake of thinking, that because they receive Wages, and
are so much Inferior to you, therefore they are below your Care to know how to
manage them. It would be as good Reason for* a Master Workman to despise the
Wheels of his Engines, because they are made of Wood. These are the Wheels of
your Family; and let your Directions be never so faultless, yet if these
Engines stop or move wrong, the whole Order of your House is either at a stand,
or discomposed. Besides, the Inequality which is between you, must not make you
forget, that Nature makes no such distinction, but that Servants may be looked
upon as humble Friends, and that Returns of Kindness and good Usage are as much
due to such of them as deserve it, as their Service is due to us when we
require it. A foolish haughtiness in the Style of speaking, or in the manner of
commanding them, is in it self very undecent; besides that it begets an
Aversion in them, of which the least ill Effect to be expected, is, that they
will be slow and careless in all that is enjoined them: And you will find it
true by your Experience, that you will be so much the more obeyed as you are
less Imperious. Be not too hasty in giving your Orders, not too angry when they
are not altogether observed; much less are you to be loud, and too much
disturbed: An evenness in distinguishing when they do well or ill, is that
which will make your Family move by a Rule, and without Noise, and will the
better set out your Skill in conducting it with Ease and Silence, that it may
be like a well disciplined Army; which knows how to anticipate the Orders
that are fit to be given them. You are never to neglect the Duty of the present
Hour, to do another thing, which though it may be better in it self, is not to
be unseasonably preferred. Allot well chosen Hours for the Inspection of your
Family, which may be so distinguished from the rest of your Time, that the
necessary Cares may come in their proper Place, without any Influence upon your
good Humor, or Interruption to other things. By these Methods you will put
your self in possession of being valued by your Servants, and then their
Obedience will naturally follow.

I must not forget one of the greatest Articles belonging to a Family, which is
the Expense. It must not be such, as by failing either in the Time or measure
of it, may rather draw Censure than gain Applause. If it was well examined,
there is more Money given to be laughed at, than for any one thing in the
World, though the Purchasers do not think so. A well-stated Rule is like the
Line, when that is once passed we are under another Pole; so the first straying
from a Rule, is a step toward making that which was before a Virtue, to change
its Nature, and to grow either into a Vice, or at least an Impertinence. The
Art of laying out Money wise'y, is not attained to without a great deal of
thought; and it is yet more difficult in the Case of a Wife, who is accountable
to her Husband for her mistakes in it. It is not only his Money, his Credit too
is at Stake, if what lies under the Wife's Care is managed, either with
undecent Thrift, or too loose Profusion. You are therefore to keep the Mean
between these two Extremes, and it being hardly possible to hold the Balance
exactly even, let it rather incline toward the Laberal side as more suitable
to your Quality, and less subject to Reproach. Of the two a little Money
misspent is sooner recovered, than the Credit which is lost by having it
unhandsomely saved; and a Wise Husband will less forgive a shameful piece of
Parcimony, than a little Extravagance, if it be not too often repeated. His
Mind in this must be your chief Direction; and his Temper, when once known,
will in great measure, justify your part in the management, if he is pleased
with it.

In your Clothes avoid too much Gaudy; do not value your self upon an
Imbroidered Gown; and remember, that a reasonable Word, or an obliging Look,
will gain you more respect, than all your fine Trappings. This is not said to
restrain you from a decent Compliance with the World, provided you take the
wiser, and not the foolisher part of your Sex for your Pattern. Some
distinctions are to be allowed, whilst they are well suited to your Quality and
Fortune, and in the distribution of the Expense, it seems to me that a full
Attendance, and well chosen Ornaments for your House, will make you a better
Figure* than too much glittering in what you wear, which may with more ease be
imitated by those that are below you. Yet this must not tempt you to starve
every thing but your own Appartment; or in order to more abundance there, give
just cause to the least Servant you have, to complain of the Want of what is
necessary. Above all, fix it in your thoughts, as an unchangeable Maxim, That
nothing is truly fine but what is fit, and that just so much as is proper for
your Circumstances of their several kinds, is much finer than all you can add
to it. When you once break through these bounds, you launch into a wide Sea of
Extravagance. Every thing will become necessary, because you have a mind to it;
and you have a mind to it, not because it is fit for you, but because some body
else has it. This Lady's Logic fetteth Reason upon its Head, by carrying the
Rule from things to Persons; and appealing from what is right to every Fool
that is in the wrong. The word necessary is miserably applied, it disordereth
Families, and overturneth Governments by being so abused. Remember that
Children and Fools want every thing because they want Wit to distinguish: and
therefore there is no stronger Evidence of a Crazy Understanding, than the
making too large a Catalogue of things necessary, when in truth there are so
very few things that have a right to be placed in it. Try every thing first in
your Judgment, before you allow it a place in your Desire; else your Husband
may think it as necessary for him to deny, as it is for you to have whatever is
unreasonable: and if you shall too often give him that advantage, the habit of
refusing may perhaps reach to things that are not unfit for you.

There are unthinking Ladies, who do not enough consider, how little their own
Figure agrees with the fine things they are so proud of. Others when they have
them will hardly allow them to be visible; they cannot be seen without Light,
and that is many times so saucy and so prying, that like a too forward Gallant
it is to be forbid the Chamber. Some, when you are ushered into their Dark
Ruelle, it is with such solemnity, that a Man would swear there was something
in it, till the Unskillful Lady breaks silence, and begins a Chat, which
discovers it is a Puppet play with Magnificent Scenes. Many esteem things
rather as they are hard to be gotten, than that they are worth getting: This
looks as if they had an Interest to pursue that Maxim, because a great part
of their own value depends upon it. Truth in these Cases would be often
unmannerly, and might derogate from the Prerogative, great Ladies would assume
to them selves, of being distinct Creatures from those of their Sex, which are
inferior, and of less difficult access.

In other things too, your Condition must give the rule to you, and therefore
it is not a Wife's part to aim at more than a bounded Liberality; the farther
extent of that Quality (otherwise to be commended) belongs to the Husband,
who has better means for it. Generosity wrong placed becomes a Vice. It is no
more a Virtue when it grows into an Inconvenience, Virtues must be enlarged
or restrained according to differing Circumstances. A Princely Mind will undo a
private Family: Therefore things must be suited, or else they will not deserve
to be Commended, let them in themselves be never so valuable: And the
Expectations of the World are best answered when we acquit our selves in that
manner which seems to be prescribed to our several Conditions, without
usurping upon those Duties, which do not so particularly belong to us.

I will close the consideration of this Article of Expense, with this short
word. Do not fetter your self with such a Restraint in it as may make you
Remarkable; but remember that Virtue is the greatest Ornament, and good Sense
the best Equipage.

BEHAVIOR and CONVERSATION.
IT is time now to lead you out of your House into the World. A Dangerous step;
where your Virtue alone will not secure you, except it is attended with a great
deal of Prudence. You must have both for your Guard, and not stir without them.
The Enemy is abroad, and you are sure to be taken, if you are found straggling.
Your Behavior is therefore to incline strongly toward the Reserved part; your
Character is to be immoveably fixed upon that Bottom, not excluding a mixture
of greater freedom, as far as it may be innocent and well timed. The
Extravagancies of the Age have made Caution more necessary; and by the same
reason that the too great License of ill Men has by Consequence in many things
restrained the Lawful Liberty of those who did not abuse it, the unjustifiable
Freedoms of some of your Sex have involved the rest in the Penalty of being
reduced. And though this cannot so alter the Nature of things, as to make that
Criminal, which in it self is Indifferent; yet if it makes it dangerous, that
alone is sufficient to justify the Restraint. A close behavior is the fittest
to receive Virtue for its constant Guest, because there, and there only, it can
be secure. Proper Reserves are the Outworks, and must never be deserted by
those who intend to keep the Place; they keep off the possibilities not only of
being taken, but of being attempted; and if a Woman sees Danger tho at never
so remote a Distance, she is for that time to shorten her Line of Liberty. She
who will allow her self to go to the utmost Extent of every thing that is
Lawful, is so very near going farther, that those who lie at watch, will begin
to count upon her.

Mankind, from the double temptation of Vanity and Desire, is apt to turn every
thing a Woman does to the hopeful side; and there are few who dare make an
impudent Application, till they discern something which they are willing to
take for an Encouragement. It is safer therefore to prevent such Forwardness,
than to go about to cure it. It gathers Strength by the first allowances, and
claims a Right from having been at any time suffered with Impunity. Therefore
nothing is with more care to be avoided, than such a kind of Civility as may be
mistaken for Invitation; and it will not be enough for you to keep your self
free from any criminal Engagements; for if you do that which either raises
Hopes or creates Discourse, there is a Spot thrown upon your Good Name; and
those kind of Stains are the harder to be taken out, being dropped upon you by
the Man's Vanity, as well as by the Woman's Malice.

Most Men are in one sense Platonic Lovers, though they are not willing to own
that Character. They are so far Philosophers, as to allow, that the greatest
part of Pleasure lies in the Mind; and in pursuance of that Maxim, there are
few who do not place the Felicity more in the Opinion of the World, of their
being prosperous Lovers, than in the Blessing it self, how much soever they
appear to value it. The being so, you must be very cautious not to gratify
these Cameleons at the price of bringing a Cloud upon your Reputation* which
may be deeply wounded, tho your Conscience is unconcerned.

Your own Sex too will not fail to help the least Appearance that gives a
Handle* to be ill-turned. The best of them will not be displeased to improve
their own Value, by laying others under a Disadvantage, when there is a fair
Occasion give for it. It distinguishes them still the more their own Credit is
more exalted, and, like a Picture set off with Shades, shines more when a
Lady, either less Innocent, or le^ Discreet is set near, to make them appear so
much the brighter. If these lend their Breath to blast such as are so unwary as
to give them this Advantage, you may be sure there will be a stronger Gale from
those, who, besides Malice or Emulation have an Interest too, to strike hard
upon a Virtuous Woman. It seems to them, tha^ their Load of Infamy is
lessened, by throwing part, of it upon others: So that they will not only
improve when it lies in their way, but take pains to find out the least
mistake an Innocent Woman commits, i^ Revenge of the Injury she does in
leading a Life which is a Reproach to them. With these you must be extreme
wary, and neither provoke them to be angry, nor invite them to be Intimate.

To the Men you are to have a Behavior which may secure you, without offending
them. No ill-bred affected Shyness, nor a Roughness, unsuitable to your Sex,
and unnecessary to your Virtue; but a way of Living that may prevent all course
Railleries or unmannerly Freedoms; Looks that forbid without Rudeness, and
oblige without Invitation, or leaving room for the saucy Inferences Men's
Vanity suggesteth to them upon the least Encouragements. This is so very nice,
that it must engage you to have a perpetual Watch upon your Eyes, and to
remember, that one careless Glance gives more advantage than a hundred Words
not enough considered; the Language of the Eyes being very much the most
significant, and the most observed.

Your Civility, which is always to be preserved, must not be carried to a
Compliance, which may betray you into irrecoverable Mistakes. This French
ambiguous word Complaisance has led your Sex into more blame, than all other
things put together. It carries them by degrees into a certain thing called a
good kind of Woman, an easy Idle Creature, that does neither Good nor Ill but
by chance, has no Choice, but leaves that to the Company she keeps* Time,
which by degrees adds to the signification of Words, has made her, according
to the Modern Style, little better than one who thinks it a Rudeness to deny
when civilly required, either her Service in Person, or her friendly
Assistance, to those who would have a meeting, or want a Confident. She is a
certain thing always at hand, an easy Companion, who has ever great
Compassion for distressed Lovers: She censureth nothing but Rigor, and is never
without a Plaster for a wounded Reputation, in which chiefly lies her Skill
in Surgery; She seldom has the Propriety of any particular Gallant, but
lives upon Brokage, and waits for the Scraps her Friends are content to
leave her.

There is another Character not quite so Criminal, yet not less Ridiculous;
which is that of a good-humored Woman, one who thinks she must always be in
a Laugh, or a broad Smile, because Good Humor is an obliging Quality; thinks
it less ill-manners to talk Impertinently, than to be silent in Company. When
such a prating Engine rides Admiral, and carries the Lantern, in a Circle of
Fools, a cheerful Concomb coming in for a Recruit, the Chattering of Monkeys is
a better noise than such a Concert of senceless Merriment. If she is applauded
in it, she is so encouraged, that, like a Ballad singer, who if commanded,
breaks his Lungs, she lets her self loose, and overfloweth upon the
Company. She conceives that Mirth is to have no intermission, and therefore
she will carry it about with her, though it be to a Funeral; and if a Man
should put a familiar Question, she does not know very well how to be angry,
for then she would be no more that pretty thing called a Good humored Woman.
This necessity of appearing at all times to be so infinitely pleased is a
grievous mistake; since in a handsome Woman that Invitation is unnecessary; and
in one who is not so, ridiculous. It is not intended by this, that you should
forswear Laughing; but remember, that Fools being always painted in that
posture, it may fright those who are wise from doing it too frequently, and
going too near a Copy which is so little inviting, and much more from doing it
loud, which is an unnatural Sound and looks so much like another Sex, that
few things are more offensive. That boilterous kind of Jollity is as contrary
to Wit and Good Manners, as it is to Modesty and Virtue. Besides, it is a
course kind of quality, that throws a Woman into a lower Form, and degradeth
her from the Rank of those who are more refined. Some Ladies speak loud and
make a noise to be the more minded, which looks as if they beat their Drums
for Volunteers, and if by misfortune none come in to them, they may, not
without reason, be a good deal out of Countenance.

There is one thing, yet more to be avoided, which is the Example of those who
intend nothing farther than the Vanity of Conquest, and think themselves secure
of not having their Honor tainted by it. Some are apt to believe their Virtue
is too Obscure, and not enough known, except it is exposed to a broader Light,
and set out to its best advantage, by some public Trials. These are dangerous
experiments, and generally fail, being built upon so weak a foundation, as that
of a too great Confidence in our selves. It is as safe to play with Fire, as to
daily with Gallantry. Love is a Passion that has Friends in the Garrison, and
for that reason must by a Woman be kept at such a distance, that she may not be
within the danger of doing the most usual thing in the World which is
conspiring against her Self: Else the humble Gallant, who is only admitted as a
Trophy, very often becomes the Conqueror; he puts on the style of victory,
and from an Admirer grows into a Master, for so he may be called from the
moment he is in Possession. The first Resolutions of stopping at good Opinion
and Esteem, grow weaker by degrees against the Charms of Courtship skilfully
applied. A Lady is apt to think a Man speaks so much reason whilst he is
Commending her, that she has much ado to believe him in the wrong when he is
making Love to her: And when besides the natural Inducements your Sex has to
be merciful, she is bribed by well chosen Flattery, the poor Creature is in
danger of being caught like a Bird listening to the Whilstle of one that has a
Snare for it. Conquest is so tempting a thing, that it often makes Women
mistake Men's Submissions; which with all their fair Appearance, have generally
less, Respect than Art in them. You are to remember, that Men who say extreme
fine things, many times say them most for their own sakes; and that the vain
Gallant is often as well pleased with his own Compliments, as he could be with
the kindest answer. Where there is not that Ostentation you are to suspect
there is Design, And as strong perfumes are seldom used but where they are
necessary to smother an unwelcome scent; so Excessive good Words leave room to
believe they are strewed to cover something, which is to gain admittance under
a Disguise. You must therefore be upon your Guard, and consider, that of the
two, Respect is more dangerous than Anger. It puts even the best Understandings
out of their place for the time, till their second thoughts restore them; it
steals upon us insensibly, throws down our Defenses, and makes it too late
to resist, after we have given it that advantage. Whereas railing goes away in
sound; it has so much noise in it, that by giving warning it bespeaketh
Caution. Respect is a slow and a sure Poison, and like Poison swells us
within our selves. Where it prevails too much, it grows to be a kind of
Apoplexy in the Mind, turns it quite round, and after it has once seized
the understanding, becomes mortal to it. For these reasons, the safest way is
to treat it like a sly Enemy, and to be perpetually upon the watch against it.

I will add one Advice to conclude this head, which is that you will let every
seven years make some alteration in you toward the Graver side, and not be
like the Girls of Fifty, who resolve to be always Young, whatever Time with his
Iron Teeth has determined to the contrary. Unnatural things carry a Deformity
in them never to be Disguised; the Liveliness of Youth in a riper Age, looks
like a new patch upon an old Gown; so that a Gay Matron, a cheerful old Fool
may be reasonably put into the List of the Tamer kind of Monsters. There is a
certain Creature called a Grave Hobbyhorse, a kind of a she Numps, that
pretends to be pulled to a Play, and must needs go to Bartholomew-Fair, to
look after the young Folks, whom she only seems to make her care, in reality
she takes them for her excuse. Such an old Butterfly is of all Creatures, the
most ridiculous, and the soonest found out. It is good to be early in your
Caution, to avoid any thing that comes within distance of such despicable
Patterns, and not like some Ladies, who defer their Conversion, till they have
been so long in possession of being laughed at, that the World does not know
how to change their style, even when they are reclaimed from that which gave
the first occasion for it.

The advantages of being reserved are too many to be set down, I will only say,
that it is a Guard to a good Woman, and a Disguise to an ill one. It is of so
much use to both, that those ought to use it as an Artifice, who refuse to
practice it as a Virtue.

FRIENDSHIPS.
I Must in a particular manner recommend to you a strict Care in the Choice of
your Friendships. Perhaps the best are not without their Objections, but
however, be sure that yours may not stray from the Rules which the wiser part
of the World has set to them. The Leagues Offensive and Defensive, seldom hold
in Politics, and much less in Friendships. The violent Intimacies, when once
broken, of which they scarce ever fail, make such a Noise; the Bag of Secrets
untied, they fly about like Birds let loose from a Cage, and become the
Entertainment of the Town. Besides, these great Dearnesses by degrees grow
Injurious to the rest of your Acquaintance, and throw them off from you. There
is such an Offensive Distinction when the Dear Friend comes into the Room,
that it is flinging Stones at the Company, who are not ape to forgive it.

Do not lay out your Friendship too lavishly at first, since it will, like
other things, be so much the sooner spent; neither let it be of too sudden a
growth; for as the Plants which shoot up too fast are not of that continuance,
as those which take more time for it; so too swift a Progress in pouring out
your Kindness, is a certain Sign that by the Course of Nature it will not be
long-lived. You will be responsible to the World, if you pitch upon such
Friends as at the time are under the weight of any Criminal Objection. In that
case you will bring your self under the disadvantages of their Character, and
must bear your part of it. Choosing implies Approving; and if you fix upon a
Lady for your Friend against whom the World shall have given Judgment, it is not
so well natured as to believe you are altogether averse to her way of living,
since it does not discourage you from Admitting her into your Kindness. And
Resemblance of Inclinations being thought none of the least Inducements to
Friendship, you will be looked upon at least as a Well-wisher if not a Partner
with her in her Faults. If you can forgive them in another, it may be presumed
you will not be less gentle to your self; and therefore you must not take it
ill, if you are reckoned a Croupiere, and condemned to pay an equal Share with
such a Friend of the Reputation she has lost.

If it happens that your Friend should fall from the State of Innocence after
your Kindness was engaged to her, you may be slow in your belief in the
beginning of the Discovery: But as soon as you are convinced by a Rational
Evidence, you must, without breaking too roughly, make a far and a quick
Retreat from such a Mistaken Acquaintance: Else by moving too slowly from one
that is so tainted, the Contagion may reach you so far as to give you part of
the Scandal, though not of the Guilt. This Matter is so nice, that as you must
not be too hasty to join in the Censure upon your Friend when she is accused,
so you are not on the other side to defend her with too much warmth; for if she
should happen to deserve the Report of Common Fame, besides the Vexation that
belongs to such a mistake, you will draw an ill appearance upon your self,
and it will be thought you pleaded for her not without some Consideration of
your self. The Anger which must be put on to vindicate the Reputation of an
injured Friend, may incline the Company to suspect you would not be so zealous,
if there was not a possibility that the Case might be your own. For this reason
you are not to carry your dearness so far, as absolutely to lose your Sight
where your Friend is concerned. Because Malice, is too quick sighted, it does
not follow, that Friendship must be blind: There is to be a Mean between these
two Extremes, else your Excess of Good Nature may betray you into a very
ridiculous Figure, and by degrees who may be preferred to such Offices as you
will not be proud of. Your Ignorance may lessen the Guilt, but will improve the
Jest upon you, who shall be kindly sollicitous to procure a Meeting, and
innocently contribute to the ills you would avoid: Whilst the Contriving
Lovers, when they are alone, shall make you the Subject of their Mirth, and
perhaps (with respect to the Goddess of Love be it spoken) it is not the worst
part of their Entertainment, at least it is the most lasting, to laugh at the
believing Friend, who was so easily deluded.

Let the good Sense of your Friends be a chief Ingredient in your Choice of
them; else let your Reputation be never so clear, it may be clouded by their
Impertinence. It is like our Houses being in the Power of a Drunken or a
Careless Neighbor; only so much worse, as that there will be no Insurance here
to make you amends, as there is in the Case of Fire.

To conclude this Paragraph; If Formality is to be allowed in any Instance, it
is to be put on to resist the Invasion of such forward Women as shall press
themselves into your Friendship, where if admitted, they will either be a Snare
or an Encumbrance.

CENSVRE.
I will come next to the Consideration, how you are to manage your Censure; in
which both Care and skill will be a good deal required. To distinguish is not
only natural but necessary; and the Effect of it is, That we cannot avoid
giving Judgment in our Minds, either to absolve or to condemn as the Case
requires. The Difficulty is, to know when and where it is fit to proclaim the
Sentence. An Aversion to what is Criminal, a Contempt of what is ridiculous,
are the inseparable Companions of Understanding and Virtue; but die letting
them go farther than our own Thoughts, has so much danger in it, that though
it is neither possible nor fit to suppress them entirely, yet it is necessary
they should be kept under very great Restraints. An unlimited Liberty of this
kind is little less than sending a Herald and proclaiming War to the World,
which is an angry Beast when so provoked. The Contest will be unequal; though
you are never so much in the right; and if you begin against such an Adversary,
it will tear you in pieces, with this Justification, That it is done in its own
defense. You must therefore take heed of Laughing, except in Company that is
very sure. It is throwing Snow-balls against Bullets; and it is the
disadvantage of a Woman, that the Malice of the World will help the Brutality
of those who will throw a slovenly Untruth upon her. You are for this Reason to
suppress your Impatience for Fools; who besides that they are too strong a
Party to be unnecessarily provoked, are of all others, the most dangerous in
this Case. A Blockhead in his Rage will return a dull Jest that will lie heavy,
though there is not a Grain of Wit in it. Others will do it with more Art, and
you must not think your self secure because your Reputation may perhaps be out
of the reach of Ill will; for if it finds that part guarded, it will seek one
which is more exposed. It flies, like a corrupt Humor in the Body, to the
weakest Part. If you have a tender Side, the World will be sure to find it, and
to put the worst Color upon all you say or do, give an Aggravation to every
thing that may lessen you, and a Spiteful turn to every thing that might
recommend you. Anger lays open those Defects which Friendship would not see,
and Civility might be willing to forget. Malice needs no such Invitation to
encourage it, neither are any Pains more superfluous than those we take to be
ill spoken of. If Envy, which never dies, and seldom sleeps, is content
sometimes to be in a Slumber, it is very unskilful to make a noise to awake it.

Besides, your Wit will be misapplied if it is wholly directed to discern the
Faults of others, when it is so necessary to be often used to mend and prevent
your own. The sending our Thoughts too much abroad, has the same Effect, as
when a Family never stays at home; Neglect and Disorder naturally follows;
as it must do within our selves, if we do not frequently turn our Eyes inwards,
to see what is amiss with us, where it is a sign we have an unwelcome Prospect,
when we do not care to look upon it, but rather seek our Consolations in the
Faults of those we converse with.

Avoid being the first in fixing a hard Censure, let it be confirmed by the
general Voice, before you give into it; Neither are you then to give Sentence
like a Magistrate, or as if you had a special Authority to bestow a good or ill
Name at your discretion. Do not dwell too long upon a weak Side, touch and go
away; take pleasure to stay longer where you can commend, like Bees that fix
only upon those Herbs out of which they may extract the Juice of which their
Honey is composed. A Virtue stuck with Bristles is too rough for this Age; it
must be adorned with some Flowers, or else it will be unwillingly entertained;
so that even where it may be fit to strike, do it like a Lady, gently; and
assure your self, that where you care to do it, you will wound others more, and
hurt your self less, by soft Strokes, than by being harsh or violent.

The Triumph of Wit is to make your good. Nature subdue your Censure; to be
quick in seeing Faults, and slow in exposing them. You are to consider, that
the invisible thing called a Good Name, is made up of the Breath of Numbers
that speak well of you; so that if by a disobliging Word you silence the
meanest, the Gale will be less strong which is to bear up your Esteem. And
though nothing is so vain as the eager pursuit of empty Applause, yet to be
well thought of, and to be kindly used by the World, is like a Glory about a
Woman's Head; it is a Perfume she carries about with her, and leaves wherever
she goes; it is a Charm against Ill Will. Malice may empty her Quiver, but
cannot wound; the Dirt will not stick, the Jests will not take; Without the
consent of the World a Scandal does not go deep; it is only a slight stroke
upon the injured Party and returns with the greater force upon those that
gave it.

VANITY AND AFFECTATION.
I Must with more than ordinary earnestness give you Caution against Vanity, it
being the Fault to which your Sex seems to be the most inclined; and since
Affectation for the most part attends it, I do not know how to divide them. I
will not call them Twins, because more properly Vanity is the Mother, and
Affectation is the Darling Daughter; Vanity is the Sin, and Affectation is the
Punishment; the first may be called the Root of Self-Love, the other the Fruit.
Vanity is never at its full growth till it spreads into Affectation, and then
it is complete.

Not to dwell any longer upon the definition of them, I will pass to the means
and motives to avoid them. In order to it, you are to consider, that the World
challenges the right of distributing Esteem and Applause; so that where any
assume by their single Authority to be their own Carvers, it grows angry, and
never fails to seek Revenge. And if we may measure a Fault by the greatness
of the Penalty, there are few of a higher size than Vanity, as there is scarce
a Punishment which can be heavier than that of being laughed at.

Vanity makes a Woman tainted with it, so top full of her self, that she
spilleth it upon the Company. And because her own thoughts are entirely
employed in Self-Contemplation; she endeavors, by a cruel Mistake, to
confine her Acquaintance to the same narrow Circle of that which only
concerns her Ladyship, forgetting that she is not of half that Importance to
the World, that she is to her self, so mistaken she is in her Value, by being
her own Appraiser. She will fetch such a Compass in Discourse to bring in her
beloved Self, and rather than fail, her fine Petty-Coat, that there can hardly
be a better Scene than such a Trial of ridiculous Ingenuity. It is a Pleasure
to see her Angle for Commendations, and rise so dissatisfied with the Ill-bread
Company, if they will not bite. To observe her throwing her Eyes about to fetch
in Prisoners, arid go about Cruizing like a Privateer, and so out or
Countenance, if she return without Booty, is no ill piece of Comedy. She is so
eager to draw respect, that the always misseth it, yet thinks it so much her
due, that when she fails she grows waspish, not considering, that it is
impossible to commit a Rape upon the will; that it must be fairly gained, and
will not be taken by Storm; and that in this Case, the Tax ever rises highest
by a Benevolence. If the World instead of admiring her Imaginary Excellencies,
takes the Liberty to laugh at them, she appealeth from it to her self, for
whom she gives Sentence, and proclaims it in all Companies. On the other
side, if encouraged by a Civil Word, she is so obliging, that she will give
thanks for being laughed at in good Language. She takes a Compliment for a
Demonstration, and sets it up as an Evidence, even against her
Looking-Glass. But the good Lady being all this while in a most profound
Ignorance of her self, forgets that Men would not let her talk upon them,
and throw so many senseless words at their head, if they did not intend to put
her Person to Fine and Ransom, for her Impertinence. Good words of any other
Lady, are so many Stones thrown at her, she can by no means bear them, they
make her so uneasy, that she cannot keep her Seat, but up she rises and goes
home half burst with Anger and Strait-Lacing. If by great chance she says any
thing that has sense in it, she expects such an Excessive rate of
Commendations, that to her thinking the Company ever rises in her Debt. She
looks upon Rules as things made for the common People, and not for Persons of
her Rank; and this Opinion sometimes tempts her to Extend her Prerogative to
the dispencing with the commandments. If by great Fortune she happens, in
spite of her Vanity, to be honest, she is so troublesome with it, that as far
as in her lies, she makes a scurvy thing of it. Her bragging of her Virtue,
looks as if it cost her so much pains to get the better of her Self, that the
Inferences are very ridiculous. Her good Humor is generally applied to the
laughing at good Sense. It would do one good to see how heartily she despises
any thing that is fit for her to do. The greatest part of her Fancy is laid out
in choosing her Gown, as her Discretion is chiefly employed in not paying for
it. She is faithful to the Fashion, to which not only her Opinion, but her
Senses are wholly resigned: so obsequious she is to it, that she would be ready
to be reconciled even to Virtue with all its Faults, if she had her Dancing
Master's Word that it was practiced at Court.

To a Woman so composed when Affectation comes in to improve her Character, it
is then raised to the highest Perfection. She first sets up for a Fine
thing, and for that Reason will distinguish her self, right or wrong, in every
thing she does. She would have it thought that she is made of so much the finer
Clay, and so much more sifted than ordinary, that she has no common Earth
about her. To this end she must neither move nor speak like other Women,
because it would be vulgar; and therefore must have a Language of her own,
since ordinary English is too course for her. The Looking-gloss in the Morning
dictateth to her all the Motions of the Day, which by how much the more
studied, are so much the more mistaken. She comes into a Room as if her Limbs
were set on with ill-made Screws, which makes the Company fear the pretty
thing should leave some of its artificial Person upon the Floor. She does not
like her self as God Almighty made her, but will have some of her own
Workmanship; which is so far from making her a better thing than a Woman, that
it turns her into a worse Creature than a Monkey. She falls out with
Nature, against which she makes War without admitting a Truce, those Moments
excepted in which her Gallant may reconcile her to it. When she has a mind to
be soft and languishing, there is something so unnatural in that affected
Easiness, that her Frowns could not be by many degrees so forbidden. When she
would appear unreasonably humble, one may see she is so excessively proud, that
there is no enduring it. There is such an impertinent Smile, such a satisfied
Simper, when she faintly disowneth some fulsom Commendation a Man happens to
bestow upon her against his Conscience, that her Thanks for it are more visible
under such a thin Disguise, than they could be if she should print them. If a
handsomer Woman takes any liberty of Dressing out of the ordinary Rules the
mistaken Lady follows, without distinguishing the unequal Pattern, and makes
her self uglier by an example misplaced; either forgetting the Privilege of
good Looks in another, or presuming, without sufficient reason upon her own.
Her Discourse is a senseless Chime of empty Words, a heap of Compliments so
equally applied to differing Persons, that they are neither valued nor
believed. Her Eyes keep pace with her Tongue, and are therefore always in
motion. One may discern that they generally incline to the compassionate side,
and that, notwithstanding her pretense to Virtue, she is gentle to distressed
Lovers, and Ladies that are merciful. She will repeat the tender part of a Play
so feelingly, that the Company may guess, without Injustice, she was not
altogether a disinteressed Spectator. She thinks that Paint and Sin are
concealed by railing at them. Upon the latter she is less hard, and being
divided between the two opposite Prides of her Beauty and her Virtue, she is
often tempted to give broad Hints that some body is dying for her; and of the
two she is less unwilling to let the World think she may be sometimes profaned,
than that she is never worshipped.

Very great Beauty may perhaps so dazzle for a time, that Men may not so clearly
see the Deformity of these Affectations; But when the Brightness goes off, and
that the Lover's Eyes are by that means set at liberty to see things as they
are, he will naturally return to his Senses, and recover the Mistake into which
the Lady's good Looks had at first engaged him. And being once undeceived,
cease to worship that as a Goddess, which he sees is only an artificial
Shrine moved by Wheels and Springs, to delude him. Such Women please only like
the first Opening of a Scene, that has nothing to recommend it but the being
new. They may be compared to Flies, that have pretty shining Wings for two or
three hot Months, but the first cold Weather makes an end of them; so the
latter Season of these fluttering Creatures is dismal: From their nearest
Friends they receive a very faint Respect; from the rest of the World, the
utmost degree of contempt.

Let this Picture supply the place of any other Rules which might be given to
prevent your resemblance to it, The Deformity of it, well considered, is
Instruction enough; from the same reason, that the sight of a Drunkard is a
better Sermon against that Vice, than the best that was ever preached upon that
Subject.

PRIDE.
AFter having said this against Vanity, I do not intend to apply the same
Censure to Pride, well placed, and rightly defined. It is an ambiguous Word;
one kind of it is as much a Virtue, as the other is a Vice: But we are
naturally so apt to choose the worst, that it is become dangerous to commend the
best side of it.

A Woman is not to be proud of her fine Gown; nor when she has less Wit than
her Neighbors, to comfort her self that she has more Lace. Some Ladies put so
much weight upon Ornaments, that if one could see into their Hearts, it would
be found, that even the Thought of Death is made less heavy to them by the
contemplation of their being laid out in State, and honorably attended to the
Grave. One may come a good deal short of such an Extreme, and yet still be
sufficiently Impertinent, by setting a wrong Value upon things, which ought to
be used with more indifference. A Lady must not appear sollicitous to ingross
Respect to her self, but be content with a reasonable Distribution, and allow
it to others, that she may have it returned to her. She is not to be
troublesomly nice, nor distinguish her self by being too delicate, as if
ordinary things were too course for her; this is an unmannerly and an offensive
Pride, and where it is practiced, deserves to be mortified, of which it seldom
fails. She is not to lean too much upon her Quality, much less to despise
those who are below it. Some make Quality an Idol, and then their Reason must
fall down and Worship it. They would have the World think, that no amends can
ever be made for the want of a great Title, or an ancient Coat of Arms: They
imagine, that with these advantages they stand upon the higher Ground, which
makes them look down upon Merit and Virtue, as things inferior to them. This
mistake is not only senseless, but criminal too, in putting a greater Price
upon that which is a piece of good luck, than upon things which are valuable in
themselves. Laughing is not enough for such a Folly; it must be severely
whipped, as it justly deserves. It will be confessed, there are frequent
Temptations given by pert Vpstarts to be angry, and by that to have our
Judgments corrupted in these Cases: But they are to be resisted; and the utmost
that is to be allowed, is, when those of a new Edition will forget themselves,
so as either to brag of their weak side, or to endeavor to hide their Meanness
by their Insolence, to cure them by a little seasonable Raillery, a little
Sharpness well placed, without dwelling too long upon it.

These and many other kinds of Pride are to be avoided.

That which is to be recommended to you, is an Emulation to raise your self to
a Character, by which you may be distinguished; an Eagerness for precedence in
Virtue, and all such other things as may gain you a greater share of the good
opinion of the World. Esteem to Virtue is like a cherishing Air to Plants and
Flowers, which makes them blow and prosper; and for that reason it may be
allowed to be in some degree the Cause as well as the Reward of it. That Pride
which leads to a good End, cannot be a Vice, since it is the beginning of a
Virtue; and to be pleased with just Applause, is so far from a Fault, that it
would be an ill Symptom in a Woman, who should not place the greatest part of
her Satisfaction in it. Humility is no doubt a great Virtue; but it cease to
be so, when it is afraid to scorn an ill thing. Against Vice and Folly it is
becoming your Sex to be haughty; but you must not carry the Contempt of things
to Arrogance toward Persons, and it must be done with fitting Distinctions,
else it may be Inconvenient by being unseasonable. A Pride that raises a
little Anger to be outdone in any thing that is good, will have so good an
Effect, that it is very hard to allow it to be a Fault.

It is no easy matter to carry even between these differing kinds so
described; but remember that it is safer for a Woman to be thought too proud,
than too familiar.

DIVERSIONS.
THE last thing I shall recommend to you, is a wise and a safe method of using
Diversions. To be too eager in the pursuit of Pleasure whilst you are Young, is
dangerous; to catch at it in riper Years, is grasping a shadow; it will not be
held. Besides that by being less natural it grows to be indecent. Diversions
are the most properly applied, to ease and relieve those who are Oppressed, by
being too much employed. Those that are Idle have no need of them, and yet
they, above all others, give themselves up to them. To unbend our Thoughts,
when they are too much stretched by our Cares, is not more natural than it is
necessary, but to turn our whole Life into a Holy day, is not only ridiculous,
but destroys Pleasure instead of promoting it. The Mind like the Body is
tired by being always in one Posture, too serious breaks, and too diverting
looseneth it: It is Variety that gives the Relish; so that Diversions too
frequently repeated, grow first to be indifferent, and at last tedious. Whilst
they are well chosen and well timed, they are never to be blamed; but when they
are used to an Excess, though very Innocent at first, they often grow to be
Criminal, and never fail to be Impertinent.

Some Ladies are bespoken for Merry Meetings, as Bessus was for Duels. They are
engaged in a Circle of Idleness, where they turn round for the whole Year,
without the Interruption of a serious Hour, They know all the Players Names,
and are Intimately acquainted with all the Booths in Bartholomew-Fair. No
Soldier is more Obedient to the sound of his Captain's Trumpet, than they are
to that which summoneth them to a Puppet-Play or a Monster. The Spring that
brings out Flies, and Fools, makes them Inhabitants in Hide-Park; in the
Winter they are an Encumbrance to the Play House, and the Ballast of the
Drawing Room. The Streets all this while are so weary of these daily Faces,
that Men's Eyes are over-laid with them. The Sight is glutted with fine things,
as the Stomach with sweet ones; and when a fair Lady will give too much of her
self to the World, she grows luscious, and oppresses instead of pleasing.
These Jolly Ladies do so continually seek Diversion, that in a little time they
grow into a Jest, yet are unwilling to remember, that if they were seldomer
seen they would not be so often laughed at. Besides they make themselves Cheap,
than which there cannot be an unkinder word bestowed upon your Sex.

To play sometimes, to entertain Company, or to divert your self, is not to be
disallowed, but to do it so often as to be called a Gamester, is to be avoided,
next to the things that are most Criminal. It has Consequences of several
kinds not to be endured; it will engage you into a habit of Idleness and ill
hours, draw you into ill mixed Company, make you neglect your Civilities
abroad, and your Business at home, and impose into your Acquaintance such as
will do you no Credit.

To deep Play there will be yet greater Objections. It will give Occasion to
the World to ask spiteful Questions. How you dare venture to lose, and what
means you have to pay such great sums? If you pay exactly, it will be enquired
from whence the Money comes? If you owe, and especially to a Man, you must be
so very Civil to him for his forbearance, that it lays a ground of having it
farther improved; if the Gentleman is so disposed; who will be thought no
unfair Creditor, if where the Estate saileth he seizes upon the Person.
Besides if a Lady could see her own Face upon an ill Game, at a deep Stake, she
would certainly forswear any thing that could put her looks under such a
Disadvantage.

To Dance sometimes will not be imputed to you as a fault; but remember that
the end of your Learning it, was, that you might the better know how to move
gracefully. It is only an advantage so far. When it goes beyond it, one may
call it excelling in a Mistake, which is no very great Commendation. It is
better for a Woman never to Dance, because she has no skill. in it, that to do
it too often, because she does it well. The easiest as well as the safest
Method of doing it, is in private Companies, amongst particular Friends, and
then carelessly, like a Diversion, rather than with Solemnity, as if it was a
business, or had any thing in it to deserve a Month's preparation by serious
Conference with a Dancing Master.

Much more might be said to all these Heads, and many more might be added to
them. But I must restrain my Thoughts, which are full of my Dear Child, and
would overflow into a Volume, which would not be fit for a New-Years-Gift. I
will conclude with my warmest Wishes for all that is good to you. That you may
live so as to be an Ornament to your Family, and a Pattern to your Sex. That
you may be blessed with a Husband that may value, and with Children that may
inherit your Virtue; That you may shine in the World by a true Light, and
silence Envy by deserving to be esteemed; That Wit and Virtue may both conspire
to make you a great Figure. When they are separated, the first is so empty, and
the other so saint, that they scarce have right to be commended. May they
therefore meet and never part; let them be your Guardian Angels, and be sure
never to stray out of the distance of their joint protection. May you so raise
your Character, that you may help to make the next Age a better thing, and
leave Posterity in your Debt for the advantage it shall receive by your Example

Let me conjure you, My Dearest, to comply with this kind Ambition of a Father,
whose Thoughts are so engaged in your behalf, that he reckons your Happiness
to be the greatest part of his own.

THE CHARACTER OF A TRIMMER HIS OPINION OF I. The Laws and Government. II.
Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs.


Corrected and Amended.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE PREFACE.
IT must be more than an ordinary provocation that can tempt a Man to write in
an Age overrun with Scribblers, as Egypt was with Flies and Locusts: That
worst Vermin of small Authors has given the World such a Surfeit, that instead
of desiring to Write, a Man would be more inclined to wish, for his own ease,
that he could not Read; but there are some things which do so raise our
passions, that our Reason can make no Resistance; and when Madmen, in two
Extremes, shall agree to make common sense Treason, and join to fix an ill
Character upon the only Men in the Nation who deserve a good one; I am no
longer Master of my better Resolution to let the World alone, and must break
loose from my more reasonable Thoughts, to expose these false Coyners, who
would make their Copper Wares pass upon us for good Payment.

Amongst all the Engines of Dissension, there has been none more powerful in
all Times, than the fixing Names upon one another of Contumely and Reproach,
and the reason is plain, in respect of the People, who though generally they are
incapable of making a Syllogism or forming an Argument, yet they can pronounce
a word; and that serves their turn to throw it with their dull malice at the
Head of those they do not like; such things ever begin in Jest, and end in
Blood, and the same word which at first makes the Company merry, grows in time
to a Military Signal to cut one another Throats.

These Mistakes are to be lamented, though not easily cured, being suitable
enough to the corrupted Nature of Mankind; but it is hard, that Men will not
only invent ill Names, but they will wrest and misinterpret good ones; so
afraid some are even of a reconciling sound, that they raise another noise to
keep it from being heard, lest it should set up and encourage a dangerous sort
of Men, who prefer Peace and Agreement, before Violence and Confusion.

Were it not for this, why, after we have played the Fool with throwing Whig
and Tory at one another, as Boys do Snow-Balls, do we grow angry at a new Name,
which by its true signification might do as much to put us into our Wits, as
the other has done to put us out of them?

This innocent word Trimmer signifies no more than this, That if Men are
together in a Boat, and one part of the Company would weigh it down on one
side, another would make it lean as much to the contrary; it happens there is a
third Opinion of those, who conceive it would do as well, if the Boat went
even, without endangering the Passengers; now it is hard to imagine by what
Figure in Language, or by what Rule in Sense this comes to be a fault, and it
is much more a wonder it should be thought a Heresy.

But so it happens, that the poor Trimmer has now all the Powder spent upon him
alone, while the Whig is a forgotten, or at least a neglected Enemy; there is
no danger now to the State (if some Men may he believed) but from the Beast
called a Trimmer, take heed of him, he is the Instrument that must destroy
Church and State; a new kind of Monster, whose deformity is so exposed, that,
were it a true Picture that is made of him, it would be enough to fright
Children, and make Women miscarry at the sight of it.

But it may be worth the examining, whether he is such a Beast as he is
Painted. I am not of that Opinion, and am so far from thinking him an Infidel
either in Church or State, that I am neither afraid to expose the Articles of
his Faith in Relation to Government, nor to say that I prefer them before any
other Political Creed, that either our angry Divines, or our refined Statesmen
would impose upon as.

I have therefore in the following Discourse endeavored to explain the
Trimmer's Principles and Opinions, and then leave it to all discerning and
impartial Judges, whether he can with Justice be so Arraigned, and whether
those who deliberately pervert a good Name, do not very justly deserve the
worst that can be put upon themselves.

THE Trimmer's Opinion. OF THE LAWS AND GOVERNMENT.
OUr Trimmer, as he has a great Veneration for Laws in general, so he has more
particular for our own, he looks upon them as the Chains that tie up our unruly
Passions, which else, like wild Beasts let loose, would reduce the world into
its first State of Barbarism and Hostility; the good things we enjoy, we owe to
them; and all the ill things we are freed from is by their Protection.

God himself thought it not enough to be a Creator, without being a Lawgiver,
and his goodness had been defective toward mankind in making them, if he had
not prescribed Rules to make them happy too.

All Laws flow from that of Nature, and where that is not the Foundation, they
may be legally imposed, but they will be lamely obeyed: By this Nature is not
meant that, which Fools and Madmen misquote to justify their Excesses; it is
innocent and uncorrupted Nature, that which dispose^ Men to choose Virtue,
without its being prescribed, and which is so far from inspiring ill thoughts
into us, that we take pains to suppress the good ones it infuses.

The Civilized World has ever paid t^ willing subjection to Laws, even
Conquerors have done homage to them; as the Romans, who took Patterns of good
Laws even from those they had subdued; and at the same time that they Triumphed
over an enslaved People, the very Laws of that place did not only remain safe,
but became Victorious; their new Masters, instead of suppressing them, paid
them more respect than they had from those who first made them: and by this
wise method they arrived to such an admirable Constitution of Laws, that to
this day they Reign by them; this Excellency of them Triumphs still, and the
World pays now an acknowledgment of their obedience to that Mighty Empire,
though so many Ages after it is dissolved; and by a later instance, the Kings
of France, who, in practice use their Laws pretty familiarly, yet think their
Picture is drawn with most advantage upon their Seals, when they are placed in
the Seat of Justice; and though the Hieroglyphick is not there of so much use to
the People as they would wish, yet it shows that no Prince is so Great, as not
to think fit, for his own Credit at least, to give an outward, when he refuses
a real worship to the Laws.

They are to mankind that which the Sun is to Plants, whilst it cherishes and
preserves 'em. Where they have their force and are not clouded or suppressed,
every thing smiles and flourishes; but where they are darkened, and not
suffered to shine out, it makes every thing to wither and decay.

They secure Men not only against one another, but against themselves too; they
are a Sanctuary to which the Crown has occasion to resort as often as the
People, so that it is an Interest as well as a Duty to preserve them.

There would be no end of making a Panegyric of Laws; let it be enough to add,
that without Laws the World would become a Wilderness, and Men little less than
Beasts; but with all this, the best things may come to be the worst, if they
are not in good hands; and if it be tr^^ that the wisest Men generally make the
Laws, it is as true, that the strongest do often Interpret them: and as Rivers
belong as much to the Channel where they run, as to the Spring from whence they
first rise, so the Laws depend as much upon the Pipes through which they are to
pass, as upon the Fountain from whence they flow.

The Authority of a King who is Head of the Law, as well as the Dignity of
Public Justice, is debased, when the clear stream of the Law is puddled and
disturbed by Bunglers, or conveyed by unclean Instruments to the People.

Our Trimmer would have them app^^^ in their full luster, and would be grieved
to see the day, when, instead of speaking with Authority from the Seats of
Justice, they should speak out of a Grate, with a lamenting voice like
Prisoners that desle to be rescued.

He wishes that the Bench may have a Natural as well as a Legal Superiority to
the Bar; he thinks Men's ab^lities very much misplaced, when the Reason of him
that pleads is visibly too strong for those who Judge and give Sentence.

When those from the Bar seem to dictate to their Superiors upon the Bench,
their Furrs will look scurvily about them, and the respect of the World will
leave the bare Character of a Judge, to follow the Essential knowledge of a
Lawyer, who may be greater in himself, than the other can be with all his
Trappings.

An uncontested Superiority in any Calling, will have the better of any
distinct Name that Authority can put upon it, and therefore if ever such an
unnatural Method should be introduced, it is then that Westminster Hall might
be said to stand upon its Head, and though Justice it self can never be so, yet
the Administration of it would be rendered Ridiculous.

A Judge has such power lodged in him, that the King will never be thought to
have chosen well, where the voice of Mankind has not beforehand recommended
the Man to his Station; when Men are made Judges of what they do not
understand, the World censures such a Choice, not out of ill will to the Men,
but fear to themselves.

If the King had the sole power of choosing Physicians, Men would tremble to see
Bunglers preferred, yet the necessity of taking Physic from a Doctor, is
generally not so great as that of receiving Justice from a Judge; and yet the
Inferences will be very severe in such cases, for either it will be thought
that such Men bought what they were not able to deserve, or which is as bad,
that Obedience shall be looked upon as a better Qualification in a Judge, than
Skill or Integrity, when such sacred things as the Laws are not only touched,
but guided by profane hands; Men will fear that out of the Tree of the Law,
from whence we expect Shade and Shelter, such Workmen will make Cudgels to beat
us with, or rather that they will turn the Canon upon our Properties, that were
entrusted with them for their Defense.

To see the Laws Mangled, Disguised, Speak quite another Language than their
own, to see them thrown from the Dignity of protecting Mankind, to the
disgraceful Office of destroying them; and notwithstanding their Innocence in
themselves, to be made the worst Instruments that the most refined Villainy can
make use of, will raise Men's Anger above the power of laying it down again, and
tempt them to follow the Evil Examples given them of Judging without Hearing,
when so-provoked by their desire of Revenge. Our Trimmer therefore, as he
thinks the Laws are Jewels, so he believes they are no better set, than in the
constitution of our English Government, if rightly understood, and carefully
preserved.

It would be too great Partiality to say they are perfect or liable to no
Objection; such things are not of this world; but if they have more
Excellencies and fewer Faults than any other we know, it is enough to recommend
them to one Esteem.

The Dispute, which is a greater Beauty, a Monarchy or a Commonwealth, has
lasted long between their contending Lovers, and (they have behaved themselves
so like Lovers, who in good Manners must be out of their Wits,) who used such
Figures to exalt their own Idols on either side,. and such angry Aggravations,
to reproach one another in the Contest, that moderate men have in all times
smiled upon this eagerness, and thought it differed very little from a
downright Frenzy: we in England, by a happy use of the Controversy, conclude
them both in the wrong, and reject them from being our Pattern, not taking the
words in the utmost extent, which is a thing, that Monarchy, leaves men no
Liberty, and a Commonwealth such a one, as allows them no Quiet.

We think that a wise Mean, between these barbarous Extremes, is that which
self-Preservation ought to dictate, to our Wishes; and we may say we have
attained to this Mean in a greater measure, than any Nation now in being, or
perhaps any we have read of; tho never so much Celebrated for the Wisdom or
Felicity of their Constitutions: We take from one the too great power of doing
hurt, and yet leave enough to govern and protect us; we take from the other,
the Confusion, the Parity, the Animosities, and the License, and yet reserve a
due care of such a Liberty, as may consist with Men's Allegiance; but it being
hard, if not impossible, to be exactly even, our Government has much the
stronger Biass toward Monarchy, which by the general Consent and Practice of
Mankind, seems to have Advantage in dispute against a Commonwealth; The Rule
of a Commonwealth are too hard for the Bulk of Mankind to come up to; that
Form of Government requires such a spirit to carry it on, as does not dwell in
great Numbers, but is restrained to so very few especially in this Age, that
let the Method appear never so much reasonably in Paper they must fail in
Practice, which will eve^ be suited more to Men's Nature as it is than as it
should be.

Monarchy is liked by the People, for the Bells and the Tinsel, the outward
Pomp and Gilding, and there must be milk for Babes, since the greatest part of
Mankind are, and ever will be included in that List; and it is approved by wise
and thinking Men, (all Circumstances and Objections impartially considered)
that it has so great an advantage above all other Forms, when the
Administration of that Power falls in good hands; that all other Governments
look out of Countenance, when they are set in Competition with it. Lycurgus
might have saved himself the trouble of making Laws, if either he had been
Immortal, or that he could have secured to Posterity, a succeeding Race of
Princes like himself; his own Example was a better Law, than he could with all
his skill tell how to make; such a Prince is a Living Law, that dictates to his
Subjects, whose thoughts in that case never rise above their Obedience, the
Confidence they have in the Virtue and Knowledge of the master, preventing the
Scruples and Apprehensions to which Men are naturally inclined, in relation to
those that govern them; such a Magistrate is the Life and Soul of Justice,
whereas the Law is but a Body and a dead one too, without his Influence to give
it warmth and vigor, and by the irresistible Power of his Virtue, he does so
reconcile Dominion and Allegiance, that all disputes between them are silenced
and subdued, and indeed no Monarchy can be Perfect and Absolute without
exception, but where the Prince is Superior by his Virtue, as well as by his
Character and his Power; so that to screw out Precedents and unlimited Power,
is a plain diminution to a Prince that Nature has made Great, and who had
better make himself a glorious Example to Posterity, than borrow an Authority
from Dark Records, raised out of the Grave, which besides their Nonusage, have
always in them matter of Controversy and Debate, and it may be; affirmed, that
the instances are very rare of Princes having the worst in the dispute with
their People, if they were Eminent for Justice in time of Peace, or Conduct in
time of War, such advantage the Crown gives to those who adorn it by their own
Personal Virtues.

But since for the greater Honor of Good and wise Princes, and the better to
set off their Character by the Comparison, Heaven has decreed there must be a
mixture, and that such as are perverse and insufficient, or at least both, are
perhaps to have their equal turns in the Government of the World, and besides,
that the Will of Man is so various, and so unbounded a thing, and so fatal too
when joined with Power misapplied; it is no wonder if those who are to be
governed, are unwilling to have so dangerous as well as so uncertain a Standard
of their Obedience.

There must be therefore Rules and Laws: for want of which, or at least the
Observation of them, it was as Capital for a Man to say that Nero did not play
well upon the Lute, as to commit Treason, or Blaspheme the Gods. And even
Vespasian himself had like to have lost his Life, for sleeping whilst he should
have attended and admired that Emperors Impertinence upon the Stage. There is
a wantonness in great Power that Men are generally too apt to be corrupted
with, and for that Reason, a wise Prince, to prevent the temptation arising
from common frailty, would choose to Govern by Rules for his own Sake, as well
as for his Peoples, since it only secures him from Errors, and does not lessen
the real Authority, that a good Magistrate would care to be possessed of; for
if the Will of a Prince is contrary either to Reason it self, or to the
universal Opinion of his Subjects, the Law by a kind restraint rescues him from
a disease that would undo him; if his will on the other side is reasonable or
well directed, that Will immediately becomes a Law, and he is arbitrary by an
easy and natural Consequence, without taking pains, or overturning the World
for it.

If Princes consider Laws as things imposed on them, they have the appearance
of Fetters of Iron, but to such as would make them their choice as well as
their practice, they are Chains of Gold; and in that respect are Ornaments, as
in others they are a defense to them, and by a Comparison, not improper for
God's Vicegerents upon Earth; as our Maker never Commands our obedience to any
thing, that as reasonable Creatures we ought not to make our own Election; so a
good and wise Governor, though all Laws were abolished, would by the voluntary
direction of his own Reason, do without restraint the very same things that
they would have enjoined.

Our Trimmer thinks that the King and Kingdom ought to be one Creature, not to
be separated in their Political Capacity; and when either of them undertake to
act a part, it is like the crawling of Worms after they are cut in pieces,
which cannot be a lasting motion, the whole Creature not stirring at a time. If
the Body has a dead Palsy, the Head cannot make it move; and God has not yet
delegated such a healing power to Princes, as that they can in a moment say to
a Languishing People oppressed and in despair, take up your Beds and walk.

The Figure of a King, is so comprehensive and exalted a thing, that it is a
kind of degrading him to lodge that power separately in his own Natural Person,
which can never be safely or naturally great, but where the People are so
united to him as to be Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone; for when he is
reduced to the single definition of a man, he sinks into so low a Character,
that it is a temptation upon Men's Allegiance, and an impairing that veneration
which is necessary to preserve their Duty to him; whereas a Prince who is so
joined to his people that they seem to be his Limbs, rather than his Subjects,
Clothed with Mercy and Justice rightly applied in their several places, his
Throne supported by Love as well as by Power, and the warm wishes of his
devoted Subjects, like never-failing Incense, still ascending toward him,
looks so like the best Image we can frame to our selves of God Almighty, that
men would have much ado not to fall down and worship him; and would be much
more tempted to the Sin of Idolatry, than to that of Disobedience.

Our Trimmer is of Opinion, that there must be so much Dignity inseparably
annexed to the Royal Function, as may be sufficient to secure it from insolence
and contempt; and there must be Condescensions from the Throne, like kind
showers from Heaven, that the Prince may look so much the more like God
Almighty's Deputy upon Earth; for power without love has a terrifying aspect,
and the Worship which is paid to it is like that which the Indians give out of
fear to Wild Beasts and Devils: he that fears God only because there is an
Hell, must wish there were no God; and he who fears the King, only because he
can punish, must wish there were no King; so that without a principle of Love,
there can be no true Allegiance, and there must remain perpetual Seeds of
Resistance against a power that is built upon such an unnatural Foundation, as
that of fear and terror. All force is a kind of soul-Play, and whosoever aims
at it himself, does by implication allow it to those he plays with; so that
there will be ever Matter prepared in the minds of People when they are
provoked, and the Prince, to secure himself must live in the midst of his own
Subjects, as if he were in a Conquered Country, raise Arms as if he were
immediately to meet or resist an Invasion, and all this while sleep as
unquietly from the fear of the Remedies, as he did before from that of the
Disease; it being hard for him to forget, that more Princes have been destroyed
by their Guards than by their People; and that even at the time when the Rule
was Quod Principi placuit Lex esto: the Armies and Praetorian Bands which were
the Instruments of that unruly Power, were frequently the means made use of to
destroy them who had it. There will ever be this difference between God and his
Vicegeren^s, that God is still above the Instruments he uses, and out of the
danger of receiving hurt from them; but Princes can never lodge Power in any
hands, which may not at some time turn it back upon them; for though it is
possible enough for a King to have power to satisfy his Ambition; yet no
Kingdom has Money enough to satisfy the avarice of under-Work-men, who learn
from that Prince who will exact more than belongs to him, to expect from him
much more than they deserve, and growing angry upon the first disappointment,
they are the Devils which grow terrible to the Conjurers themselves who brought
them up, and cannot send them down again; And besides that there can be no
lasting Radical Security, but where the Governed are satisfied with the
Governors. It must be a Dominion very unpleasant to a Prince of an elevated
Mind, to impose an abject and sordid servility, instead of receiving the
willing Sacrifice of Duty and Obedience. The bravest Princes in all times, who
were incapable of any other kind of fear, have feared to grieve their own
People; such a fear is a glory, and in this sense it is an infamy not to be a
Coward: So that the mistaken Heroes who are void of this generous kind of fear,
need no other aggravation to complete their ill Characters.

When a Despotick Prince has bruised all his Subjects with a slavish Obedience,
all the force he can use cannot subdue his own fears; Enemies of his own
Creation, to which he can never be reconciled, it being impossible to do
injustice and not to fear Revenge: there is no cure for this fear, but the not
deserving to be hurt, and therefore a Prince who does not allow his thoughts to
stray beyond the Rules of Justice, has always the blessing of an inward quiet
and assurance, as a natural effect of his good Meaning to his People, and tho
he will not neglect due precautions to secure himself in all Events, yet he is
incapable of entertaining vain and remote suspicions of those, of whom he
resolves never to deserve ill.

It is very hard for a Prince to fear Rebellion, who neither does, nor intends
to do any thing to provoke it; therefore too great a diligence in the
Governors, to raise and improve dangers and fears from the People, is no very
good Symptom, and naturally begets an inference that they have thoughts of
putting their Subjects Allegiance to a Trial; and therefore not without some
Reason fear before hand, that the Irregularities they intend, may raise Men to
a Resistance.

Our Trimmer thinks it no advantage to a Government, to endeavor the
suppressing all kind of Right which may remain in the Body of the People, or to
employ small Authors in it, whose Officiousness or want of Money may encourage
them to write, though it is not very easy to have Abilities equal to such a
Subject; they forget that in their too high strained Arguments for the Rights
of Princes, they very often plead against humane Nature, which will always give
a Biass to those Reasons which seem of her side; it is the People that Reads
those Books, and it is the People that must judge of them; and therefore no
Maxims should be laid down for the Right of Government, to which there can be
any Reasonable Objection; for the World has an Interest, and for that Reason is
more than ordinary discerning to find out the weak sides of such Arguments as
are intended to do them hurt; and it is a diminution to a Government, to
Promote or Countenance such well affected mistakes which are turned upon it
with disadvantage, whenever they are detected and exposed; and Naturally the
too earnest Endeavors to take from Men the Right they have, tempt them, by the
Example to Claim that which they have not.

In Power, as in most other things, the way for Princes to keep it, is not to
grasp more than their Arms can well hold; the nice and unnecessary enquiring
into these things, or the Licensing some Books, and suppressing some others
without sufficient Reason to Justify the doing either, is so far from being an
Advantage to a Government, that it exposes it to the Censure of being Partial
and to the suspicion, of having some hidden designs to be carried on by these
unusual methods.

When all is said, there is a Natural Reason of State, and undefinable thing,
grounded upon the Common Good of Mankind* which is immortal, and in all Changes
and Revolutions, still preserves its Original Right of saving a Nation, when
the Letter of the Law perhaps would destroy it; and by whatsoever means it
moves, carries a Power with it, that admits of no opposition, being supported
by Nature, which inspires an immediate consent at some Critical times into
every individual Member, to that which visibly tends to preservation of the
whole; and this being so, a Wise Prince instead of Controverting the right of
this Reason of State, will by all means endeavor it may be of his side, and
then he will be secure.

Our Trimmer cannot conceive that the Power of any Prince can be lasting, but
where it is built upon the foundation of his own unborrowed virtue, he must not
only be the first Mover and the Fountain, from whence the great Acts of State
originally flow, but he must be thought so to his People that they may preserve
their veneration for him; he must be jealous of his Power, and not impart so
much of it to any about him, as that he may suffer an Eclipse by it.

He cannot take too much care to keep himself up, for when a Prince is thought
to be led by those, with whom he should only advise, and that the Commands he
gives are transmitted through him, and are not of his own growth; the World
will look upon him as a Bird adorned with Feathers that are not his own, or
consider him rather as an Engine than a living Creature; besides, 'twould be a
Contradiction for a Prince to fear a Commonwealth, and at the same time create
one himself, be delegating such a Power to any Number of Men near him, as is
inconsistent with the Figure of a Monarch: it is the worst kind of
Co-ordination the Crown can submit to; for it is the exercise of Power that
draws the respect along with it, and when that is parted with, the bare
Character of a King is not sufficient to keep it up; but though it is a
diminution to a Prince, to parcel out so liberally his Power amongst his
Favorites, it is worse to divide with any other Man, and to bring himself in
Competition with a single Rival; a Partner in Government is so unnatural a
thing, that it is a squint-eyed Allegiance that must be paid to such a double
bottomed Monarchy. The two Czars of Muscovy are an Example that the more
civilized part of the World will not be proud to follow, whatsoever Gloss may
be put upon this method, by those to whom it may be of some use, the Prince
will do well to remember, and reflect upon the Story of certain Men who had set
up a Statue in Honor of the Sun, yet in a very little time they turned their
backs to the Sun, and their Faces to the Statue.

These Mystical Unions are better placed in the other World, than they are in
this, and we shall have much ado to find, that in a Monarchy Gods Vicegerency
is delegated to more Heads than that which is anointed.

Princes may lend some of their Light to make another shine, but they must
still preserve the superiority of being the brighter Planet, and when it
happens that the Reversion is in Men's Eyes, there is more care necessary to
keep up the Dignity of Possessions, that Men may not forget who is King, either
out of their hopes or fears who shall be. If the Sun should part with all his
Light to any of the Stars, the Indians would not know where to find their God,
after he had so deposed himself, and would make the Light (wherever it went)
the Object of their Worship.

All Usurpation is alike upon Sovereignty, its no matter from what hand it
comes; and Crowned Heads are to be the more Circumspect, in respect Men's
thoughts are naturally apt to ramble beyond what is present, they love to work
at a distance, and in their greedy Expectations; which their minds may be
filled with of a new Master, the old one may be left to look a little out of
Countenance.

Our Trimmer owns a Passion for liberty, yet so restrained, that it does not in
the least impair or taint his Allegiance, he thinks it hard for a Soul that
does not love Liberty, ever to raise it self to another World he takes it to be
the foundation of all virtue, and the only seasoning that gives a relish to
life, and though the laziness of a slavish subjection, has its Charms for the
more gross and earthly part of Mankind, yet to men made of a better sort of
Clay, all that the World can give without Liberty has no taste; it is true,
nothing is sold so cheap by unthinking men, but that does no more lessen the
real value of it, than a Country Fellows Ignorance does that of a Diamond, in
selling it for a Pot of Ale. Liberty is the Mistress of Mankind, she has
powerful Charms which do so dazzle us, that we find Beauties in her which
perhaps are not there, as we do in other Mistresses; yet if she was not a
Beauty, the World would not run mad for her; therefore since the reasonable
desire of it ought not to be restrained, and that even the unreasonable desire
of it cannot be entirely suppressed, those who would take it away from a People
possessed of it, are likely to fail in the attempting, or be very unquiet in
the keeping of it.

Our Trimmer admires our blessed Constitutions, in which Dominion and Liberty
are so well reconciled; it gives to the Prince the glorious Power of commanding
Freemen, and to the Subject, the satisfaction of seeing the Power so lodged, as
that their Liberties are secure; it does not allow the Crown such a Ruining
Power, as that no grass can grow where e're it treads, but a Cherishing and
Protecting Power; such a one as has a grim Aspect only to the offending
Subjects, but is the joy and the Pride of all the good ones; their own interest
being so bound up in it, as to engage them to defend and support it; and tho in
some instances the King is restrained yet nothing in the Government can move
without him; our Laws make a distinction between Vassalage and Obedience;
between devouring Prerogatives, and a licentious ungovernable Freedom: and as
of all the Orders of Building, the Composite is the best, so ours by a happy
mixture and a wise choice of what is best in others, is brought into a Form
that is our Felicity who live under it, and the envy of our Neighbor that
cannot imitate it.

The Crown has power sufficient to protect our Liberties. The People have so
much Liberty as is necessary to make them useful to the Crown.

Our Government is in a just proportion, no Tympany, no unnatural swelling
either of Power or Liberty; and whereas in all overgrown Monarchies, Reason,
Learning, and Enquiry are hanged in Effigy for Mutineers; here they are
encouraged and cherished as the surest Friends to a Government established upon
the Foundation of Law and Justice. When all is done, those who look for
Perfection in this World, may look as the Jews have for their Messiah, and
therefore our Trimmer is not so unreasonably Partial as to free our
Governments; and from all objections, no doubt there have been fatal Instances
of its Sickness, and more than that, of its Mortality, for sometime, though by a
Miracle, it has been revived again: but till we have another race of Mankind,
in all Constitutions that are bounded, there will ever be some matter of
Strife, and Contention, and rather than want pretensions, Men's Passions and
Interests will raise them from the most inconsiderable Causes.

Our Government is like our Climate* there are Winds which are sometimes loud
and unquiet, and yet with all the Trouble they give us, we owe, great part of
our Health unto them, they clear the Air, which else would be like a standing
Pool, and in stead of Refreshment would be a Disease unto us.

There may be fresh Gales of asserting Liberty, without turning into such
storms of Hurricane, as that the State should run any hazard of being Cast away
by them; these struglings which are natural to all mixed Governments, while
they are kept from growing in Convulsions, do by a mutual agitation from the
several parts, rather support and strengthen, than weaken or maim the
Constitution; and the whole frame, instead of being torn or disjointed, comes
to be the better and closer knit by being thus exercised; but what ever faults
our Government may have, or a discerning Critic may find in it, when he looks
upon it alone; let any other be set against it, and then it shows its
Comparative Beauty; let us look upon the most glittering outside of unbounded
Authority, and upon a nearer enquiry, we shall find nothing but poor and
miserable deformity within; let us imagine a Prince living in his Kingdom, as
if in a great Gally, his Subjects tugging at the Oar, laden with Chains, and
reduced to real Rags, that they may gain him imaginary Laurels; let us
Represent him gazing among his Flatterers, and receiving their false Worship,
like a Child never Contradicted, and therefore always Cozen'd^ or like a Lady
complemented only to be abused, condemned never to hear Truth* and Consequently
never to do Justice, w^llowing in the soft Bed of wanton and unbridled
Greatness, not less odious to the Instruments themselves, than to the Objects
of his Tyranny; blown up into an Ambitious Dropsy, never to be satisfied by the
Conquest of other People, or by the Oppression of his own; by aiming to be more
than a Man, he falls lower than the meanest of 'em, a mistaken Creature,
swelled with Panegyricks, and flattered out of his Senses, and not only an
Encumbrance, but a Nuisance to Mankind, a hardened and unrelenting Soul, and
like some Creatures that grow fat with Poisons, he grows great by other Men's
Miseries; an Ambitious Ap^ of the Divine Greatness, an unruly Giant that would
storm even Heaven it self, but that his scaling Ladders are not long enough; in
short, a Wild and devouring Creature in rich Trappings, and with all his Pride
no more than a Whip in God Almighty's hand, to be thrown into the Fire when the
World has been sufficiently scourged with it: This Picture laid in right
Colors would not incite Men to wish for such a Government, but rather to
acknowledge the happiness of our own, under which we enjoy all the Privilege
Reasonable Men can desire, and avoid all the Miseries many others are subject
to; so that our Trimmer would keep it with all its faults, and does as little
forgive those who give the occasion of breaking it, as he does those that take
it.

Our Trimmer is a Friend to Parliaments, notwithstanding all their faults, and
excesses, which of late have given such matter of Objection to them; he thinks
that though they may at sometimes be troublesome to Authority, yet they add the
greatest strength to it under a wise Administration; he believes no Government
is perfect except a kind of Omnipotence reside in it, to exercise upon great
Occasions: Now this cannot be obtained by force alone upon People, let it be
never so great, there must be their consent too, or else a Nation moves only by
being driven, a sluggish and constrained Motion, void of that Life and Vigor
which is necessary to produce great things, whereas the virtual Consent of the
whole being included in their Representatives, and the King giving the sanction
to the united sense of the People, every Act done by such an Authority, seems
to be an effect of their choice as well as a part of their Duty; and they do
with an eagerness, of which Men are incapable whilst under a force, execute
whatsoever is so enjoined as their own Wills, better explained by Parliament,
rather than from the terror of incurring the Penalty of the Law for omiting
it, and by means of this Political Omnipotence, what ever Sap or Juice there is
in a Nation, may be to the last drop produced, whilst it rises naturally from
the Root; whereas all power exercised without consent, is like the giving
Wounds and Gashes, and tapping a Tree at unseasonable Times, for the present
occasion, which in a very little time must needs destroy it.

Our Trimmer believes, that by the advantage of our Situation, there can hardly
any such sudden Disease come upon us, but that the King may have time enough
left to consult with his Physicians in Parliament; pretenses indeed may be
made, but a real necessity so pressing, that no delay is to be admitted, is
hardly to be imagined, and it will be neither easy to give an instance of any
such thing for the time past, or reasonable to Presume it will ever happen for
the time to come: but if that strange thing should fall out, our Trimmer is not
so streight-lac'd, as to let a Nation die, or to be stifled, rather than it
should be helped by any but the proper Officers. The Cases themselves will
bring the Remedies along with them; and he is not afraid to allow that in order
to its preservation, there is a hidden Power in Government, which would be lost
if it was designed, a certain Mystery, by virtue of which a Nation may at some
Critical times be secured from Ruin, but then it must be kept as a Mystery; it
is rendered useless when touched by unskilful hands: and no Government ever
had, or deserved to have that Power, which was so unwary as to anticipate their
claim to it: Our Trimmer cannot help thinking it had been better, if the
Triennial Act had been observed; because it is the Law, and he would not have
the Crown, by such an Example, teach the Nation to break it; all irregularity
is catching, it has a Contagion in it, especially in an Age, so much inclined
to follow ill Patterns than good ones.

He would have a Parliament, because it is an Essential part of the
Constitution, even without the Law, it being the only Provision in
extraordinary Cases, in which there would be otherwise no Remedy, and there can
be no greater Solecism in Government, than a failure of Justice.

He would have had one, because nothing else can unite and heal us, all other
Means are mere Shifts and Projects, Houses of Cards, to be blown down with the
least Breath, and cannot resist the Difficulties which are ever presumed in
things of this kind; and he would have had one, because it might have done the
King good, and could not possibly have done him hurt, without his consent,
which in that Case is not to be supposed, and theresore for him to fear it, is
so strange and so little to be comprehended, that the Reasons can never be
presumed to grow in our Soil, or to thrive in it when Transplanted from any
other Country; and no doubt there are such irresistible Arguments for calling a
Parliament, and tho it might, be denied to the unmannerly mutinous Petitions of
men, that are malicious and diaffected, it will be granted to the soft and
obsequious Murmurs of his Majesty's best Subjects, and there will be such
Retorick in their silent Grief, that it will at last prevail against the
Artifices of those, who either out of Guilt or Interest, are afraid to throw
themselves upon their Country, knowing how scurvily they have used it; that day
of Judgment will come, tho we know neither the day nor the hour. And our
Trimmer would live so as to be prepared for it, with full assurance in the mean
time, that the lamenting Voice of a Nation cannot long be resisted, and that a
Prince who could so easily forgive his People when they had been in the wrong,
cannot fail to hear them when they are in the right.

The Trimmer's Opinion concerning the Protestant Religion.
REligion has such a Superiority above other things, and that indispensable
Influence upon all Mankind, that it is as necessary to our Living Happy in this
World, as it is to our being Saved in the next, without it man is an abandoned
Creature, one of the worst Beasts Nature has produced, and fit only for the
Society of Wolves and Bears; therefore in all Ages it has been the Foundation
of Government: and though false Gods have been imposed upon the Credulous part of
the World, yet they were Gods still in their Opinion, and the Awe and Reverence
Men had to them and their Oracles, kept them within bounds toward one another,
which the Laws with all their Authority could never have effected without the
help of Religion; the Laws would not be able to subdue the perverseness of Men's
Wills, which are Wild Beasts, and require a double Chain to keep them down; for
this Reason it is said, That it is not a sufficient ground to make War upon a
Neighboring State, because they are of another Religion, let it be never so
differing: yet if they Worshipped nor Acknowledged any Deity at all, they may be
Invaded as Public Enemies of Mankind, because they reject the only thing that
can bind them to live well with one another; the consideration of Religion is
so twisted with that of Government, that it is never to be separated, and tho
the Foundations of it ought to be Eternal and Unchangeable, yet the Terms and
Circumstances of Discipline, are to be suited to the several Climates and
Constitutions, so that they may keep men in a willing Acquiescence unto them,
without discomposing the World by nice disputes, which can never be of equal
moment with the public Peace.

Our Religion here in England seems to be distinguished by a peculiar effect of
God Almighty's goodness, in permiting it to be introduced, or rather restored,
by a more regular Method than the Circumstances of most other Reformed
Churches, would allow them to do, in relation to the Government; and the
Dignity with which it has supported it self since, and the great Men our Church
has produced, ought to recommend it to the esteem of all Protestants at least:
Our Trimmer is very partial to it, for these Reasons, and many more, and
desires that it may preserve its due Jurisdiction and Authority? so far he is
from wishing it oppressed by the unreasonable and malicious Cavils of those who
take pains to raise Objections against it.

The Questions will then be, how and by what Methods this Church shall best
support it self (the present Circumstances considered) in relation to
Dissenters of all sorts: I will first lay this for a ground, That as there can
be no true Religion without Charity, so there can be no true humane prudence
without bearing and condescension: This Principle does not extend to oblige the
Church always to yield to those who are disposed to Contest with her, the
expediency of doing it is to be considered and determined according to the
occasion, and this leads me to lay open the thoughts of our Trimmer, in
reference first, to the Protestants, and then to the Popish Recusants.

What has lately happened among us, makes an Apology necessary for saying any
thing that looks like favor toward a sort of Men who have brought themselves
under such a disadvantage.

The late Conspiracy has such broad Symptoms of the disaffection of the whole
Party, that upon the first reflections, while our thoughts are warm, it would
almost persuade us to put them out of the protection of our good Nature, and to
think that the Christian Indulgence with our compassion for other Men's
Sufferings, cannot easily deny, seems not only to be forfeited by the ill
appearances that are against them, but even becomes a Crime when it is so
misapplied; yet for all this, upon second and cooler thoughts, moderate Men
will not be so ready to involve a whole Party in the guilt of a few, and to
admit inferences and Presumptions to be Evidence in a Case, where the Sentence
must be so heavy, as it ought to be against all those who have a fixed
resolution against the Government established? besides^ Men who act by a
Principle grounded upon Moral Virtue, can never let it be clearly extinguished
by the most repeated Provocations; if a right thing agreeable to Nature and
good Sense takes root in the heart of a Man, that is impartial and unbiased,
no outward. Circumstances can ever destroy it; it is true, the degrees of a Man's
Zeal for the Prosecution of it may be differing, faults of other Men, the
consideration of the public, and the seasonable Prudence by which Wise Men
will ever be directed, may give great Allays; they may lessen and for a time
perhaps suppress the exercise of that, which in general Proposition may be
reasonable, but still whatever is so will inevitably grow and spring up again,
having a Foundation in Nature, which is never to be destroyed.

Our Trimmer therefore endeavors to separate the detestation of those who had
either a hand or a thought in the late Plot, from the Principle of Prudential
as well as Christian Charity toward Mankind, and for that reason would fain
use the means of reclaiming such of the Dissenters as are not incurable, and
even bearing to a degree those that are as far as may consist with the Public
Interest and Security; he is far from justifying an affected separation from
the Communion of the Church, and even in those that mean well, and are
mistaken, he looks upon it as a Disease that has seized upon their Minds, very
troublesome as well as dangerous, by the Consequence it may produce: he does
not go about to excuse their making it an indispensable duty, to meet in
numbers to say their Prayers, such meetings may prove mischievous to the State
at least; the Laws which are the best Judges, have determined that there is
danger in them: he has good nature enough to lament that the perverseness of a
Part should have drawn Rigorous Laws upon the whole Body of the Dissenters, but
when they are once made no private Opinion must stand in Opposition to them; if
they are in themselves reasonable, they are in that respect to be regarded,
even without being enjoined, if by the Change of Time and Circumstances they
should become less reasonable than when they were first made, even then they
are to be obeyed too, because they are Laws, till they are mended or repealed
by the same Authority that Enacted them.

He has too much deference to the Constitution of our Government, to wish for
more Prerogative Declarations in favor of scrupulous Men, or to dispense with
Penal Laws in such manner, or to such an end, that suspecting Men might with
some reason pretend, that so hated a thing as Persecution could never make way
for it self with any hopes of Success, otherwise than by preparing the deluded
World by a false prospect of Liberty and Indulgence. The inward Springs and
Wheels whereby the Engine moved, are now so fully laid open and exposed that it
is not supposable that such a baffled Experiment should ever be tried again,
the effect it had at the time, and the Spirit it raised, will not easily be
forgotten, and it may be presumed the remembrance of it may secure us from any
more attempts of that Nature for the future; we must no more break a Law to
give Men ease, than we are to Rifle an House with a devout intention of giving
the plunder to the Poor; in this case, our Compassion would be as ill directed,
as our Charity in the other.

In short, the veneration due to the Laws is never to be thrown off, let the
pretenses be never so specious; yet with all this he cannot bring himself to
think, that an extraordinary diligence to take the uttermost penalty of Laws,
upon the poor offending Neighbor, is of it self such an all sufficient virtue,
that without any thing else to recommend Men, it should Entitle them to all
kind of Preferments and Rewards; he would not detract from the merits of those
who execute the Laws, yet he cannot think such a piece of service as this, can
entirely change the Man, and either make him a better Divine, or a more knowing
Magistrate than he was before, especially if it be done with a partial and
unequal hand in Reverence to greater and more dangerous Offenders.

Our Trimmer would have those mistaken Men ready to throw themselves into the
arms of the Church, and he would have those arms as ready to receive them that
shall come to us; he would have no supercilious look to fright those strayed
Sheep from coming into the Fold again; no ill-natured maxims of an Eternal
suspicion, or a belief that those who have once been in the wrong can never be
in the right again; but a visible preparation of mind to receive with joy all
the Proselytes that come amongst us, and much greater earnestness to reclaim
than punish them: It is to be confessed, there is a great deal to forgive, a
hard task enough for the Charity of a Church so provoked; but that must not cut
off all hopes of being reconciled, yet if there must be some anger left still,
let it break out into a Christian Revenge, and by being kinder to the Children
of Disobedience than they deserve, let the injured Church Triumph, by throwing
shame and confusion of face upon them; there should not always be Storms and
Thunder, a clear Sky would sometime make the Church look more like Heaven, and
would do more toward the reclaiming those wanderers, than a perpetual terror,
which seemed to have no intermission; for there is in many, and particularly in
English Men, a mistaken pleasure, in resisting the dictates of Rigorous
Authority; a Stomach that rises, against a hard imposition, nay, in some,
raise even a lust in suffering from a wrong point of Honor, which does not
want the applause, from the greater part of Mankind, who have not learnt to
distinguish; constancy will be thought a virtue even where it is a mistake; and
the ill Judging World will be apt to think that Opinion most right, which
produces the greatest number of those who are willing to suffer for it; all
this is prevented, and falls to the ground, by using well-timed Indulgence; and
the stubborn Adversary who values himself upon his Resistance whilst he is
oppressed, yields insensibly to kind Methods, when they are applied to him, and
the same Man naturally melts into Conformity, who perhaps would never have been
beaten into it. We may be taught by the Compassion that attends the most
Criminal Men when they are Condemned, that Faults are much more natural things
than Punishments, and that even the most necessary acts of severity do some
kind of violence to our Nature, whose Indulgence will not be confined within
the strait bounds of inexorable Justice; so that this should be an Argument for
gentleness, besides that it is the likeliest way to make these Men ashamed of
their Separation, whilst the pressing them too hard, tends rather to make them
proud of it.

Our Trimmer would have the Clergy supported in their Lawful Rights, and in all
the Power and Dignity that belongs to them, and yet he thinks that possibly
there may be in some of them a too great eagerness to extend the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; which tho it may be well intended, yet the straining of it too
high has an appearance of Ambition that raises men's Objections to it, and is
far unlike the Apostolic Zeal, which was quite otherwise employed, that the
World draws inferences from it, which do the Church no service.

He is troubled to see Men of all sides sick of a Calenture of a mistaken
Devotion, and it seems to him that the devout Fire of mistaken Charity with
which the Primitive Christians were inflamed, is long since extinguished, and
instead of it a devouring Fire of Anger and Persecution breaks out in the
World; we wrangle now one with another about Religion till the Blood comes,
whilst the Ten Commandments have no more authority with us, than if they were
so many obsolete Laws or Proclamations out of date; he thinks that a Nation
will hardly be mended by Principles of Religion, where Morality is made a
Heresy; and therefore as he believes-Devotion misplaced when it gets into a
Conventicle, he concludes that Loyalty is so too, when lodged in a Drunken
Club; those Virtues deserve a better Seat of Empire, and they are degraded,
when such Men undertake their defense, as have too great need of an Apology
themselves.

Our Trimmer wishes that some knowledge may go along with the Zeal on the right
side, and that those who are in possession of the Pulpit, would quote* at least
so often the Authority of the Scriptures as they do that of the State; there
are many who borrow too often Arguments from the Government; to use against
their Adversaries, and neglect those that are more proper, and would be more
powerful; a Divine grows less, and puts a diminution on his own Character, when
he quoteth any Law but that of God Almighty, to get the better of those who
contest with him; and it is a sign of a decayed Constitution, when Nature with
good diet cannot expel noxious Humors without calling Foreign Drugs to her
Assistance; So it looks, like want of health in a Church, when instead of
depending upon the power of that Truth which it holds, and the good Examples of
them that teach it, to support it self, and to suppress Errors, it should have
a perpetual recourse to the secular Authority, and even upon the slightest
occasions.

Our Trimmer has his Objections to the too busy diligence, and to the overdoing
of some of the dissenting Clergy, and he does as little approve of those of our
Church, who wear God Almighty's Liveries, as some old Warders in the Tower do
the King's, who do nothing in their place but receive their Wages for it; he
thinks that the Liberty of the late times gave men so much Light, and diffused
it so universally amongst the people, that they are not now to be dealt with,
as they might have been in Ages of less enquiry; and therefore in some well
chosen and dearly beloved Auditories, good resolute Nonsense backed with
Authority may prevail, yet generally Men are become so good Judges of what they
hear, that the Clergy ought to be very wary how they go about to impose upon
their Understandings, which are grown less humble than they were in former
times, when the Men in black had made Learning such a sin in the Laity, that
for fear of offending, they made a Conscience of being able to read; but now
the World is grown saucy, and expects Reasons, and good ones too, before they
give up their own Opinions to other Men's Dictates, tho never so Magisterially
delivered to them.

Our Trimmer is far from approving the Hypocrisy, which seems to be the
reigning Vice amongst some of the Dissenting Clergy, he thinks it the most
provoking sin Men can be guilty of, in Relation to Heaven, and yet (which may
seem strange) that very sin which shall destroy the Soul of the Man who
preaches, may help to save those of the Company that hear him, and even those
who are cheated by the false Ostentation of his strictness of life, may by that
Pattern be encouraged to the real Practice of those Christian Virtues which he
does so deceitfully profess; so that the detestation, of this fault may
possibly be carried on too far by our own Orthodox Divines, if they think it
cannot be enough expressed without bending the Stick another way; a dangerous
Method, and a worse Extreme for Men of that Character, who by going to the
outmost line of Christian Liberty, will certainly encourage others to go beyond
it: No Man does less approve the ill-bred Methods of some of the Dissenters, in
rebuking Authority, who behave themselves as if they thought ill manners
necessary to Salvation; yet he cannot but distinguish and desire a Mean between
the sawcyness of some of the Scotch Apostles, and the undecent Courtship of
some of the Silken Divines, who, one would think, do practice to bow at the
Altar, only to learn to make the better Legs at Court.

Our Trimmer approves the Principles of our Church, that Dominion is not
founded in Grace, and that our Obedience is to be given to a Popish King in
other things, at the same time that our Compliance with him in his Religion is
to be denied; yet he cannot but think it a very extraordinary thing if a
Protestant Church should by a voluntary Election, choose a Papist for their
Guardian, and receive Directions for supporting their Religion, from one who
must believe it a Mortal Sin not to endeavor to destroy it; such a refined
piece of Breeding would not seem to be very well placed in the Clergy, who will
hardly find Precedents to justify such an extravagant piece of Courtship, and
which is so unlike the Primitive Methods, which ought to be our Pattern; he
has no such unreasonable tenderness for any sorts of Men, as to expect their
faults should not be impartially laid open as often as they give occasion for
it; and yet he cannot but smile to see that the same Man, who sets up all the
Sails of his Rhetoric, to fall upon Dissenters; when Popery is to be handled,
he does it so gingerly, that he looks like an Ass mumbling of Thistles, so
afraid he is of letting himself loose where he may be in danger of letting his
Duty get the better of his Discretion.

Our Trimmer is far from relishing the impertinent wanderings of those who pour
out long Prayers upon the Congregation, and all from their own Stock, which God
knows, for the most part is a barren Soil, which produces weeds instead of
Flowers, and by this means they expose Religion it self, rather than promote
Men's Devotions: On the other side, there may be too great Restraint put upon
Men, whom God and Nature has distinguished from their Fellow Laborers, by
blessing them with a happier Talent, and by giving them not only good Sense,
but a powerful Utterance too, has enabled them to gush out upon the attentive
Auditory, with a mighty stream of Devout and unaffected Eloquence; when a Man
so qualified, endued with Learning too, and above all, adorned with a good
Life, breaks out into a warm and well delivered Prayer before his Sermon, it
has the appearance of a Divine Rapture, he raises and leads the Hearts of the
Assembly in another manner, than the most Composed or best Studied Form of set
Words can ever do; and the Pray-wees, who serve up all their Sermons with the
same Garnishing, would look like so many Statues, or Men of Straw in the
Pulpit, compared With those who speak with such a powerful Zeal, that men are
tempted at the moment to believe Heaven it self has dictated their words to 'em.

Our Trimmer is not so unreasonably indulgent to the Dissenters, as to excuse
the Irregularities of their Complaints, and to approve their threatening Styles,
which are so ill-suited to their Circumstances as well as their Duty; he would
have them to show their Grief, and not their Anger to the Government, and by
such a Submission to Authority, as becomes them, if they cannot acquiesce in
what is imposed; let them deserve a Legislative Remedy to their Sufferings,
there being no other way to give them perfect redress; and either to seek it,
or pretend to give it by any other Method, would not only be vain, but Criminal
too in those that go about it; yet with all this, there may in the mean time be
a prudential Latitude left, as to the manner of preventing the Laws now in
force against them: The Government is in some degree answerable for such an
Administration of them, as may be free from the Censure of Impartial Judges;
and in order to that, it would be necessary that one of these methods be
pursued, either to let loose the Laws to their utmost extent, without any
Moderation or Restraint, in which at least the Equality of the Government would
be without Objection, the Penalties being exacted without Remission from the
Dissenters of all kinds; or if that will not be done (and indeed there is no
Reason it should) there is a necessity of some Connivance to the Protestant
Dissenters to execute that which in Humanity must be allowed to the Papists,
even without any leaning toward them, which must be supposed in those who are
or shall be in the administration of public Business; and it will follow that,
according to our Circumstances, the distribution of such connivance must be
made in such a manner, that the greatest part of it may fall on the Protestant
side, or else the Objections will be so strong, and the Inferences so clear,
that the Friends, as well as the Enemies of the Crown, will be sure to take
hold of them.

It will not be sufficient to say that the Papists may be connived at, because
they are good Subjects and that the Protestant Dissenters, must suffer because
they are ill ones; these general Maxims will not convince discerning Men,
neither will any late Instances make them forget what passed at other times in
the World; both sides have had their Turns in being good and ill Subjects. And
therefore it is easy to imagine what suspicions would arise in the present
conjuncture, if such a partial Argument as this should be imposed upon us; the
truth is, this Matter speaks so much of it self, that it is not only
unnecessary, but it may be mannnerly to say any more of it.

Our Trimmer therefore could wish, that since notwithstanding the Laws which
deny Churches to say Mass in; even not only the Exercise, but also the
Ostentation of Popery is as well or better performed in the Chapels of so many
Foreign Ministers, where the English openly resort in spite of Proclamations
and Orders of Council, which are grown to be as harmless things to them, as the
Popes Bulls and Excommunications are to Heretics who are out of his reach; I
say he could wish that by a seasonable as well as an equal piece of Justice,
there might be so much consideration had of the Protestant Dissenters, as that
there might be at sometimes, and at some places, a^ Veil thrown over an
Innocent and retired Conventicle, and that such an Indulgence might be
practiced with less prejudice to the Church, or diminution to the Laws; it
might be done so as to look rather like a kind Omission to enquire more
strictly, than an allowed Toleration of that which is against the Rule
established.

Such a skilful hand as this is very Necessary in our Circumstances, and the
Government by making no sort of Men entirely desperate, does not only secure it
self from Villainous attempts, but lay such a Foundation for healing and
uniting Laws, when ever a Parliament shall meet, that the Seeds of Differences
and Animosities between the several contending sides may (Heaven consenting) be
for ever destroyed.

The Trimmer's Opinion concerning the Papists.
TO speak of Popery leads me into such a Sea of Matter, that it is not easy to
forbear launching into it, being invited by such a fruitful Theme, and by a
variety never to be exhausted; but to confine it to the present Subject, I will
only say a short word of the Religion it self; of its influences here at this
time; and of our Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to our manner of living with
them.

If a Man would speak Maliciously of this Religion, one may say it is like
those Diseases, where as long as one drop of the infection remains, there is
still danger of having the whole Mass of Blood corrupted by it. In Swedeland
there was an absolute cure, and nothing of Popery heard of, till Queen
Christina, (whether moved by Arguments of this or the other World, may not be
good Manners to enquire) thought fit to change her Religion and Country, and to
live at Rome, where she might find better judges of her Virtues, and less
ungentle Censures of those Princely Liberties, to which she was sometimes
disposed, than she left at Stockholme; where the good breeding is as much
inferior to that of Rome in general, as the Civility of the Religion. The
Cardinals having rescued the Church from those Clownish Methods the Fishermen
had first introduced, and mended that Pattern so effectually, that a Man of
that Age, if he should now come into the World, would not possibly know it.

In Denmark the Reformation was entire; in some States of Germany, as well as
Geneva, the Cure was universal; but in the rest of the World where the
Protestant Religion took place, the Popish humor was too tough to be totally
expelled, and so it was in England; though the Change was made with all the
advantage imaginable to the Reformation, it being Countenanced and introduced
by Legal Authority, and by that means, might have been perhaps as perfect as in
any other Place, if the short Reign of Edward the 6th, and the succession of a
Popish Queen had not given such advantage to that Religion, that it has
subsisted ever since under all the hardships that have been put upon it; it has
been a strong Compact Body, and made the more so by these Sufferings; it was
not strong enough to prevail, but it was able, with the help of foreign
support, to carry on an Interest which gave the Crown trouble, and to make a
considerable (not to say dangerous) Figure in the Nation; so much as this could
not have been done without some hopes, nor these hopes kept up without some
reasonable grounds: In Queen Elizabeth's time, the Spanish Zeal for their
Religion, and the Revenge for 88, gave warmth to the Papists here, and above
all the Right of the Queen of Scots to succeed, was while she lived sufficient
to give them a better prospect of their Affairs: In King James's time their
hopes were supported by the Treaty of the Spanish Match, and his gentleness
toward them, which they were ready to interpret more in their own Favor, than
was either reasonable or became them, so little tenderness they have, even
where it is most due, if the Interest of their Religion comes in competition
with it.

As for the late King, tho he gave the most glorious Evidence that ever Man did
of his being a Protestant, yet, by the more than ordinary Influence the Queen
was thought to have over him, and it so happening that the greatest part of his
Anger was directed against the Puritans, there was such an advantage to Men
disposed to suspect, that they were ready to interpret it a leaning toward
Popery, without which handle it was Morally impossible, that the ill-affected
part of the Nation could ever have seduced the rest into a Rebellion.

That which helped to confirm many well meaning Men in their Misapprehensions
of the King, was the long and unusual intermission of Parliaments; so that
every year that passed without one, made up a new Argument to increase their
Suspicion, and made them presume that the Papists had a principal hand in
keeping them off; This raised such Heats in Men's Minds, to think that Men who
were obnoxious to the Laws, instead of being punished, should have Credit
enough to serve themselves; even at the price of destroying the Fundamental
Constitution; that it broke out into a Flame, which before it could be
quenched, had almost reduced the Nation to Ashes.

Amongst the miserable Effects of that unnatural War, none has been more fatal
to us, than the forcing our Princes to breathe in another Air, and to receive
the early impressions of a Foreign Education; the Barbarity of the English,
toward the King and the Royal Family, mighty very well tempt him to think the
better of every thing he found abroad, and might-naturally produce more
gentleness, at least, toward a Religion by which he was hospitably received,
at the same time that he was thrown off and Persecuted by the Protestants,
(though his own Subjects) to aggravate the Offense. The Queen Mother, (as
generally Ladies do with Age) grew most devout and earnest in her Religion; and
besides, the temporal Rewards of getting larger Subsidies from the French
Clergy, she had Motives of another kind, to persuade her to show her Zeal; and
since by the Roman Dispensatory, a Soul converted to the Church is a Sovereign
Remedy, and lays up a mighty stock of merit, she was solicitous to secure her
self in all Events, and therefore first set upon the Duke of Gloucester, who
depended so much upon her good will, that she might for that reason have been
induced to believe, the Conquest would not be difficult; but it so fell out,
that he either from his own Constancy, or that he had those near him by whom he
was otherways advised, chose rather to run away from her importunity, than by
staying to bear the continual weight of it: It is believed she had better
success with another of her Sons, who, if he was not quite brought off from our
Religion, at least such beginnings were made, as made them very easy to be
finished; his being of a generous and aspiring Nature, and in that respect,
less patient in the drudgery of Arguing, might probably help to recommend a
Church to him, that exempts the Laity from the vexation of enquiring; perhaps
he might (tho by mistake) look upon that Religion as more favorable to the
enlarged Power of Kings, a consideration which might have its weight with a
young Prince in his warm blood, and that was brought up in Arms.

I cannot hinder my self from a small digression, to consider with admiration,
that the old Lady of Rome, with all her wrinkles, should yet have Charms, able
to subdue great Princes; so far from handsome, and yet so imperious; so
painted, and yet so pretending; after having abused, deposed, and murdered so
many of her Lovers, she still finds others glad and proud of their now Chains;
a thing so strange) to indifferent Judges, that those who will allow no other
Miracles in the Church of Rome, must needs grant that this is one not to be
contested; she sits in her Shop, and sells at dear Rates her Rattles and her
Hobby-Horses, whilst the deluded World still continues to furnish her with
Customers.

But whither am I carried with this Contemplation? it is high time to return to
my Text, and to consider the wonderful manner of the Kings coming home again,
led by the hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of his own People, who
received him, if possible, with Joys equal to the Blessing of Peace and Union
which his Restoration brought along with it; by this there was an end put to
the hopes some might have abroad, of making use of (...) less happy
Circumstances, to throw him into Foreign Interests and Opinions, which had been
wholly inconsistent with our Religion, our Laws, and all other things that are
dear to us; yet for all this some of those Tinctures and impressions might so
far remain, as though they were very innocent in him, yet they might have ill
effects here, by softning the Animosity which seems necessary to the Defender
of the Protestant Faith, in opposition to such a powerful and irreconcilable an
Enemy.

You may be sure, that among all the sorts of Men who applied themselves to the
King at his first coming home, for his Protection, the Papists were not the
last, no^ as they fain would have flattered themselves, the least welcome;
having their past Sufferings, as well as their present Professions to recommend
them; and there was something that looked like a particular Consideration of
them, since it so happened, that the Indulgence promised to Dissenters at
Breda, was carried, on in such a manner, that the Papists were to divide with
them, and though the Parliament, notwithstanding its Resignation to the Crown in
all things, rejected with scorn and anger a Declaration framed for this
purpose, yet the Birth and steps of it gave such an alarm, that Men's suspicions
once raised, were not easily laid asleep again.

To omit other things, the breach of the Tripple League, and the Dutch War with
its appurtenances, carried Jealousies to the highest pitch imaginable, and fed
the hopes of one Party, and the fears of the Other to such a degree, that some
Critical Revolutions were generally expected, when the ill success of that War,
and the Sacrifice France thought fit to make of the Papists here, to their own
interest abroad, gave them another Check; and the Act of enjoining the Test to
all in Offices, was thought to be no ill Bargain to the Nation, though bought at
the Price of 1200000 pound, and the Money applied to continue the War against
the Dutch, than which nothing could be more unpopular or less approved.
Notwithstanding the discouragements, Popery is a Plant that may be mowed down,
but the Root will still remain, and in spite of the Laws, it will sprout up and
grow again; especially if it should happen that there should be Men in Power,
who in weeding it out of our Garden, will take care to Cherish and keep it
alive; and though the Law for excluding them from Places of Trust was tolerably
kept as to their outward Form, yet there were many Circumstances, which being
improved by the quick-sighted Malice of ill affected Men, did help to keep up
the World in their suspicions, and to blow up Jealousies to such a height both
in and out of Parliament, that the remembrance of them is very unpleasant, and
the Example so extravagant, that it is to be hoped nothing in our Age like it
will be re-attempted; but to come closer to the Case in question in this
Condition we stand with the Papists, what shall now be done according to our
Trimmer's Opinion, in order to the better Bearing this grievance, since as I
have said before, there is no hopes of being entirely free from it; Papists we
must have among us, and if their Religion keep them from bringing honey to the
Hive, let the Government try at least by gentle means to take away the Sting
from them. The first Foundation to be laid is, that a distinct Consideration is
to be had of the Popish Clergy, who have such an eternal Interest against all
accommodation, that it is a hopeless thing to propose any thing to them less
than all; their Stomachs have been set for it ever since the Reformation, they
have pinned themselves to a Principal that admits no mean: they believe
Protestants will be damned, and therefore by an extraordinary Effect of
Christian Charity, they would destroy one half of England that the other might
be saved; then for this World, they must be in possession for God Almighty, to
receive his Rents for him, not to account till the Day of Judgment, which is a
good kind of Tenure, and ye cannot well blame the good Men, that will stir up
the Laity to run any hazard in order to the getting them restored. What is it
to the Priest, if the deluded Zealot undoes himself in the Attempt? he sings
Masses as jollily, and with as good a Voice at Rome or St. Omers as ever he
did; is a single Man, and can have no wants but such as may be easily supplied,
yet that he may not seem altogether insensible, or ungrateful to those that are
his Martyrs, he is ready to assure their Executors, and if they please, will
procure a Grant sub Annulo Piscatoris, that the good Man by being changed, has
got a good Bargain, and saved the singing of some hundred of years, which he
would else have had in Purgatory. There Is no Cure for this Order of Men, no
Expedient to be proposed, so that tho the utmost severity of the Laws against
them, may in some sort be mitigated, yet no Treaty can be made with Men who in
this Case have left themselves no free Will, but are so muffled by Zeal, tied
by Vows, and kept up by such unchangeable Maxims of the Priesthood, that they
are to be left as desperate Patients, and looked upon as Men that will continue
in an Eternal State of Hostility, till the Nation is entirely subdued to them.
it is then only the Lay Papists that are capable of being treated with, and we
are to examine of what temper they are, and what Arguments are the most likely
to prevail upon them, and how far it is advisable for the Government to be
Indulgent to them; the Lay Papists generally keep their Religion, rather
because they will not break Company with those of their Party, than out of any
settled Zeal that has Root in them; most of them do by the Mediation of the
Priests Marry amongst one another, to keep up an Ignorant Position by hearing
only one side; others by a mistake look upon it as the Escutcheo^s of the more
Ancient Religion of the two; and as some Men of a good Pedigree, wi^^ despise
meaner Men, though never so (...) superior to them by Nature, so these under^
value Reformation as an Upstart, and think there is more Honor in supporting
an old Error, than in embracing what seems to them to be a new Truth; the Laws
have made them Men of Pleasure, by excluding them from Public Business, and it
happen^ well they are so, since they will the more easily be persuaded by
Arguments of Ease and Convenience to them; they have not put off the Man in
general, nor the Englishman in particular, those who in the la^e storm against
them went into other Countries, tho they had all the Advantage that might
recommend them to a good Reception, yet in a little time they chose to steal
over again, and live here with hazard, rather than abroad with security. There
is a Smell in our Native Earth, better than all the Perfumes in the East; there
is something in a Mother, tho never so Angry, that the Children will more
naturally trust Her, than the Studied Civilities of Strangers, let them be
never so Hospitable; therefore it is not advisable nor agreeing with the Rules
of Governing Prudence, to provoke Men by hardships to forget that Nature, which
else is sure to be of our side.

When these Men by fair Usage are put again into their right Senses, they will
have quite differing Reflections from those which Rigor and Persecution had
raised in them: A Lay Papist will first consider his Abby-Lands, which
notwithstanding whatever has or can be alleged, must sink considerably in the
Value, the moment that Popery prevails; and it being a disputable Matter,
whether Zeal might not in a little time get the better of the Law in that case;
a considering Man will admit that as an Argument to persuade him, to be content
with things as they are, rather than run this or any other hazard by Change, in
which perhaps he may have no other Advantage, than that his new humble
Confessor may be raised to a Bishopric, and from thence look down
superciliously upon his Patron, or which is worse, run to take Possession for
God Almighty of his Abbey, in such a manner as the usurping Landlord (as he will
then be called) shall hardly be admitted to be so much as a Tenant to his own
Land's, lest his Title should prejudge that of the Church, which will then be
the Language; he will think what disadvantage it is to be looked upon as a
separate Creature, depending upon a Foreign Interest and Authority, and for
that reason, exposed to the Jealousy and Suspicion of his Countrymen; he will
reflect what Encumbrance it is to have his House a Pasture for hungry Priests
to graze in, which have such a never-failing Influence upon the Foolish, which
is the greatest part of every Man's Family, that a Man's Dominion, even over
his own Children, is mangled, and divided, if not totally undermined by them;
then to be subject to what Arbitrary Taxes the Popish Convocation shall impose
upon them for the carrying on the Common Interest of that Religion, under
Penalty of being marked out for half Heretics by the rest of the Party; to
have no share in Business, no opportunity of showing his own Value to the
World; to live at the best an useless, and by others to be thought a dangerous
Member of the Nation where he is born, is a burden to a generous Mind that
cannot be taken off by all the Pleasure of a lazy unmanly life, or by the
nauseous enjoyment of a dull Plenty, that produces no good for the Mind, which
will be considered in the first place by a Man that has a Soul; when he shall
think, that if his Religion, after his wading through a Sea of Blood, come at
last to prevail, it would infinitely lessen, if not entirely destroy the Glory,
Riches, Strength and Liberty of his own Country. And what a Sacrifice is this
to make to Rome, where they are wise enough to wonder there should be such
Fools in the World, as to venture, struggle, and contend, nay even die Martyrs
for that which, should it succeed, would prove a Judgment instead of a Blessing
to them; he will conclude that the advantages of throwing some of their
Children back again to God Almighty when they have too many of them, are not
equal to the Inconveniences they may either feel or fear, by continuing their
separation from the Religion established.

Temporal things will have their weight in the World, and tho Zeal may prevail
for a time, and get the better in a Skirmish, yet the War ends generally on the
side of Flesh and Blood, and will do so till Mankind is another thing than it
is at present: And therefore a wise Papist in cold Blood, considering these and
many other Circumstances, which 'twill be worth his pains to see if he can
unmuffle himself from the Mask of Infallibility, will think it reasonable to
set his Imprisoned Senses at Liberty, and that he has a right to see with his
own Eyes, hear with his own Ears, and judge by his own Reason; the consequence
of which might probably be, that weighing things in a right Scale, and seeing
them in their true Colors, he would distinguish between the merit of suffering
for a good Cause, and the foolish ostentation of drawing inconveniences upon
himself; and therefore will not be unwilling to be convinced that our
Protestant Creed may make him (...) in the other World, and the (...) this. A
few of such wise Proselytes would by their Example draw so many after them,
that the Party would insensibly melt away, and in a little time, without any
angry word, we should come to an Union, that all Good Men would have Reason to
rejoice at; but we are not to presume upon these Conversions, without preparing
Men for them by kind and reconciling Arguments; nothing is so against our
Nature, as to believe those can be in the right who are too hard upon us; there
is a deformity in every thing that does us hurt, it will look scurvily in our
Eye while the smart continues, and a Man must have an extraordinary Measure of
Grace, to think well of a Religion that reduces him and his Family to Misery;
in this respect our Trimmer would consent to the mitigation of such Laws as
were made, (as it is said King Henry VIII. got Queen Elizabeth) in a heat
against Rome: It may be said that even States as well as private Men are
subject to Passion; a just indignation of a villainous Attempt produces at the
same time such Remedies, as perhaps are not without some mixture of Revenge,
and therefore tho time cannot Repeal a Law, it may by a Natural Effect soften
the Execution of it; there is less danger to Rouse a Lion when at Rest, than to
awake Laws that were intended to have their time of Sleeping, nay more than
that, in some Cases their Natural periods of Life, dying of themselves without
the Solemnity of being revoked, any otherwise than by the common consent of
Mankind, who do cease to Execute, when the Reasons in great Measure fail that
first Created and Justified the Rigor of such unusual Penalties.

Our Trimmer is not eager to pick out some places in History against this or
any other Party; quite contrary, is very sollicitous to find out any thing that
may be healing, and tend to an Agreement; but to prescribe the means of this
Gentleness so as to make it effectual, must come from the only place that can
furnish Remedies for this Cure, viz. a Parliament; in the mean time, it is to
be wished there may be such a mutual calmness of Mind, as that the Protestants
might not be so jealous, as still to smell the Match that was to blow up the
King and both Houses in the Gunpowder Treason, or to start at every appearance
of Popery, as if it were just taking Possession. On the other side, let not the
Papists suffer themselves to be led by any hopes, tho never so flattering, to a
Confidence or Ostentation which must provoke Men to be less kind to them; let
them use Modesty on their sides, and the Protestants Indulgence on theirs; and
by this means there will be an overlooking of all Venial Faults, a tacit
connivence at all things that do not carry Scandal with them, and would amount
to a kind of Natural Dispensation with the severe Laws, since there would be no
more Accusers to be found, when the occasions of Anger and Animosity are once
removed; let the Papists in the mean time remember, that there is a respect due
from all lesser numbers to greater, a deference to be paid by an Opinion that
is Exploded, to one that is Established; such a Thought well digested will have
an influence upon their Behavior, and produce such a Temper as must win the
most eager Adversaries out of their ill Humor to them, and give them a Title
to all the Favor that may be consistent with the Public Peace and Security.

The Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to things abroad.
THE World is so composed, that it is hard, if not impossible, for a Nation not
to be a great deal involved in the fate of their Neighbors, and tho by the
felicity of our Situation, we are more Independent than any other People, yet
we have in all Ages been concerned for our own sakes in the Revolutions abroad.
There was a time when England was the over-balancing Power of Christendom, and
that either by Inheritance or Conquest, the better part of France received Laws
from us; after that we being reduced into our own Limits, France and Spain
became the Rivals for the Universal Monarchy, and our third Power, tho in it
self less than either of the other, happened to be Superior to any of them, by
that choice we had of throwing the Scales on that side to which we gave our
Friendship. I do not know whether this Figure did not make us as great as our
former Conquest, to be a perpetual Umpire of two great contending Powers, who
gave us all their Courtship, and offered all their Incense at our Altar, whilst
the Fate of either Prince seemed to depend upon the Oracles we delivered; for
the King of England to sit on his Throne, as in the Supreme Court of Justice,
to which the two great Monarchs appeal, pleading their Cause, and expecting
their Sentence* declaring which side was in the right, or at least if we
pleased which side should have the better of it, was a piece of Greatness which
was peculiar to us, and no wonder if we endeavor to preserve it, as we did for
a considerable time, it being our Safety, as well as Glory, to maintain it; but
by a Fatality upon our Councils, or by the refined Policy of this latter Age,
we have thought fit to use industry to destroy this mighty Power, which we have
so long enjoyed; and that equality between the Two Monarchs, which we might for
ever have preserved, has been chiefly broken by us, whose Interest it was above
all others to maintain it; when one of them, like the overflowing of the Sea,
had gained more upon the other than our convenience, or indeed our safety,
would allow; instead of mending the Banks, or making new ones, we our selves
with our own hands helped to cut them, to invite and make way for a farther
Inundation. France and Spain have had their several turns in making use of our
Mistakes, and we have been formerly as deaf to the Instances of the then weaker
part of the World to help them against the House of Austria, as we can now be
to the Earnestness of Spain, that we would assist them against the Power of
France. Gondamar was as sawey, and as powerful too in King James his Court, as
any French Ambassador can have been at any time since, when Men talk as wrong
then on the Spanish side, and made their Court by it, as well as any can have
done since by talking as much for the French; so that from that time, instead
of weighing in a wise Balance the power of either Crown, it looks as if we had
learnt only to weigh the Pensions, and take the heaviest.

It would be tedious, as well as unwelcome, to recapitulate all our wrong
steps, so that I will go no farther than the King's Restoration, at which time
the Balance was on the side of France, and that by the means of Cromwell, who
for a separate Interest of his own had sacrificed that of the Nation, by
joining with the stronger side, to suppress the Power of Spain, which he ought
to have supported. Such a Method was natural enough to an Usurper, and showed
he was not the Lawful Father of the People, by his having so little care of
them; and the Example coming from that hand, one would think should, for that
Reason, be less likely to be followed. But to go on, home comes the King,
followed with Courtships from all Nations abroad, of which some did it not only
to make them forget how familiarly they had used him when he was in other
Circumstances, but to bespeak the Friendship of a Prince, who besides his other
Greatness, was yet more considerable by being re-established by the love of his
people. France had an Interest either to dispose us to so much good will, or at
least to put us into such a Condition, that we might give no Opposition to
their Designs; and Flanders being a perpetual Object in their Eye, a lasting
Beauty for which they have an incurable passion, and not being kind enough to
consent to them, they meditated to commit a Rape upon her, which they thought
would not be easy to do, while England and Holland were agreed to rescue her,
whenever they should hear her cry out for help to them; to this end they put
in practice Seasonable and Artificial Whispers, to widen things between us, and
the States. Amboyna and the Fishery must be talked of here; the freedom of the
Seas, and the preservation of Track must be insinuated there; and there being
combustible matter on both sides, in ^ little time it took Fire, which gave
those that kindled it, sufficient cause to smile and hug themselves, to see us
both fall into the Net they had laid for us. And it is observable and of good
example to us, if we will take it, That their Design being to set (...)
together at Cuffs to weaken us, they kept themselves Lookers on till our
Victori^^ began to break the Balance; then the King of France, like a wise
Prince, was resolved to support the beaten side, and would no more let the
Power of the Sea, than we ought to suffer the Monarchy of Europe, to fall into
one hand: In pursuance to this he took part with the Dutch, and in a little
time made himself Umpire of the Peace between us; some time after, upon
pretense of his Queen's Title to part of Flanders^ by Right of Devolution, he
falls into i^ with a mighty Force, for which the Spaniard was so little
prepared, that he made a very swift Progress, and had such a Torrent of
undisputed Victory, that England and Holland, tho the Wounds they had given one
another were yet green; being struck with the apprehension of so near a danger
to them, thought it necessary, for their own defense, to make up a sudden
League, into which Sweden was taken to interpose for a Peace between the two
Crowns.

This had so good an effect, that France was stopped in its Career, and the Peace
of Aix le Chapelle was a little after concluded. 'Twas a forced put; and tho
France wisely dissembled their inward dissatisfaction, yet from the very moment
they resolved to unty the Triple knot, whatever it cost them; for his Christian
Majesty, after his Conquering Meals, ever rises with a stomach, and he liked
the Pattern so well, that it gave him a longing desire to have the whole Piece.
Amongst the other means used for the attaining this end, the sending over the
Duchess of Orleans, was not the least powerful; she was a very welcome Guest
here, and her own Charms and Dexterity joined with other Advantages, that might
help her persuasions, gave her such an Ascendant, that she should hardly fail
of success. One of the Preliminaries of her Treaty, tho a trivial thing in it
self, yet was considerable in the Consequence, as very small circumstances
often are in relation to the Government of the World. About this time a general
Humor, in opposition to France, had made us throw off their Fashion, and put
on Vests, that we might look more like a distinct People, and not be under the
servility of imitation, which ever pays a greater deference to the Original;
than is consistent with the Equality all Independent Nations should pretend to;
France did not like this small beginning of ill Humors, at least of Emulation,
and wisely considering that it is a natural Introduction first to make the
World their Apes, that they may be afterward their Slaves. It was thought that
one of the Instructions Madam brought along with her, was to laugh us out of
these Vests, which she performed so effectually, that in a moment, like so many
Footmen who had quitted their Masters Livery, we all took it again, and
returned to our old Service; so that the very time of doing it gave a very
critical Advantage to France; since it looked like an Evidence of our returning
to their Interest, as well as to their Fashion, and would give such a distrust
of us to our new Allies, that it might facilitate the dissolution of the knot,
which tied them so within their bounds, that they were very impatient till they
were freed from the re^^^aint.

But the Lady had a more extended Commission than this and without doubt we
double-laid the Foundation of a new strict Alliance, quite contrary to the
other, in which we had been so lately engaged. And of this there were such
early appearances, that the World began to look upon us as falling into
Apostasy from the common Interest. Notwithstanding all this, France did not
neglect at the same time to give good words to the Dutch, and even to feed them
with hopes of supporting them against us, when on a sudden, that never to be
forgotten Declaration of War against them comes out, only to vindicate his own
Glory, and to revenge the Injuries done to his Brother in England, by which he
became our Second in this Duel; so humble can this Prince be, when at the same
time he does more Honor than we deserve, he lays a greater share of the blame
upon our Shoulders, than did naturally belong to us; the particulars of that
War, our part in it while we staid in it, and when we were out of breath, our
leaving the French to make an end of it, are things too well known to make it
necessary, and too unwelcome in themselves to incite me to repeat them; only
the wisdom of France is in this to be observed, That when we had made a
separate Peace, which left them single to oppose the united Force of the
Confederates, they were so far from being angry, that they would not show so
much as the least coldness, hoping to get as much by our Mediation for a Peace,
as they would have expected from our Assistance in the War, our Circumstances
at that time considered; This seasonable piece of Indulgence in not reproaching
us, but rather allowing those Necessities of State which we gave for our
Excuse, was such an engaging Method, that it went a great way to keep us still
in their Chains, when, to the Eye of the World, we had absolutely broke loose
from them: And what passed afterward at Nimeguen, tho the King's Neutrality
gave him the outward Figure of a Mediator, it appeared that his Interposition
was extremely suspected of Partiality by the Confederates, who upon that Ground
did both at and before the Conclusion of that Treaty, treat his Ministers there
with a great deal of neglect in his Peace as well as that in the Pyrenean and
Aix le Chapelle, the King of France, at the Moment of making it, had the
thought of breaking it; for a very little time after he broached his
Pretensions upon Alost, which were things that if they had been offered by a
less formidable hand, would have been smiled at; but ill Arguments being
seconded by good Armies, carry such a power with them, that naked sense is a
very unequal Adversary. It was thought that these aerie Claims were chiefly
raised with the prospect of getting Luxenburg for the Equivalent; and this
Opinion was confirmed by the blocking it up afterward, pretending to the
Country of Chimay, that it might be entirely surrounded by the French
Dominions, and it was so pressed that it might have fallen in a little time, if
the King of France had not sent Orders to his Troops to retire, and his
Christian Generosity which was assigned for the reason of it, made the World
smile, since it is seen how differently his devout Zeal works in Hungary: that
specious Reason was in many respects ill-timed, and France it self gave it so
faintly, that at the very time it looked out of Countenance; the true ground of
his Retiring is worth our observation; for at the instance of the Confederates,
Offices were done, and Memorials given, but all ineffectual till the word
Parliament was put into them; that powerful word had such an effect, that even
at that distance it raised the Seige, which may convince us of what efficacy
the King of England's words are, when he will give them their full weight, and
threaten with his Parliament; it is then that he appears that great Figure we
ought to represent him in our Minds, the Nation his Body, he the Head, and
joined with that Harmony, that every word he pronounces is the Word of a
Kingdom: Such words, as appears by this Example, are as effectual as Fleets and
Armies, because they can create them, and without this his word sounds abroad
like a faint Whisper, that is either not heard, or (which is worse) not minded.
But tho France had made this step of forced Compliance, it did not mean to
leave off the pursuit of their pretensions; and therefore immediately proposed
the Arbitration to the King; but it appeared, that notwithstanding his Merit
toward the Confederates, in saving Luxenburg, the remembrances of what had
passed before, had left such an ill taste in their Mouths, that they could not
Relish our being put into a Condition to dispose of their Interests, and
therefore declined it by insisting upon a general Treaty, to which France has
ever since continued to be averse; our great earnestness also to persuade the
Confederates to consent to it, was so unusual, and so suspicious a method, that
it might naturally make them believe, that France spoke to them by our Mouth,
and for that Reason, if there has been no other, might hinder the accepting it;
and so little care has been taken to cure this, or other Jealousies the
Confederates may have entertained, that quite contrary, their Ministers here
every day take fresh Alarms, from what they observe in small, as well as in
greater Circumstances; and they being apt both to take and improve
apprehensions of this kind, draw such Inferences from them, as make them
entirely despair of us.

Thus we now stand, far from being Innocent Spectators of our Neighbors Ruin,
and by a fatal mistake forgetting what a Certain Forerunner it is to our own*
and now it is time our Trimmer should tell something of his Opinion, upon this
present State of things abroad, he first professes to have no Biass, either for
or against France, and that his thoughts are wholly directed by the Interest of
his own Country; he allows, and has read that Spain used the same Methods, when
it was in its height, as France does now, and therefore it is not Partiality
that moves him; but the just fear which all reasonable Men must be possessed
with, of an over-growing Power; Ambition is a devouring Beast, when it has
swallowed one Province, instead of being cloyed, it has so much the greater
Stomach to another, and being fed, becomes still the more hungry; so that for
the Confederates to expect a security from any thing but their own united
strength, is a most miserable fallacy; and if they cannot resist the
Encroachments of France by their Arms, it is in vain for them to dream of any
other means of preservation; it would have the better grace, besides the saving
so much Blood and Ruin, to give up all at once; make a Present of themselves,
to appease this haughty Monarch, rather than be whispered, flattered, or
cozened out of their liberty. Nothing is so soft as the first applications of a
greater Prince, to engage a weaker, but that smiling Countenance is but a
Vizard, it is not the true Face; for as soon as their turn is served, the
Courtship flies to some other Prince or State, where the same part is to be
acted over again, leaves the old mistaken Friend, to Neglect and Contempt, and
like an insolent Lover to Cast off Mistress, Reproaches her with that Infamy,
of which he himself was the Author, Sweden, Bavaria, Palatine, etc. may by
their Fresh Examples, teach other Princes what they are reasonably to expect,
and what Snakes are hid under the Flowers the Court of France so liberally
throws upon them, whilst they can be useful. The various Methods and deep
Intrigues, with the differing Notes in several Countries, do not only give
suspicion, but assurance that every thing is put in Practice, by which
universal Monarchy may be obtained. Who can reconcile the withdrawing of his
Troops from Luxenburg, in consideration of the War in Hungary, which was not
then declared, and presently after encouraging the Turk to take Vienna, and
consequently to destroy the Empire? Or who can think that the Persecution of
the Poor Protestants of France, will be accepted of God, as an Atonement for
hazarding the loss of the whole Christian Faith? Can he be thought in earnest,
when he seemed to be afraid of the Spaniards, and for that reason must have
Luxenburg, and that he cannot be safe from Germany, unless he is in possession
of Strasburg? All Injustice and Violence must in it self be grievous, but the
aggravations of supporting 'em by false Arguments, and insulting Reasons, has
something in it yet more provoking than the Injuries themselves; and the World
has ground enough to apprehend, from such a Method of arguing, that even their
Senses are to be subdued as well as their Liberties. Then the variety of
Arguments used by France in several Countries is very observable: In England
and Denmark, nothing insisted on but the Greatness and Authority of the Crown;
on the other side, the Great Men in Poland are commended, who differ in Opinion
with the King, and they argue like Friends to the Privilege of Diet, against
the separate Power of the Crown: In Sweden they are troubled that the King
should have changed something there of late, by his single Authority, from the
ancient and settled Authority and Constitutions: At Ratis bone, the most
Christian Majesty takes the Liberties of all the Electors, and free States,
into his Protection, and tells them the Emperor is a dangerous Man, an
aspiring Hero, that would infallibly devour them, if he was not at hand to
resist him on their behalf; but above all in Holland, he has the most obliging
tenderness for the Commonwealth, and is in such disquiets, lest it should be
invaded by the Prince of Orange, that they can do no less in gratitude, than
undo themselves when he bids them, to show how sensible they are of his
excessive good Nature; yet in spite of all these Contradictions, there are in
the World such refined Statesmen, as will upon their Credit affirm the
following Paradoxes to he real truth; first that France alone is sincere and
keeps its Faith, and consequently that it is the only Friend we can rely upon;
that the King of France, of all Men living, has the least mind to be a
Conqueror; that he is a sleepy, tame Creature, void of all Ambition, a poor
kind of a Man, that has no farther thoughts than to be quiet; that he is
charmed by his Friendship to us, that it is impossible he should ever do us
hurt, and therefore tho Flanders was lost, it would not in the least concern
us; that he would fain help the Crown of England to be absolute, which would be
to take pains to put it into a condition to oppose him, as it is, and must be
our Interest, as long as he continues in such an overballancing Power and
Greatness.

Such a Creed as this, if once received, might prepare our belief for greater
things, and as he that taught Men to eat a Dagger, began first with a Pen
knife; so if we can be prevailed with to digest the smaller Mistakes, we may at
last make our stomachs strong enough for that of Transubstantiation. Our
Trimmer cannot easily be converted out of his senses by these State Sophisters,
and yet he has no such peevish Obstinacy as to reject all Correspondence with
France, because we ought to be apprehensive of the too great power of it; he
would not have the kings Friendship to the Confederates extended to the
involving him in any unreasonable or dangerous Engagements, neither would he
have him lay aside the consideration of his better establishment at home, out
of his excessive Zeal to secure his Allies abroad; but sure there might be a
Mean between these two opposite Extremes, and it may be wished that our
Friendship with France should at least be so bounded, that it may consist with
the humor as well as the Interest of England. There is no Woman but has the
fears of contraictng too near an intimacy with a much greater Beauty, because
it exposes her too often to a Comparison that is not advantageous to her; and
sure it may become a Prince to be as jealous of his Dignity, as a Lady can be
of her good looks, and to be as much out of Countenance, to be thought an
humble Companion to so much a greater Power; to be always seen in an ill Light,
to be so darkened by the brightness of a greater Star, is somewhat mortifying;
and when England might ride Admiral at the head of the Confederates, to look
like the Kitching-Yatch to the Grand Louis, is but a scurvy Figure for us to
make in the Map of Christendom; it would rise up in our Trimmer's stomach* if
ever (which God forbid) the power of calling and intermitting Parliaments here,
should be transferred to the Crown of France, and that all the opportunities of
our own settlements at home should give way to their Projects abroad; and that
our Interests should be so far sacrificed to our Compliance, that all the
Omnipotence of France can never make us full amends for it In the mean time, he
shrinks at the dismal prospect he can by no means drive away from his thoughts,
that when France has gathered all the fruit arising from our Mistakes, and that
we can bear no more with them, they will cut down the Tree and throw it into
the fire; for all this while, some Superfine Statesmen, to comfort us, would
sain persuade the World that this or that accident may save us, and for all
that is or ought to be dear to us, would have us to rely wholly upon Chance,
not considering that Fortune is Wisdoms Creature, and that God Almighty loves
to be on the Wisest as well as the Strongest side; therefore this is such a
miserable shift, such a shameful Evasion, that they would be laughed to death
for it, if the ruining Consequence of this Mistake did not more dispose Men to
rage, and a detestation of it.

Our Trimmer is far from Idolatry in other things, in one thing only he comes
near it, his Country is in some degree his Idol; he does not Worship the Sun,
because it is not peculiar to us, it rambles about the World, and is less kind
to us than others; but for the Earth of England, tho perhaps inferior to that
of many places abroad, to him there is Divinity in it, and he would rather dye,
than see a piece of English Glass trampled down by a Foreign Trespasser: He
thinks there are a great many of his mind, for all plants are apt to taste of
the Soil in which they grow, and we that grow here, have a Root that produces
in us a Stalk of English Juice, which is not to be changed by grafting or
foreign infusion and I do not know whether any thing less will prevail, than
the Modern Experiment, by which the Blood of one Creature is transmitted into
another; according to which, before the French can be let into our Bodies,
every drop of our own must be drawn out of them.

Our Trimmer cannot but lament, that by a Sacrifice too great for one Nation to
another, we should be like a rich Mine, made useless only for want of being
wrought, and that the Life and Vigor which should move us against our Enemies
is miserably applied to tear our own Bowels; that being made by our happy
situation, not only safer, but if we please greater too, than other Countries
which far exceed us in extent; that having Courage by Nature, Learning by
Industry, and Riches by Trade, we should corrupt all these Advantages, so as to
make them insignificant, and by a fatality which seems peculiar to us, misplace
our active rage one against another, whilst we are turned into Statues on that
side where lies our greatest danger; to be unconcerned not only at our
Neighbors ruin but our own, and let our Island lie like a great Hulk in the
Sea, without Rudder or Sail, all the Men cast away in her, or as if we were all
Children in a great Cradle, and rockt asleep to a foreign Tune.

I say when our Trimmer represents to his Mind, our Roses blasted and
discolored, whilst the Lilies Triumph and grow Insolent, upon the Comparison;
when he considers our own once flourishing Laurel, now withered and dying, and
nothing left us but a remembrance of a better part in History, than we shall
make in the next Age: which will be no more to us than an Escutcheon hung upon
our Door when we are dead; when he foresees from hence, growing Infamy from
abroad, confusion at home, and all this without the possibility of a Cure, in
respect of the voluntary fetters good Men put upon themselves by their
Allegiance without a good measure of preventing Grace, he would be tempted to
go out of the World like a Roman Philosopher, rather than endure the burden of
Life under such a discouraging Prospect. But Mistakes, as all other things,
have their Periods, and many times the nearest way to Cure, is not to oppose
them, but stay till they are crushed with their own weight: for Nature will not
allow any thing to continue long that is violent; violence is a wound, and as a
wound, must be curable in a little time, or else it is Mortal; but a Nation,
comes near to be Immortal, therefore the wound will one time or another be
cured, tho perhaps by such rough Methods, if too long forborne, as may even make
the best Remedies we can prepare, to be at the same time a Melancholy
Contemplation to us; there is but one thing (God Almighties Providence
excepted) to support a Man from sinking under these afflicting thoughts, and
that is the hopes we draw singly from the King himself* without the mixture of
any other consideration.

Tho the Nation was lavish of their Kindness to him at his first coming, yet
there remains still a stock of Warmth in Men's Hearts for him.

Besides the good Influences of his happy Planet are not yet all spent, and tho
the Stars of Men past their youth are generally declining, and have less Force
like the Eyes of decaying Beauties, yet by a Blessing peculiar to himself, we
may yet hope to be saved by his Autumnal Fortune; He has something about him
that will draw down (...) healing Miracle for his and our Deliverance; a Prince
which seems fitted for such in offending Age, in which Men's Crimes have been so
general, that the not forgiving his People has been the destroying of them,
whose Gentleness gives him a natural Dominion that has no bounds, with such a
noble mixture of Greatness and Condescension, an engaging Look, that disarms
Men of their ill Humors, and their Resentments; something in him that wants a
Name, and can be no more defined than it can be resisted; a Gift of Heaven, of
its last finishing, where it will be peculiarly kind; the only Prince in the
World that dares be familiar, or that has right to triumph over those forms
which were first invented to give awe to those who could not judge, and to hide
Defects from those that could; a Prince that has exhausted himself by his
Liberality, and endangered himself by his Mercy; who out-shines by his own
Light and natural Virtues all the varnish of studied Acquisitions; his Faults
are like Shades to a good Picture, or like Allay to Gold, to make it the more
useful, he may have some, but for any Man to see them through so many
reconciling Virtues, is a Sacrilegious piece of ill nature, of which no
generous Mind can be guilty; a Prince that deserves to be loved for his own
sake, even without the help of a Comparison; our Love, our Duty, and our
Danger, all join to cement our Obedience to him; in short whatever, he can do,
it is no more possible for us to be angry with him, than with a Bank that
secures us from the raging Sea, the kind Shade that hides us from the scorching
Sun, the welcome Hand that reaches us a Reprieve, or with the Guardian Angel,
that rescues our Souls from the devouring Jaws of wretched Eternity.

CONCLUSION
TO Conclude, our Trimmer is so fully satisfied of the Truth of these
Principles, by which he is directed, in reference to the Public, that he will
neither be Hectored and Threatened, Laughed, nor Drunk out of them; and instead
of being converted by the Arguments of his Adversaries to their Opinions, he is
very much confirmed in his own by them; he professes solemnly that were it in
his Power to choose, he would rather have his Ambition bounded by the Commands
of a Great and Wise Master, than let it range with a Popular License, though
crowned with success; yet he cannot commit such a Sin against the glorious
thing called Liberty, nor let his Soul stoop so much below it self, as to be
content without repining to have his Reason wholly subdued, or the Privilege of
Acting like a sensible Creature, torn from him by the imperious Dictates of
unlimited Authority, in what hand soever it happens to be placed. What is there
in this that is so Criminal, as to deserve the Penalty of that most singular
Apophthegm, A Trimmer is worse than a Rebel? What do angry men ail to rail so
against Moderation, does it not look as if they were going to some very scurvy
Extreme, that is too strong to be digested by the more considering part of
Mankind? These Arbitrary Methods, besides the injustice of them, are (God be
thanked) very unskillful too, for they fright the Birds, by talking so loud,
from coming into the Nets that are laid for them; and when Men agree to rifle a
House, they seldom give warning, or blow a Trumpet; but there are some small
Statesmen, who are so full charged with their own Expectations, that they
cannot contain.

And kind Heaven by sending such a seasonable Curse upon their undertakings,
has made their ignorance an Antidote against their Malice; some of these cannot
treat peaceably, yielding will not satisfy them, they will have men by storm;
there are others, that must have Plots, to make their Service more necessary,
and have an Interest to keep them alive, since they are to live upon them; and
persuade the King to retrench his own Greatness, so as to shrink into the head
of a Party, which is the betraying him into such a Unprincely mistake, and to
such a wilful diminution of himself, that they are the last Enemies he ought to
allow himself to forgive; such Men, if they could, would prevail with the Sun
to shine only upon them and their Friends, and to leave all the rest of the
World in the dark; this is a very unusual Monopoly, and may come within the
Equity of the Law, which makes it Treason to Imprison the King, when such
unfitting bounds are put to his Favor, and he confined to the narrow limits of
a particular set of Men, that would enclose him; these Honest and only Loyal
Gentlemen, if they may be allowed to bear Witness for themselves, make a King
their Engine, and degrade him into a property at the very time that their
Flattery would make him believe they paid Divine Worship to him; besides these
there is a flying Squadron on both sides, that are afraid the World should
agree, small dabblers in Conjuring, that raise angry Apparitions to keep Men
from being reconciled, like Wasps that fly up and down, buz and sting to keep
Men unquiet; but these Infects are commonly short-lived Creatures, and no doubt
in a little time Mankind will be rid of them; they were Giants at least who
fought once against Heaven, but for such Pigmies as these to contend against
it, is such a provoking Folly, that the insolent Bunglers ought to be laughed
and hist our of the World for it; they should consder there is a Soul in that
great body of the People, which may for a time be drowzy and unactive, but when
the Leviathan is roused, it moves like an angry Creature, and will neither be
convinced nor resisted: the People can never agree to show their united Powers,
till they are extremely tempted and provoked to it, so that to apply
Cupping-Glasses to a great Beast naturally disposed to sleep, and to force the
Tame thing whether it will or no to be Valiant, must be learnt out of some
other Book than Machiavil, who would never have prescribed such a preposterous
Method. It is to be remembered, that if Princes have Law and Authority on their
sides, the People on theirs may have Nature, which is a ^ormidable Adversary;
Duty, Justice, Religion, nay, even Humane Prudence too, bids the People suffer
any thing rather than resist; but uncorrected Nature, where e're it feels the
smart will run to the nearest Remedy, Men's Passions in this Case are to be
considered as well as their Duty, let it be never so strongly enforced, for if
their Passions are provoked, they being as much a part of us as our Limbs, they
lead Men into a short way of Arguing, that admits no distinction, and from the
foundation of Self-Defence, they will draw Inferences, that will have miserable
effects upon the quiet of a Government.

Our Trimmer therefore dreads a general discontent, because he thinks it
differs, from a Rebellion, only as a Spotted Fever does from the Plague, the
same Species under a lower degree of Malignity; it works several ways;
sometimes like a slow Poison that has its Effects at a great distance from the
time it was given, sometimes like dry Flax prepared to catch at the first Fire,
or like Seed in the ground ready to sprout upon the first Shower; in every
shape it is fatal, and our Trimmer thinks no pains or precaution can be so great
as to prevent it.

In short he thinks himself in the right, grounding his Opinion upon that
Truth, which equally hates to be under the Oppressions of wrangling Sophistry
of the one hand, or the short dictates of mistaken Authority on the other.

Our Trimmer adores the Goddess Truth, though in all Ages she has been scurvily
used, as well as those that Worshipped her; it is of late become such a ruining
Virtue, that Mankind seems to be agreed to command and avoid it; yet the want
of Practice which Repeals the other Laws, has no influence upon the Law of
Truth, because it has root in Heaven, and an Intrinsic value in it self, that
can never be impaired; she shows her Greatness in this, that her Enemies even
when they are successful are ashamed to own it; nothing but Power full of Truth
has the prerogative of Triumphing, not only after Victories, but inspite of
them, and to put Conquest her self out of Countenance; she may be kept under
and suppressed, but her Dignity still remains with her, even when she is in
Chains; Falsehood with all her Impudence, has not enough to speak ill of her
before her Face, such Majesty she carries about her, that her most prosperous
Enemies are fain to whisper their Treason; all the Power upon Earth can never
extinguish her; she has lived in all Ages; and let the Mistaken Zeal of
prevailing Authority, Christen any opposition to it, with what Name they
please, she makes it not only an ugly and unmannerly, but a dangerous thing to
persist; she has lived very retired indeed, nay sometime so buried, that only
some few of the discerning part of Mankind could have a Glimpse of her; with
all that she has Eternity in her, she knows not how to die, and from the
darkest Clouds that shade and cover her, she breaks from time to time with
Triumph for her Friends, and Terror to her Enemies.

Our Trimmer therefore inspired by this Divine Virtue, thinks fit to conclude
with these Assertions, That our Climate is a Trimmer, between that part of the
World where men are Roasted, and the other where they are Frozen; That our
Church is a Trimmer between the Phrenzy of Platonic Visions, and the
Lethargick Ignorance of Popish Dreams; That our Laws are Trimmers, between the
Excess of unbounded Power, and the Extravagance of Liberty not enough
restrained; That true Virtue has ever been thought a Trimmer, and to have its
dwelling in the middle between the two Extremes; That even God Almighty himself
is divided between his two great Attributes, his Mercy and his Justice.

In such Company, our Trimmer is not ashamed of his Name, and willingly leaves
to the bold Champions of either Extreme, the Honor of contending with no less
Adversaries, than Nature, Religion, Liberty, Prudence, Humanity and Common
Sense.

THE ANATOMY OF AN EQUIVALENT.
I. THE World has of late years never been without some extraordinary Word to
furnish the Coffee-Houses and fill the Pamphlets. Sometimes it is a new one
invented, and sometimes an old one revived. They are usually fitted to some
present purpose, with intentions as differing as the various designs several
parties may have, either to delude the People, or to expose their Adversaries:
They are not of long continuance, but after they have passed a little while,
and that they are grown nauseous by being so often repeated, they give place to
something that is newer. Thus after Whig, Tory, and Trimmer have had their
time, now they are dead and forgotten, being supplanted by the word Equivalent,
which reigns in their stead.

The Birth of it is in short this: After many repeated Essays to dispose Men
to the Repeal of Oaths and Tests, made for the security of the Protestant
Religion, the general aversion to comply in it was found to be so great, that
it was thought advisable to try another manner of attempting it, and to see
whether by putting the same thing into another Mould, and softning an harsh
Proposition by a plausible Term, they might not have better success.

To this end, instead of an absolute quitting of these Laws, without any
Condition; which was the first Proposal; now it is put into gentler Language,
and runs thus; If you will take away the Oaths and Tests, you shall have as
good a thing for them. This put into the fashionable Word, is now called an
Equivalent.

II. So much to the Word it self. I will now endeavor in short to examine and
explain, in order to the having it fully understood, First, What is the nature
of a true Equivalent; and In the next place, What things are not to be admitted
under that denomination.

I shall treat these as general Propositions, and though I cannot undertake how
far they may be convincing, I may safely do it that they are impartial; of
which there can be no greater evidence than that I make neither Inference nor
Application, but leave that part entirely to the Reader, according as his own
Thoughts shall direct and dispose him.

III. I will first take notice, that this Word, by the application which has
been made of it in some modern instances lies under some Disadvantage, not to
say some Scandal. It is transmitted hither from France; and if as in most other
things that we take from them, we carry them beyond the Pattern, it should
prove so in this, we should get into a more partial style than the principles
of English Justice will I hope ever allow us to be guilty of.

The French King's Equivalents in Flanders are very extraordinary Bargains; his
manner of proposing and obtaining them is very differing from the usual methods
of equal dealing. In a later instance, Denmark, by the encouragement as well as
by the example of France, has proposed things to the Duke of Holstein, which
are called Equivalents, but that they are so, the World is not yet sufficiently
convinced, and probably the Parties concerned do not think them to be so, and
consequently do not appear to be at all disposed to accept them. Princes enjoin
and prescribe such things when they have Strength and Power to supply the want
of Arguments; and according to practice in these Cases, the weaker are never
thought to have an ill Bargain, if they have any thing left them. So that the
first Qualification of an Equivalent, must be, that the Appraisers be
indifferent, else it is only a Sound, there can be nothing real in it: For,
where the same party that proposes a Bargain, claims a Right to set the
Value; or which is worse, has power too to make it good, the other may be
forced to submit to the Conditions, but he can by no means ever be persuaded to
treat upon them.

IV. The next thing to be considered is that to make an Equivalent in reality
an equal thing in the Proposer, it must be a better thing than that which is
required by him; just as good is subject to the hazard of not being quite so
good: It is not easy to have such an even hand as to make the Value exactly
equal; besides, according to the Maxim in Law, Melior conditio possidentis* the
Offer is not fair, except the thing offered is better in value than the thing
demanded. There must be allowance for removing what is fixed, and there must be
something that may be a justification for changing. The value of things very
often depends more upon other circumstances, than upon what is merely
intrinsic to them; therefore the calculation must be made upon that foot,
perhaps in most cases; and particularly the want which one of the parties may
have of the thing he requires, makes it more valuable to him than it is in it
self. If the party proposing does not want the thing he would have in Exchange,
his requiring it is Impertinent: If he does, his want of it must go into the
appraisement, and by consequence every Proposer of an Equivalent must offer a
better thing, or else he must not take it unkindly to be refused, except the
other party has an equal want of the same thing, which is very improbable,
since naturally he that vanteth most will speak first.

V. Another thing necessary to the making a fair Bargain is, that let the
parties who treat, be they never so unequal in themselves, yet as to the
particular thing proposed, there must be an exact equality, as far as it
relates to the full Liber^y of taking or refusing, concurring or objecting,
without any consequence of Revenge, or so much as Dissatisfaction; for it is
impossible to treat where it is an Affront to dliffer; in that case there is no
mean between the two extremes, either an open Quarrel or an entire Submission;
the way of Bargaining must be equal* else the Bargain it self cannot be so: For
example, the Proposer is not only to use equal terms as to the matter, but fair
ones in the manner too. There must be no intimations of Anger in case of
refusal, much less any open Threatening. Such a Style is so ill suited to the
usual way of Treating, that it looks more like a Breach of the Peace, than
the making a Bargain. It would be yet more improper and less agreeing with the
nature of an Equivalent, if whilst two Men are chaffering about the Price, one
of them should actually take the thing in question at his own rate, and
afterward desire to have his possession confirmed by a formal Agreement; such
a proceeding would not only destroy that particular contract, but make it
impossible to have any other, with the party that could be guilty of such a
practice.

VI. Violence preceding destroys all Contract, and even tho the party that
offers it should have a right to the thing he so takes, yet it is to be
obtained by legal means, else it may be forfeited by his irregularity in the
pursuit of it: The Law is such an Enemy to Violence, and so little to be
reconciled to it, that in the Case of a Rape, the Punishment is not taken off
though the party injured afterward consents. The Justice of the Law has its
eye upon the first act, and the Maxim of Volenti non fit injurial, does not in
this case help the Offender, it being a plea subsequent to the Crime, which
makes it to be rejected as a thing wrong dated and out of time.

In taking away Goods or Money it is the same thing. The party robbed, by
giving them afterward to the taker, does not exempt him from the Punishment of
the Violence: Quite contrary, the Man from whom they were taken is punishable,
if he does not prosecute. If the case should be, that a Man thus taking away a
thing without price, claims a right to take it, then whether it is well or
ill founded is not the Question; but sure, the party from whom it is so taken,
whilst he is treating to Sell or Exchange it, can never make a Bargain with so
orbitrary a Chapman, there being no room left after that to talk of the Value.

VII. To make an equal Bargain there must be a liberty of differing, not only
in every thing that is really essential, but in every thing that is thought so
by either party, and most especially by him who is in possession of the thing
demanded: His Opinion must be a Rule to him, and even his Mistake in the Value,
though it may not convince the Man he has to deal with, yet he will be
justified for not accepting what is offered, till that Mistake is fairly
rectified and overruled.

When a Security is desired to be changed, that side which desires it must not
pretend to impose upon the other, so as to dictate to them, and tell them
without debate, that they are safe in what is proposed, since of that the
Counsel on the other side must certainly be the most competent Judges. The hand
it comes from is a great Circumstance, either to invite or discourage in all
matters of Contract: the Qualifications of the Party offering must suit with
the Proposition it self, else let it be never so fair, there is ground for
Suspicion.

VIII. When Men are of a temper, that they think they have wrong done them, if
they have not always the better side of a Bargain: If they happen to be such as
by experience have been found to have an ill Memory for their Word. If the
Character they bear, does not recommend their Justice, wherever their
Interest is concerned. In these cases, thinking Men will avoid dealing, not
only to prevent surprise, but to cut off the occasions of difficulty or dispute.

It is yet more discouraging, when there are, either a precedent Practice, or
standing Maxims of gross Partiality, in assuming a privilege of exemption from
the usual methods of equal dealing.

To illustrate this by an Instance* Suppose that in any case, the Church of
Rome should have an Interest to promote a Bargain; let her way of dealing be a
little examined, which will direct those with whom she treats, how far they
are to rely upon what she proposes to them. We may begin with the Quality in
the World, the least consisting with equal dealing, viz. An incurable
Partiality to herself; which, that it may arrive to its full perfection, is
crowned with Infallibility. At the first setting out, she makes her self
incapable of dealing upon terms of Equality, by the Power she claims of
binding and loosing, which has been so often applied to Treaties, as well as
to Sins.

If the definition of Justice is to deal equally, she cannot be guilty of it
without betraying her Prerogative, and according to her Principles, she gives
up the Superiority derived to her by Apostolical Succession, if she degradeth
her self so as to be judged by the Rules of common Right, especially of the
Bargain should be with Heretics, who in her Opinion have forfeited the claim
they might otherwise have had to it.

IX. Besides, her Taste has been so spoiled by unreasonable Bargains, that she
can never bring down her Palate to any thing that is fair or equal. She has
not only judged it an Equivalent, but a great Bargain for the other side, to
give them Absolutions and Indulgence for the real Payment of great Sums, for
which she has drawn Bills to have them repayed with Interest in Purgatory.

This Spiritual Bank has carried on such a Trade upon these advantageous
Terms, that it can never submit to the small Profits an ordinary Bargain would
produce.

The several Popes have in exchange for the Peter Pence, and all their other
Rents and Fines out of England, sent sanctified Roses, Relics, and other such
Wonder-working Trifles. And by virtue of their Character of Holy Fathers, have
used Princes like Children, by sending them such Rattles to play with, which
they made them buy at extravagant Rates; besides which, they were to be
thankful too, in to the bargain.

A Chip of the Cross, a piece of St. Laurence's Grid-iron, a Hair of St. Peter,
have been thought Equivalents, for much more substantial things. The Popes
being Masters of the Jewel-House, have set the Rates upon them, and they have
passed; though the whole Shop would not take up the value of a Bodkin in
Lombardstreet upon the credit of them.

They are unconscionable Purchasers, for they get all the Money from the living
by praying for them when they are dead. And it is observable, that the Northern
part of Christendom, which best understands Trade, were the first that
refused to make any more Bargains with them; so that it looks as if the chief
quarrel to the Heretics was not as they were ill Christians, but as they were
unkind Merchants, in so discourteously rejecting the Commodities of the growth
of Rome.

To conclude this Head, There is no bartering with Infallibility, it being so
much above Equality, that it cannot bear the Indignity of a true Equivalent.

X. In all Bargains there is a necessity of looking back, and reflecting how
far a present proposal is reconcilable with former practice; For Example, if at
any time a thing is offered, quite differing from the Arguments used by the
Proposer, and inconsistent with the Maxims held out by him at other times. Or
in a Public case, if the same men who promote and press a thing with the
utmost violence, do in a little time after with as much violence press the
contrary, and profess a detestation of the very thing, for which they had
before employed all their Interest and Authority. Or if in the case of a Law
already made, there should be a privilege claimed to exempt those from the
obligation of observing it, who yet should afterward desire and press to have
a new Law made in exchange for the old one, by which they would not be bound;
and that they should propose a security by a thing of the very same nature as
that which they did not allow to be any before. These Incoherences must
naturally have the effect of raising suspicion, or rather they are a certain
proof, that in such circumstances it is irrational for men to expect an
effectual Equivalent.

XI. If whatsoever is more than ordinary is suspicious, every thing that is
unnatural is more so: It is only unnecessary but unnatural too to persuade with
violence what it is folly to refuse; to push men with eagerness into a good
bargain for themselves, is a style very much unsuitable to the nature of the
thing. But it goes further and is yet more absurd, to grow angry with men for
not receiving proposal that is for their advantage; Men ought to be content
with the Generosity of offering good bargains, and should give their compassion
to those who do not understand them: but by carrying their good nature so far
as to be Choleric in such a case, they would follow the example of the Church
of Rome, where the definition of Charity is very extraordinary. In her
Language, the Writ de Haeretico Comburendo is a Love letter, and burning men
for differing with them in Opinion, howsoever miscalled Cruelty, is as they
understand it, the perfection of flaming Charity.

When Anger in these cases lasts long, it is most probable that it is for our
own sakes; Good nature for others is one of those Diseases that is cured by
time, and especially where it is offered and rejected; but for our selves it
never fails, and cannot be exstinguished but with our life. It is fair if men
can believe that their friends love them next to themselves, to love them
better is too much; the Expression is so unnatural that it is cloying, and men
must have no sense, who in this case have no suspicion.

XII* Another Circumstance necessary to a fair bargain is, That there must be
openness and freedom allowed, as the effect of that Equality which is the
foundation of Contracting. There must be full liberty of objecting, and making
doubts and scr^ples: If they are such as can be answered, the party convinced
is so much the more confirmed and encouraged to deal, instead of being hindered
by them; but if instead of an answer to satisfy, there is nothing but anger for
a reply, it is impossible not to conclude that there is never a good one to
give; so that the objection remaining without being fully confuted, there is an
absolute bar put to any further Treaty.

There can be no dealing where one side assumeth a privilege to impose, so as
to make an offer and not bear the examination of it, this is giving judgment
not making a bargain. Where it is called unmannerly to object, or criminal to
refuse, the surest way is for men to stay where they are, rather than treat
upon such disadvantage.

If it should happen to be in any Country where the governing power should
allow men Liberty of Conscience in the choice of their Religion, it would be
strange to deny them liberty of speech in making a bargain. Such a
contradiction would be so discouraging, that they must be unreasonably
sanguine, who in that case can entertain the hopes of a fair Equivalent.

XIII. And equal Bargain must not be a Mystery nor a Secret. The purchaser or
proposer is to tell directly and plainly, what it is he intends to give in
Exchange for that which he requires. It must be viewed and considered by the
other party, that he may judge of the value; for without knowing what it is, he
cannot determine whether he shall take or leave it. An assertion in general,
that it shall be as good or a better things, is not in this a sufficient excuse
for the mistake of dealing upon such uncertain terms. In all things that are
dark and not enough explained, suspicion naturally follows: A secret
generally implies a defect or a deceit; and if a false light is an objection,
no light at all is yet a greater. To pretend to give a better thing, and to
refuse to show it, is very near saying it is not so good a one; at least so it
will be taken in common construction. A Mystery is yet a more discouraging
thing to a Protestant; especially if the Proposition should come from a Papist;
it being one of his great Objections to that Church, that there are so many of
them Invisible and Impossible, which are so violently thrust upon their
understandings, that they are overlaid with them. They think that rational
creatures are to be convinced only by reason, and that reason must be visible
and freely exposed; else they will think themselves used with contempt instead
of equality, and will never allow such a suspected secrecy to be a fit preface
to a real Equivalent.

XIV. In matters of Contract not only the present value, but the contingences
and consequences, as far as they can be fairly supposed, are to be considered.
For Example, if there should be possibility, that one of the Parties may be
ruined by accepting, and the other only disappointed by his refusing; the
consequences are so extremely unequal, that it is not imaginable, a man should
take that for an Equivalent, which has such a fatal possibility at the heels
of it.

If it should happen in a public case, that such a proposal should come from
the minor part of an Assembly or Nation, to the greater; It is very just, that
the hazard of such a possibility should more or less likely fall upon the
lesser part, rather than upon the greater; for whose sake and advantage things
are and must be calculated in all public Constitutions. Suppose in any mixed
Government, the chief Magistrate should propose upon a condition, in the
Senate, Diet, or other Supreme Assembly, either to Enact or Abrogate one or
more Laws, by which a possibility might be let in of destroying their Religion
and Property, which in other language signifies no less than Soul and Body;
where could be the Equivalent in the case, not only for the real loss, but even
for the fear of losing them? Men can fall no lower than to lose all, and if
losing all destroys them, the venturing all must fright them.

In an instance when Men are secure; that how far soever they may be overrun
by Violence, yet they can never be undone by Law, except they give their
assistance to make it possible, though it should neither be likely nor
intended, still the consequence which may happen is too big for any present
thing to make amends for it. Whilst the world Possible remains, it must
forbid the bargain. Wherever it falls out therefore, that in an Example of
a public nature, the Chan^ing, Enacting, or Repealing a Law, may naturally tend
to the misplacing the Legislative power in the hands of those who have a
separate interest from the body of a People, there can be no treating, till it
is demonstrably made out, that such a consequence shall be absolutely
impossible; for if that shall be denied by those who make the proposal, if it
is because they cannot do it, the motion at first was very unfair. If they can
and will not, it would be yet less reasonable to expect that such partial
dealers would ever give an Equivalent fit to be accepted.

XV. It is necessary in all dealing to be assured in the first place, that the
party proposing is in a condition to make good his Offer; that he is neither
under any former Obligations or pretended Claims, which may render him
incapable of performing it; else he is so far in the condition of a Minor, that
whatever he disposes by sale or exchange may be afterward resumed, and the
Contract becomes void, being originall^ defective, for want of a sufficient
legal power in him that made it.

In the case of a strict Settlement, where the party is only Tenant for life,
there is no possibility of treating which one under such fetters; no purchase
or exchange of Lands or any thing else can be good, where there is such an
incapacity of making out a Title; the interest vested in him being so limited,
that he can do little more than pronounce the words of a Contract, he can by no
means perform the effect of it.

In more public instances, the impossibility is yet more express; as suppose
in any Kingdom, where the people have so much liberty left them, as that they
may make Contracts with the Crown, there should be some peculiar rights claimed
to be so fixed to the Royal Function, that no King for the time being could
have power to part with them, being so fundamentally tied to the Office, that
they can never be separated. Such Rights can upon no occasion he received in
exchange for any thing the Crown may desire from the People: That can never be
taken in payment, which cannot lawfully be given, so that if they should part
with that which is required upon those terms, it must be a gift, it cannot be a
bargain.

There is not in the whole Dictionary a more untractable word than Inherent,
and less to be reconciled to the word Equivalent.

The party that will Contract in spite of such a Claim, is content to take
what is impossible to grant, and if he complains of his Disappointment, he
neither can have Remedy, nor deserves it.

If a Right so claimed happens to be of so comprehensive a nature, as that by a
clear inference it may extend to every thing else, as well as to the particular
matter in question, as often as the Supreme Magistrate shall be so disposed,
there can in that case be no treating with Prerogative that swalloweth all the
Right the People can pretend to; and if they have no right to any thing of
which they are possessed, it is a Jest and not a Bargain, to observe any
Formality in parting with it.

A Claim may be so stated, that by the power and advantage of interpreting, it
shall have such a murdering eye, that if it looks upon a Law, like a
Basilisk, it shall strike it dead: Where is the possibility of Treating, where
such a Right is assumed* Nay, let it be supposed that such a Claim is not well
founded in Law, and that upon a free disquisition it could not be made out; yet
even in this case, none that are well advised will conclude a Bargain, till it
is fully stated and cleared, or indeed, so much as engage in a treaty, till by
way of preliminary all possibility shall be removed of any trouble or dispute.

XVI. There is a collateral circumstance in making a Contract, which yet
deserves to be considered, as much as any thing that belongs to it; and that
is the character and figure of the parties contracting; if they treat only by
themselves, and if by others, the Qualifications of the Instruments they employ.

The Proposer especially, must not be so low as to want credit. nor so raised
as to carry him above the reach of ordinary dealing. In the first, There is
scandal, in the other danger. There is no Rule without some Exception, but
generally speaking the means should be suited to the end, and since all Men who
treat, pretend an equal bargain, it is desirable that there may be equality in
the persons as well as in the thing.

The manner of doing things has such an influence upon the matter, that Men
may guess at the end by the instruments that are used to obtain it, who are a
very good direction how far to rely upon or suspect the sincerity of that which
is proposed. An Absurdity in the way of carrying on a Treaty, in any one
Circumstance, if it is very gross, is enough to persuade a thinking Man to
break off, and take warning from such an ill appearance. Some things are so
glaring that it is impossible not to see, and consequently not to suspect them;
as suppose in a private case, there should be a Treaty of Marriage between two
Honorable Families, and the proposing side should think fit to send a Woman
that had been Carted, to persuade the young Lady to an approbation and consent;
the unfitness of the Messenger must naturally dispose the other party to
distrust the Message, and to resist the temptation of the best Match that could
be offered, when conveyed by that hand, and ushered in by such a discouraging
preliminary.

In a public instance the suspicion arising from unfit Mediators, still
grows more reasonable in proportion, as the consequence is much greater of
being deceived. If a Jew should be employed to solicit all sorts, of
Christians to unite and agree; the contrariety of his profession, would not
allow Men to stay till they heard his Arguments, they would conclude from his
Religion, that either the Man himself was mad, or that he thought those to be
so, whom he had the Impudence to endeavor to persuade.

Or suppose an Adamite should be very sollicitous and active, in all places,
and with all sorts of Persons, to settle the Church of England in particular,
and a fair Liberty of Conscience for all Dissenters; though nothing in the
World has more to be said for it than Naked Truth, yet if such a Man should run
up and down without Clothes, let his Arguments be never so good, or his
Commission never so Authentic, his Figure would be such a contradiction to his
business, that how serious soever that might be in it self, his interposition
would make a Jest of it.

Though it should not go so far as this, yet if Men have contrarieties in their
way of living not to be reconciled; as if they should pretend infinite zeal for
liberty, and at that time be in great favor and employed by those who will not
endure it.

If they are affectedly singular, and conform to the generality of the World in
no one thing, but in playing the knave.

If demonstration is a familiar word with them, most especially where the thing
is ^mpossible.

If they quote Authority to supply their want of sense, and justify the value
of their Arguments, not by reason, but by their being paid for them, (in which,
by the way, those who pay them have probably a very melancholy Equivalent.) If
they brandish a Prince's Word like a Sword in a Crowd, to make way for their
own impertinence; and in dispute, as Criminals formerly fled to the Statue of
the Prince for Sanctuary; if they should now, when baffled, creep under the
protection of a Kings Name, where out of respect they are no farther to be
pursued.

In these cases; Though the propositions should be really good, they will be
corrupted by passing through such Conduits* and it would be a sufficient
Mistake to enter into a Treaty; but it would be little less than Madness from
such hands to expect an Equivalent.

XVII. Having touched upon these particulars as necessary in order to the
stating the nature of an equal Bargain, and the Circumstances belonging to it,
let it now be examined in two or three instances* what things are not to be
admitted by way of Contract, to pass under the Name of an Equivalent.

First, Though it will be allowed, that in the general corruption of mankind,
which will not admit Justice alone to be a sufficient tie to make good a
Contract, that a Punishment added for the breach of it, is a fitting or rather
a necessary Circumstance; yet it does not follow, that in all cases, a great
Penalty upon the party offending is an absolute and an entire Security. It must
be considered in every particular case, how far the Circumstances may
rationally lead a Man to rely more or less upon it.

In a private instance, the Penalty inflicted upon the breach of Contract must
be first, such a one as the party injured can enforce, and Secondly, such a one
as he will enforce, when it is in his power.

If the Offending party is in a capacity of hindering the other from bringing
the Vengeance of the Law upon him. If he has strength or privilege sufficient
to over rule the Letter of the Contract; in that case, a Penalty is but a Word,
there is no consequence belonging to it. Secondly, The forfeiture or punishment
must be such as the Man aggrieved will take; for Example, if upon a Bargain,
one of the Parties shall stipulate to subject himself, in case of his failure
to have his Ears cut, or his Nose slit by the other, with security given, that
he shall not be prosecuted for executing this part of the Agreement; the
Penalty is no doubt heavy enough to discourage a Man from breaking his
Contract; but on the other side it is of such a kind, that the other how much
soever he may be provoked, will not in cold Blood care to inflict it. Such an
extravagant Clause would seem to be made only for show and found, and no Man
would think himself safer by a thing which one way or other is sure to prove
ineffectual.

In a public Case, Suppose in a Government so constituted that a Law may be
made in the nature of a Bargain, it is in it self no more than a dead letter,
the life is given to it by the execution of what it contains; so that let it
in it self be never so perfect, it depends upon those who are entrusted with
seeing it observed.

If it is in any Country, where the chief Magistrate chooses the Judges, and
the Judges interpret the Laws; a Penalty in any one particular Law can have no
effect but what is precarious. It may have a loud voice to threaten, but it has
not an hand to give a blow; for as long as the Governing Power is in possession
of this Prerogative, let who will choose the Meat, if they choose the Cooks, it
is they that will give the taste to it. So that it is clear that the rigor of a
Penalty will not in all cases fix a Bargain, neither is it Universally a true
Position, that the increase of punishment for the breach of a new Law, is an
Equivalent for the consent to part with an old one.

XVIII. In most Bargains there is a reference to the time to come, which is
therefore to be considered as well as that which comes within the compass of
the present valuation.

Where the party Contracting, has not a full power to dispose what belongs
to him or them in Reversion, who shall succeed after him in his Right; he
cannot make any part of what is so limited, to be the condition of the
Contract. Further, he cannot enjoin the Heir or Successor to forbear the
exercise of any Right that is inherent to him, as he is a Man; neither can he
restrain him without his own consent, from doing any act which in it self is
lawful, and liable to no objection. For Example, A Father cannot stipulate with
any other Man, that in Consideration of such a thing done, or to be done, his
Son shall never Marry; because Marriage is an Institution Established by the
Laws of God, and Man, and therefore no body can be so restrained by any power
from doing such an act, when he thinks fit, being warranted by an Authority
that is not to be controuled.

XIX. Now as there are Rights inherent in Men's persons in their single
capacities, there are Rights as much fixed to the Body Politic, which is a
Creature that never dies. For instance, There can be no Government without a
Supreme Power, that Power is not always in the same hands, it is in different
shapes and dresses, but still wherever it is lodged, it must be unlimited: It
has a jurisdiction over every thing else, but it cannot have it above it self.
Supreme Power can no more be limited than Infinity can be measured; because it
cease to be the thing; its very being is dissolved, when any bounds can be
put to it.

Where this Supreme Power is mixed, or divided, the shape only differs, the
Argument is still the same.

The present State of Venice cannot restrain those who succeed them in the same
power, from having an entire and unlimited Sovereignty; they may indeed make
present Laws which shall retrench their present Power, if they are so disposed,
and those Laws if not repealed by the same authority that enacted them, are to
be observed by the succeeding Senate till they think sit to Abrogate them, and
no longer; for if the Supreme Power shall still reside in the Senate, perhaps
composed of other Men, or of other minds (which will be sufficient) the
necessary consequence is, that one Senate must have as match right to alter such
a Law, as another could have to make it.

XX. Suppose the Supreme Power in any State should make a Law, to enjoin all
subsequent Lawmakers to take an Oath never to alter it, it would produce these
following Absurdities.

First, All Supreme Power being instituted to promote the safety and benefit,
and to prevent the prejudice and danger which may fall upon those who live
under the protection of it; the consequence of such an Oath would be, that all
Men who are so trusted, shall take God to witness, that such a Law once made,
being judged at the time to be advantageous for the public, though afterward
by the vicissitude of times, or the variety of accidents or interests, it
should plainly appear to them to be destructive, they will suffer it to have
its course, and will never repeal it.

Secondly, If there could in any Nation be found a set of Men, who having a
part in the Supreme legislative Power, should as much as in them lies, betray
their Country by such a criminal engagement, so directly opposite to the nature
of their Power, and to the Trust reposed in them. If these Men have their power
only for life, when they are dead such an Oath can operate no farther; and tho
that would be too long a Lease for the life of such a Monster as an Oath so
composed, yet it must then certainly give up the Ghost. It could bind none but
the first makers of it, another generation would never be tied up by it.

Thirdly, In those Countries where the Supreme Assemblies are not constant
standing Courts, but called together upon occasions, and Composed of such as
the People choose for that time only, with a Trust and Character that remains
no longer with them than till that Assembly is regularly dissolved, such an
Oath taken by the Members of a Senate, Diet, or other Assembly to chosen, can
have very little effect, because at the next meeting there may be quite another
set of Men who will be under no Obligation of that kind. The eternity intended
to that Law by those that made it, will be cut off by new Men who shall succeed
them in their power, if they have a differing Taste, or another Interest.

XXI. To put it yet farther, Suppose a Clause in such a Law, that it shall be
criminal in the last degree for any Man chosen in a subsequent Assembly, to
propose the repealing of it; and since nothing can be Enacted which is not
first proposed, by this means it seems as if a Law might be Created which
should never die. But let this be Examined.

First, such a clause would be so destructive to the being of such a
Constitution, as that it would be as reasonable to say, that a King had right
to give or sell his Kingdom to a foreign Prince, as that any number of Men who
are entrusted with the Supreme Power, or any part of it, should have a right to
impose such Shackles* upon the Liberty of those who are to succeed them in the
same Trust. The ground of that Trust is, that every Man who is chosen into such
an Assembly, is to do all that in him lies for the good of those who chose
him: The English of such a Clause would be, that he is not to do his best for
those that chose him, because though he should be convinced that it might be
very fatal to continue that Law, and therefore very necessary to repeal it, yet
he must not repeal it, because it is made a Crime, and attended with a Penalty.

But secondly, to show the emptiness as well as injustice of such a Clause, it
is clear, that although such an Invasion of Right should be imposed, it will
never be obeyed: There will only be Deformity, in the Monster, it will neither
sting nor bite. Such Lawgivers would only have the honor of attempting a
contradiction which can never have any success; for as such a Law in it self
would be a Madness, so the Penalty would be a Jest; which may be thus made out.

XXII. A Law that carries in it self Reason enough to support it, is so far
from wanting the protection of such a Clause, or from needing to take such an
extraordinary receipt for long Life, that the admitting it must certainly be
the likeliest and the shortest way to destroy it; such a Clause in a Law must
imply an opinion that the greatest part of mankind is against it, since it is
impossible such an exorbitance should be done for its own sake; the end of it
must be to force Men by a Penalty, to that which they could not be persuaded
to, whilst their Reason is left at liberty. This Position being granted, which
I think can hardly be denied, put the case that a Law should be made with this
imaginary Clause of Immortality, after which another Assembly is chosen, and if
the majority of the Electors shall be against this Law, the greater part of the
Elected must be so too, if the choice is fair and regular; which must be
presumed, since the supposition of the contrary is not to come within this
Argument. When these Men shall meet, the Majority will be visible beforehand of
those who are against such a Law, so that there will be no hazard to any single
Man in proposing the Repeal of it, when he cannot be punished but by the
Majority, and he has such a kind of assurance as comes near a Demonstration,
that the greater Number will be of his mind, and consequently, that for their
own sakes they will secure him from any danger.

For these Reasons, wherever in order to the making a Bargain, a Proposition
is advanced to make a new Law, which is to ^ye up those who neither can nor
will be bound by it, it may be a good Jest, but it will never be a good
Equivalent.

XXIII. In the last place, let it be examined how far a Promise ought to be
taken far a Security in a Bargain.

There is great Variety of Methods for the Security of those that deal,
according to their Dispositions and Interests; some are binding, others
inducing circumstances, and are to be so distinguished.

First, Ready Payment is without exception, so of that there can be no dispute;
in default of that, the good Opinion Men may have of one another is a great
ingredient to supply the want of immediate Performances. Where the Trust is
grounded upon Inclination only, the Generosity is not always returned; but
where it springs from a long Experience it is a better foundation, and yet
that is not always secure. In ordinary dealing, one Promise may be an
Equivalent to another, but it is not so for a thing actually granted or
conveyed; especially if the thing required in exchange for it, is of great
value, either in it self or in its consequences. A bare Promise as a single
Security in such a case is not an equal proposal; if it is offered by way of
addition, it generally gives cause to doubt the Title is crazy, where so
slender a thing is brought in to be a supplement.

XXIV. The Earnest of making good a Promise, must be such a behavior
preceding; as may encourage the party to whom it is made to depend upon it:
Where instead of that, there has been want of Kindness; and which is worse an
Invasion of Right, a Promise has no persuading force; and till the Objection
to such a Proceeding is forgotten, (which can only be the work of time) and the
Skin is a little grown over the tender part, the Wound must not be touched.
There must be some Intermission at least to abate the smart of unkind usage, or
else a Promise in the Eye of the party injured is so far from strengthening a
Security, that it raises more doubts, and gives more justifiable cause
suspect it.

A Word is not like a Bone, that being broken and well set again, is said to be
sometimes stronger in that very part: It is far from being so in a Word given
and not made good. Every single Act either weakeneth or improveth our Credit
with other Men; and as an habit of being just to our Word will confirm, so an
habit of too freely dispensing with it must necessarily destroy it. A Promise
has its effect to persuade a Man to lay some weight upon it, where the
Promiser has not only the power, but may reasonably be supposed to have the
will of performing it; and further, that there be no visible interest of the
party promising to excuse himself from it, or to evade it.

All Obligations are comparative, and where they seem to be opposite, or
between the greater and the lesser, which of them ought to have precedence in
all respects every man is apt to be his own Judge.

XXV. If it should fall out that the Promiser with full intent at the time to
perform, might by the interposition of new Arguments, or differing Advice think
himself obliged to turn the matter of Conscience on the other side, and should
look upon it to be much a greater fault to keep his word than to break it; such
a Belief will untye the strictest Promise that can be made, and though the
Party thus absolving himself should do it without the mixture or temptation of
private interest, being moved to it merely by his Conscience, as then informed;
yet how far soever that might diminish the Fault in him, it would in no degree
lessen the inconveniences to the party who is disappointed, by the breach of an
engagement upon which he relied.

XXVI. A Promise is to be understood in the plain and natural sense of the
words, and to be sure not in his who made it, if it was given as part of a
Bargain. That would be like giving a Man power to raise the value of his Money
in the payment of his Debt, by which, tho he paid but half or less, be might
pretend according to the letter to have made good the Contract.

The power of interpreting a Promise entirely takes away the virtue of it. A
Merchant who should once assume that privilege, would save himself the trouble
of making any more Bargains.

It is still worse if this Jurisdiction over a Man's Promise, should be lodged
in hands that have Power to support such an extraordinary Claim; and if in
other Cases, forbearing to deal upon those terms is advisable, in this it
becomes absolutely necessary.

XXVII. There must in all respects be a full liberty to claim a Promise, to
make it reasonable to take it in any part of payment; else it would be like
agreeing for a Rent, and at the same time making if criminal to demand it.

A superiority of Dignity or Power in the party promising makes it a more
tender thing for the other party to treat upon that security. The first makes
it a nice thing to claim, the latter makes it a difficult thing to obtain.

In some cases, a Promise is in the nature of a Covenant, and then between
equal parties the breach of it will bear a Suit; but where the greatness of the
Promiser is very much raised above the level of equality, there is no
Forfeiture to be taken. It is so far from the party grieved his being able to
sue or recover Damages, that he will not be allowed to explain or expostulate,
and instead of his being relieved against the breach of Promise, he will run
the hazard of being punished for breach of Good Manners* Such a Difficulty is
putting all or part of the Payment in the Fire, where Men must burn their
Fingers before they can come at it.

That cannot properly be called good payment, which the party to whom it is due
may not receive with ease and safety. It was a Kings Brother of England who
refused to lend the Pope money, for this reason, That he would never take the
Bond of one, upon whom he could not distrain.

The Argument is still stronger against the Validity of a Promise, when the
Contract is made between a Prince and a Subject. The very offering a Kings Word
in Mortgage is rather a threatening in case of refusal, than an inducing
Argument to accept it; it is unfair at first, and by that gives greater cause
to be cautious, especially if a thing of that value and dignity as a Kings Word
ought to be, should be put into the hands of State Brokers to strike up a
Bargain with it.

XXVIII. When God Almighty makes Covenants with Mankind, His Promise is a
sufficient Security, notwithstanding his Superiority and his Power; because
first, he can neither err nor do injustice. It is the only Exception to his
Omnipotence, that by the Perfection of his being he is incapacitated to do
wrong. Secondly, at the instant of his Promise, by the extent of his Foresight,
which cannot fail, there is no room left for the possibility of any thing to
intervene, which might change his mind. Lastly, he is above the receiving
either Benefit or Inconvenience, and therefore can have no Interest or
Temptation to vary from his Word, when once he has granted it.

Now though Princes are God's Vicegerents, yet their Commission not being so
large, as that these Qualifications are devolved to them, it is quite another
case, and since the offering a Security implies it to be examined by the party
to whom it is proposed, it must not be taken ill that Objections are made to
it, even though the Prince himself should be the immediate Proposer.

Let a familiar Case be put; Suppose a ^rince, tempted by a Passion too strong
^or him to resist, should descend so as to ^romise Marriage to one of his
Subjects, and as Men are naturally in great haste upon such occasions, should
press to take possession before the necessary Forms could ^e complied with;
would the poor Ladies Scruples be called criminal for not taking (...) Security
of the Royal Word? Or ^ould her Allegiance be tainted by her re^^^^ing the
sacred Person of her Sovereign, because he was impatient of delay? Courte^^^ in
this case might persuade her to accept it, if she was so disposed, but sure the
(...) exercise of Power can never claim it.

XXIX. There is one Case where it is more particularly a Duty to use very great
^^^tion in accepting the security of a Pro^^^, and that is, when Men are
authorized and trusted by others to act for them. This ^^tteth them under much
greater restraints, than those who are at liberty to treat for themselves. It
is lawful, though it is not ^rudent for any man to make an ill Bargain for
himself, but it is neither the one nor ^he other, where the party contracting
^reateth on behalf of another, by whom he (...) entrusted. Men who will
unwarily ac^ept an ill security, if it is for themselves, forfeit their own
discretion, and undergo the Penalty, but they are not responsible to any body
else. They lie under the Mortification and the loss of committing the error, by
which though they may expose their Judgment to some censure, yet their Morality
suffers no reproach by it.

But those who are deputed by others to treat for them, upon terms of best
advantage, though the Confidence placed in them should prevent the putting any
limits to their Power in their Commission, yet the Condition implied if not
expressed, is that the Persons so Trusted shall neither make an ill Bargain,
nor accept a slight Security.

The Obligation is yet more binding when the Trust is of a Public Nature. The
aggravation of disappointing a Body of Men that rely upon them, carries the
Faul^ as high as it can go, and perhaps no Crim^ of any kind can outdo such a
deliberate breach of Trust, or would more justly mak^ Men forfeit the
protection of humane Society.

XXX. I will add one thing more upon this, Head, which is, that it is not
alway^ a true Proposition, that it is safe to rely upon a Promise, if at the
time of making it, i^ is the Interest of the Promiser to make i^ good. This,
though many times it is a good Inducement, yet it has these Excep^ions to it.
First, if the Proposer has at ^^^er times gone plainly against his visible
^nterest, the Argument will turn the other ^ay, and his former Mistakes are so
many Warnings to others, not to come within the danger of any more: let the
Inducements to those Mistakes be never so great and generous, that does not
alter the Nature, they are Mistakes still.

Interest is an uncertain thing, It goes and comes, and varieth according to
times and circumstances; as good build upon a Quicksand, as upon a presumption
that Interest shall not alter. Where are the Men so distinguished from the rest
of Mankind, that it is impossible for them to ^istake their Interest? Who are
they that ^^ve such an exemption from humane ^eailty, as that it can never
happen to them not to see their Interest for want of Underderstanding, or not
to leap over it by excess of Zeal.

Above all, Princes are the most liable to Mistake; not out of any defect in
their Nature, which might put them under such an unfortunate distinction; quite
contrary, the blood they derive from wise and great Ancestors, does rather
distinguish them on the better side; besides that their great Character and
Office of Governing gives a noble Exercise to their Reason, which (...) very
hardly fail to raise and improve (...) But there is one Circumstance annexed
their Glorious Calling, which in this respect is sufficient to outweigh all
those Advantages; it is that Mankind, divided in most things else, agree in
this, to conspire in their endeavors to deceive and mislea^^ them; which makes
it above the power of humane understanding, to be so exactly guarded as never
to admit a surprise, and the highest applause that could ever yet be given to
the greatest Men that ever wore a Crown, is that they were no oftener deceived.

Thus I have ventured to lay down my thoughts of the Nature of a Bargain, and
the due Circumstances belonging to an Equivalent, and will now conclude with
thi^ short word. Where Distrusting may be the cause of provoking Anger, and
Trusting may be the cause of bringing Ruin the Choice is too easy to need the
being Explained.

A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon occasion of His Majesty's late Gracious
Declaration of Indulgence.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon Occasion of His Majesty's late Gracious
Declaration of Indulgence.
SIR,
SINCE Addresses are in fashion, give me leave to make one to you. This is
neither the Effect of Fear, Interest, or Resentment; therefore on may be sure
it is sincere: and for that reason it may expect: to be kindly received.
Whether it will have power enough (...) Convince, depends upon the Reason
(...) of which you are to judge; and upon your Preparation of Mind, to be
persuaded by Truth, whenever it appears to you. It ought not to be the less
welcome, for coming from a friendly Hand, one whose kindness to you is not
lessened by difference of Opinion, and who will not let h^^ Thoughts for the
Public be so tied or confined to this or that Sub-division of Protestants, as
to stifle the Charity, which, besides all other Arguments, (...) at this time
become necessary to serve us.

I am neither surprised nor provoked^ (...) see that in the Condition you were
(...) into by the Laws, and the ill Circumstance^ you lay under, by having the
Exclus^^^ and Rebellion laid to your Charge, you were desirous to make your
selves less uneasy and obnoxious to Authority. Me^ who are sore, run to the
nearest Reme^^ with too much have to consider all the consequences: Grains of
allowance are to (...) given, where Nature gives such strong Influences. When
to Men under Sufferings it offers Ease, the present Pain will ^^^rdly allow
time to examine the Reme^^^s; and the strongest Reason can hardly gain a fair
Audience from our Mind, whilst so possessed, till the Smart: is a little
^^layed.

I do not know whether the Warmth tha^ naturally belongs to new Friendships,
may not make it a harder Task for me to persuade you. It is like telling
Lovers, in the beginning of their Joys, th^^ they will in a little time have an
(...). Such an unwelcome Style does not ^^^ly find Credit: but I will suppose
you (...) not so far gone in your new Passion, but that you will Hear still;
and therefore I am under the less Discouragement, (...) I offer to your
Consideration two ^^^gs. The First is, The Cause you have (...) suspect your
new Friends. The Second, ^^e Duty incumbent upon you, in Christianity and
Prudence, not to hazard the Public Safety, neither by desire of Ease, ^or of
Revenge.

To the First: Consider that notwithstanding the smooth Language which is now
put on to engage you, these new Friends did not make you their Choice, but
their Refuge: They have ever made their first Courtships to the Church of
England, and when they were rejected there they made their Application to you
in the second place. The Instances of this might be given in all times. I do
not repeat them, because whatsoever is unnecessary, must be tedious, the truth
of this Assertion being so plain, as not to admit a Dispute. You cannot
therefore reasonably flatter your selves, that there is any Inclination to you.
They never pretended to allow you any Quarter, but to usher in Liberty for
themselves under that shelter* I refer you to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and to the
Journals of Parliament, where you may be convinced, if you can be so mistaken,
as to doubt; nay, at this very hour, they can hardly forbear, in the height of
their Courtship, to let fall hard Words of you. So little is Nature to be
restrained; it will start out sometimes, disdaining to submit to the Usurpation
of Art and Interest.

This Alliance, between Liberty and Infallibility, is bringing together the Two
most contrary things that are in the World. The Church of Rome does not only
dislike the allowing Liberty, but by its Principles it cannot do it. Wine is
not more expressly forbid to the Mahometans, than giving Heretics Liberty to
the Papists: They are no more able to make good their Vows to you, than Men
married before, and their Wife alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
The continuance of their kindness, would be a habit of Sin, of which they are
to repent, and their Absolution is to be had upon no other terms, than their
promise to destroy you. You are therefore to be hugged now, only that you may
be the better squeezed it another time. There must be something extraordinary,
when the Church of Rome sets up Bills, and offers Plasters, for tender
Consciences: By all that has hitherto appeared, her skill in Surgery lies
chiefly in a quick Hand, to cut off Limbs; but she is the worst at healing, of
any that ever pretended to it.

To come so quick from another Extreme, is such an unnatural Motion, that you
ought to be upon your Guard; the other day you were Sons of Belial: Now, you
are Angels of Light. This is a violent change, and it will be fit for you to
pause upon it, before you believe it: If your Features are not altered, neither
is their Opinion of you, what ever may be pretended. Do you believe less than
you did, that there is Idolatry in the Church of Rome? Sure you do not. See
then, how they treat both in Words and Writing, those who entertain that
Opinion. Conclude from hence, how inconsistent their Favor is with this single
Article, except they give you a Dispensation for this too, and by a Non
Obstante, secure you that they will not think the worse of you.

Think a little how dangerous it is to build upon a Foundation of Paradoxes.
Popery now is the only Friend to Liberty; and the known Enemy to Persecution:
The Men of Taunton and Tiverton, are above all other Eminent for Loyalty. The
Quakers from being declared by the Papists not to be Christians, are now made
Favorites, and taken into their particular Protection; they are on a sudden
grown the most accomplished Men of the Kingdom, in good Breeding, and give
Thanks with the best Grace, in double refined Language. So that I should not
wonder, though a Man of that Persuasion, inspite of his Hat, should be Master
of the Ceremonies. Not to say harsher words, these are such very new things,
that it is impossible not to suspend our Belief, till by a little more
Experience we may be informed whether they are Realities or Apparitions: We
have been under shameful mistakes if these Opinions are true; but for the
present, we are apt to be incredulous; except we could be convinced, that the
Priests words in this case too, are able to make such a sudden and effectual
change; and that their Power is not limited to the Sacrament, but that it
extends to alter the nature of all other things, as often as they are so
desposed.

Let me now speak of the Instruments of your Friendship, and then leave you to
judge, whether they do not afford matter of Suspicion. No sharpness is to be
mingled where Healing only is intended; so nothing will be said to expose
particular men, how strong soever the Temptation may be, or how clear the
Proofs to make it out. A word or two in general, for you better caution, shall
suffice: Suppose then, for Argument's sake, that the Mediators of this new
Alliance, should be such as have been formerly employed in Treaties of the same
kind, and there detected to have Acted by Order, and to have been Empowered to
give Encouragements and Rewards. Would not this be an Argument to suspect them?

If they should plainly be under Engagements to one side, their Arguments to
the other ought to be received accordingly; their fair Pretenses are to be
looked upon as part of their Commission, which may not improbably give them a
Dispensation in the case of Truth, when it may bring a prejudice upon the
Service of those by whom they are employed.

If there should be men who having formerly had Means and Authority to persuade
by Secular Arguments, have in pursuance of that Power, sprinkled Money amongst
the Dissenting Ministers; and if those very men should now have the same
Authority, practice the same Methods, and Disburse, where they cannot otherwise
persuade: It seems to me to be rather an Evidence than a Presumption of the
Deceit.

If there should be Ministers amongst you, who by having ^allen under
Temptations of this kind, are in some sort engaged to continue their Frailty,
by the awe they are in lest it should be exposed: The Persuasions of these
unfortunate Men must sure have the less force, and their Arguments, though
never so specious, are to be suspected, when they come from Men who have
mortgaged themselves to severe Creditors, that expect a rigorous Observation of
the Contract, let it be never so unwarrantable.

If these, or any others, should at this time Preach up Anger and Vengeance
against the Church of England; may it not without Injustice be suspected, that
a thing so plainly out of Season, sprinketh rather from Corruption than
Mistake; and that those who act this Choleric part, do not believe themselves,
but only pursue higher Directions, and endeavor to make good that part of
their Contract which obliges them, upon a Forfeiture, to make use of their
inflaming Eloquence? They might apprehend their Wages would be retrenched if
they should be Moderate: And therefore whilst Violence is their Interest, those
who have not the same Arguments, have no reason to follow such a partial
Example.

If there should be Men, who by the load of their Crimes against the
Government, have been bowed down to comply with it against their Conscience;
who by incurring the want of a Pardon, have drawn upon themselves a necessity
of an entire Resignation: Such men are to be lamented, but not to be believed.
Nay, they themselves when they have discharged their Unwelcom Task, will be
inwardly glad that their forced Endeavors do not succeed, and are pleased when
men resist their Insinuations; which are far from being Voluntary or Sincere,
but are squeezed out of them by the weight of their being so Obnoxious.

If in the height of this great dearness by comparing things, it should
happen, that at this instant, there is much surer Friendship with those who are
so far from allowing Liberty, that they allow no Living to a Protestant under
them. Let the Scene lie in what part of the World it will, the Argument will
come home, and sure it will afford sufficient ground to suspect. Apparent
Contradictions must strike us; neither Nature nor Reason can digest them:
Self-Flattery, and the desire to Deceive our selves, to gratify present
Appetite, with all their Power, which is Great, cannot get the better of such
broad Conviction, as some things carry along with them. Will you call these
vain and empty Suspicions? have you been at all times so void of Fears and
Jealousies as to justify your being so unreasonably Valiant in having none
upon this occasion? Such an extraordinary Courage at this unseasonable time, to
say no more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended.

If then for these and a thousand other Reasons, there is cause to suspect,
sure your new Friends are not to dictate to you, or advise you; for instance,
The Addresses that fly abroad every Week, and Murder us with another to the
same; the first Draughts are made by those who are not very proper to be
Secretaries to the Protestant Religion: and it is your part only to Write them
our fairer again.

Strange! that you who have been formerly so much against Set Forms, should now
be content the Priests should Indite for you. The nature of Thanks is an
unavoidable consequence of being pleased or obliged; they grow in the Heart,
and from thence show themselves either in Looks, Speech, Writing, or Action: No
man was ever Thankful because he was bid to be so, but because he had, or
thought he had some Reason for it. If then there is cause in this Case to pay
such extravagant Acknowledgments, they will flow naturally, without taking such
pains to procure them; and it is unkindly done to Tire all the Posthorses with
carrying Circular Letters to solicit that which would be done without any
trouble or constraint: If it is really in it self such a Favor, what needs
so much pressing men to be thankful, and with such eager circumstances, that
where Persuasions cannot delude* Threatenings are employed to fright them into a
Compliance. Thanks must be volantary, not only unconstrained, but unsolicited,
else they are either Trifles or Snares, that either signify nothing, or a
great deal more than is intended by those that give them. If an Inference
should be made, That whosoever thanketh the King for his Declaration, is by
that engaged to Justify it in point of Law; it is a greater Stride than, I
presume, all those care to make who are persuaded to Address: If it shall be
supposed, that all the Thankers will be Repealers of the TEST, whenever a
Parliament shall meet. Such an Expectation is better prevented before, then
disappointed afterward; and the surest way to avoid the lying under such a
Scandal, is not to do any thing that may give a color to the Mistake: These
bespoken Thanks are little less improper than Love Letters that were solicited
by the Lady to whom they are to be directed: so, that besides the little ground
there is to give them, the manner of getting them does extremely lessen their
Value. It might be wished that you would have suppressed your impatience, and
have been content for the sake of Religion, to enjoy it within your selves
without the Liberty of a public Exercise, till a Parliament had allowed it;
but since that could not be, and that the Artifices of some amongst you have
made use of the Well-meant Zeal of the generality to draw them into this
Mistake; I am so far from blaming you with that sharpness which perhaps, the
Matter in strictness would bear, that I am ready to err on the side of the more
gentle construction.

There is a great difference between enjoying quietly the Advantages of an Act
irregularly done by others, and the going about to support it against the Laws
in being: the Law is so Sacred, that no Trespass against it is to be defended;
yet Frailties may in some measure be excused, when they cannot be justified.
The Desire of enjoying a Liberty from which Men have been so long restrained,
may be a Temptation that their Reason is not at all times able to resist. It in
such a case, some Objections are leapt over, indifferent Men will be more
inclined to lament the Occasion, than to fall too hard upon the Fault, whilst
it is covered with the Apology of a good Intention; but where to rescue your
selves from the Severity of one Law, you give a Blow to all the Laws, by which
your Religion and Liberty are to be protected; and instead of silently
receiving the Benefit of this Indulgence, you set up for Advocates to support
it, you become voluntary Aggressors, and look like Counsel retained by the
Prerogative against your old Friend Magna Charta, who has done nothing to
deserve her falling thus under your Displeasure.

If the Case then should be, that the Price expected from you for this Liberty,
is giving up your Right in the Laws, sure you will think twice, before you go
any further in such a losing Bargain. After giving Thanks for the Breach of one
Law, you lose the Right of Complaining of the Breach of all the rest; you will
not very well know how to defend your selves when you are pressed; and having
given up the Question when it was for your Advantage, you cannot re-call it
when it shall be to your Prejudice. If you will set up at one time a Power to
help you, which at another time, by parity of Reason, shall be made use of to
destroy you, you will neither be pitied, nor relieved against a Mischief you
draw upon your selves, by being so unreasonably thankful. It is like calling in
Auxiliaries to help, who are strong enough to subdue you: In such a case your
Complaints will come too late to be heard, and your Sufferings will raise Mirth
instead of Compassion.

If you think, for your Excuse, to expound your Thanks, so as to restrain them
to this particular Case, others, for their Ends, will extend them further: And
in these differing Interpretations, that which is backed by Authority will be
the most likely to prevail; especially when by the Advantage you have given
them, they have in truth the better of the Argument, and that the Inferences
from your own Concessions are very strong, and express against you. This is so
far from being a groundless Supposition, that there was a late Instance of it,
the last Session of Parliament, in the House of Lords, where the first Thanks,
though things of course, were interpreted to be the Approbation of the Kings
whole Speech, and a Restraint from the further Examination of any part of it,
though never so much disliked; and it was with difficulty obtained, not to be
excluded from the liberty of objecting to this mighty Prerogative of
Dispensing, merely by this innocent and usual piece of good Manners, by which
no such thing could possibly be intended.

This shows, that some Bounds are to be put to your good Breeding, and that
the Constitution of England is too valuable a thing to be ventured upon a
Complement. Now that you have for some time enjoyed the Benefit of the End, it
is time for you to look into the Danger of the Means: The same Reason that made
you desirous to get Liberty, must make your sollicitous to preserve it; so that
the next Thought will naturally be not to engage your self beyond Retreat, and
to agree so far with the Principles of all Religion, as not to rely upon a
Deathbed Repentance.

There are certain Periods of Time, which being once past, make all Cautions
ineffectual, and all Remedies desperate. Our Understandings are apt to be
hurried on by the first Heats, which, if not restrained in time, do not give us
leave to look back, till it is too late. Consider this in the Case of your
Anger against the Church of England, and take warning by their Mistake in the
same kind, when after the late King's Restoration, they preserved so long the
bitter Taste of your rough Usage to them in other times, that it made them
forget their Interest, and sacrifice it to their Revenge.

Either you will blame this Proceeding in them, and for that reason not follow
it, or if you allow it, you have no reason to be offended with them; so that
you must either dismiss your Anger, or lose your Excuse; except you should
argue more partially than will be supposed of Men of your Morality and
Understanding.

If you had now to do with those rigid Prelates, who made it a matter of
Conscience to give you the least Indulgence, but kept you at an uncharitable
Distance, and even to your most reasonable Scruples continued stiff and
inexorable, the Argument might be fairer on your side: but since the common
Danger has so laid open that Mistake, that all the former Haughtiness toward
you is for ever extinguished, and that it has turned the Spirit of Persecution
into a Spirit of Peace, Charity, and Condescension; shall this happy Change
only affect the Church of England? And are you so in love with Separation, as
not to be moved by this Example? It ought to be followed, were there no other
Reason than that it is Virtue; but when besides that, it is become necessary to
your Preservation, it is impossible to fail the having its Effect upon you.

If it should be said, that the Church of England is never humble but when she
is out of power, and therefore loses the Right of being believed when she
pretended to it: The Answer is, First, it would be an uncharitable Objection,
and very much mistimed; an unseasonable Triumph, not only ungenerous, but
unsafe: So that in these respects it cannot be urged, without Scandal, even
though it could be said with Truth. Secondly, This is not so in Fact, and the
Argument must fall, being built upon a false Foundation; for whatever may be
told you at this very Hour, and in the Heat and Glare of your present Sunshine,
the Church of England can in a Moment bring Clouds again; and turn the Royal
Thunder upon your Heads, blow you off the Stage with a Breath, if she would
give but a Smile or a king Word; the least Glimpse of her Compliance would
throw you back into the State or Suffering, and draw upon you all the Arrears
of Severity, which have accrued during the time of this Kindness to you, and
yet the Church of England, with all her Faults, will not allow her self to be
rescued by such unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the Weight of Power,
rather than ^e under the Burden of being criminal.

It cannot be said, that she is unprovoked; Books and Letters come out every
Day, to call for Answers, yet she will not be stirred. From the supposed
Authors, and the Style, one would swear they were Undertakers, and had made a
Contract to fall out with the Church of England. There are Lashes in every
Address, Challenges to draw the Pen in every Pamphlet: In short, the fairest
Occasions in the World given to quarrel; but she wisely distinguishes between
the Body of Dissenters, whom she will suppose to act as they do, with no ill
Intent; and these small Skirmishers, picked and sent out to picqueer, and to
begin a Fray amongst the Protestants, for the Entertainment as well as the
Advantage of the Church of Rome.

This Conduct is so good, that it will be scandalous not to applaud it. It is
not equal Dealing to blame our Adversaries for doing ill, and not commend them
when they do well.

To hate them because they persecuted, and not to be reconciled to them when
they are ready to suffer, rather than receive all the Advantages that can be
gained by a Criminal Compliance, is a Principle no sort of Christians can own,
since it would give an Objection to them never to be answered.

Think a little who they were that promoted your former Persecutions, and then
consider how it will look to be angry with the Instruments, and at the same
time to make a League with the Authors of your Sufferings.

Have you enough considered what will be expected from you? Are you ready to
stand in every Borough by Virtue of a Conge d'eslire, and instead of Election,
be satisfied if you are Returned?

Will you in Parliament justify the Dispensing Power, with all its
Consequences, and Repeal the Test, by which you will make way for the Repeal of
all the Laws, that were made to preserve your Religion, and to Enact others
that shall destroy it?

Are you disposed to change the Liberty of Debate into the Merit of Obedience;
and to be made Instruments to repeal or enact Laws, when the Roman Consistory
are Lords of the Articles?

Are you so linked with your new Friends, as to reject any Indulgence a
Parliament shall offer you, if it shall not be so comprehensive as to include
the Papists in it?

Consider, that the employed Conditions of your new Treaty are no less, than
that you are to do every thing you are desired, without examining, and that for
this pretended Liberty of Conscience, your real Freedom is to be sacrificed:
Your former Faults hang like Chains still about you, you are let loose only
upon Bayl; the first Act of Noncompliance, sends you to Jayl again.

You may see that the Papists themselves do not rely upon the Legality of this
Power, which you are to justify, since the being so very earnest to get it
established by a Law, and the doing such very hard things in order, as they
think, to obtain it, is a clear Evidence, that they do not think that the
single Power of the Crown is in this Case a good Foundation; especially when
this is done under a Prince, so very tender of all the Rights of Sovereignty,
that he would think it a Diminution to his Prerogative, where he conceives it
strong enough to go alone, to call in the Legislative help to strengthen and
support it.

You have formerly blamed the Church of England, and not without reason, for
going so far as they did in their Compliance; and yet as soon as they stopped,
you see they are not only deserted, but prosecuted: Conclude then from this
Example, that you must either break off your Friendship, or resolve to have no
Bounds in it. If they do not succeed in their Design, they will leave you
first; if they do, you must either leave them, when it will be too late for
your Safety, or else after the squeaziness of starting at a Surplice, you must
be forced to swallow Transubstantiation:

Remember that the other day those of the Church of England were Trimmers for
enduring you, and now by a sudden Turn, you are become the Favorites; do not
deceive your selves, it is not the nature of lasting Plants thus to shoot up in
a Night; you may look gay and green for a little time, but you want a Root to
give you a Continuance. It is not so long since, as to be forgotten, that the
Maxim was, It is impossible for a Dissenter not to be a REBEL. Consider at this
time in France, even the new Converts are so far from being employed, that they
are disarmed; their sudden Change makes them still to be distrusted,
notwithstanding that they are reconciled: What are you to expect then from your
dear Friends, to whom, when ever they shall think fit to throw you off again,
you have in other times given such Arguments for their excuse?

Besides all this, you Act very unskilfully against your visible Interest, if
you throw away the Advantages, of which you can hardly fail in the next
probable Revolution. Things tend naturally to what you would have, if you would
let them alone, and not by an unseasonable Activity lose the Influences of your
good Star, which promises you every thing that is prosperous.

The Church of England convinced of its Error in being severe to you; the
Parliament, whenever it meets, sure to be gentle to you; the next Heir bred
in the Country which you have so often quoted for a Pattern of Indulgence; a
general Agreement of all thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selves off
from the Protestants abroad, but rather enlarge the Foundations upon which we
are to build our Defenses against the Common Enemy; so that in truth, all
things seem to conspire to give you Ease and Satisfaction, if by too much haste
to anticipate your good Fortune, you do not destroy it.

The Protestants have but one Article of Humane Strength, to oppose the Power
which is now against them, and that is, not to lose the advantage of their
Numbers, by being so unwary as to let themselves be divided.

We all agree in our Duty to our Prince; our Objections to his Belief do not
hinder us from seeing his Virtues; and our not complying with his Religion,
has no effect upon our Allegiance; we are not to be laughed out of our
Passive-Obedience, and the Doctrine of Non-Resistance; though even those who
perhaps owe the best part of their Security to that Principle, are apt to make
a Jest of it.

So that if we give no advantage by the fatal Mistake of misapplying our Anger,
by the natural course of things, this Danger will pass away like a shower of
Hail; fair weather will succeed, as lowering as the Sky now looks, and all
this by plain and easy Receipt; Let us be still, quiet, and undivided, firm at
the same time to our Religion, our Loyalty, and our Laws; and so long as we
continue this method, it is next to impossible, that the odds of 200 to one
should lose the Bett; except the Church of Rome, which has been so long barren
of Miracles, should now in her declining Age, be brought to Bed of One that
would outdo the best she can brag of in her Legend.

To conclude, the short Question will be, Whether you will join with those who
must in the end run the same Fate with you? If Protestants of all sorts, in
their Behavior to one another, have been to blame, they are upon the more
equal terms, and for that very reason it is fitter for them now to be
reconciled. Our Disunion is not only a Reproach, but a Danger to us; those who
believe in modern Miracles, have more Right, or at least more Excuse, to
neglect all Secular Cautions; but for us, it is as justifiable to have no
Religion, as wilfully to throw away the Humane Means of preserving it. I am,

Dear Sir, Your most Affectionate humble Servant, T. W.

SOME CAUTIONS Offered to the CONSIDERATION Of Those who are to Choose MEMBERS
TO SERVE in the Ensuing Parliament.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

Some Cautions offered to the Consideration of those who are to choose Members
to serve for the Ensuing Parliament.
I Will make no other introduction, than that it is hoped the Counties and
Boroughs will remember in general, That besides other Consequences, they will
have the Credit of a good Choice, or the Scandal that belongs to an ill one.

The Creators will be thought like their Creatures; and therefore an ill Choice
will either be a disparagement of their Understanding, or their Morals.

There cannot be a fuller Approbation of a thing, than the Choosing of it; so
that the fault of the Members chosen, if known beforehand, will be judged to
be of the growth of that County or Borough, after such a solemn Approbation of
them.

In short, those who send up their Representatives to Westminster, should take
care they may be such as will do them Right, and their Country Honor.

Now to the particulars.

I. A very extraordinary earnestness to be chosen, is no very good Symptom: A
desire to serve the Nation in Parliament, is an English Man's Ambition: Always
to be Encouraged, and never to be disapproved.

A Man may not only be willing to stand, but he may declare that willingness to
his Friends, that they may assist him, and by all the means becoming a modest
and prudent Man, he may endeavor to succeed, and prevent the being
disappointed in it.

But there is a wide difference between this and the raising a king of petty
War in the County or Corporation; entering the Lists rather for a Combat than an
Election; throwing Fireballs to put Men into heat, and omitting to spread no
Reports, whether true or false, which may give an advantage by laying a Blemish
upon a Competitor.

These Methods will ever be suspicious; it will never be thought a Natural
thing for Men to take such extravagant pains for the mere sake of doing good to
others.

To be content to suffer something for a good end, is that which many would do
without any great repugnance: but where a Man can honestly propose nothing to
himself, except Troubles, Charge, and Loss, by absence from his own Affairs, to
be so violent in the pursuit of so ill a Bargain, is not at all suited to the
languishing Virtue of Mankind so corrupted.

Such a self-denying Zeal in such a self-seeking Age, is so little to be
imagined, that it may without injury be suspected.

Therefore when these blustering Pretenders come upon the Stage, their natural
Temper and other Circumstances ought to be very well considered, before Men
trust them with the disposal of their Money, or their Liberty.

And I am apt to believe, there could hardly be found one single Man whose
other Qualifications would over-balance the Objections that lie against such
importunate Suitors.

II. Recommending Letters ought to have no effect upon Elections.

In this I must distinguish; for tho in strictness perhaps there should be no
Exception; yet in compliance with long practice, and out of an Indulgence that
is necessary in a time when Mankind is too much loosened from severe Rules, to
be kept close up to them, Letters sent only from Equal Men, doing Good Men
right by giving Evidence in their behalf, offering them as fitly qualified,
when they really are so, and freeing them from unjust Aspersions, may be still
allowed.

The Letters I mean, are from Men of Power, where it may be beneficial to
comply, and inconvenient to oppose.

Choice must not only be free from Force, but from Influence, which is a degree
of Force: There must be no difficulty, no apprehension that a Refusal will be
ill taken, or resented.

The Freeholders must be Freemen too; they are to have no Shackles upon their
Votes in a Election: and the Men who stand, should carry their own Letters of
Recommendation about them, which are there good Character and Behavior in the
World, without borrowing Evidence, especially when it comes from suspected
hands.

Those who make use of these Epistles, ought to have no more advantage from
them, that the Muscovites have from the Letters put into their hands, when they
are buried, to recommend them to St. Nicholas.

The first should as little get admittance. for Men into the Parliament, as
these Letters can introduce the Bearers into Heaven.

The Scandal of such Letters lies first in the arrogant imposing of those that
write them, and next in the wretched Meanness of those that need them.

Men must be fallen very low in their Credit, who upon such an occasion have a
recourse to Power to support it: Their Enemies could not give stronger Evidence
of their not being fit for that which they pretend to. And if the Electors
judge otherwise, they will be pretty sure in a little time to see their
Mistake, and to repent it.

III. Non-Attendance in former Parliaments ought to be a Bar against the Choice
of Men who have been guilty of it.

It is one of the worst kinds of Non-Residence, and the least to be excused: It
is very hard that Men should despise a Duty, which perhaps is the only ground
of the respect that is paid to them.

It is such a piece of Sawciness for any one to press for the Honor of serving
in Parliament, and then to be careless in Attending it, that in a House where
there were so many Officers, the Penalty had not been improper to have
Cashiered them for not appearing at the General Muster.

If men forbear to come out of Laziness, let them be gratified by taking their
ease at Home without interruption; If out of small Cunning to avoid
Difficulties, and to escape from the Inconvenience of Voting in Critical Cases,
let them enjoy that despicable pitch of Wisdom, and never pretend to make a
Figure where the Public is to be served.

If it would not be thought advisable to trust a Man immediately after he has
been drawn out of a Gaol, it may be as reasonable to look upon one who for his
Nonattendance in the House has been sent for in Custody, as a king of
Bankrupt, which puts him upon unequal terms with those who have been
assiduous in the discharge of their Duty.

They who thought fit in one Session to neglect the Public Business, may be
justly suspected, by their standing, in the next to intend their own.

Besides these more deliberate Offenders, there are some who do not Attend even
when they are in the House: absent in their Thoughts for want of Comprehending
the Business that is doing, and therefore diverted from it by any thing that is
Trivial.

Such Men are Nusances to a serious Assembly; and when they are Numerous, it
amounts almost to a Dissolution; it being scarce possible for good sense to
be heard, whilst a noise is made by the buzzing of these Horse flies.

The Roman Censors who degraded a Senator for yawning whilst there was a
Debate, would have much more abundant matter here upon which they might
exercise their Jurisdiction.

To conclude this Head, There are so few that ever mended in these Cases, that
after the first Experiment it is not at all reasonable to take them upon a new
Trial.

IV. Men who are unquiet and busy in their Natures, are to give more than
ordinary proofs of their Integrity, before the Electing them into a Public
Trust can be justified. As a hot Summer breeds greater swarms of Flies, so an
active time breeds a greater number of these shining Gentlemen.

It is pretty sure, That men who cannot allow themselves to be at rest, will
let no body else be at quiet. Such a perpetual Activity is apt by degrees to be
applied to the pursuit of their private interest. And their thoughts being in a
continual motion, they have not time to dwell long enough upon any thing to
entertain a scruple.

So that they are generally at full liberty to do what is most convenient for
them, without being fettered by any Restraints.

Nay further; Whenever it happens that there is an Impunity for Cheating, these
nimble Gentlemen are apt to think it a disparagement to their Understandings
not to go into it.

I doubt it is not a wrong to the present Age, to say, that a Knave is a less
unpopular Calling than it has been in former times. And to say truth, it would
be ingratitude in some Men to turn Honest, when they owe all they have to their
Knavery.

The People are in this respect unhappy; they are too many to do their own
business; their numbers, which make their strength, are at the same time the
cause of their weakness; they are too unweildy to move; and for this Reason
nothing can ever redeem them from this incurable Impotency: So that they must
have Solicitors to pursue and look after their Interests: who are too often
disposed to dispense with the Fidelity they owe to those that trust them;
especially if the Government will pay their Bills without Abatement.

It is better these Gentlement's dexterity should be employed any where than in
Parliament, where the ill consequence of their being Members is too much
diffused, and not restrained to the County or Borough who shall be so unwary as
to Choose them.

V. Great Drinkers are less fit to Serve in Parliament than is apprehended.

Men's Virtue, as well as their Understanding, is apt to be tainted by it.

The appearance of it is Sociable and well-natur'd, but it is by no means to be
relied upon.

Nothing is more frail than a Man too far engaged in wet Popularity.

The habit of it makes Men careless of their business, and that naturally
leads them into Circumstances, that make them liable to Temptation.

It is seldom seen, That any Principles have such a root, as that they can be
proof against the continual droppings of a Bottle.

As to the Faculties of the Mind, there is not less Objection; the vapors of
Wine may sometimes throw out sparks of Wit, but they are like scattered pieces
of Ore, there is no Vein to work upon.

Such Wit, even the best of it, is like paying great Fines; in which case there
must of necessity be an abatement of the constant Rent.

Nothing sure is a greater Enemy to the Brain, than too much moisture; it can
the least of any thing bear the being continually steeped: And it may be said,
that Thought may be resembled to some Creatures which can live only in a dry
Country.

Yet so arrogant are some men, as to think they are so much Masters of
Business, as that they can play with it; they imagine they can drown their
Reason once a day, and that it shall not be the worse for it; forgetting, that
by too often diving the Understanding at last grows too weak to rise up again.

I will suppose this fault was less frequent when Solon made it one of his
Laws, That it was Lawful to Kill a Magistrate if he was found D^unk. Such a
Liberty taken in this Age, either in the Parliament or out of it, would do
terrible Execution.

I cannot but mention a Petition in the year 1647, from the County of Devon, to
the House of Commons, against the undue Election of Burgesses, who are strong
in Wine and weak in Wisdom.

The cause of such Petitions is to be prevented by Choosing such as shall not
give handle for them.

VI. Wanting-Men give such cause of suspicion where ever they deal, that surely
the Chusers will be upon their guard, as often as such dangerous pretenders
make their application to them.

Let the behavior of such Men be never so plausible and untainted, yet they
who are to pitch upon those they are to trust with all they have, may be
excused, if they do not only consider what they are but what they may be.

As we Pray our selves we may not be led, into Temptation, we ought not by any
means to thrust others into it; even though our own Interest was not concerned;
And sure when it is, the Argument has not less force.

If a Man has a small Estate, and a numerous Family; where it happens that a
Man has as many Children as he has Tenants, It is not a Recommending
Circumstance for his Election.

When it comes to be the Question with such a Man, Whether he shall be Just to
the Public, or Cruel to his Family? It is very possible the decision may be on
the side of Corrupted Nature.

It is a Complement to this Age, which it does not deserve, to suppose Men are
so tied up to Morality, as that they cannot be pinched out of it: especially
now when it is called Starving not to be Embroidered, or served in Plate.

The Men Chosen to serve their Country, should not be laden with Suits that
may tempt them to assume Privileges; much less under such Necessities as may
more immediately prepare them for Corruption.

Men who need a Parliament for their own particular Interest, have more reason
to offer their Service than others have to accept of it. And though I do not
doubt, but there may be some whose Virtue would triumph over their Wants, let
them be never so pressing; yet to expose the Public to the hazard of being
deceived, is that which can never be justified by those that Choose. And tho it
must be allowed possible for a wanting-Man to be honest, yet it is impossible
for a Man to be wise that will depend upon it.

VII. There is a sort of Men that have a Tinsel-wit, which make them shine
among those who cannot judge.

Club and Coffee-house Gentlemen, Petty Merchants of small Conceits, who have
an Empty habit of prating without meaning; They always aim at Wit and generally
make false Fire.

Their business is less to learn, than to set themselves out; which makes them
choose to be with such as can only be Witnesses of their small Ingenuity, rather
than with such as might improve it.

There is a subordinate Wit, as much inferior to a Wit of business, as a Fiddler
at a Wake is to the lofty Sound of an Organ.

Men of this Size are in no degree suited to the business of redressing
Grievances, and making Laws.

There is a Parliament Wit to be distinguished from all other kinds; those who
have it, do not stuff their heads only with Cavils and Objections.

They have a deliberate and an observing Wit, a Head turned to Public things;
Men who place a greater pleasure in mending a Fault than in finding it out.

Their Understanding directs them to object in the right place, and not like
those who go by no other Rule, than to conclude, That must be the best Counsel
which was not taken.

These Wholesale Judges show such a gross and peevish Ignorance, that it
appears so openly in all they say or do, That they give loud warning to all
considering Men, not to choose them.

VIII. The dislike of slight Airy Men must not go so far, as to recommend
heaviness in opposition to it, especially where men are convicted of it by
Experience in former Sessions.

As a lively Coxcomb will seldom fail to lay in his claim for Wit; so a
Blockhead is apt to pretend, That his heaviness is a proof of his Judgment.

Some have an universal Lethargy spread upon their Understanding without
exception; others have an Insufficiency (...) hoc, as in some Cases men have
(...) hanc; These last can never so (...) thoughts to public Business, as to
give the attention that is necessary to Comprehend it.

There are those who have such a thick Shell upon their Brains, that their
Ignorance is impenetrable, and makes such astout resistance against Common
Sense, that it will never be subdued by it: True Heart of Oak, Ignorance that
will neveryield, let Reason beat never so hard upon it; and though their kind
Neighbors have at several Elections sent them up to School again, they have
still returned the same incurable Dunces.

There is a false Gravity that is a very ill symptom; and it may be said, That
as Rivers, which run very slowly, have always the most Mud at the bottom; so a
solid stiffness in the constant course of a man's Life, is a sign of a thick
bed of Mud at the bottom of his Brain.

A dull man is so near a dead Man, that he is hardly to be ranked in the List
of the Living; and as he is not to be buried whilst he is half alive, so he is
as little to be employed whilst: he is half dead.

Parliaments are now grown to be quite other things than they were formerly.

In Ancient Times they were little more than Great Assizes; A Roll of
Grievances; Magna Charta confirmed; Privileges of Holy Church preserved; so
many Sacks of Wool given, and away.

Now there are Traps and Gins laid for the well-meaning Country-Gentleman; he
is to grapple with the Cunning of Men in Town, which is not a little improved
by being rewarded and encouraged.

So that men whose good Intentions are not seconded and supported by some
degree of Ability, are as much the more dangerous, as they are less criminal
than Cunning Knaves. Their honest Mistakes, for want of distinguishing, either
give a Countenance to, or at least lessen the Scandal of the injurious things
that are done to the Public: and with leave asked for so odd an expression,
Their Innocent Guilt is as mischievous to the Laws and Liberties, as the most
deliberate Malice of those that would destroy them.

IX. There is an Abuse which daily increases, of sending such to Parliament,
as are scarce old enough to be sent to the University.

I would not in this restrain the Definition of these Boys to the Age of Twenty
One: If my Opinion might take place, I should wish that none might be chosen
into the House of Commons under Thirty; and to make some Equality, I should
from the same Motives, think it convenient, That no Lord should have a Vote in
Judicature under that Age.

But to leave this Digression; I cannot see why the Chusers should not at least
make it a Rule among themselves, Not to send any Man to Represent them under
the Age of Twenty five, which is the time of Majority in most other places of
the world.

Surely it is not that we are Earlier plants than our Neighbors.

Such supposition could neither be justified by our Climate, nor by the degree
of Latitude in which we are placed; I must therefore attribute it to the haste
our Ancestors had (and not without reason) to free themselves from the Severity
of Wardships.

But whether this, or any thing else, was the cause of our earlier stepping
into Man's Estate; so it is now, that according to our Laws, Twenty one is the
Age of Discretion; and the Young Man is then vested with a Legal, how defective
soever he may be in his Natural Understanding.

With all this, there ought to be a difference made between coming out of
Pupilage, and leaping into Legislatorship.

It is perhaps inconvenient enough that a man should be so soon let loose to
destroy his own Estate; but it is yet worse, that he should then have a Power
of giving away other men's.

The Law must make General Rules, to which there always will be some Objections.

If there were Tryers appointed to judge when Leading-Strings should be left
off, many would wear them a very great while, and some perhaps with their Gray
Hairs; there being no small number of Old Boys in all times and especially in
this.

It is necessary therefore to make Exceptions to this General Rule, where the
Case so much requires it, as it does in the matter in question.

The ground of sending these Minors to Parliament ought not to recommend the
Continuance of it to those who are Lovers of Liberty; since it was by the
Authority and Influence of Great Men, that their Stripling Sons were first
received by the humble depending Boroughs, or the complying Counties.

They called it, as many do still, the best School for Young Men. Now
Experience has showed us, that it is like a School only in this respect, That
these Youngsters when they are admitted, deserve to be whipped in it.

If the House of Commons is a School, it must be for Men of riper Age; these
are too young to learn there, and being elevated by a mistaken smattering in
small Politics, they grow too supercilious to learn any where else; so that
instead of improving young promising Plants, they are destroyed by being
misplaced.

If then they do themselves hurt by it, it is surer yet that they do the House
no good by coming into it.

They were not Green Geese that are said to have saved the Capitol; they were
certainly of full Age, or else their Cackling could not have been heard, so as
to give warning.

Indeed it looked of late, when the Fashion was to have long continued
Parliaments, as if we might plant a Boy in the House with a Prospect that he
might continue there till he had Gray Hairs: And that the same Sapling might
have such a Root, as that he might grow up to be Timber without being removed.

If these Young Men had skill enough to pitch upon some Body in the House, to
whom they might resign their Opinion, and upon whose Judgment they might lean
without Reserve, there might be less Objection.

But to speak Truth, they know as little how to choose, as those did who Elected
them: so that there is no other Expedient left, than the letting them alone.

One may say, generally speaking, That a young Man being too soon qualified for
the serious Business of Parliaments, would really be no good Symptom.

It is a sign of too much Phlegm, and too little Fire in the beginning of Age,
if Men have not a little more heat than is convenient; for as they grow older
they will run a hazard of not having so much as is necessary.

The Truth is, The vigor of Youth is softened and misapplied, when it is not
spent either in War or close Studies; all other Courses have an idle Mixture
that comes to nothing, and makes them like Trees, which for want of Pruning
run up to Wood, and seldom or never bear any Fruit.

To conclude this Head, it must be owned, That there is no Age of our Life
which does not carry Arguments along with it to humble us: and therefore it
would be well for the Business of the World, if young Men would stay longer
before they went into it, and old Men not so long before they went out of it.

X. Next to these may be ranked a sort of superfine Gentlemen, Carpet-Knights,
Men whose Heads may be said to be only Appurtenances to their Perukes, which
entirely ingross all their Care and Application.

There Understanding is so strictly appropriated to their Dress; that no part
of it is upon pain of their utmost Displeasure to be diverted to any other use.

It is not by this intended to recommend an affected Clown, or to make it a
necessary Qualification for a Member of Parliament, that he must renounce clean
Linen or good Manners; but surely a too earnest Application to make every thing
sit Right about them, strikes too deep into their small stock of Thoughts to
allow it Furniture for any thing else.

To do Right to these fine-spun Gentlemen, Business is too course a thing for
them, which makes it an unreasonable Hardship upon them to oppress them with
it; so that in tenderness to them, no less than out of care to the Public, it
is best to leave them to their Tailors with whom they will live in much better
Correspondence, when the Danger is prevented of their falling out about
Privileges.

XI. Men of Injustice and Violence, in their private Dealings, are not to be
trusted by the People with a Commission to treat for them in Parliament.

In the 4th of Edw. 3. The King Commands in his Writs not to choose any
Knights who had been Guilty of Crime, or Maintenance.

These warm Men seldom fail to run into Maintenance, taken in a larger Extent.

It is an unnatural Sound to come from a Man that is arbitrary in his
Neighborhood, to talk of Laws and Liberties at Westminster; he is not a proper
Vehicle for such Words, which ought never to be profaned.

An habitual Breaker of the Laws, to be made one of the Lawmakers, is as if
the Benches in Westminster Hall should be filled with Men out of Newgate.

Those who are of this Temper cannot change their Nature out of respect to
their Country.

Quite contrary; they will less scruple to do Wrong to a Nation where no Body
takes it to himself, than to particular Men to whose Resentments they are more
immediately exposed.

In short they lie under such strong Objections, that the over-balance of
better Men cannot altogether purify an Assembly where these unclean Beasts are
admitted.

XII. Excessive Spenders and unreasonable Savers are to be Excluded, being both
greedy from differing Causes.

They are both of them Diseases of Infection, and for that Reason are not to be
admitted into Public Assemblies.

A prodigal Man must be, greedy because he thinks he can never spend enough.

The Wretch must be so, because he will never think he can hoard enough.

The World first admireth Men's Wisdom for getting Money, and then raileth at
them if they do not throw it away? so that the Prodigal Man is only the less
unpopular Extreme; he is every jot as well prepared as the Miser to fall out
with his Morals, when once a good Temptation is offered him to lay them aside.

On the other side, some Rich Men are as eager to overtake those that are
Richer, as a Running horse is to get to the Race-post, before the other that
contendeth with him.

Men often desire to heap, rather because others have more, than that they know
what to do with that which they covet with so much Impatience.

So that it is plain, the Fancy has as great a share in this imaginary
Pleasure of Gathering as it has in Love, Ambition, or any other Passion.

It is pretty sure, that as no Man was ever the Richer for having a good
Estate, if he did not look after it; so neither will he be the Honester if he
has never so much.

Want of care will always create want of Money; so that whether a Man is a
beggar because he never had any Money, or because he can never keep any, it is
all one to those who are to trust him.

Upon this head of Prodigality, it may be no unreasonable Caution to be afraid
of those who in former Service have, been extravagantly Liberal of the Public
Money.

Trusting is so hazardous a thing, that it should never be done but where it is
necessary; so that when Trustees are found upon Trial to be very Lavish, even
without examining into the Causes of it, (which are generally very suspicious)
it is a reasonable part of preventing Wit to change Hands, or else the Chusers
will pay the Penalty that belongs to good Nature so misplaced, and the
Consequences will be attended with the Aggravation of their not being made
Wiser by such a severe and costly warning.

XIII. It would be of very great use to take a general Resolution throughout
the Kingdom, That none should be chosen for a County but such as have either in
Possession, or Reversion, a considerable Estate in it; nor for a Borough,
except he be Resiant, or that he has some Estate in the County, in present or
Expectancy.

There have been Eminent Men of Law who were of opinion, That in the Case of a
Burgess of a Town not Resiant, the Court is to give Judgment according to the
Statute, notwithstanding Custom to the contrary.

But not to insist now upon that, the prudential part is Argument enough to set
up a Rule to abrogate an ill Custom.

There is not, perhaps, a greater Cause of the Corruption of Parliaments, than
by adopting Members, who may be said to have no title by their Births.

The Juries are by the Law to be Exvicineto; And shall there be less care that
the Representatives of the People be so too?

Sure the Interest of the County is best placed in the hands of such as have
some share in it.

The Outliers are not so easily kept within the pale of the Laws.

They are often chosen without being known, which is more like choosing
Valentines, than Members of Parliament. The Motive of their standing is more
justly to be supposed, that they may redress their own Grievances which they
know, than those of the Country, to which they are strangers.

They are chosen at London to serve in Cornwall, etc. and are often Parties,
before they come to be Representatives: One would think the Reproach it is for
a County not to have Men within their own Circle to serve them in Parliament,
should be Argument enough to reject these Trespassers, without urging the ill
Consequences in other Respects of their being admitted.

XIV. As in some Cases it is advisable to give a total exclusion to Men not
fitly qualified; so in others it is more proper to lay down a general Rule of
Caution, with allowance of some Exceptions, where Men have given such proofs of
themselves, as create a Right for them to be distinguished.

Of this nature is that which I shall say concerning Lawyers, who, by the same
Reason that they may be useful, may be also very dangerous.

The Negligence, and want of Application in Gentlemen, has made them to be
thought more necessary than naturally they are in Parliament.

They have not only engrossed the Chair of the Speaker, but that of a Committee
is hardly thought to be well filled, except it be by a Man of the Robe.

This makes it worthy of the more serious reflection of all Gentlemen, that it
may be an Argument to them to quailfy themselves in Parliamentary Learning, in
such a manner, as that they may rely upon their own Abilities, in order to the
serving their Country.

But to come to the point in question; It is not without Precedent, that
Practising-Lawyers have been excluded from serving in Parliament; and, without
following those Patterns strictly, I cannot but think it reasonable, that
whilst a Parliament sits, no Member of Parliament should plead at any Bar.

The Reason of it is in many respects strong in it self, and is grown much
stronger by the long sitting of Parliaments of late; but I will not dwell upon
this: The matter now in question being concerning Lawyers being Elected, which
I conceive should be done with so much circumspection, that probably it would
not often happen.

If Lawyers have great Practice, that ought to take them up; if not, it is no
great sign of their Ability; and at the same time gives a suspicion, that they
may be more liable to be tempted.

If it should be so in Fact, That no King ever wanted Judges to soften the
stiffness of the Laws that were made, so as to make them suit better with the
Reason of State, and the Convenience of the Government; it is no Injury now to
suppose it possible for Lawyers in the House of Commons, so to behave
themselves in the making of New Laws, as the better to make way for the having
their Robes lined with Fur.

They are Men used to argue on both sides of a Question; And if ordinary Fees
can inspire them with very good Reasons in a very ill Cause, that Faculty
exercised in Parliaments, where it may be better encouraged, may prove very
inconvenient to those that choose them.

And therefore, without arraigning a Profession, that it would be scandalous
for a man not to honor; one may, by a Suspicion, which is the more excusable
when it is in the behalf of the People, imagine that the habit of taking Money
for their Opinion, may create in some such a forgetfulness to distinguish, that
they may take it for their Vote.

They are generally Men who by a laborious study hope to be advanced: They have
it in their Eye as a Reward for the Toil they undergo.

This makes them generally very slow, and ill disposed (let the Occasion never
so much require it) to wrestle with that Soil where Preferment grows.

Now if the Supposition be in its self not unreasonable, and that it should
happen to be strengthened and confirmed by Experience it will be very
unnecessary to say any more upon this Article, but leave it to the Electors to
consider of it.

XV. I cannot forbear to put in a Caveat against Men tied to a Party.

There must in every body be a Leaning to that sort of Men who profess some
Principles, more than to others who go upon a different Foundation; but when a
man is drowned in a Party, plunged in it beyond his depth, he runs a great
hazard of being upon ill terms with good Sense, or Morality, if not with both
of them.

Such a man can hardly be called a Free-Agent and for that reason is very unfit
to be trusted with the Peoples Liberty, after he has given up his own.

It is said, That in some part of the Indies they do so affect little Feet,
that they keep them squeezed while they are Children, so that they stay at that
small size after they are grown Men.

One may say something like this of Men locked up in a Party; They put their
Thoughts into such a Narrow Mould, that they can never be enlarged nor released
from their first Confinements.

Men in a Party have Liberty only for their Motto; in reality they are greater
Slaves than any body else would care to make them.

A Party, even in times of Peace, (tho against the Original Contract, and the
Bill of Rights) sets up and continues the exercise of Martial Law: Once
enrolled, the Man that quitteth, if they had their will, would be hanged for a
Deserter.

They communicate Anger to one another by Contagion: And it may be said, that
if too much Light dazzleth the Eyesight, too much Heat does not less weaken the
Judgment.

Heat reigns in the Fancy; and Reason, which is a colder Faculty of the
Brain, takes more time to be heard, than the other will allow.

The Heat of a Party is like the Burning of a Fever; and not a Natural Warmth,
evenly distributed to give Life and Vigor.

There was a time indeed when Anger showed a good sign of Honesty; but that
Evidence is very much weakened by Instances we have seen since the Days of Yore:
And the Public spirited Choler has been thrown off within time of Memory, and
lost almost all its Credit with some People, since they found what Governments
thought fit to make their so doing a step to their preferment.

A strong blustering Wind seldom continues long in one Corner.

Some men knock loud only to be let in; the Bustle they make is animated by
their private Interest. The outward Blaze only is for Religion and Liberty: The
true lasting Fire, like that of the Vestals which never went out, is an
eagerness to get somewhat for themselves.

A House of Commons composed of such Men, would be more properly so many
Merchants incorporated in a Regular Company, to make their particular
Adventures, than Men sent from the People to serve and represent them.

There are some Splenetick Gentlemen who confine their favorable Opinion
within so narrow a compass, that they will not allow it to any man that was not
hanged in the late Reigns.

Now by that rule one might expect they should rescue themselves from the
disadvantage of being now alive; and by abdicating a World so little worthy of
them, get a great Name to themselves, with the general satisfaction of all
those they would leave behind them.

Amongst the many other ill consequences of a stated Party, it is none of the
least, that it tempts low and insignificant men to come upon the Stage, to
expose themselves, and to spoil Business.

It turns a Cipher into a Figure, such a one as it is: A man in a Party is
able to make a noise, let it be never so empty a sound.

A weak man is easily blown out of his small senses, by being mustered into a
Party; he is flattered till he likes himself so well, that he takes it
extremely ill if he has not an Employment.

Nothing is more in fashion, than for men to desire good Places, and I doubt
nothing is less so than to deserve them.

From Nobody to somebody is such a violent stride, that Nature, which has the
Negative Voice, will not give its Royal Assent to it: So that when insufficient
Men aim at being in business, the worst of their Enemies might out of malice to
them, pray for their Preferment.

There could be no end, if one did not stop till this Theme had no more matter
to furnish. I will only say, Nothing is more evident, than that the Good of the
Nation has been sacrificed to the Animosities of the several Contending
Parties; and without entering into the dispute which of them are more or less in
the right, it is pretty sure, that whilst these Opposite Sets of Angry Men are
playing at Football, they will break all the Windows, and do more hurt than
their pretended Zeal for the Nation will ever make amends for.

In short, a man so engaged is retained before the people take him for their
Council; he has such a Reverse for his Party, that it is not advisable for
those who would choose him, to depend upon his Professions. All Parties assuming
such a Dispensing Power, that by their Sovereign Authority they cancel and
dissolve any Act or Promise that they do not afterward approve.

These things considered, those who will choose such men deserve whatever
follows.

XVI. Pretenders to Exorbitant Merit in the late Revolution, are not without
Objections against them, when they stand to serve in Parliament. It would not
only be a low, but a Criminal kind of Envy, to deny a distinguishing Justice to
Men who have been instrumental and active, when the Service of their Country
required it. But there ought to be Moderation in men's Claims, or else it is
out of the Power of our poor Island to satisfy them. It is true, Service of all
kinds is grown much dearer, like Labourer's Wages, which formerly occasioned
several Statutes to regulate them.

But now the men who only carried Mortar to the Building, when it is finished,
think they are ill dealt with if they are not made Master-Workmen.

They presently cry out, The Original Contract is broken, if their Merit is not
rewarded, at their own Rate too.

Some will think there never ought to be an end of their Rewards; when
indifferent Judges would perhaps be puzzled to find out the beginning of their
Merit.

They bring in such large Bills, that they must be examined: Some bounds must
be put to men's Pretensions; else the Nation, which is to pay the Reckoning,
will every way think it a scurvy thing to be undone, whether it be by being
overrun by our Enemies, or by the being, exhausted by our Friends.

There ought therefore to be deductions where they are reasonable, the better
to justify the paying what remains.

For example, if any of these passionate Lovers of the Protestant Religion
should not think fit, in their manner of Living, to give the least evidence of
their Morality, their claims upon that Head might sure be struck off without
any Injustice to them.

If there are any who set down great Sums as a Reward due to their Zeal for
rescuing Property from the Jaws of Arbitrary Power; their pretensions may
fairly be rejected, if now they are so far from showing a care and tenderness
of the Laws, that they look rather like Council retained on the other side.

It is no less strange, than I doubt it is true, that some Men should be so in
Love with their dear Mistress, Old England, with all her Wrinkles, as out of an
Heroic Passion to Swim over to rescue her from being Ravished; and when they
have done the Feat, the first thing after Enjoyment is, that they go about to
Strangle her.

For the sake of true Love, it is not sit that such ungentile Gallants should
be too much encouraged; and their Arrogance for having done well at first, will
have no right to be excused, if their so doing ill at last does not make them a
little more modest.

True Merit, like a River, the deeper it is the less noise it makes.

These loud proclaimers of their own Deserts, are not only to be suspected for
their truth, but the Electors are to consider that such meritorious Men lay an
assessment upon those that Choose them.

The Public Taxes are already heavy enough without the addition of these
private Reckonings. It is therefore the safer way not to employ Men, who will
expect more for their Wages, than the mistaken Borough that sends them up to
Parliament could be sold for.

XVII. With all due regard to the noblest of Callings, Military Officers are
out of their true Element when they are misplaced in a House of Commons.

Things in this World ought to be well suited. There are some Appearances so
unnatural, that men are convinced by them without any other Argument.

The very Habit in some Cases, recommendeth or gives Offense.

If the Judges upon the Bench should, instead of their Furrs, which signify
Gravity, and bespeak Respect, be Clothed like the Jockeys at New Market, or
wear Jack-Boots and Steenkirks; they would not in reality have less Law, but
Mankind would be so struck with this unusual Object, that it would be a great
while before they could think it possible to receive Justice from Men so
Accouter'd.

It is to some degree the same thing in this Case; such Martial Habits,
Blue-Coats, Red Stockings, etc. make them look very unlike Grave Senators. One
would almost swear they were Creatures apart, and of a differing Species from
the rest of the Body.

In former times, when only the Resiant Shopkeeper was to Represent his
Corporation (which by the way is the Law still at this day) the Military Looks
of one of these Sons of Mars, would have stared the Quaking Member down again
to his Borough.

Now the number of them is so increased, that the Peaceable part of the House
may lawfully swear they are in fear of their Lives, from such an Awful
Appearance of Men of War.

It makes the Room look like a Guardhouse by such an ill-suited mixture. But
this is only the outside, the bark of the Argument; the root goes yet deeper
against Choosing such Men, whose Talents ought to be otherwise applied.

Their Two Capacities are so inconsistent, that Men's undertaking to serve both
the Cures, will be the cause in a little time, that we shall neither have Men
of War, nor Men of Business, good in their several kinds.

An Officer is to give up his Liberty to obey Orders; and it is necessarily
incident to his Calling that he should do so.

A Member of Parliament is originally to be tender of his own Liberty, that
other Men may the better trust him with theirs.

An Officer is to enable himself by his Courage, improved by Skill and
Experience, to support the Laws (if Invaded) when they are made; but he is not
supposed to be at leisure enough to understand how they should be made.

A Member of Parliament is to fill his thoughts with what may best conduce to
the Civil Administration; which is enough to take up the whole Man, let him be
never so much raised above the ordinary Level.

These two opposite Qualifications, being placed in one Man, make him such an
ambiguous divided Creature, that he does not know how to move.

It is best to keep Men within their proper Sphere; few Men have Understanding
enough exactly to fill even one narrow Circle, fewer are able to fill two;
especially when they are both of so great compass, and that they are so
contrary in their own Natures.

The Wages he has as a Member, and those he receives as an Officer, are paid
for Services that are very differing; and in the doubt which of them should be
preferrably performed, it is likely the greater Salary may direct him, without
the further inducements of complying most, where he may expect most advantage
by it.

In short, if his dependence is not very great, it will make him a scurvy
Officer; if it is great, it will make him a scurvier Member.

XVIII. Men under the scandal of being thought private Pensioners, are too fair
a mark to escape being considered, in reference to the point in Question.

In case of plain Evidence, it is not to be supposed possible, that Men
convicted of such a Crime should ever again be Elected.

The difficulty is in determining what is to be done in case of suspicion.

There are suspicions so well grounded, that they may pretend to have the force
of proofs, provided the penalty goes only to the forbearing to Trust, but not
extending it so far as to Punish.

There must be some things plain and express to justify the latter, but
Circumstances may be sufficient for the former: As where Men have had such
sudden Cures of their ill Humors, and opposition to the Court, that it is out
of the way of ordinary methods of recovery from such Distempers, which have a
much slower progress; it must naturally be imputed to some Specific that
makes such a quick alteration of the whole Mass of Blood.

Where Men have raised their way of Living, without any visible means to
support them in it, a suspicion is justified, even by the Example of the Law,
which in cases of this kind, though of an inferior nature, does upon this
foundation not only raise Inferences, but inflict Punishments.

Where Men are immoral, and scandalous in their Lives, and dispense familiarly
with the Rules by which the World is Governed, for the better preserving the
bonds of human Society; it must be a confidence very ill placed, to conclude it
impossible for such Men to yield to a Temptation well offered and pursued;
when, the truth is the habit of such Bons vivants, which is the fashionable
word, makes a suspicion so likely, that it is very hard not to believe it to
be true.

If there should be nothing but the general Report, even that is not to be
neglected.

Common Fame is the only Liar that deserves to have some Respect still
reserved to it; tho she tells many an Untruth, she often hits right, and most
especially when she speaks ill of men.

Her Credit has sometimes been carried too far, when it has gone to the
divesting men of any thing of which they were possessed, without more express
evidence to justify such a proceeding.

If there was a doubt whether there ever was any Corruption of this kind it
would alter the Question; but sure that will not bear the being controverted.

We are told; That Charles the Fifth sent over into England 1200000 Crowns to
be distributed amongst the Leading Men, to encourage them to carry on Elections.

Here was the Protestant Religion to be bought out for a valuable Consideration
according to Law, though not according to Gospel, which exalts it above any
Price that can be set upon it.

Now, except we had reason to believe that the Virtue of the World is improved
since that time, we can as little doubt that such Temptations may be offered,
as that they may be received.

It will be owed, that there is to be a great tenderness in Suspecting; but it
must be allowed at the same time, that there ought not to be lest in Trusting,
where the People are so much concerned; especially, when the Penalty upon the
Party suspected goes no further than a Suspension of that Confidence, which it
is necessary to have in those who are to represent the Nation in Parliament.

I cannot omit the giving a Caution against admitting Men to be chosen, who
have Places of any value.

There needs the less to be said upon this Article, the truth of the
Proposition being supported by such plain Argumen^s.

Sure no Man has such a plentiful spring of Thought, as that all that flows
from it is too much to be appled to the Business of Parliament.

It is not less sure, that a Member of Parliament, of all others, ought not to
be exempted from the Rule, That no Man should serve two Masters.

It does so split a Man's Thoughts, that no Man can know how to make a fitting
Distribution of them to two such differing Capacities.

It exposes Men to be suspected, and tempted, more than is convenient for the
Public Service, or for the mutual good Opinion of one another, which their
ought to be in such an Assembly.

It either gives a real dependence upon the Government, which is inconsistent
with the necessity there is, that a Member of Parliament should be disengaged,
or at least it has the appearance of it, which makes them not look like
Freemen, though they should have virtue enough to be be so.

More Reasons would lessen the Weight of this last, which is, That a Bill to
this effect, commonly called the Self-Denying Bill, passed even this last House
of Commons.

A greater Demonstration of the irresistible strength of Truth cannot possibly
be given; so that a Copy of that Bill in every County or Borough, would hardly
fail of discouraging such Pretenders from Standing, or at least it would
prevent their Success if their own Modesty should not restrain them from
attempting it.

XX. If Distinctions may be made upon upon particular Men, or Remarks fixed
upon their Votes in Parliament, they must be allowed in relation to those
Gentlemen, who for Reasons best known to themselves thought fit to be against
the Triennial Bill.

The Liberty of Opinion is the thing in the World that ought least to be
controlled, and especially in Parliament.

But as that is an undoubted Assertion, it is not less so, That when Men Sin
against their own Light, give a Vote against their own Thought, they must not
plead Privilege of Parliament against the being arraigned for it by others,
after they are Convicted of it by themselves.

There cannot be a Man* who in his Definition of a House of Commons, will state
it to be an Assembly, that for the better redressing of Grievances the People
feel, and for the better furnishing such Supplies as they can bear, is to
continue, if the King so pleases, for his whole Reign.

This could be as little intended, as to throw all into one Hand, and to
renounce the Claim to any Liberty, but so much as the Sovereign Authority would
allow.

It destroys the end of Parliaments, it makes use of the Letter of the Law
to extinguish the Life of it.

It is, in truth, some kind of Disparagement to so plain a thing, that so much
has been said and written upon it; and one may say, It is such an Affront to
these Gentlemen's Understandings to censure this Vote only as a Mistake, that,
as the Age goes, it is less Discredit to them to call it by its right Name;
and if that is rightly understood by those who are to choose them, I suppose
they will let them exercise their Liberty of Conscience at home, and not make
Men their Trustees, who in this Solemn Instance have such an unwillingness to
surrender.

It must be owned, That this Bill has met with very hard Fortune, and yet that
does not in the least diminish the value of it.

It had in it such a Root of Life, that it might be said, It was not Dead but
Sleeped; and we see that the last Session, it was revived and animated by the
Royal Assent, when once fully informed of the Consequences, as well as of the
Justice of it.

In the mean time, after having told my Opinion, Who ought not to be Chosen:

If I should be asked, Who ought to be, my Answer must be, choose Englishmen;
and when I have said that, to deal honestly, I will not undertake that they are
easy to be found.

A Rough Draught OF A NEW MODEL AT SEA, 1694.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

A Rough Draught OF A NEW MODEL AT SEA, 1694.
I Will make no other Introduction to the following Discourse, than that as the
Importance of our being strong at Sea, was ever very great, so in our present
Circumstances it is grown to be much greater; because, as formerly our Force of
Shipping contributed greatly to our Trade and Safety. So, now it is become
indispensibly necessary to our very Being.

It may be said now to England, Martha, Martha, thou art busy about many
things, but one thing is necessary to the Question, What shall we do to be
saved in this World? There is no other Answer but this, Look to your Moate.

The first Article of an English-mans Political Creed must be, That he
believes in the Sea, etc. without that there needed no General Council to
pronounce him capable of Salvation here.

We are in an Island confined to it by God Almighty, not as a Penalty but a
Grace, and one of the greatest that can be given to Mankind. Happy Confinement
that has made us Free, Rich, and Quiet; a fair Portion in this World, and very
well worth the preserving, a Figure that ever has been envied, and could never
be imitated by our Neighbors. Our Situation has made Greatness abroad by Land
Conquests unnatural things to us. It is true, we made Excursions, and glorious
ones too, which make our Names great in History, but they did not last.

Admit the English to be Giants in Courage, yet they must not hope to succeed
in making War against Heaven, which seems to have enjoined them to acquiesce
in being happy within their own Circle. It is no Paradox to say, that England
has its Root in the Sea, and a deep one too, from whence it sends its
Branches into both the Indies. We may say further in our present Case, That if
Allegiance is due to Protection, ours to the Sea is due from that Rule, since
by that, and by that alone, we are to be protected; and if we have of late
suffered Usurpation of other Methods, contrary to the Homage we owe to that
which must preserve us. It is time now to restore the Sea to its right; and as
there is no Repentance effectual without Amendment, so there is not a moment to
be lost in their going about it.

It is not pretended to launch into such a Voluminous Treatise, as to set down
every thing to which so comprehensive a Subject might lead me; for as the Sea
has little less variety in it than the Land; so the Naval Force of England
extends it self into a great many Branches, each of which are important
enough to require a Discourse apart, and peculiarly applied to it: But there
must be preference to some Consideration above others, when the weight of them
is so visibly Superior that it cannot be contested. It is there, first, that
the Foundations are to be laid of our Naval Economy; amongst these, there is
one Article which in its own Nature must be allowed to be the Cornerstone of
the Building.

The Choice of Officers, with the Discipline and Encouragement belonging to
them. Upon this Head only, I shall then take the liberty to venture my Opinion
into the World, with a real Submission to those, who may offer any think better
for the advantage of the Public.

The first Question then will be, Out of what sort of Men the Officers of the
Fleet are to be chosen; and this immediately leads us to the present
Controversy between the Gentlemen and the Tarpaulins.

The usual Objection on both sides are too general to be relied upon.
Partiality and Common Prejudices direct most Men's Opinions, without entering
into the particular Reasons which ought to be the ground of it. There is so
much ease in aquiescing in Generals, that the Ignorance of those who cannot
distinguish, and the Largeness of those who will not, makes Men very apt to
decline the trouble of stricter Enquiries, which they think too great a price
for being in the right, let it be never so valuable.

This makes them judge in the Lump, and either let their Opinions swim along
with the Stream of the World, or give them up wholly to be directed by Success.
The effect of this is, that they change their Minds upon every present
uneasiness, wanting a steady Foundation upon which their Judgment should be
formed. This is a pearching upon the Twigs of things, and not going to the
Root. But sure the Matter in question deserves to be examined in another
manner, since so much depends upon it.

To state the thing impartially, it must be owned that it seems to lie
fairest for the Tarpaulin: It gives an Impression that must have so much
weight as to make a Man's Opinion lean very much on that side, it carries so
much Authority with it, it seems to be so unquestionable, that those are
fittest to Command at Sea, who have not only made it their Calling, but their
Element; that there must naturally be a prejudice to any thing then can be said
against it. There must therefore be some Reason extraordinary to support the
Argument on the other side, or else the Gentlemen could never enter the Lists
against such a violent Objection, which seems not to be resisted. I will
introduce my Argument with an Assertion, which as I take to be true almost in
all Cases, so it is necessary to be explained and enforced in this. The
Assertion is, that there is hardly a single Proposition to be made, which is
not deceitful, and the tying our Reason too close to it, may in many Cases be
destructive. Circumstances must come in, and are to be made a part of the
Matter of which we are to judge; positive Decisions are always dangerous, more
especially in Politics. A Man, who will be Master of an Argument, must do like
a skilful General, who sends Scouts on all sides, to see whether there may
not be an Enemy. So he must look round to see what Objections can be made, and
not go on in a straight Line, which in the ready way to lead him into a mistake.

Before then, that we conclude what sort of Men are fittest to Command at Sea,
a Principle is to be laid down, that there is a differing Consideration to be
had of such a Subject Matter, as is in it self distinct and independent, and of
such a one as being a Limb of a Body, or a Wheel of a Frame, there is a
necessity of suiting it to the rest, and preserving the Harmony of the whole. A
Man must not in that Case restrain himself to the separate Consideration of
that single Part, but must take care it may fall in and agree with the Shape of
the whole Creature, of which it is a Member. According to this Proposition,
which I take to be indisputable, it will not I hope appear an Affectation, or
an extravagant Fit of unseasonable Politics, if, before I enter into the
particular State of the present Question, I say something of the Government of
England, and make that the Groundwork of what sort of Men are most proper to
be made use of to Command at Sea.

The Forms of Government to which England must be subjected, are either
Absolute Monarchy, a Commonwealth, or a Mixed Monarchy, as it is now; with those
natural Alterations that the Exegency of Affairs may from time to time suggest.
As to Absolute Monarchy I will not allow my self to be transported into such
Invectives, as are generally made.against it; neither am I ready to enter into
the aggrevating Style of calling every thing Slavery, that restrains Men in
any part of their Freedom: One may discern in this, as in most other things,
the good and bad of it. We see by too near an Istance, what Fra^^e does by it;
it does not only struggle with the rest of Christendom; but is in a fair way of
giving Law to it.

This is owing in great Measure to a Despotick and Undivided Power; the
uncontrollable Authority of the Directive Councils makes every thing move
without Disorder or Opposition, which must give an advantage, that is plain
enough of it self, without being proved by the melancholy Experience we have
of it at this time.

I see and admire this; yet I consider at the same time, that all things of
this kind are comparative: That as on one side, without Government Men cannot
enjoy what belongs to them in particular, nor can a Nation be secure, or
preserve it self in general: So on the other side, the end of Government being,
that Mankind should live in some competent State of Freedom, it is very
unnatural to have the End destroyed by the Means that were originally made use
of to attain it. In this respect something is to be ventured, rather than
submit to such a precarious State of Life, as would make it a Burden to a
reasonable Creature; and therefore, after I have owned the Advantages in some
kind of an unlimitted Government; yet, while they are attended with so many
other discouraging Circumstances, I cannot think but that they may be bought
too dear; and if it should be so, that it is not possible for a State to be
Great and Glorious, unless the Subjects are wretchedly Miserable. I am ashamed
to own my low-spirited frailty in preferring such a Model of Government, as may
agree with the reasonable Enjoyment of a Free People, before such a one, by
which Empire is to be extended at such an unnatural Price. Besides whatever
Men's Opinions may be one way or another, in the general Question, there is an
Argument in our Case that shuts the Door to any Answer to it. ( Viz.) We
cannot subsist under a Despotick Power, our very Being would be destroyed by
it; for we are to consider, we are a very little Spot in the Map of the World,
and make a great Figure only by Trade, which is the Creature of Liberty; one
destroyed, the other falls to the Ground by a natural Consequence, that will
not admit a dispute. If we would be measured by our Acres, we are poor
inconsiderable People; we are exalted above our natural Bounds, by our good
Laws, and our excellent Constitution. By this we are not only happy at Home,
but considerable Abroad. Our Situation, our Humor, our Trade, do all concur to
strengthen this Argument. So that all other Reasons must give place to such a
one as makes it out, that there is no Mean between a Free Nation and No Nation.

We are no more a People, nor England can no longer keep its Name from the
moment that our Liberties are extinguished; the Vital Strength that should
support us being withdrawn, we should then be no more than the Carcass of a
Nation, with no other Security than that of Contempt; and to subsist upon no
other Tenure, than that we should be below the giving Temptation to our
stronger Neighbors to devour us. In my Judgment, therefore, there is such
a.short Decision to be made upon this Subject, that in Relation to England, an
Absolute Monarchy is as an unreasonable thing to be wished, as I hope it will
be impossible to be obtained.

It must be considered in the next place, whether England likely is to be
turned into a Commonwealth. It is hard at any time to determine what will be
the Shape of the next Revolution, much more at this time would it be
inexcusably Arrogant to undertake it. Who can foresee whether it will be from
without, or from within, or from both? Whether with or without the Concurrence
of the People? Whether regularly produced, or violently imposed? I shall not
therefore Magisterially declare it impossible that a Commonwealth should be
settled here; but I may give my humble Opinion, that according to all
appearances, it is very improbable.

I will first lay it down for a Principle, That it is not a sound way of
arguing, to say, That if it can be made out, that the Form of a Commonwealth
will best suit with the Interest of the Nation, it must for that reason of
necessity prevail.

I will not deny but that Interest will not lie, is a right Maxim, wherever
it is sure to be understood; else one had as good affirm, That no Man in
particular, nor Mankind in general, can ever be mistaken. A Nation is a great
while before they can see, and generally they must feel first before their
Sight is quite cleared. This makes it so long before they can see their
Interest; that for the most part it is too late for them to pursue it: If Men
must be supposed always to follow their true Interest, it must be meant of a
New Manufactory of Mankind by God Almighty; there must be some new Clay, the
old Stuff never yet made any such infallible Creature.

This being premised, it is to be inquired, Whether instead of inclination, or
a leaning toward a Commonwealth, there is not in England a general dislike to
it; if this be so as I take it to be, by a very great disparity in Numbers; it
will be in vain to dispute the Reason, whilst Humor is against it, allowing
the weight that is due to the Argument, which may be alleged for it; yet, if
the Herd is against it, the going about to convince them, would have no other
effect than to show that nothing can be more impertinent than good Reasons,
when they are misplaced or ill-timed.

I must observe, That there must be some previous Dispositions in all great
Changes to facilitate and to make way for them: I think it not at all absurd,
I affirm That such Resolutions are seldem made at all, except by the general
Preparations of Men's Minds they are half made before, and it is plainly
visible, that Men go about them.

Though it seems to me that the Argument alone makes all others unnecessary,
yet I must take notice that* besides what has been said upon this Subject,
there are certain Preliminaries to the first building a Commonwealth. Some
Materials absolutely necessary for the carrying on such a Fabick, which at
present are wanting amongst us, I mean Virtue, Morality, Diligence, or at least
Hypocrisy. Now this Age is so plain dealing, as not to dissemble so far as to
an outward* Pretense of Qualities which seem at present so Unfashionable, and
under so much Discountenance.

From hence we may draw a plain and natural Inference, That a Commonwealth is
not fit for us, because we are not fit for a Commonwealth.

This being granted, the Supposition of this Form of Government of England,
with all its Consequences as to the present Question, must be excluded; and
Absolute Monarchy having been so too by the Reasons at once alleged, it will
without further Examination fall to a Mixed Government, as we now are. I will
not say, that there is never to be any Alteration; the Constitution of the
several Parts that concur to make up the Frame of the present Government, may
be altered in many things, in some for the better, and in others, perhaps for
the worse, according as Circumstances shall arise to induce a Change; and as
Passion and Interest shall have more or less Influence upon the Public
Councils; but still, if it remains in the whole so far a a mixed Monarchy,
that there shall be a restraint upon the Prince, as to the Exercise of a
Despotick Power, it is enough to make it a Groundwork for the present Question.
It appears then that a bounded Monarchy is that kind of Government which will
most probably prevail and continue in England; from whence it must follow (as
has been hinted before) that every considerable Part ought to be so composed,
as the better to conduce to the preserving the Harmony of the whole
Constitution. The Navy is of so great Importance, that it would be disparaged
by calling it less than the Life and Soul of Government.

Therefore to apply the Argument to the Subject we are upon; in case the
Officers be all Tarpaulins, it would be in reality too great a tendency to a
Commonwealth; such a part of the Constitution being Democratically disposed may
be suspected to endeavor to bring it into that Shape; where the influence must
be so strong, and the Supposition will be the more justifiable. In short, if
the Maritim Force, which is the only thing that can defend us, should be wholly
directed by the lower sort of Men, with an entire Exclusion of the Nobility and
Gentry; it will not be easy to answer the Arguments supported by so great a
probability, that such a Scheme would not only lean toward a Domocracy, but
directly lead us into it.

Let us now examine the contrary Proposition, ( viz.) that all Officers should
be Gentlemen.

Here the Objection lierh so fair of its introducing an Arbitrary Government,
that it as little to be answered in that respect, as the former is in the
other. Gentlemen in a general Definition, will be suspected to lie more than
other Men, under the Temptations of being made Instruments of unlimitted Power;
their Relations, their Way of Living, their Taste of the Entertainments of the
Court, inspire an Ambition that generally draws their Inclinations toward it,
besides the gratifying of their Interests. Men of Quality are often taken with
the Ornaments of Government, the Splendour dazleth them so, as that their
Judgments are surprised by it; and there will be always some that have so
little remorse for invading other Men's Liberties, that it makes them less
solicitous to preserve their own.

These things throw them naturally into such a dependence as might give a
dangerous Biass; if they alone were in Command at Sea, it would make that great
Wheel turn by an irregular Motion, and instead of being the chief means of
preserving the whole Frame, might come to be the chief Instruments to
discompose and dissolve it.

The two further exclusive Propositions being necessarily to be excluded in
this Question, there remains no other Expedient; neither can any other
Conclusion be drawn from the Argument as it has been stated, than that there
must be a mixture in the Navy of Gentlemen and Tarpaulins, as there is in the
Constition of the Government, of Power and Liberty. This Mixture is not to be
so rigorously defined, as to set down the exact Proportion there is to be of
each; the greater or lesser Number must be directed by Circumstances, of which
the Government is to Judge, and which makes it improper to set such Rounds, as
that upon no occasion it shall on either side be lessened or enlarged. It is
possible the Men of Wapping may think they are injured, by giving them any
Partners in the Dominion of the Sea; they may take it unkindly to be jostled in
their own Element by Men of such a different Education, that they may be said
to be of another Species; they will be apt to think it an Usurpation upon them,
and notwithstanding the Instances that are against them, and which give a kind
of Prescription on the other side, they will not easily acquiesce in what they
conceive to be a hardship to them.

But I shall in a good measure reconcile my self to them by what follows; (
viz.) The Gentlemen shall not be capable of bearing Office at Sea, except they
be Tarpaulins to; that is to say, except they are so trained up by a continued
habit of living at Sea, that they may have a Right to be admitted free Denizens
of Wapping Upon this depends the whole Matter; and indeed here lies the
difficulty, because the Gentlemen brought up under the Connivance of a looser
Discipline, and of an easier admittance, will take it heavily to be reduced
within the Fetters of such a New Model; and I conclude, they will be extremely
averse to that which they call an unreasonable Yoke upon them, that their
Original Consent is never to be expected. But if it appears to be convenient,
and which is more, that it is necessary for the Preservation of the whole, that
it should be so; the Government must be called in Aid to suppress these first
Boilings of Discontent; the Rules must be imposed with such Authority, and the
Execution of them must be so well supported, that by degrees their Impatience
will be subdued, and they will concu^ in an Establishment to which they will
every day be more reconciled.

They will find it will take away the Objections which are now thrown upon
them, of setting up for Masters, without having even been Apprentices; or at
least, without having served out their Time.

Mankind naturally swells against Favor and Partiality; their belief of
their own Merit makes Men object them to a prosperous Competitor, even when
there is no pretense for it; but when there is the least handle offered, to be
sure it will be taken. So, in this Case, when a Gentleman is preferred at Sea,
the Tarpaulin is very apt to impute it to Friend or Favor: But if that
Gentleman has before his Preferment passed through all the Steps which lead to
it, that he smells as much of Pitch and Tar, as those that were Swadled in
Sail-Cloath; his having an Escutcheon will be so far from doing him harm, that
it will set him upon the advantage Ground: It will draw a real Respect to his
Quality when so supported, and give him an Influence, and and Authority
infinitely superior to that which the mere Sea men can ever pretend to.

When a Gentleman has learned how to Obey, he will grow very much fitter to
Command; his own Memory will advise him not to inflict too rigorous
Punishments. He will better resist the Temptations of Authority (which are
great) when he reflecteth how much he has at other times wished it might be
gently exercised, when he was liable to the Rigor of it.

When the undistinguished Discipline of a Ship has tamed the young Mastership,
which is apt to arise from a Gentleman's, Birth and Education. He then grows
Proud in the right place, and valueth himself first upon knowing his Duty, and
then upon doing it.

In plain English, Men of Quality in their several Degrees must either restore
themselves to a better Opinion, both for Morality and Diligence, or else
Quality it self will be in danger of being extinguished.

The Original Gentleman is almost lost in strictness, when Posterity does not
still further adorn by their Virtue. The Escutcheon their Ancestors first got
for them by their Merit, they deserve the Penalty of being deprived of it.

To expect that Quality alone should waft Men up into Places and Employments,
is as unreasonable, as to think that a Ship, because it is Carved and Gilded,
should be fit to go to Sea without Sails or Tackling. But when a Gentleman
makes no other use of his Quality, than to incite him the more to his Duty, it
will give such a true and settled Superiority, as must destroy all Competition
from those that are below him.

It is time now to go to the Probationary Qualifications of an Officer at Sea:
And I have some to offer, which I have digested in my Thoughts, I hope
impartially, that they may not be Speculative Notions, but things easy and
practicable, if the directing Powers will give due Countenance and
Encouragement to the Execution of them: But whilst I am going about to set them
down, though this little Essay was made to no other End, than to introduce
them, I am upon better Recollection, induced to put a restraint upon my self,
and rather retract the Promise I made at the beginning, than by advising the
particular Methods, by which I conceive the good End that is aimed at may be
obtained, to incur the Imputation of the thing of the World, of which I would
least be guilty, which is of anticipating, by my private Opinion, the Judgment
of the Parliament, or seeming out of my slender Stock of Reason to dictate to
the Supreme Wisdom of the Nation. They will, no doubt, consider the present
Establishments for Discipline at Sea, which are many of them very good, and if
well executed, might go a great way in the present Question. But I will not say
they are so perfect, but that other may be added to make them more effectual,
and that some more Supplemental Expedients may be necessary to complete what is
yet defective: And whenever the Parliament shall think fit to take this Matter
into their Consideration, I am sure they will not want for their Direction, the
Auxiliary Reasons of any Man without Doors, muchless of one, whose Thoughts are
so entirely and unaffectedly resigned to whatever they shall determine in this,
or any thing else relating to the Public.

MAXIMS OF STATE.

By a late Person of Honor.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

MAXlMS OF STATE.
1. THAT a Prince who falls out with Laws, breaks with his best Friends.

2. That the exalting his own Authority above his Laws, is like letting in his
Enemy to surprise his Guards: The Laws are the only Guards he can be sure will
never run away from him.

3. A Prince that will say he can do no Good, except he may do every thing;
teaches the People to say, They are Slaves, if they must not do whatever they
have a mind to.

4. That Power and Liberty are like Heat and Moisture; where they are well
mixed* every thing prospers; where the are single, they are destructive.

5. That Arbitrary Power is like most other things, that are very hard, they
are also very apt to break.

6. That the profit of Places should be measured as they are more or less
conducing to the Public Service; and if Business is more necessary than
Splendour, the,Instrument of it ought in Proportion to be better paid; that the
contrary Method is as impertinent, as it would be to let the.Carving of a Ship
cost more than all the rest of it.

7. That where the least useful part of the People have the most Credit with
the Prince, Men will conclude, That the way to get every thing, is to be good
for nothing.

8. That an extravagant Gift to one Man, raises the Market to every body else;
so that in consequence, the unlimitted Bounty of an unthinking Prince makes
him a Beggar, let him have never so much Money.

9. That if ordinary Beggars are whipped, the daily Beggars in fine Clothes (out
of a proportionable Respect to their Quality) ought to be hanged.

10. That Pride is as loud a Beggar as Want, and a great deal more Saucy.

11. That a Prince, who will give more to Importunity than Merit, had as good
set out a Proclamation to all his Loving Subjects, forbidding them to do well,
upon the penalty of being undone by it.

12. That a wise Prince will not oblige his Courtiers, who are Birds of Prey,
so as to disoblige his People, who are Beast of Burden.

13. That it is safer for a Prince to Judge of Men by what they do to one
another, than that they do to him.

14. That it is a gross Mistake to think, That a Knave between Man and Man, can
be honest to a King, whom of all other Men generally they make the least
Scruple to deceive.

15. That a Prince who can ever trust the Man that has once deceived him,
loses the Right of being Faithfully dealt with by any other Person.

16. That it is not possible for a Prince to find out such an Honest Knave, as
will let no body else Cheat him.

17. That if a Prince does not show an Aversion to Knaves, there will be an
Inference that will be very Natural, let it be never so Unmannerly.

18. That a Prince who follows his own Opinion to soon, is in danger of
repenting it too late.

19. That it is less dangerous for a Prince to mind too much what the People
say, than too little.

20. That a Prince is to take care that the greater part of the People may not
be angry at the same time; for though the first beginning of their Ill Humor
should be against one another, yet if not stopped, it will naturally end in Anger
against him.

21. That if Princes would Reflect how much they are in the Power of their
Ministers, they would be more circumspect in the Choice of them.

22. That a wise Prince will support good Servants against Men's Anger, and not
support ill ones against their Complaint.

23. That Parties in a State generally, like Freebooters, hang out False
Colors; the pretense is the Public Good; the real Business is, to catch
Prizes; like the Tartars, wherever they succeed, instead of Improving their
Victory, they presently fall upon the Baggage.

24. That a Prince may play so long between Two Parties, that they may in time
join together, and be in earnest with him.

25. That there is more Dignity in open Violence, than in the unskilful Cunning
of a Prince, who goes about to Impose upon the People.

26. That the People will ever suspect the Remedies for the Diseases of the
State, where they are wholly excluded from seeing how they are prepared.

27. That changing Hands without changing Measures, is as if a Drunkard in a
Dropsey should change his Doctors, and not his Diet.

28. That a Prince is to watch that his Reason may not be so subdued by his
Nature, as not to be so much a Man of Peace, as to be just in an Army; nor so
much a Man of War, as to be out of his Element in his Counsel.

29. That a Man who cannot mind his own Business, is not to be trusted with the
King's.

30. That Quality alone should only serve to make a show in the Embroidered
Part of the Government; but that Ignorance, though never so well born, should
never be admitted to spoil the Public Business.

31. That he who thinks his Place below him, will certainly be below his Place.

32. That when Princes Examples cease to have the force of a Law, it is a
sure sign that his Power is wasting, and that there is but little distance
between Men's neglecting to Imitate, and their refusing (...) Obey.

33. That a People may let a King fall, yet still remain a People; but if a
King let his People slip from him* he is no longer King.

ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce the Death of the Ingenious Translator of these Essays, an imperfect
Transcript of the following Letter was intended for the Press, but having the
good fortune to meet with a more correct Copy, I thought my self under a
necessity of Publishing it with this Third Edition, not only to do Justice to
his Memory, but to the Great Person he Chose for his Patron.

M. G.

A Letter sent by his Lordship to Charles Cotton, Esquire upon his New Translation
and Dedication of Montaigne's Essays.
SIR.
I have too long delayed my Thanks to you for giving me such an obliging
Evidence of your Remembrance: That alone would have been a welcome Present, but
when joined with the Book in the World I am the best entertained with, it
raises a strong desire in me to be better known, where I am sure to be so much
pleased. I have till now thought Wit could not be Translated, and do still
retain so much of that Opinion, that I believe it impossible, except by one
whose Genius comes up to that of the Author. You have so kept the Original
Strength of his Thought, that it almost tempts a Man to believe the
Transmigration of Souls, and that his being used to Hills, is come into the
Moore-Lands to Reward us here in England, for doing him more Right than his
Country will afford him. He has by your means mended his First Edition: To
transplant and make him Ours, is not only a Valuable Acquisition to us, but a
Just Censure of the Critical Impertinence of those French Scribblers who have
taken pains to make little Cavils and Exceptions, to lessen the Reputation of
this great Man, whom Nature has made too big to Confine himself to the
Exactness of a Studied Style. He let his Mind have its full Flight, and shows
by a generous kind of Negligence that he did not Write for Praise, but to give
to the World a true Picture of himself and of Mankind. He scorned affected
Periods, or to please the mistaken Reader with an empty Chime of Words. He has
no Affectation to set himself out, and depends wholly upon the Natural Force
of what is his own, and the Excellent Application of what he borrows.

You see, Sir, I have kindness enough for Monsieur de Montaigne to be your
Rival, but no Body can pretend to be in equal Competition with you: I do
willingly yield which is no small matter for a Man to do to a more prosperous
Lover; and if you will repay this piece of Justice with another, pray believe,
that he who can Translate such an Author without doing him wrong must not only
make me Glad but Proud of being his

Very humble Servant, Halli^ax.

FINIS.

