December. 23. 1663.

Imprimatur.

William Morice.

FLORVS HVNGARICVS: OR The History OF HUNGARIA AND TRANSYLVANIA Deduced from
the Original of that Nation, and their settling in Europe in the Year of our
Lord 461, To this Dangerous and Suspectful Period of that Kingdom by the
present Turkish Invasion, Anno 1664.

John Chantry. sculp



LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Hen. Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane.
1664.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of BATH, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
THIS History (Written Originally in Latin by a Noble Hand, native of that
Kingdom) was like a Treatise of that deserving quality, addressed to the Hands
of two Illustrious Persons, whom the Translatour (sure of doing the Author no
injury in this particular) has represented in your single SELF, to what
advantage of Luster the World shall speak.

For (my Lord) it is not the design of this Dedication to bring water to the
Ocean, (although the Ever-flowing Tribute that is due to Virtue is natural and
necessary) both because this straight and shallow, will not boast or presume to
be proud of any Additament to Your Fame; and for that this Candle in such
Daylight will prove but a faint and unobserved Glimmering of that full
Splendor.

Actions and not Words, have entertained the greatest part of your Life, till
the late blessed Change, which shall never be mentioned but with Your Name;

Pax nescit COMITIS non memor esse sui:

Insomuch that your Lordship is a living Epitome of our late War, and is read
by most men with Delight and Admiration.

Upon that account it is (my Lord) that I humbly present to You this FLORUS
HUNGARICUS and Abridgement of their History, not knowing with whose Sum of
Glory this Compendium of so renowned a Nation would better suit; for from the
Founding of their Empire, Time has had few respites, and but momentary
vacations from Military Affairs.

In which Speculation (my Lord) I am so much assured, that you are frequently
Conversant, and familiarly please your Self in that Heroical Diversion, that I
could not restrain the Ambitious Tender of this COMMENTARY; which although very
uneven, and abrupt of Style (as could not be avoided in such a pent and narrow
inconvenience of Expression) yet it has plainly conveyed and continued the
story.

The Endeavor, what it is, is most humbly submitted to Your Lordships
Judgment, and most submissively begs Your Protection and Patronage, under
which it doubts not to find acceptance with the World.

(My Lord) I am Your most Humble and Obedient Servant J. H.

To the READER.
THE Affairs and History of Hungary variously agitated under several mutations
and Revolutions, are now presented to the World in an Epitome, which
nevertheless Comprehends most of the Transactions in Europe, and may entitle
it self to be its Remembrancer. This Nation some Ages before, not seen and
unheard of, did out of its Ruins rise to a Mighty Kingdom, and as it did so
wonderfully increase, so did it with the same Urgencies of Fate, decline as
fast, and again recover it self; and so by the inconstancy of its Fortune
either added Terror or Hope to its Neighbors: For while this People struggled
for Empire, intending to heap up their Glory in the Splendour of one Day, and
would allow no futurities to their Felicity, the Justice of Providence decreed
them a laborious race, wherein their speed and Strength has been tired; and by
many uneven Ascents and Descents, almost wearied out of Breath: in which time
notwithstanding (the space of Twelve hundred years and upwards) it has
effected so many great things both in War and Peace, that it seems to have
dared and accomplished things far beyond either its Fortune or Ability,
Commanding and extending its Power so far over the adjoining Nations, that
while its Actions and story is read, both Asia and Europe are concerned, and
are again subjected in the review, as Tributaries to the Renown of this Empire.

I must confess that so many Vicissitudes, and the Grandeur of the subject do
much discompose the Contexture, but so that the shape of the Majesty hereof
will sufficiently appear, although it have not its full Proportions.

We consider therefore the Hungarian Nation according to these Intervals or
Distances, The first Age was most fierce and Sanguinous, while they were under
the darkness of Paganism, which lasted almost 600 years, during which time
they exceeded the very Beasts in all savage and barbarous Cruelty. The
following Age under Geysa and Stephen, Christian Princes, until the Reign of
Charles Son of Lewis, in which time passed 340 years, was afflicted and sore
put to it; yet it made a shift to rear it self and raise its Glory out of the
Dust. Thence to our Times have run 330 years, in which its Glories have been
retrograde, and have verged to a decrepit and feeble estate, save that under K.
Matthias the Kingdom moved its Arms with some vigor, and seemed to be renewed
to a Fresh and active Youth and Virility.

But Matthias being taken away by the envyous Destinies, the Hungarians soon
lost their ancient Courage and Virtue, suffering the Turks to possess
themselves of the greatest part of their Country (which they are now like
wholly to subdue) while they were divided betwixt the Interests of Ferdinand
the Emperor, and John Zapolyai Vayvod of Transylvania, pretenders to that
Crown; so that Hungary is to be sought in it self. For while the Kingdom was
insociable and coveted by many, it became burdened with more weight then it
could bear; and that Government which might have been well supported and
maintained by one, being shouldred by so many, fell with ruin to the Ground.

It is now redevable to the Reader, that I give an account of what Authors have
been consulted in the Compiling of this Treatise; Many Hungarian Writers being
waived because of their Flattery and fondness of their own Nation, or Fabulous
Untruths; of which sort are Ranzanus, Ritius, and others; but one for all is
Bonfinius, who has loaded the Original of the Hungarians with a multitude of
Fictions. Thur^^zius has done something better; in the whole six hundred
Authors have been conferred; but those to whom Credence was due are only
these; First Nicholas Istuamfi, a man conversant in the story who wrote his
Rationale from the life of Matthias the first; but because of his propense
affection to the Caesar's (for which teason he either neglects Truth or conceals
their Vices) foam rare, more Ancient and modern Writers have been
contra-examined against him. Next to him, Flavius Ascanius Centorinus, who
Composed his History of the Dacian Wars out of the Manuscript Commentaries of
Ferdinand, and Castaldus (his General) themselves. Lastly, John Michael Brutus,
who wrote of this matter by the Command of Stephen Bathori King of Poland,
together with Thuanus and some few not so Eminent.

The Reader, it is presumed, will be hereby satisfied of the veracity and
Authority of this Discourse, whose Subject (being so much a stranger) needed a
very ample Certificate, for that Impostures of these distant Regions are very
rife and frequent.

All that is to be Apologized and Excused, is the style, which pretends to
nothing but understandible English, shut up by such rigid clauses and
restraints of matter, that it could not breath any free Language. And when the
Reader shall have perceived how this Volume is crowded to render it a Manual
acceptable to the diversion of curious and inquisitive men, he will no doubt
vouchsafe a Pardon to this Endeavor.

Vale.
THE HISTORY OF HUNGARIA AND TRANSYLVANIA.
THIS Nation, The Derivation of the Huns
not seen nor known in Europe, before the decrepit Estate of the Roman Empire,
had their formidable Extract from the extremest part of Maeotis, inhabited by
the Massagetes, next neighbors to the Dahi, as Plinius, Mela and Ptolomy do
report, though some Authors have derived them from the Parthians, both seated
betwixt the Rivers Oxus and Iaxarta.

Former Times called all that Tract of ground lying North and North-east, by
the Name of Scythia, and under that general Appellation the Inhabitants were
notified to the world, which now is distinguished into the different Tribes of
the present Tartarian Empire; who at this day continue that vagrant, incursive,
and predatory disposition, that brought these necessitous Huns in vast
multitudes into fertiler though never so distant Regions.

It will be therefore requisite to give some brief account of this Nursery and
source of so many Martial Nations, Scithia their place of Extraction.
and particularly of this of the Huns, because of this singular remarque, that
none of her swarms besides, were ever blessed with the Christian Faith; and
arrived to, and persisted in the Glory of a Kingdom and Empire under the
Ensign of the Cross, entire, separate and unmixt from other Nations, in all
the Fortunes of War, and the variation of their Estate.

Scythia by the Ancients was divided into the European and Asiatick; Its
Description and division.
the former made stretching it self from the Springs of Tanais by the Banks of
the Lake Maeotis and the Euxine Sea, to Ister (so named when swelled with the
Confluence of the Danow, Savus and Dravus, 3 great Rivers by the City of
Belgrade) the reason of which mistake was, for that they falsely supposed Asia
to be divided from Europe by the Tanais: For from Taenarus the Extreme
promontory of Peloponesus to the Springs and rise of Tanais, not more than half
the Line extending to the Northern Ocean, is Comprehended; that River arising
in the Confines of the greater Russia, and the lesser Tartary, from a Lake
called Ivanowo Iezcier, not out of the Riphaean Mountains, as is fabled by the
Ancients; for that there are no such Hills in nature, nor was it ever agreed
among Geographers where they should be sited. And it is since manifest that
from the Lake aforesaid there is as much space of ground lying between the Sea,
as is betwixt it and Peloponensus, so that many places are assigned to Asia in
this Region, which do truly belong to Europe. This is the rather insisted, to
rectify the general mistake in most of the modern Maps and descriptions of the
World.

The vastness of the Asian Scythia is so great, The Asian Scythia.
that its bounds were neither known in the past, not discovered to the present
Age; Circumscribed to the East with the opposite shore of unknown Seas; to the
North with the Frozen Scythian Sea; to the West with the Cimmerian Bosphorus,
Maeotis, Tanais, and a Line drawn to the White Sea; to the South with the
Indies; whence it comes to pass that the Straight of Anian is yet
controverted; some allowing no such Sea; others so narrow a one, that the
Scythians are feigned to have had their originals from America. The uncertainty
of our knowledge of this Country is imputed to this main Cause, for that none
of the Mighty of the world could ever boast of a Conquest thereof. We read of
Expeditions made against the Scythians, both toward the East and the West, but
no way remarquable for their progression. Cyrus never reached Iaxarta; Darius
attempting the Europaean Scythians, came not to the Mountains of Dacia. Trajan
who went further then any of his Predecessors, arrived not to the Springs of
Marusius. The Arms of Alexander the Great, the more inward Inhabitants only
heard of, but felt not. And Pliny complains that in his time the vastness of
the Maeotick Lake was altogether unknown, some saying it was a Gulf or Bay of
the Sea; others that it was divided from it by an Isthmus or small piece of
ground. And even now although Zingis Chan, and Temur or Tamerlane Chan,
attained the Dominion of all Scythia, and their Acts are extant and read by
many Men in the Arabic Tongue; yet the places thereof are so obscured by their
barbarous and confused names that they afford imperfect light to any Discovery.

The very word Scythian, Scythia now called Tartary.
in former times extended not its self further than to the Taurica Chersonesu;
led by which reason, Strabo called that Scythia the Less, now termed by
Pinetus, Precopsa and Gazara, and even at this day, on the same account is
Tartaria the Less denominated: For what ever Ancient Times called Scythia, the
greatest part thereof by the latter is called Tartaria or Tataria, The Country
of a most Warlike Nation, addicted to Prey and Robbery. The whole is almost
Desert and desolat, so that Planocarpus the Nuncio of Innocent the fourth,
found the better half of it to be Sandy Plains, and destitute of Inhabitants;
who have no certain or fixed Habitations, as counting it a sin and a crime to
build a City; Its Desert and Inhabitable side
(as is reported of the Ancient Nomades, whose Progeny these are) but carry
their Tents about with them.

This Desert Tartaria (called in Arabic, Kafshak and Barka, from whence the
Hungarians are deduced) is shut up to the South with the Caspian and Euxine
Seas, and the interjacent Hills of the Circassian Mamalukes, anciently
Caucasus. The East is limited by the Chovaresmi, by Strabo called Chorasmasini;
by Stephanus, Chorameni (a People derived from the Massagetae and Sacae, to
whom Bessus and Spiramenes fled from the Bactrians and Sogdiani) Atcar and
Schagnak; until ranging to other Regions as far as Turquestana (which is Seated
betwixt Oxus and Iaxara, the peculiar derivation of the Huns) it joins with the
Getae, and the Chinese, who Conterminate with the Mogoles and the Chattaei. On
the North is the Region of Siberia, vast solitudes and Deserts, and Sands like
Mountains. Lastly, on the West, Russia, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire. There
are many Tribes of this People, but quite different in Language, as much as the
Borderers differ in their several manners from the peaceable simple
dispositions of the Inlanders.

The Nation of the Sythians, The Antiquity of the Scythians, their propagation.
Justin affirms, to have been most Ancient, although much disputed for
Antiquity by the Egyptians. For the Mountainous places were first Inhabited,
then the Plains. Nor is there scarce any People of Europe or Asia, which have
not been propagated out of the North, even the Eastern parts as far as India,
where under the Name of Parthians, as mentioned before, now called Persians,
they dilated their Empire; and the Western, to the Regions of Polonia, Germany,
Pannonia, and Denmark; known now and denominated from the Seats of the
Sauromatae, Goths, Huns, and Cymbri, Cumani, Comoiri, Geloni, the same with the
Peucini* Othogothi, Thuringi, Eastern Gotths, and Gepidae originally deduced
from the Confines of Tanais, and many more, to which are added the Celtae; part
of whom had their Seat in Thracia, as another part of them gave Name to the
Germans, Gauls, and Brittons; so that the world has been peopled in a manner
out of these Regions.

But in the middle Age of the World, Their change of Name into Huns.
those Scythians were dreaded by fewer Names, and renownedly by that of the
Huns, subdivided into the White and Black by Procopius (to omit the Gorths who
are also allied to the said People by a nearer Etymology, for that according to
the Aeolian Dialect which rendered the Scythian, the Character (...). is added
before the Consonant (...). in the word (...) whence are derived the Goths, by
barbarous pronunciation.

The White were the People seated, The Destruction of the Huns.
as aforesaid, betwixt Oxus and Iaxarta, that gave Name and being to the
Hungariane. But because no sure and undoubted Authority thereof can be produced
(which may not be vvondred at, because the most certain things are scarce
testifiable and mostly fabulous, and the Romans after the Decay of their Empire
intent to their own, became (as justly ashamed) incurious of other affairs)
we must content our selves with the best Conjectures, and among others, with
that of St. Jerome, who Writes, that the Huns came from the Massagetae, and
the Extremest parts of the Maeotis; and next with allusion of words, for that
Abtela and Attila, the first whereof was the Name of the Euthalitan Kings (to
which stock generally the Huns are referred) and the last of the Hungarians,
are Names so alike that they cannot be discriminated. To omit many more
witnesses, viz. Menander, Paulus Diaconus, Ammianus, and Fernandes, who are
copious in the proof thereof by diverse most Convincing Arguments, to which we
must refer the Reader.

Certain it is, they were Conterminous to the first Extract of the Turks now
called Turcomania, Bordering Northeast upon Persia, where they Inhabited until
vanquished by their Sultan or Chan, in the Time of Justinian, when part of them
mixing and uniting with the Turks, the other part fled Northwards; of whose
remains descended the Avares, who after their Progenitors migration Westward,
Combated often with the Turks, and likewise by them at last worsted, seconded
their fellows into Europe. The Western Huns are those who at this day are
called Tartars, part of whom by the Name of Cimmerii since Cymbri, possessed
themselves of Denmark. So that after the race of so many Ages, the same Quarrel
is revived now under the same Names of both Nations, if we give credit to
Antiquity. Next we consider the former Inhabitants of Hungary.

The Mysians Inhabited both the Banks of Danubius, The former inhabitants of
Hungary.
against whom Darius led an innumerable Army; They were called by Homer,
Galactophagi, Milk-eaters, a Generation of most just and honest men. Of those a
part were the Getae, whose King Dormichaetes so despised Riches, that content
with Victory, he released Lysimachus his prisoner, which simplicity is alleged
to this day, as the cause of their Servitude to other Nations. Syrmius had
Dominion afterward of the same Nation, as King of the Triballi, who for fear of
Alexander the Great, fled into the Island Peuce, the Fame of whom remains to
this day, by that Tract of Ground which lies between Varadin Peter, and
Belgrade, called by his Name Syrmia.

From these came those Mysians, who possesed themselves of Habitations between
the Lydians, Phrygians, and Trojans; with an equal simplicity, as unwilling to
obey, as ambitious of Commanding. The Daci, Dahi, Daae, and Dahae are the same
People; part of them sat down by the Mountainous places of Transylvania, part
between Oxus and Iaxarta, near to the Massagetes, which space of ground,
because it is so great, Strabo cannot be induced to assign the same originals
to them both; but how weakly, their migrations and invasions into remotest
distanced Regions do sufficiently evince. Plinius makes no distinction between
the Daci and the Getae, but only of Name; For as Cottisan is styled by Horace,
the King of the Daci, so by Suetonius, he is called Prince of the Getae: But
Strabo makes them thus to differ, the Getae to be those whose Country bended
toward the East and the Sea; and the Dacians those who stretched themselves
oppositely toward Germany, and the rise of the River Ister; although he
presently adds, that they both use the same Language.

Neither does he herein agree with himself, because he makes the River Marus or
Marusius, to glide through the Getae, and fall into the Danow, which by a due
distinction should be said to pass by the Country of the Daci. For this River
by Herodotus termed Maris, by others Marsus or Margus; and by the Hungarians,
Maros; which arises from the Carpathian Hill belonging to the Daci, bends
toward the South, till before Alba, winding to the Westward, it is mingled
with the Tybiscus, from whence another Error of the same Author is discovered,
in that he writes that the Marusius flows into the Danow. Nor are there wanting
some (Iustus Lipsius, and Isaac Causabon) who expound that Marus in Tacitus of
this Marisus, by which name also Cluverius understands Morava, as giving Name
to Moravia.

Of these Nations as of Servile manners and Spirits, the Names of Slaves or
Servants were borrowed, represented in Comedies (as they either personated
true, or seeming-true Slaves) by Davus and Geta, as the Scholiast on
Aristophanes witnesses, and is further proved by the Authority of the Comical
Apollodorus in one of his Fables, where they are both named, and whence Terence
borrowed them, whence soon after the said Names were applied to unlearned and
ignorant men. Hence the same Terence, Davus sum non Oedipus, of no capacity to
resolve Riddles.

This Danubius, The Danubius.
since mention is to be frequently made of it and occurs here; Eustathius the
Interpreter of Dionysus, out of Strabo and Stephanus reports to have been once
called Matthoas; but when the Scythians in passing over it were sorely
afflicted, it came to be called Danusius or Danubius, (...) or Danum, in the
Macedon Language signifying Death, as Plutarch witnesses; between which River
and Ister, Peolomy and Pliny so distinguish, that the upper part from
Axiopolis, which the Pannonians and Iazyges possess, to its Springs be called
the Danow; and the rest to the Sea-ward be named Ister; which difference at
this day, is hardly or not at all observed. Some have fabled that this River
fell from the Riphean Hills, and that one of its Arms disembogued it self into
the Adriatic Sea.

Now that which afterward more peculiarly was called Dacia, The Description of
Dacia.
Comprehends at this time, Transylvania, Moldavia, Valachia beyond the Alps;
between the European Sarmatia, and the Rivers of Danubius and Tyra, and the
Iazyg^s Metanastae: Moldavia stretches it self to the Euxine Sea. Transalpina
along the Banks of the Danubius. Transylvania is bounded and Confined by the
aforesaid Principalities, White-Russia and Hungary. To the Dacians between the
Carpathian Mounrains and Ister, the Iazyges were conterminate, to these the
Pannonians, being encompassed with two great Forests, and three Rivers, the
Savus, Dravus, and Ister. The Grecians called them Paeones, but wherefore does
not appear; for that Paeonia, according to Justin Ptolomy, is sited in
Macedonia, whose Inhabitants (passing by an ancienter fiction of Endymion's
Son) are fabled by Lazius upon the Discomfiture given the Macedonians by
Aemilius, to have retreated and Planted themselves by Ister.

But Dion Cassius oppugning this Error, derives the Name of the Pannones from
Pannus, a word signifying Cloth, Pannonia whence so called.
of which they made themselves patcht Clothes of diverse Colors and pieces;
which observation of Habit gave Names to several of the Ancient Nations. Greece
was thereby termed Palliata, i. e. Cloaked. Rome, Togata, Gowned. France was
divided into Togata and Braccata, Gowned and Breeched. But I do not understand
how the excellent Isaac Causabon, by the words of Dion, can conceive that
Pannus was a word of the Pannonian Mother Tongue as he largely shows, for the
word (...) used by Dion is rather referrible to the Custom of wearing the
garment, than to the Language of the Nation; nor is the word Pannus of so
modern an Extraction but that it was well known to Polybius and other Grecians.
By all which it may be supposed that by a small mutation from the word (...) or
(...), the noted Name of (...) may arise, and be in use with the Grecians, as
is abovesaid. But to their story.

THE first Captain that led the Huns into these parts of Hungary was Belamber,
incited thereto by a Nobleman, The invitation of the Huns into Europe.
(who persuing a Deer that took the great River Tanais, (the supposed bound of
Asia and Europe) to the other side, was ravished with the view of so delightful
a Prospect, and fruitful Soil) and by his own Ambition of rendering himself
Famous and Terrible to the World.

His passage over the Tanais, lost him a multitude of Men (for Bridges and
Boats were, the one impossible, and the convenient use of the other not known)
yet not so disabled Him but that He continued his Expedition by the
cheerfulness of his People, and discomfited the or Roxolans now Russes.
Alani; thence he turned his victorious Arms toward the Inhabitants of the
Black Sea, and subduing them, persuaded them to take up Arms with him against
the Mysians and Dacians, the former Possessors of Servia, Russia, Bulgaria,
Moldavia, etc. who made stout opposition. When Melamber, aged and wearied out,
left the Achievement to his Son Mundzuch alias Bendeguz, B^lamber their first
Captains Conquest.
who Defeated the Goths (after two unlucky and almost fatal Combats) then
Conquerours of Pannonia and that Tract of the World, and in a mortal Battle
slew the Terror of the Huns, Alatheus and Saprax, the Guardians of Videricus
King of the Goths, and stretched his Conquest over all the Territory which
lies betwixt the River Ister and Borysthenes, which includes the Country they
now possess.

He dying left two Sons (the terrible) Attila and Bleda, Attila his Son
succeeds him.
to the Tuition of his Brothers Hottar and Rugila, who having vanquished the
Eastern parts and utterly expelled the Visigoths from all Thracia, mastering
also Macedonia, and Illyria, compelled or frighted the Romans to purchase their
Peace with the present payment of 700 l. of Gold, and 300 afterward yearly,
for pretended default whereof and other piques, Attila marching through Germany
ruined Argentorate, which he re-edifying caused to be called Strasburg, and in
the Catalaunian Fields, gave Battle to Aetius Lieutenant to not Chaalans in
Burgundy as is mistaken, by a place called Maurice near the River Matrona or
Marn in France.
Valentinianus the Emperor, assisted by the Kings of the Goths and Gauls.

Attila had in his Army 50000. some say, 700 thousand men, but the Fate of
Europe struggling with this Emergent and sudden danger, and loath to resign her
Glory to such a tumultuous and barbarous enemy courageously maintained her
Title, and made the Hun retreat with the Common mutual loss of 170 thousand
men, to his Conquest of Hungary; to which he never had returned had the Goths,
or Romans pursued their success and victory.

Attila troubled with this his first Disappointment resolved to recover the
reputation of his Puissance, and therefore having provided himself in five
years vacancy from War of another Terrible Host, purposed by Tyrol to descend
into Italy, but finding those difficult passes defended by Valentinian, he
turned his Force upon Dalmatia, and conquering the Roman Army near the
Tergestine Bay, beseiged, and after three years leagure took and sacked Aquileia.

From thence he passed to Vreona in Italy, but advancing further toward
Ravenna was met in his way by Pope Leo; and by him dehorted and entreated from
a further pursuit of his success.

The event was not less wonderful then the former eruptions of this destroyer
were unnexpected, but the reverence meekness, Gravity and Humility of those
Fathers of the Church were even attractives to those Savage Barbarians.

At the approach of them notwithstanding, The Original of the Venetians
the Venetians then inhabiting the same Lands which yet belong to their
Territory, fled to the Islands in which their Glorious Seignory now continues,
and laid the Foundation of their Greatness upon the fear of their ruin; That
which then was their temporary shelter proving the impregnable Fortress and
Defyant Bulwork of Christendom against all other Invasions through a long
duration of time and honor.

Attila at his return dyed in Hungary, Attila's Death.
suffocated with blood which he used to excern by his Nostrills in some
abundance, but now falling into his mouth, whether by the Judgment of God in
satisfaction of all that he had so inhumanely spilt, or by practice of his
brothers friends (whom he had caused to be killed upon suspicion of his
aspiring to the sole Command) who made a violent advantage of that infirmity
and diverted its course, is not certainly delivered.

To sum up the story of this Attila for satisfaction of the Reader I have
adjoined his Title, not unlike that which the Turkish Sultans now use toward
these very Hungarians, retorting their own insolence and arrogance upon the
impotent feeble remnant of that once mighty and most populous Nation; in haec
verba;

ATTILA the Nephew of Nimrod, His Title.
nourished in Engaddi, by the Grace of God, King of Huns, Medes, Goths, and
Dacians, The Terror of the World, and Scourge of God.

Which last he added after his Conference with an Hermit.

This (however denied by some Hungarian Authors) is reported by so many others,
that the Reader may give credit to it; for though Attila was not then a
Christian professed, yet certainly he was not altogether a Pagan, as his assent
to Leo beforementioned will partly evince.

Attila Dying left two Sons Aladerick and Chaback, His two Sons succeed.
who (as the fortune of the World and War varies) lost all with the same career
of Ruin as their Father gained Dominion by monstrous Accessions; for at his
Death the Limits of his Territories were on the one part stretched to the Huns
and Iugri in Scythia, and on the other to France, and Italy; so that this
Empire labored under its own weight and fell by unnatural and Intestine
Divisions.

This same Aladerick is supposed by many to have been begotten by Attila upon
Honoria the Daughter of the Emperor Valentinian, but this opinion is rejected
by others, The intestine feuds of the Huns
because they say Attila died before she arrived at his Camp. Whatever his
Birth was, it was certain he was Favored by the Princes of Germany, and
Dieterick of Verona, and aided against his Elder Brother, advanced to the
Supreme Power by the Huns, who notwithstanding as is usual in such fraternal
and Civil Feuds, revolted soon after to Aladerick, Their Destruction*
and so sheathing their Swords in their own Bowels, made easy way to their
Enemies designs of revenge against them.

The first that engaged and Encountered them was Arderick King of the Gepidae,
who vindicated his People from the slavery of the Huns, killing of them 30000
in one Battle, and so pursued his success upon their frighted remains that
they lost all their several Conquests at one breath (Aladerick himself coming
to this Bloody end, as a victime and sacrifice to those infinite slaughters
that had been committed by his People) for hereupon Ardarick seized Dacia; the
Goths, both the Pannonia's or Hungary; the Alani or Russes Mysia; while Chaba
the other Brother difficultly recovered his Country of Scythia; Uto and
Ischalmus, with some others of his Huns diverted into Romania, whose Posterity
is remaining to this day in the Town of Gala^z. Ermedzar and Uzindur Cousins of
the said two Captains, sat down between the Rivers Marusius and Alutha, and by
the ascents to the Mountainous places of Dacia, and to avoid the suspicion of
the name of Huns, called themselves Now called Siculi.
Szekeli, which term or word signifies a fixed place and habitation, not
vagabonds or Fugitives, for which their Nation was now so infamous.

The Roman Dominions being thus freed of the Successors of Attila, The Lombards
possess Hung^^y*
was anew oppressed with the alternate and Vicissitudinary Power of the Rugi,
Goths, and Lombards; who successively by the crafty instigation of the feeble
Romans subdued one another; the Lombards assisted by Swain K. of Denmark, after
other Conquests seating themselves in Pannonia: whither the A^ARES (not the
same but another Tribe of Huns) being beaten out of the Northern Scythia by the
Euthalitae The O^^ginal of the firrt Huns.
who had themselves been beaten by the Turk^, in the Year 500. after the
Incarnation, possessed themselves of the Country of Ister, having expelled the
Goths from Taur^ca, and utterly extinguished the Name of the Gepidae. In their
advance to Pannonia; Alboynus Captain of the Longobards, to prevent the fortune
of War with so necessitous a People, made a friendly Composition with them,
whereby it was agreed that the Avares should be possessed of Hungaria, upon
Condition to restore it again if the Lumbards failed of their Enterprise and
design upon Italy: but that succeeding, these Huns being quietly possessed,
stayed not here but Invaded the Territories of the Romans; The AVARES poss^sse
themselves of Hungary.
from whom (once defeated by them) their Leader under pretense of making Baths,
borrowed some Carpenters, which he employed in making Bridges over the
Dauubius, that he might more easily Invade and infest their Dominions. His
first Conquest by this means was of Syrmia, by which his Forces grew so
terrible, that they were counted the avengers of the sins of the Eastern
Europe; having compelled the Emperor Maurice to purchase a Peace of him with
the sum of Fourscore thousand pound of Gold, which lasted no longer than two
years; for the Barbarian regardlesse of his Faith, demanded an increase of the
Tribute, Afflict the Roman Dominions.
and upon the denial thereof seized Strigonium and Viminacum, and in several
encounters greatly endamaged many of their Provinces and wasted and consumed
more of their Legions.

Their Empire or Government continued after that time with very various
fortune, at first with great overthrows often weakening their Foster-friends
the Lombards, until the time of Charles the Great, when they grew into a
Coalition with the Bojarij, from whom now came the new name of the Bavarians,
(hateful enough to the Boij or Bohemians) with whose King Tudun, Charles the
Great and his Son, managed diverse Wars, not with the Hungarians themselves, as
many have erroniously maintained. At which time (as nothing gained by humane
power is durable) these Avares either lost their Name among other Nations, The
Avares extinguished.
or else were wholly cut off and extinguished. Nicephorus says the following
Huns or Hungarians, dissolved their power and extirpated them; the German
Writers assign Charlemaigne to that work, as Suidas does the Bulgarian's;
whence most certain it is to be concluded, that they stuck in all the snares,
and by one or all of their hands came to the period of their Name and
Greatness.

But leaving them to that Final Suppression, let us consider from the Premises,
what Sad and Doleful Ages those were that brought up the Rear of the Roman
Monarchy! On which like a Bear damned to the Stake, so many fierce Mastiffs
were let fly together. But it is more wonderful how Christianity amidst such
horrid and continual subversions of Things could ever get footing? nay, dilate
it self with the Progress of these Infidels? Which though a Diversion, I
cannot but mind the Reader for the Honor and convincing verity of our
Religion, to take notice of. There being now no visible footsteps remaining of
the Hungarian Nation in this Territory; it shamed a Noble people to bear the
Yoke of a Foreign Ruler, having been used themselves to Govern and Command
others. The remains of the old Huns repossesse themselv^s
And hereupon those Huns who fled that great Defeat given to Attila's Sons, and
were scattered into Transylvania and Russia (where now there is a Tribe of them
yet remaining toward Siberia, called Iugri by Geographers) impatient of their
retirement and obscure condition, invited their kindred and Contrymen, who
now had breathed from their expulsion out of Europe into Scythia, and Siberia,
and the Northermost parts of Europe, as aforesaid, to return again and make
another venture with them for the Restoration of their Name and Honor by
their former Conquests.

Little invitation served a penurious and warlike Nation made and designed for
great things and addicted to Glory, besides that the dangerous condition of
their Europaean friends, who sculkt from the fury of the victorious Goths, did
urgently call for their assistance. In the year 890. seven several Armies of
them under seven Leaders all vested with equal power invaded Dacia again,
Their Successes.
and after some exploratory peace-pretending Messages to Suatopolugus then King
of those Countries proceeded to attaque him, who making resistance was defeated
and driven beyond Danubius; thence pursuing their success they laid wast the
whole Country of Illyria, and peirced into Moravia and Bohemia, and subdued all
Hungary, and as much more Territory as is contained between the River Gran, the
Swevian Hills and from Ister to the Sea, extending it thence also toward the
East.

Yet so uneven and fluctuating was their Fortune, that though Arnulphus the
Emperor was glad to seek and obtain Peace of them, yet Luithpoldus the
Emperors General after Arnulphus his Decease, upon their return from a new
incursion under Chussales their King into Germany the length of 250 leagues on
the North side of the Danow, where they destroyed all before them, encountered
them near Vienna in Austria, The Huns defeated by Luithpoldus.
wearied with spoil and the length of the Journey and overthrew them, 12000 of
them perishing in that river whose Banks had suffered so often by their bloody
and frequent Inundations; the rest were driven and pursued to Presburgh, having
lost their K. whose generous spirit could not endure the fatal dishonor of
that bloody Field, wherein the Huns were like again to have run the same hazard
of their former ruin but that a mutiny amongst the victor Army opportunely
stopped a further pursuit.

The news of this defeat did not long keep the Huns at home but grown strong
with rest, and more robust by the divisions of the Germans, and having newly
substituted Dursack and Bugoth, to the Regal Dignity, they again resum^d their
former design; which the next year they enterprised, possessing themselves of
all Paninonia, exhausted already by continual spoil, carrying also Colonies,
with them and placing them in the Countries of the Boii.

To oppose them, Lewis the Emperor having called a Counsel, and by their
Concurrence raised a great Army, encountered them at Auspurg seated near the
River Rhodanum, on whose Banks this Field was ^ought.
Augusta Vindelicorum, where he was worsted in a famous Battle; Luithpoldus the
former successeful General, with Eysenrick His Arch-Sewer and 15 Counts, being
slain on the place, together with most of the Army. Nor fared he better at his
second Conflict, having for safety of Germany induced all the Provinces to take
sudden Arms with him, being defeated by this Stratagem; the Huns had fought
almost to a desperate Event, in the Fields near the Leman Lake, when advised by
imminet danger, they counterfeited a flight, and by that means drew the enemy
into the Woods upon their Ambushes, Lewis the Emperor defeated the second time
by the Hun^.
and there made a cruel and vast slaughter of them; and following their good
fortune, made Havoc of all the Country round about with fire and Sword in
their usual manner, neither Churches, Monasteries, Bishops, or Priests escaping
their sacrilegious and destroying hands.

No stop being like to be put to their fury, they burnt down Utinum, and
passing the river Oenus, dispeopled the Canton of Zurick, and compelling
Schleckdorp and Damasia, beyond the Iser, with other Towns by famine and thi^st
to surrender, demolished and ruined them. Auspurg was served in the same
manner, and numberless multitudes of men led Captives like beasts after them,
which luggage with their other spoils invited the Boii to fall upon them, but
they were so sharply entertained, that with the slaughrer there and in the
whole Territory the Huns seemed to have made a final end at this one bout.

Ratisbone was now burnt by them, Their ravage and Devastations.
whence by Osterhof they passed the D^nubius, puttin^ the Bohemians,
Franconians, and the adjacent Nations to the Sword, So that most of the rivers
of Germany were turned into blood, and Lewis broken with so many mischiefs,
glad to make the Empire Tributary to the Huns, who leaving Germany (as prone to
War, and enlargement of Dominion, fell next upon the Grecian Empire (which they
had only touched in the former War) by the beginning of the next Spring, They
invade Grecia.
when passing through the Mysia superior and wasting Thracia infesting also
the Macedonians, they conquered Bulgaria (which yet made some resistance) and
all those stranger Countries, insomuch that Constantine the Colleague of
Alexander his Uncle, refused not being terrified by these approach^s, the
payment and Tribute imposed on his Cities.

The Huns being thus established and fixed in their former possession gained by
their Sword in Hungary, The Description of Hungaria as then possessed by that
Nation.
it will be requisite to describe that tract of ground, which came under the
said appellation and was then a most ample and spacious Dominion. The Kingdom
of Pannonia did not formerly exceed the Banks of the Danubius, and because it
extended it self from the said River as far as the Carpathian Hills, which
terminate the European Sarmatia, it was called the hither and the further
Hungary. The upper part of the hither, contained Styria and Austria, the
inferior was all that tract of ground between the River Dravus, the Balaton
Lake (which upon the coming of Christ broke out in the country of Gisa) the
Deserts of Vertha and the Danubius. The further Hungary separated by the
Carpathian Hills from Moravia of the Marcomanni, Silesia and Poland contains
that part of the Iazyges Metanastae, and Dacia which is on this side the Hills,
which the River Tybiscus runs thorough, arising from the Maromorusian Hills
above Zigeth not that in Lower Hungary.
and between Zemlin and Salankien is mingled with the Danube. Between the
Rivers Dravus and Savus, lies Sclavonia reaching as far as the River of Hun.
Below Savus lies Croatia, both the Bosnia's, Dardania, now Dalmatia; The
Illyrians possess the further parts, the same with the Liburnians, bounded
with the Adriatic Sea, and Eastward with the River Bosna: To this Confine both
the Mysia's, the Upper, in which is Servia and Rascia, and the lower now called
Bulgaria: for the Bulgarians now coming from Asia, compelled the Bessi,
ejected out of the Lower Mysia, to seat themselves in the Upper: Both of them
lie between the Danube, and mountain of Hun: The Danube emptying it self into
the Euxine Sea. To the Eastward of Hither Hungary lies Dacia betvveen the
River Tyra, the Danube, and the Sea, comprehending Transylvania, Moldavia, and
Transalpina, or Valachia. Transylvania is compassed with Woods and Hills, in
manner and form of a Crown.

These Countries being subdued by the Huns they contented themselves with
Tribute for Germany, who soon disdaining that servile under Barbarians, under
Conrade Duke of Franconia, saluted Caesar in place of Lewis, and Arnulphus the
Son of Luithpoldus procla^med King of the Boii, took Arms again, but the B^ii
were at the entrance of the War so consternated, that the Huns with universal
spo^l passed as far as the River Oenus again: where Arnulphus having selected
the ablest Soldiers, The Germans arm against them.
and secured the rest in the City, set upon them in their carlesse jollity, and
encompassing them by surprise, made a great slaughter of some, and drove others
into the River, and brought a general Fear, greater then any before upon their
whole Army, which was freed thereof by the egregious Virtue and Valor of
Dursach, who in the very instant of the danger, compelled the Bohemian weakened
by so ^ierce a War, to strike a League and Agreement with him.

But the present Disaster was expiated with great Victories, Their second
Expedition into Italy.
the Huns still hankered after Italy the Lady of so many Pleasures: The
Dissentions between Leo the Fifth, Sergius the Third, and Christopher the
Antipope, adding to their Hopes as if designed for Avengers of their Pride and
Ambition; hereupon passing Friuli with spoiling and burning, they came as far
as Pavia, and by the river Brenna, with a horrible Carnage overthrew
Berengarius, who had amassed an innumerable Host of the Tuscans, Volscans, and
other Nations of Italy. Which Defeat was occasioned merely by their Contempt of
the Enemy, who having in vain after many Prayers and entreaties voluntarily
offered there delivery of their spoil, and a Covenant or Article of never
invading Italy again, upon condition of Life and Departure on horseback, took
advantage of the negligence of the Italians, and punished this their Arrogance:
for with three parties they surprised the secure Bodies of the Enemy, who staid
expecting the return of their Commissioners, sent with their denial to the
Huns, and killed a great many with their drink in their Throats: The Italians
under Berengrius Vanquished.
so those that could not be appeased with submission and Gifts were now
destroyed with fury and cruelty.

All places now opened to their victorious Arms, which are reported to have
been so po^ent at this time, that they overran likewise the Boiarij (contrary
to their Agreement) Franconia and Saxony, with vast depopulations: nor did
their rage stop here, for within two years they peirced as far as Basil, They
Master all places.
which having razed they wasted Alsatia and Lorrain, with so much ^^lerity,
that Conrade who purchased his peace with money, seemed conquered before any
Enemy was at hand. And such was the horror of this Defeat abovesaid, that the
Huns en^aged, abstained not from the Flesh of the ^^ain, The Cause of which
being asked of Le^el (a Hungarian Captain taken prisoner at Auspurg by Conrade)
was thus declared. (...) are the Avengers of the sins of Mankind, appointed by
God for your punishment; when we ^^sist from persecuting you, by the angry God,
we are taken by you and destroyed.

Italy although so often chastised, The Divisions in Italy and Rome.
yet nothing the wi^er, was distracted with various factions, Lewis the Son of
^oson relying upon the Papal right, assumed to himself the Imperial Dignity,
being assisted and encouraged by the Lumbards, who would have Berengarius
divested of the Dignity; he being thu^ between the Hammer and the Anvile,
called in the Huns, the sworn Enemies of the Faith: they under pretense of Aid,
undertake the Expedition, and range through Italy, killing and bringing to
obedience Lambert the Archbishop of Millan, Heydelbert the Captain of the Guard
or Pretorium, with other Rebels. Berengarius not long surviving this Victory,
his Son the second of that name succeeded him, against whom ro^e up Rodolph,
Duke of Burgundy his Rival, to the Dominion of Italy, Berengarius therefore
diffiding in his own forces, as the Heir of his Fathers Kingdom and manners,
trod in the same Track of an Hungarian Expedition, who in his cause wasting
Italy, soon after overthrew Odelricus, the Count of the Place, or Major Domo,
with his numerous Army, as afterward they took the Marquess Adelbert and
Giselbert Prisoners, but they were no sooner departed, then Berengarius was
overcome, The Huns third and fourth Expedition into Italy.
and persidiously slain, though justly in respect of his cruelties to his own
blood; This Murder of the King, gave good occasion to the Huns to return into
Italy, where they again burnt Ticinum, exercising cruelty as a virtue: and
having plundered and undone the Provinces laded themselves home with a most
rich spoil.

A German War followed this, The Germans under Henry the Emperor, refuse the
Tribute.
Henry surnamed the Fowler, Son of Conrade deceased, denied to pay the tribute
now insolently and imperiously redemanded by the Huns, who thereupon keeping
their faith religiously with the Boii, (Arnulph their King having fled to them
in avoydance of the designs and snares of Conrade but was afterward brought
back by the Prudence of Henry) wasted Transylvania, Swevia, but chiefly Saxony,
the Hereditary Country of the Emperor, who unable to endure this their haughty
and presumptuous behavior, with a well composed Army surpised them at
Meersburgh, Defeat the Huns at Meersburgh.
in the Confines of the Thuringian Saxons; having given Order to his Men to
receive their first flight of Arrows upon their Sheilds, discreetly and
conveniently placed, and while they were fitting and preparing for another
volley, to rush in upon them; by which Military Policy the Huns were driven
foul upon one another and slain with a terrible slaughter, and Germany thereby
freed from a shameful and ignominious slavery.

The remains and relics of those Hungarians which survived the Battle, were
slain by one another Treachery and Discovery; the feigned and pretended reward
whereof was impunity and pardon offered to such of them as should reveal their
Comrades and Countrymen; so that no more then Seven escaped to carry the news
of this miserable Defeat and disaster to Pannonia and Dacia; the Horror
whereof so stupefied this Nation, that during the Reign of Henry, they totally
abstained from meddling with Germany.

Until the time of Otho the Great, The Hungarians stunned and stupefied withthe
loss.
the Hungarians therefore continued at home within their own walls; but then it
appeared what power and prevalence Shame has over Fear, although things be
never so hazardous or desperate; for having recruited themselves by a long
quiet and cessation from War, with their former Courage and Force they Invaded
the Limits of Bavaria, while other Parties of them wasted the Trani, Norici,
and Charini; for which Depredations they were to satisfy soon after to the
utmost; for Berchtoldus Duke of Bohemia, overcame them near Valence, and with
the Sword and the River Tranus, to which they fled, made an end of them all:
with the same fortune they fought with the Charini, Their Fortune changes.
where having lost their Leaders and General they were forced to fly.

To revenge these Discom^itures Taxis (not yet advanced to the Regal Dignity)
undertook two other Expeditions the one into Austria, and the other against the
said Charini or Carinthi, in the Confines of Italy, which he miserably
havocked, but him Berholdus his Son so worsted and routed, that he was forced
to sculk and sneak for shelter; the cause of which Calamity was his feirce and
brutish Valor ungovernable by any Art or policy; Being beaten here he turned
his Fury upon Italy, Huns Invade Italy again.
where he was appeased by ^erengarius the third, Protector to Lotharius, with
Ten Bushels of Money, which Tribute was imposed upon the heads of those that
gave suck, being as much as ^ugo had formerly paid.

The Cruelty of the Huns was not yet quite allayed, when Gerard the Bohemian,
and Duke Conrade, not long before banished by Otho, fell a spoiling the
Churches, and robbing the Monasteries, and distributed the Ecclesiastical
Treasure among the Hungarians, as yet Pagans, now intending an Irruption into
Hungary; for Bulczko the Successor of Dursach, having considered the past
Calamities, and the small ability of his present Condition, dispatched away
Embassado^s to Otho under pretense of Civility and good friendship; but indeed
to enquire of his present state, whether or no, it offered any advantage to his
necessitous Arms. These returned with an answer rather fitted to the flattery
of the occasion, which Bulzko sought, than any thing of truth.

So that in the 50. year after Lewis was slain at Rhodanum; with a 100000 Men,
Commanded by himself and the Tetrarchs, Laetius, Sura, Taxus, and Schaba; such
a number of mere Hungarians being never seen before in those parts, As Germany
also.
he set upon Germany; when through fear of them as they passed, the whole
Country was abandoned, the Cities either strongly Fortified or deserted, the
People betaking themselves to the inaccessible places of Mountains and Rocks
for the safety of their lives.

The Huns in the mean while clambring over Hills and peircing through Woods,
most horribly burnt and wasted all the Country, and having desolated Bavaria,
passed beyond the Rhine and under the Conduct of Conrade, subverted Lorrain,
wherein they violated all Humane and Divine things. Otho almost stupisfied with
the danger, with eight Legions passed into Switzerland, having made Peace with
the Venetians, at the same time as the Hungarians had defeated the Bohemians in
a sore Battle, who guarded the passes. It was now observed, that the first
onset of these Barbarians was the most forcible and vehement, and that they
raged because their time was short. The Huns totally and finally overcome by
Otho the Great^^
The Germans therefore beset them on every side, cutting off their straglers
and Foragers, and carried their Success to the Camp, where the Huns tired with
fight and plunder were wretchedly Vanquished, and the River Lycus filled with
their slain; their General being taken was hanged upon a Gibbet at Ratisbone
with some of his Captains, the rest being dismayed, secured themselves in their
entrenchments. By this Battle the strength of the Hu^s was wholly broken; yet
being made more tractble by this great slaughter, they were in a manner saved
by this their Ruin.

The Second BOOK.
AS the precedent necessary requisite to conversion to Christianity, divine
Providence was pleased by these frequent and ruinous losses and slaughters,
upon the neck of one another, to bring these barbarous Huns to an humble sense
of their calamitous and ruinous condition, Sense of misery the way to
Christianity.
and by that prepare and soften their minds to the Reception of the great
Evangelicall truth, against whose Innocent Doctrine, the applauses of their
Triumphs and the noising loud Fame of their puis^ance and success had
out-dinn'd the Trumpets of the Prince of Peace, so that ^he still voice of the
Redeemer could not be heard in the Thunder of their impetuous, pro^perous
violences.

Taxis one of the Tetrarchs dying valiantly in this last unfortunate encounter,
the Huns chose GEYSA his Son, either for his Fathers or ^his own Piety's sake,
Geysa the first King of Hungary.
for their King and Governor. For as there are, as in Time, so in all other
things a kind of vicissitude; the 980th year from the Incarnation was not yet
ended, when Geysa washed in the saving fount by Adelbert, began to propagate
the worship of the true ^od and renouncing his Idols to abolish all
superstition, studying to take off that fierce and barbarous Nation from the
desire of War, and by Christian marsuetude and sweetness to attemperate their
minds and senses. To this he was the more encouraged by Constantine the 7th. of
that name Emperor of the East, and the Germans who mainly promoted it, as
being highly affected with such glad tidings; Next he appointed Priests and
Bishops, the untamed ^^ture of his people in vain resisting, and so reduced
them, that abandoning Barbarism, and the worship of Mars and Hercules, His
zeal to Christianity.
they embraced the Christian Faith. The Captives, (of which in such a long
tract of time there could be no small multitude carried away by them)
industriously builded their Churches and brought their Children to be baptized.
To the better effect of all which, Geysa used the help (...) a Pilgrim a very
holy man who being invited by him into Hungary, chose to himself other
Colleagues; Geysa also by the aid and Arms o^ the Saxons and Bavarians kept his
Enemies within their limits, so that the people of Hungary found themselves
obliged to him for their preservation, who like an auspicious star shined upon
them in a night whose gloominesse portended it for the last of their Existence,
when sheathing their Swords he dispelled such an angry Tempest with a sudden
Serenity.

He waged War in Austria against his will which unjustly taken away by Rodeger
he restored to Leopold, whose ^on being shortly after expelled, the Hungarians
under the conduct of Abas recovered and held it until Albert the Son of Henry
the Emperor restored it to Germany. There were also other occasions of this
Difference, Henry surnamed the Holy, ^isseised his Brother Bruno of his
Dominions in ^amburg, who avoiding the danger fled to the Hungarians, by whom
meeting with the Emperor then engaged in an expedition designed to the
expulsion of Hardwick out of Lombardy, ^runo was reconciled and re-invested in
his Estate. And having thus settled this Hungarian Realm as part of Christendom,
I shall not be obliged to so prolix a narrative of their future Actions as
being better regulated and Marshal^ed to History, His Actions.
which has registered them with that of their Neighbors: the rise and the fall
of all powerful things being that object which most men consider, because of
most concern to the world, for all middle things the means of extremes are
indifferent, and do not engage ordinary and common observation.

STEPHEN his Son succeeded him both in dignity and virtue, Stephen the second
King.
at the same time when both the English, Danes, Polonians and Hungarians had
forsaken their false Religions, Pope Boniface the 7th. was then also expelled
by Pope Penedict, from Rome, whence Stephen was honored with many presents,
and a privilege of conferring ecclesiastical preferments: His courageous zeal
broke the many designs and attempts of his Pagan Subjects and Relations, as his
fortune gained him Transylvania, then abounding with ancient wealth, and now
subdued to a constant obedience and subjection to the Hungarian Scepter. He
over came likewise the Bulgarians a warlike and successeful people in the East,
His Atchievments
to whose Emperor Basilius, after this glorious defeat, they were forced to
submit themselves. He had issue by his Wife Gisala the Sister of the Emperor,
a Son called Emerick, who dyed in his Minority, and to the great grief of his
Father, and the perpetual disgust of his Mother; in his room Vazules Stephens
Uncles Son, was appointed and raised to the hopes of the Throne. Stephen dyed
in the year of our Lord 1034. having reigned happily and prudently 37. years, a
man of great humility and piety even unto Superstition, in a very great and
ample fortune, which is subject to presumption and pride, for which his Widow
was much hated and abominated.

PETER notwithstanding succeeded him, Peter the 3d. King.
the Son of his Sister, who managed his power no better then he gained it, by
the Murder of Vazules; scandalizing the Government by base Covetousness and
Arrogance, from which Crimes it had hitherto been inviolate: not knowing that
things lifted up on high are more conveniently raised for a fall; nor to be of
more pernicious Consequence to any Fortune then the lest and supremest. He
first banished Gisala, then took away her Dower, (reputed a just judgment on
her) pillaged his people, and murdered his Nobles; whereupon ensued a
Conspiracy against him, which prevailed so, that the Kingdom was transferred
to Abas, and the Counselors and Partakers of Peter's exorbitances, Peter
deposed.
slain by the popular rage. Peter escaped to Henry the Emperor, who knowing
him guilty of the defection of the Bohemians, forbad him his Presence, and cast
him into Chains, but by the intercession of Albertus General of the Eastern
limits, and Caesar's own generous Sentiments for a person descended of a Royal
Family, He was soon after taken into favor.

ABAS was substituted in his place, by whom all Peter's Acts were rescinded,
Abas the 4th. King.
and the Kingdom seemed to have recovered its former dignity, except that
Peter claimed it as Hereditary, and Abas that would command others, was a
Vassal to his own passions.

The first thing he did, was by an Embassy to explore the mind of the Emperor
concerning Peter, but receiving dilatory answers, he made 2 invasions, the one
into Bavaria where his Army and General were defeated, the other into Styria
and Carniola, whence he carried away a great many Captives. This gave occasion
to the Princes of Germany to assemble at Colen, and by unanimous Resolution
there taken to invade Abas, which enterprise so succeeded, that Abas beaten in
two Battles, and having lost all his Country, as far as the River Gran beyond
Pre burgh, was forced to a submission, by which he was bound to receive Gisala
the banished Queen, to restore Austria, and other places, with the late
Captives: which Articles he stood not to, but spighting his Nobles, as the
occasion of his Misfortunes, under the pretense of convening them for Advice,
most treacherously flew them and their Children: but this the more incensed
others just indignation, so that the remains of them escaping to the Emperor,
engaged him and Peter against Abas. At Raab a signal Battle was commenced,
where by the revolt of Abas his Army, by which they satisfied for their former
Defection from Peter, Abas slain at Sh^ba.
Abas was forced to fly and in the pursuit slain at Sheba, as a Victime and
Sacrifice to the Ghosts of his murdered Nobility.

PETER was again restored by the Emperor, Peter restored.
who in triumphal progress rounded all Hungary, and having received the Royal
Dignity, by the election of the Bishops assembled at Alba, transferred it to
Peter, who returning to the same vicious and cruel Excesses, neither mindful of
his past, nor provident of his future fortunes, provoked the Hungarians under
two Captains Visca and Brunna, to another Combination and Rebellion against
him, but the design being timely discovered, the chief Accomplices were most
miserably tortured. Yet the Sedition abated not, for by another Conspiracy
inflamed by a general hatred against Christian Religion, scandalized by their
Kings enormous lives, the Hungarians privily sent for Andrew and Leventa,
according to the advice of King Stephen, out of Poland, whither they had been
banished; These lurking for a while at Newhausel, (now so called) by the river
Nitre, and assisted by the inhabitants, wreaked their revenge designed against
the King upon the Religion, massacring a great number of Bishops then assembled
at Pesth. Peter presently thereupon being forsaken of his own, Deposed by
Andre^ and his eyes put out, etc.
was drawn out of his hiding place in the Mossonian Grounds, and after his eyes
were put out, had his privities cut off, which disgraceful maims he survived
three years. So when prudence is wanting to the first fortune, the future is
always most dangerous.

ANDREW succeeded in the year of Christ 1047, Andrew the 5th. K.
He repressed the innovated superstition, and punished with the sword or
banishment such as had assisted him to Victory in his irreligious Cruelty.
Henry the Third, Emperor, then engaged in a Papal War in Italy, (between
Benedict the 9, and Sylvester the third, and Clement the Second, whom he placed
at last in St. Peter's Chair) being no way at Leisure to attend Hungary; but
that at last by his power determined, he resolved to revenge the injury done to
Peter, invading first the Southern parts of Hungary, but was forced to retreat
by the overflowings of the Lakes and Rivers; the next expedition was by water,
where he was worsted by a Stratagem, the last by water and land, His War with
Germany.
but with as had success, having advanced so far, and straightened for
provisions, that he was forced to desire license and leave to return. A peace
ensued this kindness, and as a pledge thereof, the Emperor gave his Daughter
in marriage to Solomon (the Son of Andrew) now confirmed in the succession to
the Crown.

BELA (the brother of Andrew) by whom he was made Duke of Pomerania, Bela the
6th. King.
and had hitherto lived in great Concord with him to the aggrandizing the
Hungarian Felicity; and a little before appointed by him to the Kingly
Government, could not brook this his Nephews advancement over his head:
assisted therefore by many of the Hungarians, and aided by the Poles, as
Solomon by Germany and ^ohemia by the Interest of Andrew, besides his standing
Legions, an engagement en^ed at the River Tibiscus, with various fortune,
until the Hungarians in detestation of the Christian Religion, and in revenge
of the suppression of Paganism by Andrew, revolted to Bela, who thereby became
Master of the Field; Andrew flying was trod down in the pursuit.

Bela used his victory with great clemency, freely giving life to the Rebels,
and dismissing the German Prisoners Ransom free; and applying himself to the
Government, appointed Markets and rates of things, lessened the Taxes and
Impositions; Money being not as yet known. He repaired and new built several
places, suppressed the Peasants and Boores, tumulting against the profession of
the Christian Religion, by sudden force; and though he gained the Kingdom by
violence and injury, His virtues
yet he governed it with piety and justice; and in the year 1065. the Third
year of his Reign, by a kind of Earthquake at the Town of Demes which
disjointed every part and Member of him, he dyed.

SOLOMON within a month after his Death was seated in his Throne by the power
of the Emperor; Solomon the 7th. K.
Geysa and Ladislaus the Sons of Bela, despairing of equal resistance, flying
for refuge into Poland; but the German Forces returning home, they resumed
courage, prevailing with Boleslaus the King of Poland to derive the friendship
contracted between their Father and himself to them his Sons; Boleslaus owing
so much to the merit of the Father, entered Hungary with them, but by the
Mediation of the Archbishop of Strigonium, Bela's sons pacified.
a Peace was happily concluded between them, on condition that Geysa and
Ladislaus should with the Title of two Dukes enjoy a third part of the
Kingdom, but the Sovereignty should abide in Solomon; This agreement with some
grudging suspicions lasted till Solomon, by the Assistance of the Dukes, took
Belgrade, the rich spoils whereof, a fourth part being only allowed the Dukes
by the advice of one Vidus, caused such a Rupture, that both had present
recourse to Arms. The first Encounter proved disastrous, but the second
fortunate to the Brothers, who had to their assistance Twenty thousand
Bohemians; this Battle was fought by the Vaccian Forest, and with great
resolution on both sides; Vidus was here slain, and Solomon thereby driven out
of his Kingdom.

GEYSA, Geysa the 8th. King.
now swayed the Hungarian Scepter, being busied in prosecuting his late
victory, for that Solomon appeared in the confines toward Presburgh,
endeavoring the restitution of his Fortune by the aid of the Germans, and other
adjacent people; and in this Martial angry mood he lighted upon the Bessi, who
had undertaken for their Liberty his final discomfiture, and severely chastised
this their preingaged arrogance; yet he advantaged not his own Affairs, till
Henry the Emperor appeared in his quarrel, and first took Newhausel and
advanced as far as Vacia, and seemed to threaten Geysa's Claim; but what he
wanted in strength to oppose, he was supplied with in Craft and Policy, to
impose upon the Germans, by a round sum of money sent them, upon which the
Emperor retired, intent upon a revengeful design against Pope Hildebrand.

And here an end was put to the Tragedies of so many Kings, The Emperors of
Germany no right in Hungary.
wherein we may observe by the way, that the Emperors though superior by
power and victory, could never make good their pretended Title to Hungaria, nor
those Kings who adhered to, or made use of their Arms to pass unpunished.
Geysa dies.
Geysa dyed by a natural death, the third year of his Reign; on whose
Affections Desideriue the Metrapolitan Bishop is said to have had so much
influence that he was once thinking to have rendered the Scepter to Solomon; But
bethinking himself that his privacy could not be without danger, and that it
would be rashness to trust the will and pleasure of an enemy, he resolved to
retain the Government.

LADISLAUS having gloriously passed the Ducal Dignity conferred on him by his
Brother, Ladislaus 9th. King his brother succeeds.
had the Regal Honor unanimously bestowed on him, as reputed a Prince of very
great Virtue and Piety, and though he refused the Crown because Solomon was yet
alive, yet the pertinacious importunity of the Hungarians overcame his modesty.
He first restored the true worship of God, and the good laws of his Ancestors
then obliterated and disused. He was assisted by an opinion of the divine
favor accompanying him in all his Actions, then which there is not a better
Instrument and Engine to govern the multitude, who conceived that the Crown of
Hungary, The reason why the Hungarians have such a veneration for that sacred
Symbol of Majesty.
with which the Princes are to this day inaugurated, came down from Heaven upon
the head of this Ladislaus.

He agreed with Solomon, for a certain yearly revenue, but he musing on his
ambition, designed on pretense of a friendly conference to betray him, but that
being discovered, He seized on him and imprisoned him at Visigrade, where being
condemned, at the intercession of a Nun admonished by Heaven, as she boasted,
he gave him Life and Liberty; which courtesy he strait abused, by engaging
Cuteschus the King of the Cumani to take his part, but unprosperously, his Army
being overpowered and discomfited, The strange forlorn condition of Solomon.
so that despairing of recovering the Kingdom, and weary of the World, he put
on Sackcloth, and betook himself to the woods and Caverns, living upon Acorns
and Berries, and drinking the water of the Lakes for his thirst, teaching the
world the uncertainty of all worldly things, and that felicity can be placed no
where but in death. It is reported he was seen once in the time of Coloman the
succeeding King, in whose Reign he also ended his Life, in the Woods of Istria.

In the mean while, Ladislaus reduced Dalmatia, and made it a perpetual
Appendix to the Hungarian Dominion, together with Croatia; There after followed
a war with the Emperor of Byzantium, or Constantinople, but it eveened with
loss to the Hungarians, for which the Bulgarian Victory and Conquest soon
after made amends. The Fury of the Cumani could nevertheless not be restrained,
till after three overthrowes, the last whereof was most courageously desended,
Ladislaus his valor.
at the banks of Ister, till Ladislaus with his own hands very difficultly slew
Achus their General, whose death stroke and broke the Constancy of this valiant
enemy, whose Confederates and Auxiliaries the Roxolani fell under the same
Fate, Russes.
and precariously obtained their Peace.

Poland was the next Scene of his Success, the cause of which Expedition was
their Expulsion of Boleslaus his great Friend and Familiar, who flying into
Hungary, tormented with an evil Conscience for the ills he had done, being
become of a good, a very bad man, died there. The Armies joined in the Confines
of Sauromatia, His Successes.
where he vigorously routed the Poles; nor desisted from his pursuit till he
had Sacked Cracovia the Metrapolis of that Nation, when Vladislaus the Brother
of Boleslaus, besought him Peace, which he obtained upon Condition that Miesco,
Boleslaus his Son, should have the Second Dignity.

The Sword being now sheathed, he built his Royal Seat of Varadin by the River
Chrysus. This City in our Times was the Chief and principal of the County of
Bihor, famous of old for the Sepulture of Kings, and the Sanctity of the place;
on the North are Hills planted with fruitful Vines, and watered with
ever-running Rivulets; the East aspects the Baths and Medicinal Springs; the
other part the plain and the woods encompasse. These great things effected,
this zealous Religious Captain even to the report of certain miracles wrought
at his Grave afterward, received at Bodrogh, Ladislaus invited to the Holy
Land war
Ambassadors from the Kings of England, France, and Spain, desiring his
assistance in the Sarazen War, which he denied not, but the Embassy took not
its effect, for he died in a new Expedition against Suatopologus of Moravia,
leaving by so much, a greater Name, by how much his Successors came behind him
in prowess and martial Achievements.

COLOMANNUS, Coloman the tenth King.
Ladislaus dying without Issue; succeeded his Uncle in the Throne, though
otherwise designed by him, for he preferred Almus his younger Nephew Son of
Geysa, as abler in body and mind, to Coloman the elder, whom he praedicted for
a Bloody man; But the Nobles sending for Coloman out of Poland, whither he had
fled (for fear of his Uncles words) Crowned him their King, his Brother Almus
being Tituladed with a Dukedom, and invested in a fourth part of the Kingdom.
Being thus advanced, as prosperous things do search the mind with sharper
pricks, he did not consider himself as a Governor and his People as Citizens,
but as an absolute Lord, and they his Slaves and vassals. About the same time
Peter the Hermit brought the Crusado into Hungary, The Crusado brought into
Hungary.
when Famine and the Plague throughout Christendom seemed to prevent his most
Religious Negotiation. Nevertheless in the Year 1096. Gualterus Sensavir was
entertained by him, and passage given him, he paying such a certain rate for
his provision, some of whose Soldiers straggling and committing some little
spoil about Belgrade, were seized and most basely and ignominiously handled,
which Gualter thought good to dissemble, intent upon his Expedition; Peter the
Hermit marching the same way upon the some Conditions, understanding at
Malevill, what had happened to his fellows, flew presently to his Arms, and
breaking open the Gates of the City, Peter the Hermit's ^verthrow
entered and slew 4000. Hungarians; but being pursued by Coloman, to avoid him,
fell into the hands of the Sultan of Nicia, who had an Army of Forty thousand
men, and lost more by his rashness and incogitance, than ever he could have
gained with his greatest moderation.

Nor did Godschalk the Priest fare any better, for entering Hungary upon the
former terms, his Soldiers from the affluence of provisions began to riot, and
forgetting the Laws of Hospitality, to abuse their Entertainers. To repress
this Insolence, Godscalk^ like Fortune by Coloman*
Coloman made after them to Belgrade with a great Army, where ensued a Battle,
but with such equal Fortune, that Coloman having recourse to Policy, prevailed
upon them under pretenses of civility and reconciliation, (desiring only the
Plunderers to be punished) that they confiding in his words disarmed
themselves, and were instantly when they no way suspected such usage, horribly
destroyed, not one of them being left alive to carry the news of this Massacre.
The Rear of those Forces arriving at Meersburgh a place encamped with the
Danow, Lynx, and Morasses; and ignorant of what had happned to their follows,
and knowing the agreement made for their passage, did wonder to see the
Straights shut to them, which, the King dreading the punishment of his perfidy
had so commanded; whereupon after a vain message to Coloman, they besiged
M^ersburgh, slew 700. of the Hungarians; but just as the Town was brought to
the utmost Extremity, a Panick-fear sei^ed on them, whereafter ensued a great
slaughter of them, the rest saved themselves by ^light.

But Godfrey of Bo^^ign anxious of the loss of those Legions, Godfrey of
Bollign his safe passage through Hungary.
succeeded better; for having debated the business and received an account of
the late slaughter by Godfrey of Ascha, he easily persuaded the Hungarians to
consent to another passage, at an enterview between them, to such a firm
understanding, that Coloman while yet Godfrey was at the said Malevill on the
Banks of Savi^^ having furnished him also with all manner of Provisions,
delivered to him his Brother Baldwin, whom he had left as Hostage for the
performance of the Agreement; though Bonfinus reports that the Duke having
taken Zemlin, opened his way by the Sword, and compelled Coloman being too weak
to oppose him, to consent at last to Passage through his Dominions. There
followed this Feud a Quarrel between Coloman and his Brother Almus. One part of
the Kingdom adhered to the King, the other to Almus; both Armies met at the
River Tybiscus by a Town called Varkon, where a Truce being concluded on, it
was further proposed, that the two Princes, to save the lives of others, should
determine their own Quarrel by Duel, ^ Custom then much in use in that Warlike
Nation, which Coloman refusing, the difference was for a while respited and
both parties laid down Arms, which presently were employed against the Russes,
but with ill Success; He makes Peace thereupon with the Venetians, and in the
mean time debaucheth the Fidelity of the Iadrenses their Subjects, whom to
reduce, Ordephalus was Commissioned, who recovered Iadra with a bloody
slaughter, and advanced his Successful Arms as far as Croatia, but was at last
by Coloman, assisted by the Styrians in the saccage of the Coast of Dalmatia,
engaged and overcome; and so all the places returned with Iadra again to his
obedience.

Hungary was now again divided by the Factions of the Brethren: Feud betwixt
the royal Brethren.
Almas twice suspected, and twice assisted by Forrainers, was once more
restored by the Arms of Hen. 5. Emp. but such was the arrogance of Colomans
fortune that seizing upon him, he caused his, and his Son Bela's Eyes to be put
out, without any trial or compearance before Judges; whence several grudges and
Conspiracies of the Nobles and secret seditious practices were occasioned and
somented against him; the effect whereof he prevented by sudden Death, which
happened in the twenty fifth year of his Reign.

STEPHEN, Stephen the 10th. King.
for his Sanguinous nature, as delighted in often seeing the punishments of the
Condemned) by his Father Nicknamed Thunder, was therefore placed under the
Government and Tuition of the most Eminent Persons for Nobility and Virtue,
under whom what he gained in Fame and Estimation, so freed from them, he lost
it as fast; notwithstanding the first and longest part of his Reign was very
prosperous. His first Enterprise was against the Russes, to restore Iarislaus
to that Government, who fearing his Uncle Uladomirs designs against him, had
fled into Poland; but he dying, the war ended as soon as it was begun; The next
Expedition was against the Bohemians, where worsted at the first Encounter, he
recruited his Army and overthrew them. Thrice he turned his Arms upon Bulgaria,
Macedonia, and Greece; and taking Belgrade razed Zengminum; afterward he
fought with various successes against Calo Johannes Emperor of Constantinople,
Calo Johannes defeated.
but finally had the better of it, forcing him to sneak home by by ways from
his progression as far as Ister, and that not without a signal defeat given him
in his retreat, at a Town called Mala Scala: though Bonfinius reports Stephen
to have been beaten at the River of Carassus, and to have besought his peace.

A Polish War ensued this in favor of the Russes against another Iarislaus
Duke of Halicia, whom Boleslaus King of Poland had resettled in his Estate,
wherein the Pole, otherwise a very Fortunate Prince, was Defeated by a
Stratagem of Stephens, joining himself to the Rear of the Polish Army upon
pretense of Friendship. And so when he had wearied his Cruelty abroad, he began
to exercise it at home, vailing his sloth with severity, murdering his Nobles,
and ravishing their Ladies: but in the twenty second year of his Reign, Stephen
puts himself into a Monastery, and resigns
troubled in Conscience with the flagitiousnesse of his Facts, he put himself
into a Monastery; though others write he only designed such a retirement.

BELA, Bela the 11th. King
his Cousin German, who had his Eyes put out as before, and flying was
entertained at Constantinople (which was the cause of the Quarrel between
Stephen and Calo Johannes) was by the wonderful inconstance of Fortune called
to a Crown, from his banishment; he had gained to his Wife, Helena Daughter of
Vr^^ Count of Augusta, by whom he had four Sons, Geysa, Ladislaus, Stephen, and
Almus: His adverse Condition had so sweetened his Felicity to him, that he
wholly intended his Repose, wherein he gave many signs of great abstinence and
Equity, notwithstanding he was not altogether faultlesse, for at an Assembly or
Convention of the Estates at Arad, though he seemed to be averse to any
Execution, yet he so wrought upon the affections of others, that most cruel
punishments were inflicted on the Authors of his Fathers occaecation. Hereupon
the Sons of the oppressed solicit Borichus, the Bastard Son of Coloman,
Borichus the Bastard Son of Coloman solicited to invade the Government.
to assume the Government, who with the assistance of some Poles and Russes,
came as far as Sajus, a River dividing both the Armies, where by the Discovery
of the Extraction of Borichus, the Poles deserted him, who was constrained to
fly for his Protection to Emanuel; Bela freed from this danger, by advice of
his Courtiers, took away the lives of two of the Chiefest Noblemen of his
Kingdom; and being given to drunkenness, in which he was full of promises,
soon after dyed.

GEYSA presently took upon him the Kingdom, Geysa the 12. King.
and managed his first Arms for the good of his Subjects: for Henry Duke of
Austria, aided by the Saxons and Stirians, to whom were added the Forces of the
Emperor Conrade, by the means and endeavor of Count Julian took Presburg: All
their Power he very gallantly first sustained, and then overcame in the
desperation of the Event, killing Seven thousand of the Germans, and taking
their Camp and Baggage. His next War was for his Confederates, for Lodomirus
aided by the Cumani, attempted to dethrone Minoslaus, whose Sister Geysa had
married; whom though with great loss by the Russes and the Cumani, he
reinstated. The Dalmatian War attended this, one in name but many in the
atrocity and fortune of the War; Manuel the Eastern Emperor invaded Dalmatia as
his Dominion, Manuel the Greek Emperors Exploits.
took the Castle of Rasus, and laid waste the circumjacent Country, and upon
the news of the advance of the Hungarians, came as far as the River Drina,
which parts Bosnia and Servia, and devasted both the Provinces, and in a set
Field overcame the joint Forces of the Confederates, who encouraged by fresh
and choice supplies, with the additions of the Bessi, by the Valor and
presence of the Emperor, were foiled again, and the Despot (or as the Language
terms him) the Archi-Zupan of the Country, was forced to submit to a Tribute,
which Success emboldned Manuel to a further attempt upon part of Hungary,
where he re-took Zeugmi^^^ repaired, after a most gallant resistance, and
Captivated a great number of the People, while Geysa was waging Wat with the
Russians.

For Lodomir ^enewing his Designs against Minoslaus, was ripe for the Revenge
of Geysa, when this diversion brought the Hungarians back upon John
Cantacuzenus, whom they Furiously and desperately set upon and overcame; but
another Army being dispatched by Manuel (retreating) under the Command of
Boricza, dis-peopled a great Tract of ground, and slew three Brigades of
Hungarians. This quarrel continued between them upon punctilio of Revenge, and
maintenance of acquist, after three several Treaties concluded and violated,
till Andronicus Duke of Naessa and Braniczobe, by treaty yielded him those
places, whereafter followed many bickerings, concluded in a League. The Holy
War resumed.
The Holy War was now recommenced by Conrade, and continued by Lewis of France,
both of which passed through Hungary, but by the perfidiousnesse of Manuci
suffered excceedingly. In whose Camp Borichus the Bastard, concealing himself,
was taken and killed: Geysa Died soon after in the Year 1160. and in the 20th.
of his Reign.

STEPHEN the Eldest Son of Geysa possessed a peaceful Scepter, Stephen the
13th. King.
which he indulged the rather for his Subjects sake, and to conciliate the
wavering affections of the Kingdom^ His first Effort was against Pope Adrian,
quarrelling about the Churches and Bishoprics of Istria and Liburnia. In this
War Manu^^ assisted him, which sorted not very luckily by reason of the
Hungarians intestine Divisions for the Uncles of Stephen insinuating themselves
into Manuel's favor, Ladislaus the elder Uncle, by sundry artifices and
collusions with that Emperor possessed himself of the Throne, vouchsafeing
Stephen the Title of a Dukedom who wisely absenting himself, the common Fate
of Usurpation befell Ladislaus, and restored Stephen again, after 5 months
unjust detainer from the Regality, by Ladislaus and not much longer; after
Stephen his second Uncle, substituted to his Brother by the same Faction, when
the People weary of them both, willingly received their Exile King.

But this was not done without much damage and danger to the Kingdom by the
Arms and Designs of Manuel, who now pretended to Hungary, so that after many
Conflicts and Depopulations, Stephen was Invested in Syrmia, without any Claim
to be made by him to Hungary, which Articles being broken on Stephen, the
Uncles part, and he af^esh invading the Dominions of his Nephew, assisted again
by the said Emperor, was wholly outed of his Principality, as his Confederate
Manuel from his part of Dalmatia. The Uncle Survived not long, being poisoned
by one of his Accomplices, who feared the Revenge of their practices and
conspiration against their Sovereign.

Stephen being therefore fully Established, the Peace was Confirmed at home,
but disquieted instantly from abroad; for Manuel the Emperor with the old
pretense of assisting Stephen, Arrived at the Banks of Ister, and from Belgrade
marched to the Seige of Zeugminum which at last was yielded to him, and with
that also Dalmatia and Syrmia, assigned by the Agreement for the Inheritance of
Bela his youngest Uncle, who had Married a Kinswoman of the Emperors. But
neither this dured long, for Stephen impatient of this Bargain sent an Army
under Dionysius, to revenge the injury, who was prosperous in one Encounter,
but was fatally defeated in the next by the Emperor.

BELA by the Decease of Stephen possessed himself of the Kingdom, Bela the 14
King.
which by his alliance with the Greek Emperor was composed and secured; In his
person Dalmatia and Syrmia, were united to the Crown of Hungary, and made
members thereof as of the same body. His Converse in Greece made him most
excellent in the Arts of Government, he first divided the Kingdom into
Provinces, Cities, and Boroughs, and made that institution in reverence of
Royal Dignity, that complaints should not be obtruded orally to them, but by
way of humble Supplication and Petition. He warred with Casimirus King of
Poland, upon a quarrel supported by both of them, in reference to the Duchy of
Halicia, but being but an auxiliary feud it was soon ended: As he did compose
those affairs of his Son in Law Isaac Angelus, the Constantinopolitan Emperor,
a weak yet Sacrilegious person. He reigned 17. years, and left a most
flourishing Kingdom to his Son Emerick.

EMERICK was wholly indisposed to War, Emerick the 15. K.
which the rather persued him; for the Venetians vexed at, and disdaining the
loss of Dalmatia, making use of the Land forces of Baldwin Earl of Flanders,
and Boniface Marquess of Montferrat, passing for the Holy Land in their
shipping, as Leagued with them in the expedition, (notwithstanding the
Thunderbolt of Pope Innocents Excommunication at the instance of Stephen, who
would have transferred the War to its proper place) took Iadra and reduced all
the Maritime part of Dalmatia.

But Emerick was more fortunate at home, having defeated a Conspiracy made
against him by Andrew and most of the Nobility by a most innocent but Majestic
device, coming of a sudden into their armed Company, with the Crown on his
head, which the Hungarians do naturally reverence, whereupon they all sheathed
their Swords and craved pardon, and were most magnificently and freely
remitted. He deceased in the eighth year of his Reign, and was succeeded by
Ladislaus the Third, who applying himself to the Reformation of the Government,
and the Laws, unhappily dyed in the 6 month after his Inauguration.

ANDREW the second, Andrew the 16 K.
for his virtue, was next advanced to the Regal Dignity. He sadly affected with
the discomfitures of the Christians, went himself Generalissimo into the Holy
Land, and passing into Asia overthrew the Sultan Abubeker, surnamed Seyseddine,
and the Successor of Saladine. He took also Damiata, and forced the Sultan to
retreat, to Caire, where he breathed out his unhappy Soul: Nor was it doubted
but that his victories would entitle him to the Holy Land the Christians being
both in the field, and in the Seige far superior, until the Nile overcame
them; for the Sultan breaking down the banks on both sides, the River swelling
to its usual heigh, overflowed into their Camp, whereupon pressed with hunger,
also and overwhelmed with misery, they capitulated for their permission of
departure, with the surrender of Damiata; Andrew bringing thence instead of
Victory the heads of St. Stephen and Margaret, His Expedition into the Holy
Land.
the right hands of benedict, Thomas, Bartholomew, part of the rod of Aaron,
and one of the Waterpots wherein Christ wrought his miracle of Wine. These
things the Hungarian Writers with intrusive Piety mainly defend. Others say
that he passed no further then Jordan, and having washed himself thrice therein,
as accounting himself disobliged from his vow, returned home.

His Justice was very remarkable, in that he justified Bancbanus (his Deputy in
his absence) who had slain his Queen, for that she had prostituted his Wife to
her vicious Brother, who came to visit her. He forgave the Venetian injuries,
made excellent Laws, and vested a negative power in the Nobles, to what should
be enacted without their Consent; By Gertrude he had three Sons, Bela, Coloman,
and Andrew, and Elizabeth his Daughter, not to be passed, for her eminent
Piety, without honorable mention, she was married to the Landgrave of Hesse,
who dying in the Holy Land, she betook her self to a Monastery, and was five
years after her death canonized by Pope Gregory the Ninth, at which
Consecration was present at Marpurg, Frederick the Emperor with diverse other
Princes, with a Conflux of 12 nundred thousand persons.

BELA the 4th. of that name was saluted King, Bela the 17. King.
while his Brother Coloman having expelled Daniel seized the Government of
Halicia and Lodomiria, himself being wholly addicted to Peace and quiet, but
herein fortune failed him, for the Tartars, (whose original described something
largely by my Author, but not to our present purpose we must here omit) with
whom joined the Cumani expelled by the same Tartars from their seats and
habitations in 1238. (by humble entreaties and profession of Christian
Religion, after they had been denied entrance or entertainment in Russia)
having been admitted into Hungary by the Kings single consent, proved the first
part of the ruin of that Kingdom: for the Hungarians offended with their
peremptory carriage and finding little redress ar Court, fell upon them of a
sudden and killed their King Kuthenes, who being thus provoked, kill slay and
burn whatever they came near, and at last joined themselves to the Tartars,
whose Invasion being rumoured before, was imputed to some design of the Kings,
to keep the Hungarians in peace with the Cumani.

Now whilst Peta one of the Tartarian Generals ravaged Poland, The Tartars
Invade Hungary.
Moravia, and Silesia, as Cadon another of their Captains did Russia, the
Emperor Bathuy Chan overthrew the Palatine of Hungary deserted of his people
at Russe-Port, and utterly crushed the Archbishop of Colozza in a moorish
ground, and laid wast all the Country as far as Vacia, and passing f^rther
totally defeated and vanquished Bela, striving in vain with the discords,
negligence and hatred of his Subjects.

Nothing remained to him in all Hungary, but Alba Regalis, Strigonium and the
Monastery of St. Martins, nor was the multitude of the slain by weapons, smoke
and clouds raised by Magic Art to be computed: Three years the Tartars
continued this ruin, searching in the Woods and Caves for the miserable
Inhabitants, others with feigned letters they allured from their hiding places,
The Tartar r^vage the Country
all which they slew, so that the stench of the dead Carcasses caused a Plague
and mortality, as a Famine was occasioned by the devastation of the Country.

By which means the Tartars were forced to abandon that Kingdom, carrying away
with them an inumerable Company into intolerable slavery. The Pope endeavored
to Christianize this savage Nation, and Bathuy Chan did grant a Truce and
Protection to the Monks, as Mango was converted, yet the other Leaders seeing
the vices of the Christians chose rather the Mohammedan Infidelity. The Tartars
thus departed, Bela by the aid of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem who from
the Faction of Rome had retired themselves into Illyria, where he had weathered
this storm, and others of the Crusado, who were frequent in those parts of
Croatia and Dalmatia, and the like assistance of the Frangipans received again
his desolate Kingdom, with his four Sons whom he had deposited in the
Fortress of Clissa.

But no sooner was he seated, then a just occasion led him against Frederick
the Emperor, who under pretense of sheltring him, had robbed him of his
Treasure, but expiated that fraud by a just force which vanquished him at Nova
a City of Austria whereby Bela gained all his enemies wealth and began to
revive the drooping spirits of the Hungarians; which while he intended by other
alleviaments, the Bohemian War recalled him, for Primislaus that King the great
friend of the Emperor Otho, so that he was called Ottho Ca^rus having married
the Widow of ^rederick attempted the recovery of Styria and Austria, not long
possessed. A fierce and cruel Battle was thereupon joined in Moravia, where
the Hungarians inferior in number and exhausted with the late War, were
overthrown and a peace made upon these conditions that the Bohemians should
enjoy Austria and the Hungarian stand seized of Styria.

STEPHEN the fifth swayed the Hungarian Scepter, Stephen the 18 K.
though not long, yet very gloriously, for he Revenged his Fathers discomfiture
upon Ottocarus, though at first he was worsted, afterward he made an
expedition against the Bulgarians, people of the Dacia Aureliana, (so called,
for that Emperors Transplanting them in Maesia from the new Dacia) and made
them willing to pay that Tribute which was due to his Predecessors. He reigned
but 2 years, leaving Hungary in a thriving condition.

LADISLAUS the fourth, Ladislaus the 19th. King.
the Son of Stephen succeeded, and was scarce 3 moneth^ old in the Government,
when a new War succeeded the former, as if Fortune had so ordered it, that the
Bohemian having ill used the 2. Kings Bela and Stephens, should satisfy for
his Injuries to the third King Ladislaus. Moravia was the Cause of the War,
wherein Ottocarus outstretched his bounds very immoderately. It was long
consulted hereupon by the Hungarians, how they should coun^erplot or oppose
these enc^oachments, when the Fates of themselves opened a Way.

The Princes of the Empire while they soveraigned it themselves without any
Chief or Head, The Original of the House of Austria.
were variously oppressed with the Factions of the Guelphs and Gibellines, by
which means it came to pass that the Name of the Counts of Hapsburg, then
obscure, igno^e, and unregarded, now exerted it self; and afterward augmented
by riches and power in Germany, and chiefly by the Marriage of Mary of
Burgundy, was thereby propagated far and wide, and became formidable to the
whole World.

Rudolphus the Major Domo or Mayor of the Palace to Ottocarus, was by the
persuasion of Venerus of Ments, declared and appointed Emperor, Ottocarus
could not brook a superior, Rudolphus Emperor.
nor Rudolphus endure a peace, Ladislaus is therefore by him adopted and
engaged as his Confederate in the War, by which Ottocarus was wholly routed and
vanquished; and beaten out of Austria, shut up in the Fiefs of Bohemia and
Moravia.

At the same time Lascus Niger the King of Poland, had for protection and
assistance addressed himself to Ladislaus, being expelled his Kingdom by Conrade
Duke of Massovia, which Ladislaus readily granted, and in his aid forthwith
subdued his rebellious Subjects, This war was taken up by the revival of
another by Ottocarus, who no way enduring the Dominion of Rudolphus formerly
his Servant, stirred up Oldamir the Duke of the Cumani, to invade Hungary the
Emperors Confederate, and for the better ligament of their new Friendship, took
to Wife that Dukes Danghter Kunigunda, unlawfully repudiating his former Wife
Margareta; The Cumani aided by some Tartars, came as far as the Lake of Hood,
burning and spoiling all the Country about. Against these Ladislaus fought
successively, Ottocarus himself after a total rout being slain in the Battle.
Peace thereupon was granted to the Queen of Bohemia, on condition that her Son
Wenceslaus should marry the Daughter of Caesar, and to hold Bohemia from the
Emperor as his Beneficiary.

But though this last Battle was so prosperously fought, yet was it the Cause
of greater Evils, for the Tartars and Cumani that escaped, implored the
assistance of their Countrymen, who following their unknown and bloody Tract in
the year 1280, broke into Hungary, renewing and carrying the dismal slaughter
of the former time as far as the Province of Pesth: The Tartars reinvade
Hungary.
whosoever they met with (for the pleasure of the Tyrant) were consumed, others
mancipated to perpetual slavery, very many with limbs cut off survived their
punishment; such as were left in the Highways, sometimes by sight, often by
their groans and howlings, knew their Wives, Husbands, Children or Parents; by
which barbarity the Kingdom was so oppressed, that there were not Cattle
enough to draw the Wains, and those the men drew, in contempt of the King, were
called Ladislaus Chariots: For he having married the Daughter of Charles King
of Sicily, grew so outrageous in his lust, and void of all fear and shame, that
he stuprated the Wifes of the Cumani, and most libidinously vitiated them; the
which Cumani (as the friendship of Princes not conciliated by virtue is very
temporary) at a large Treatment given him at Keretzegum, there slew him, and
put an end to his flagitious Practices.

ANDREW the third, Andrew the 20 K.
enjoyed the Kingdom after Ladislaus the Nephew of Andrew the second, by the
Daughter of the Marquess of Este and Son of Stephen. Boniface the eighth,
obtruded Charles Robert, a Youth of twelve years of age, the Great Grandchild
of Charles Duke of Anjo^, who at the solicitation of Pope Clement the fourth,
after many fruitless Wars managed by the Papacy, deprived Manfred the Bastard
of Conrade the Emperor, of the Kingdom of Sici^ia, and suffered the same
Fortune by Peter of Arragon. This Andrew, as he gained the Kingdom by the love
and affection of his Subjects, so he maintained it by his own worth and Virtue.

He was in the beginning of his Reign taken Prisoner by Albert of Austria,
Adolphus of Nassau then Emperor, and after his enlargement at Vienna, Andrew
established in the Government.
contracted with Agnes the Daughter of the said Albert, which said Contract
upon his return was annulled by the States of Hungary, as done in his
Restraint, which occasioned a War with various Successes in Austria, until
intestine Troubles forced Albert to make Peace, that he might bend his Arms
against Adolph, whom he slew, and advanced himself (though not unpunished for
his disloyalty) into the Imperial Throne. Andrew in the mean while gently
reduced the favorers of Charles and the Pontifical Authority, by which he was
invested; but that len^i^y of his was abused to his Contempt and avilement; for
the seditious practices of the same men, brought Charles, Andrew yet living,
into Hungary, but the danger rendering King Andrew's Authority more acceptable
to his other Subjects, restrained Charles his Advance. In the conclusion of his
Reign the Venetians being Excommunicated by the Pope, for the seizure of
Ferrara, the Iadrenses revolted to the Hungarians, to reduce whom, Belletus
Iustinianus was sent with a power; but by the Stratagems of the Vaivod of
Dalmatia, was presently repulsed.

Andrew Deceasing, Wencess^us chosen King by the Nobility.
the Hvngarians being divided among themselves, one part of them acknowledged
Charles for King, others blamed the Pope for meddling with a matter no way
belonging to him, under pretense of Religion: The Generality therefore being of
that opinion; the Archbishop of Colozza, the Bishop of Varadin, and other
their Accomplices, invited Wenceslaus (Son of Wenceslaus the King of Bohemia who
refused) to accept and entertain the Crown; wherein the strangeness of Fortune
is observable, that the Issue of Ottocar^^ (so odious to the Hungarians) should
now be spontaneously desired of them. But that a^dent and sudden affection soon
cooling, and Charles his Partisans, with the assistance of Albert of Austria*
infesting Moravia with frequent incursions, Wenceslaus the Father mistrusting
the levity of the Hungarians, made an Expedition into the Kingdom, where
finding his Son near Pesth (who came to meet him with his Crown on his head,
^i^hly adorned) he carried him away presently with him, together with his
Crown, into Bohemia; giving this reason to the Demands of the Hungarians, that
he did it to avoid an imminent storm: hence a Quarrel and hidden War: for
Uladislaus L^ctius being removed from the Polonian Scepter, flying to Amadeus
or Es^^s, the Palatine of Hungary, watched an opportunity of recovering his
Kingdom from Wenceslaus: whose Government, being too heavy for the Poles, the
Palatine levying an Army soon re-settled his Guest, and Wenceslaus shortly
after Deceased, so that this was a kind of Interregnum or Vacancy.

Boniface the eighth, Charles named for King, and imposed upon the Hungarians
by the Pope.
yet furiously persisting in Execution of his purpose and designation of
Charles, by Nicholas Cardinal of Ostia, with the usual Anathema Excommunicated
the Hungarians, who on the contrary declared the Pope guilty of disturbing the
Peace, and interdicted his Bishops in the same manner (who at present seemed to
acquiesce, awaiting a fitter opportunity the adverse party being too prevalent,
for their Revenge) and the rather provoked by this Papal thunder, proceeded to
the Election of Otho the third Duke of Bavaria, to the Kingdom, in the Year of
Christ 1305. He received the Crown gratis from Wenceslaus for which great sums
had been offered by the Hungarians, Otho Duke of Bavaria chosen K. by the
Nobility.
and was inaugured at Alba Re^alis; and the better to win and insinuate himself
into the favor of the Nobles and People, he wore the Crown (which is had as
before in the greatest veneration) constantly in his Progresses and public
appearances. Once as he entered Transylvania he lost the Crown, being put up in
a Case and tied to his Horses Saddle, which was not found till next day, and
this was taken for an unlucky Omen of his Expulsion first into Russia, by which
people he was for a while again restored, and his last final deprivation by
Ladislaus Vaivod of the Kingdom, who sided with Charles and the Papal
pretenses, though he had been one of the advancers of Otho before. By this
means much Blood was spilt by those intestine Divisions; the Cardinal Gentilis
being sent again with new Curses and Bans against the Adversaries of Charles,
which brought innumerable mischief^ both upon Clergy, Nobility, and People,
most unnaturally divided one against another.

These Factions having so long oppressed this Nation, it was unanimously agreed
to confer the Supreme Power upon a single person they chose thereupon in the
Feilds of (...) Charles the Nephew of (...) ^laudus King of* Sicily, Charles
the 21 K. of Hungary.
by Mary the Daughter of Stephen the fourth, and Son of Charles Martell; in
whom the Discords and Feuds of the Nobility were by his Virtues reconciled. He
was encircled in the presence of his Father, with that Crown which Ladist^us
had surrendered* His first Exploit and Enterprise was against Matthew
Trinesiniensis; who had refused Allegiance, whom he overcame in a bloody Battle
at Cassovia; but with great hazard and dubious Event; his numerous Troops of
Horse, among whom was a veterane tried Band of the Knights of the Order of St.
John, turning their backs to a Brigade of 1700 Curassiers. Nor did the
Conspiration cease here, for a bloody and ^nefarious Design was laid at
Visigrade, where Felicianus Sakanus a special Servant of the Kings with a drawn
Sword, struck at him, who inclining his body, the blow cut off the Fingers of
the Queen; nor had the King escaped, had not the Soldiers of the Guard freed
him (being mounted) from imminent Death. The Assassinate for terror, was
quartered, and his four quarters sent as a spectacle, through the Kingdom, and
his Family and Posterity utterly extinguished.

Intending now an Expedition against the Sarazens, a revolt of the Valachians
withheld him, he advanced therefore against Bo^aradine the Vayvod thereof, and
Compelled him with the Expense of the War, to pay the yearly Tribute; but
returning he was set upon by that perfidious Nation in the abrupt and least
passable places, and Defeated, he himself changing his Habit for his easier
Escape. Others say he undertook this War upon no ground, and therefore they
ascribe the Event to his wickedness; Burying the Noble memorable Acts of this
man in this Overthrow, The Virtues of Charles
who was so Potent and Prudent a Prince, that most of the Kings of his Time
were by his Force or Prudence obliged to him. He had to his Wives, Mary the
Daughter of Casimir Duke of Poland; Beatrice Daughter of the Emperor, and
Elizabeth the Daughter of Uladislaus of Poland; by the last he had Issue
Charles, who died at the years, as Ladislaus at four months, end. His surviving
Son Andrew had Apulia; Lewis, Hungaria for his Patrimony. Under this Charles
the Realm recovered its former Puissance, for he Ruled over Rama, Servia,
Gallicia, Saler^a, L^d^miria, Cumania, and Naples; far Famed, had he not
begotten his Son Lewis, although that also, be attributed to his Glory.

The Third BOOK.
LEWIS not inferior to so great a Father, Lewis the 22. King.
and skilled in martial Affairs, exercised his first Arms against the insolence
of the Valachians and Servians, who contemning his youth recoyled from the
obedience they owed and performed to his Father, but were reduced to the same
Conditions. Those being subjugated he solemnly dismissed his mother, whose
Sanctity had procured her a veneration even unto Superstition, to Apulia, and
thence to Rome, requesting of his brother Andrew the Loan of 44 thousand Marks
of gold, (as the Covetousness of the Times then required) for the price of his
Confirmation in the Kingdom of Naples: which Affair concluded, he aided his
adoptive Father Casimir (who before had designed Charles his Natural Son, but he
survived not long after) against John of Bohemia and the Lithuanians, whom he
attempted to force to the belief of the Christian Religion, but found the
difference betwixt Words and Swords. The Bohemian advanced as far as Cracovia,
he again expelled out of that Dominion, from whence he was not yet retired, but
the Tartars made another invasion into Hungary, but nevertheless were so well
received by Andrew the Vaivod, The Tart^rs beaten and expelled out of Hungary.
Son of Ladislaus aforesaid, (who avoiding their Arrows, came to handy blows
with them, and the dint of Sword) that they were utterly overthrown, and their
General Atlamus taken prisoner, and the name of the Tartar after this defeat
not heard of in Hungary for many years.

With the same fortune he prevailed against the Croats, in which expedition he
was personally present, accompanied with Stephen Neman Prince of Bosnia, whose
Daughter he had married, for while as yet he stayed in the Confines of Croatia,
they submitted themselves, and took the Oath of Fidelity and Allegiance: but
the Venetian War was bloody, who in spite of Lewis, reduced Schodra to their
subjection, after he had lost many men in the attempt of relieving it. While
these things were doing; Joan the Wife of Andrew new-invested in Apulia, for
the love and lust of her Adulterer the Prince of Tarentum, The Histor^ of J^an
the v^ulter^us Qu* of Naples.
designed to transfer that Kingdom with her self to his Embraces, by the death
of her husband, whom she hung with a silken halter. This Fact obliged Lewis to
a just revenge, which to prosecute (having in vain received Letters from Joan
in Excuse thereof and by his answer declared her guilty of that and other
precedent and subsequent Crimes) he marched into Italy, where he was assisted
by Phillip of M^ntua, Malatesta of Ariminum, and other Princes, whose
Governments by the sloth of Charles the Emperor were beco^e absolute Tyrannies.

By these Arms he drove Lewis Prince of Tarente the Adulterer, Lewis success
against her.
and Ioane his Wife out of Italy, to Marseilles and Avignion, and possessed
himself of all the Dominion of Apulia, on that side the Sea, and taking the
Duke of Dyrrachium beheaded him by the common Executioner, as he sent the
brothers of the said Lewis (with the Son of Andrew as his Ward) bound in Chains
into Hungary, whether, the Pest raging in Italy and depopulating many places,
and whole Provinces, he soon after followed, and placed Stephen Laskus his
Vaivod in Transylvania.

But the Neapolitans rebelling, as not enduring a foreign Government, the
Hungarians left in that Kingdom, twice defeated them, once by a Salley made by
Stephen the Governor of Naples, whom they had blocked up, and the next time by
Volphordus in plain Battle, though he lost his life as the price of the
victory; when Ioane having solicited and obtained new Supplies, at the
instances of the Pope, to whom as a Gratuity she consigned Avignion, Avignion
how invested in the Pope.
and to whose Arbitrament she submitted her Cause, attempted again the recovery
of the Kingdom, whereupon Lewis returning with wonderful fortune, took
Barletum, Carnesium, where his life was near endangered, Luceria and Salernum,
(with most of all the Towns) and placing Garrisons therein in the year of
Jubilee came to Rome. The Papal seat was then at Avignion, wherefore the Prefect
of Rome, Nicolaus Rentius, a man of eminent worth and virtue, meeting the King
with the Estates of the City, proffered him the absolute supreme power thereof,
but he refusing, it was tendered to Charles the fourth, out of fear of Clement
the Pope, to whom, Charles being of an abject spirit, delivered the said
Rentius Captive.

Joan in the mean while never left urging of Clement to take her part,
promising great advantages to satisfy his Covetousness, if he would effect
her Restitution, which in fine, by much entreaty to Lewis, who was religiously
given, and could not be wrought upon any other way, was obtained at his hands.
The Venetians fell by his next Arms, for Lewis confederated with Leopold of
Austria, and the Cr^atians invaded the Maritine part of Dalmatia, in two
inroads by Friuli and Istria, Lewis's success against the Venetians
Tarvisia frustrated his Conquest, but Spalatra, and other places opened their
gates to the experience and Courage of his veterane Army, securing and
confirming some places, and reducing others, among whom were the inconstant
Schodrians. The Total of this expedition amounted to the Acquists of that part
of the Venetian Territory which extends it self from the Bay of Phanaticia, to
Dyrrachium, and all Dalmatia, in lieu of those places taken in this War which
by an agreement he surrendered.

But this agreement lasted not long, both parties taxing each other, as the
manner is, for the breach of it, though the fault was in the Venetians, who
engaging Charles the Emperor, invaded the Dalmatians and Croats, put by this
Treaty under the protection of Lewis; These Invaders were encountered first
successefully by Paul, the Son of Ladislaus the Vaivod, but unprosperously by
Stephen of Transylvania, whose rashness and fury overthrew him, and made him a
Prisoner to the Victor. Thereafter many were the vicissitudes of fortune. Lewis
by this Defeat, was persuaded by the Croats to a two years truce, which
expired, Leopold growing insolent, was beaten by the Venetians and recruiting
himself for another Encounter, The Genoese and Venetian Quarrel.
was induced by Lewis to another two years Cessation, but he having underhand
held intelligence with the Genoese, privily prepared for a War, by the dread
whereof the Venetians with Restitution of what they had got, were glad to
descend and Consent to a Peace.

The Genoese nevertheless proceeding in their Enterprise, reduced the Venetians
under the Conduct of Peter Auria to Extremity, but themselves afterward puffed
up with success, were subjected to the wheel of Fortune by the invention of
Guns, Invention of Guns.
and Engine found out then by Bertholdus Niger; in fine, Lewis by Land, and the
Genoese by Sea, besieged and took Clodia, when all parties wearied with the
many miseries of the War, referred themselves to the arbitrament of the Duke of
Savoy, who first of all ordered the razing of the Castle of Tened, as the
occasion and continual foment of the quarrel, awarding also the Decennial
payment of 7 thousand Crowns, by the Venetians to Lewis, who content with the
glory of his Actions, and this incompetent sum in respect of his Expenses,
ceased the War.

While these things were acting in Venice, Pope Urban excited Lewis against
Ioane, because she took part with Clement the seventh the Antipope, who
forthwith dispatched away Charles his Son (as some say) others his Nephew by
Andrew, who with 8000 men passed into Italy, and was welcomed there with the
Acclamations of Victory. He subdued sever^l Towns, and mulcted the Florentines
in the sum of 40. thousand Crowns. At Rome, he was adorned with all the Regal
Habiliments; Ioane placing her sole hope in the Duke of Anjou. She had
intermarried for her fourth husband, Otho of Brundusium, the Tarentine during
in Custody, and the King of Sardinia her next husband dead in Spain. Otho
though he took part with Urban against the inclination of Ioane, yet was
constant to her against the Hungarians, who took in several other Towns.
Charles being arrived and introduced into Naples, Joane taken in Castle Novo ^n
Naples.
besieged Joan, who had shut up her self in Castle Novo. Otho comes and
besieges the City and the Besiegers, till Charles sallying out, he was after a
gallant opposition by reason of a fall off his Horse taken Prisoner, and Ioane
hereupon despairing of any relief forced to surrender.

But Lewis of Anjou, Uncle and Regent of Charles the sixth of France, Lewis of
Anjou invested in Naples.
whom Clement had invested and ^eoffed in the Realms of Apulia and Sicilia (as
purchased from Ioane) with 30 thousand Horse (the number of the Foot uncertain)
passed into Italy, whom Charles inferior in Strength, so bafled with delays,
that his great numbers proving burdensome to him, and Lewis dying thereupon,
either by disease or poison, the Frenchmen two or three in Company were glad to
beg their way and departure home.

Lewis in his return out of Italy to Hungary, enterprized by Nicholas the
Palatine upon Bosnia, which had revolted from him, but he wearied out with the
Siege of Sebenico, was easily overcome. Better Fortune attended him in his
Expedition against Stratomirius, the Prince of the Bulgarians, who vanquished
was taken Captive at Gemleick, but soon after by the good will of the King, and
the liking of the Kingdom restored to his Principality.

The Family of the Piasti failing in Casimir, Lewis chosen King of Poland.
Lewis was now crowned King of Poland, the first of foraign Princes that was
chosen by them: the Administration of this Government he committed to his
mother Elizabeth, the Customary delights of his native Country inviting his
return. Nor did she continue long there, having by her levity and flexibility
gained the love of some, but not the reverence of all persons; wearied
therefore with new Commotions, she departed rather frighted then feared into
Hungary, but prefering the privilege of absoluteness before the humors of
another, she was soon induced to retire back again.

In the mean while the Nobles of the greater Polonia created Vladislaus the
Duke of Cusavia, of a Monk, to their King, whom Sabinius though chief of the
same Counsel and Combination with other of the Nobility on the part of Lewis
overcame, and sent him Captive to Lewis, who by his extraordinary Clemency, in
which he was not superable, gave him an Abbey as satisfied in having reduced him
to his former Condition; the same Fate pursued the Rebellious Russes, who were
now annexed to the Crown of Hungary, and several Lords or Vaivods set over
them. Hence Jealousies and suspicions, and ill rumors among the Polanders,
which Uladislaus Prince of Oppelon late Governor of white Russia fomented; the
reason of the Kings erecting this new Authority, was partly his propensity to
his own blood and kindred, and partly because he believed that that Country
under the name of Hallicia and Lodomiria did belong to Hungary.

This indisposition of Affairs, and the weariness of those frequent journevs
the King made into Poland, who loved his ease and was delighted with Home,
caused him to appoint a Triumvirate of Polonian Noble men to the Administration
of that Kingdom. He himself intending the Chastisement of the Vayvod of
Valachia who had Revolted from him, received an overthrow by his Lieutenant
Ladislaus of Transylvania, being shamefully beaten between the Rocks and
abruptnesses of Novigrade, which loss he repaid to effect; meeting the same
Enemy secure by reason of their late Victory in the Plains of Bulgaria, and
making them thereby to submit to their former Tribute. His Exploits aainst his
Rebels.
About this Time the Cumani received the Christian Faith, and Lewis upon the
same Religious account marched against the Lithuanians (who depredated Russia)
and restrained, and upon their Submission pardoned them, and restored to them
their Duke.

Lewis had Daughters Catharina, Mary, and Hedwiga; Catharine died young, Mary
with the Succession to the Crown, was Married to Sigismund, whose Father was
Charles the 4th Emperor; Hedwiga by the Consent of the Nobles of Poland was
chosen Queen thereof, whom Iagello Great Duke of Lithuania afterward Married,
and converted his Kingdom to Christianity, and by the Name of Uladislaus was
worthily Registered among the Kings of Polonia.

LEWIS died at Tyrnaw, His Death.
to the great loss and detriment of Hungaria, a man of a Courageous and
courteous mind, bountiful to Learned men, and very skilful in Astrology, for
which he was styled Ordongos Lajos by his People. He used in Disguises to visit
the Towns and places near his Residence, inquiring into the lives and manners
of his Magistrates and himself, by which he might better correct what was
amiss, and if report pleased him enjoy the Happiness and Felicity thereof.

Mary the second Daughter of Lewis (her Sister Hedwiga being Married to the
King of Poland and settled there, Mary notwithstand-ing her sex styled the 23.
King.
by which means a strict League and union was begun between both Nations) was
saluted with the Title of King of Hungaria; she was betrothed to Sigismund of
Brandenburg, but their minority hindered the present consummation of the Match.
She Governed happily by the prudence of her ministers, and the beloved memory
of her Father, but as soon as she entrusted the whole menage of the State into
the hands of Nicholas Gara the then Palatine (who by his insolence was
unsufferable to the Nobles) a Civil dissension, inflamed by the envy and hatred
against him, arose in the Kingdom, the secret Design whereof was, the
deposition of her from the Throne.

Some of the Grandees thereupon consulted to call in Charles Surnamed the
Little Son, or as others, Nephew of Lewis (who had relieved and afterward
distressed Pope Urban) and was now gloriously invested in the Kingdom of Naples
(out of Italy,) delegating to him upon this Errand, the Bishop of Zagrabia, who
effected the business notwithstanding the disswasion of Charles his Wife. His
passage into Hungary, was by the way of Sipontus and Zagrabia, where
unexpectedly Arrived, he pretended for his rapinous seizure of the Scepter, the
Composure of those Tumults and Factions in the State.

This caused Sigismund (whom his Father in his Life time had sent into Hungary
to be educated and fashioned according to the Hungarian manners) to fly into
Bohemia, while Charles being honorably received evey where, surprised the
Castle of Buda, and in presence of the Queen and her Grandmother (who wisely
tempered and dissembled their resentments) caused himself to be Crowned at Alba
Regalis; and not long after, was so inveagled and blinded by his Parasites
(with whom he most delighted) that he could not foresee the danger of his
unjust Usurpation. For the Generality and the Nobles being estranged in their
affections, Elizabeth the Queen Mother, and the abovenamed Palatine, under
Color of a private Conference at the House of Blasius Forgatz, there by a
private hand Assassinated him, upon the rumor whereof, Charles assassinated
the Italians that came with him, Covenanting for their safety, obtained a
dismission into their own Country.

The Queens were now in hopes of a plenary Restitution, when the Banus or
Prince of Croatia took upon him the Revenge of Charles his Death, assisted
therein by some of his Favorers, by whom Elizabeth was Drowned in the River of
Bruszula, and Mary with somewhat better fortune preserved in Custody; The
Palatine and Forgatz were both cruelly slain. Sigismund having notice of
Charles his Fate, and sensible likewise of the danger the Queens were in,
levied a great Army, for the Expense whereof he pawned the Marquisate of
Brandenburg to Iodocus and Procopius, his Cousin Germans.

His Fortune in this Expedition was answerable to his strength; Sigismund
Husband of Mary undertakes and effects her Restitutio^s.
for intent against the Croatian, (who frighted with the danger had Articled
for his Indemnity with Mary, whom he had set at liberty) he possessed himself
of that Country with Bosnia, and at Quinque Ecclesiae, put him to Death with
thirty of his partakers and Conspirators against the Queens. The Bishop of
Zagrabia, in respect to his quality, had his goods only Confiscated. Thus
Charles expiated his prodigious Lust by the Queens, as the Queens for the
ungovernance and breach of Faith by the Banus, and he for his Cruelty by
Sigismund, whom Hungary now acknowledged as their new and rightful Sovereign,
as the Kingdom of Naples did Lewis the Son of Charles.

Sigismund maintaining his Kingdom by the same Prudence with which he
recovered it, Sigismund his (...).
made an Expedition against the Valachians and Moldavians, and slew their
Vaivod, Stephen; and annex^d them by Oath of Subjection to the Crown of
Hungary. But War ceased not here, for Alexander indevoured to restore the
Valachians to their Liberty; and being too weak and inferior in force, called
in the Turks to his assistance, whom also Sigismund put to a most shameful
flight, and pursuing them as far as Thrace, Mary dies, the Title to the
Succession disputed.
took in Nicopolis. But the Death of Mary sowered the sweetness of this
Victory; for Uladislaus of Poland now pretended a Right to the Kingdom, by
virtue of the Agreement made betwixt Mary and his Wife Hedwiga.

But John Canysa the Archbishop of Strigonium, possessing the abrupt passages
and difficulries of the Mountains, kept out Uladislaus, though the Turks, far
more dangerous, could not be repressed. Their Design was the recovery of
Nicopolis, in order whereunto they laid waste the adjoining Dominions of
Hungary, (whither their Arms in the minority of their Empire had not yet
reached) but Bajazet the fourth King, Bajazet's great Successes.
having vanquished Mark the Prince of Bulgaria and Lazarus the Despot of
Servia, as on the Asian side he had Conquered the Kindome of Armenia;
thereafter infested Phocis and Thessaly, and now threatened with the Siege of
Nicopolis, a further progress of his Victories.

To avert this storm, Sigismund dealt with him by Ambassadors, but words not
availing, he prepared with force to Encounter this Enemy, levying to that end a
very select Army of Hungarians, Germans, and French, resolving to crush and
suppress the rising greatness of the Turk, before he grew too potent with so
many additions, which his successful Scymitar had annexed to his first mean and
inconsiderable Patrimony. In this Expedition he was accompanied with John the
Hardy, Son of Philip Duke of Burgundy, who jointly retook in many Towns seized
by the Turks in Bulgaria, and in one great Battle carried away the Victory,
when the Frenchmen according to the light humor of their Nation, were so
dissolved by Lust and Luxury, and became so arrogant withal, that they boasted
they could sustain and support the falling Heaven with their Spears.

Bajazet having failed of his design upon Constantinople, and risen from the
Seige thereof, was now in person before Nicopolis, whither Sigismund being also
come, The Battle of Nicopolis most fatal to the Christians.
he put his Army into Battalia, giving the Van to his Hungarians, as best
skilled in the Turkish manner of fighting, and placing the French as his
Rear-guard; who taking this for a disgrace, before Sigismund had opened his
Battle, fell suriously open the Turk, whose Arrows so galled and terrified
their Horses, that their Riders being forced to alight, they ran soul upon the
Hungarians, who misgiving this for a rout; fell into a present dismay, and
thence to flight, wherein numbers of them perished in the Danow, John of
Burgundy with abundance of other Nobles, was taken Prisoner and was ransomed
with the sum of 200 thousand Crowns. Sigismund doubtful of his life in a light
Galley escaped to Constantinople, whence by Rhodes, and so to Daimatia, and by
the help of the Archbishop of Serigonium, he recovered his Kingdom. Bajazet
fortunated with this Victory, not long after became far more miserable then the
vanquished, (so deceitful is the greatest assurance of humane things) being
overcome by Tamerlane (by my Author called Temir) the great Cham of Tartary,
Bajaze^ a sad Spectacle of humane Frailty.
and enclosed in an Iron Cage, made his Footstool when he took Horse, and
wherein betwixt rage and impatient indignation he brained himself against the
Grates.

The misfortune of this Field, opened a way to the revenge of those persons who
were related to the 30. Noblemen, put to death by him at Quinque Ecclesiae, for
by a potent Conspiracy, in which Ladislaus the King of Poland was concerned (by
their invitation of him to assume the Scepter) Sigismund was seized on a
sudden, Sigismund seized and made a Prisoner.
and put into the Custody of the sons of Nicholas the late Palatine in the
Castle of Soklos (Buda and the places confining with Germany adhering to him
notwithstanding) which gave opportunity to Ladislaus, to pursue his design upon
the Kingdom of Naples, (newly transferred by Pope Alexander from Lewis the Son
of Charles aforesaid for his encroachment upon the Church Territory, to Lewis
of Anjou) which he reovered in his own right. He was now besieging the often
mentioned The City of Z^ra.
Iadra, and had forced it from the Venetians, when news was brought him that
Sigismund having over-perswaded, and by promises prevailed on the Mother of the
Sons of Nicholas the Palatine, Sigismund ^reed.
had obtained his liberty, and having privily passed into Moravia and Bohemia,
had openly resumed His Title and the Government, and had put to Death Stephen
the Vaivod of Transylvania, with some few others as the Authors of the late
Treason against him.

Hereupon Ladislaus thought best for the preservation of his own (for another
defection of the Neapolitans was likewise suspected) to part with Iadra and his
pretenses upon the Venetians for a sum of money, and to return: But Sigismund
had settled himself sure in the Government, and was now engaged in a War against
the people of Bosnia, who had during these late Troubles, renounced their
Allegiance to the Crown of Hungary.

Nor did he engage with better fortune against the Turks, although weakened by a
civil War between the Five Sons of Bajazet, his Lieutenant Stephen^ Lossontius,
The Hungarians ^^orsted by the Turks.
aiding Mark the Vaivod of Mold^via, who had shook off the Turkish yoke, being
discomfited, and the said Vaivod deposed by Mahomet the fifth King of Turkey. Who
to prosecute this quarrel commanded Isaac the Bassa of Bosnia, to invade
Hungary; where notwithstanding he was defeated twice by Nicholas Pe^ri, yet by
the negligence and divisions among the Hungarians, he had at last the better of
it, destroying by fire many Towns and Villages.

Rupert the Emperor being deceased, Pope John the 22. dealt with the German
Princes to elect Sigismund in his place, as a person whose regal Majesty,
Magnificence, and Virtue, the skill and readiness of many Languages, did
excellently adorn and prefer before all the Princes, his Cotemporaries, as
inferior likewise to none of his Predecessors, if success in Battle, and
chastity in Bed had not been wanting. Soon after his Assumption to this
Dignity, he threatened a War against Uladislaus of Poland, but it was superseded
by a Truce, Belgrad^^ put into the possession of Sigismund.
which a Peace ensued. The Turks busy encroachments disturbing and disseising
his Neighbors, he had Belgrade consigned him by George Bulchus the Despot of
Servia, who had other places in Hungary in exchange thereof: by which means the
Turks being put to a stand, he had leisure to employ his Army against the
Venetians, aided by the Florentines, who had seized several places, but after
some bickerings this difference was also composed, for that Sigismund was now
engaged in a Bohemian War in maintenance of his new Title to that Crown: About
this time the Council of Constance was held, and Pope John convicted of 40.
Crimes, committed to the Custody of Lewis Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Otho
Colonn^ by the name of Martin the Fifth, placed in the Papal Chair. At this
same Council John Hus and Hierome of Prague were Condemned and Burnt for
Heretics, whose death was revenged by John Zisca and Procopius, to the great
loss and detriment of Sigismund, the great and professed Enemy of the
Reformation. And that it might appear there was more than humane direction in
the infliction of the Defeats given him by Zisca, 15000. Hungarians that
followed Sigismund perished by the breaking of the Ice in one Expedition.

His Reign was concluded with a rebellious Insurrection of the Boors and
Peasants, resolving to assert their Liberty or perish rather than endure
slavery; and in this mood they raged with Fire and Sword, but their ungoverned
and undisciplined Multitude rendered them an easy Conquest to a small Party of
Experienced Soldiers. Sigismund departing from Prague commended his Son in law
Albertus to the Nobles, The Death of Sigismund.
and at his arrival at Znoyma in Moravia, departed this life, aged 70. years.
He was a very active person, but little beholding to Fortune, and by her means
deceived in the Constancy of his Friends. He was a great favourer of Learned
men, affirming that Precedence was justly due to them; for that Riches and
Regal Pomp happen merely by Fate. He connived at and forgave Barbara his Wife,
taken often in the act of Uncleanness, being himself a most infamous Adulterer.

ALBERT, from Duke of Austria in a few months was made Duke of Luxenburg,
Albert of Austria succeeds. the 25. K.
Marquess of Moravia, King of Bohemia, and Hungary (though the latter
complaining of the Spoil and havoc made by the Turks in that Kingdom during
the absence of Sigismund busied in the Affairs of Germany and Italy, did with
much reluctance consent to his Election) as also of the Romans. He swayed the
Scepter but two years, and was a notable Evidence of the inconstancy of the
World in his sudden Advancement and as speedy Fall. He was Crowned at Alba,
whence coming to Buda, the Germans took upon them the Civil administration of
the City, together with the placing of Officers, as more allied to him than the
Hungarians; and in maintenance of this their Intrusion, caused a Chief Noble
man that stoutly opposed them to be put to Death. This so enraged the
Hungarians that they flew to their Arms, and killed all the Germans they met or
could tell where to find them, which Bloody Fury lasted till a certain Monk
prevailed them to surcease it.

At this time the Turks wasting Rassia, and having subdued Synderovia, George
Bulch^s the Despot of the Province, commiting the Guard of the Castle which was
the Chief Residence of his Government, to his two Sons, betook himself with his
third Son Lazarus for succor and aid into Hungary, but Albert intent upon his
Covetousness suffered the two Princes to be taken, when although Amurath (as
the Turkish Annals have it) had Married their Sister some three years before,
Rascia subdued by the Turks.
he caused their privities to be cut off, and their Eyes to be put out, upon
pretense that they assisted their Father as then Designing War against him.
Albert was upon his March when he understood of the taking of the Castle; which
dismaying him, he encamped betwixt the River Tybiscus and the Danow, suffering
Amurath after the attainment of his Design to retire unmolested. Albert Dies.
During which idling his Soldiers got the Flux, by inordinate eating of Fruit,
which same disease at the Town of Nesmel, took him also away at his return to
Hungary.

ELIZABETH his Wife, being left big with Child, was urgent with the Nobles that
they would regard the Issue of the King her Husband she then went with; and in
the mean time to her delivery to create an Interrex or Protector; to which
motion those that were present agreed; but others would have the Scepter
translated to Uladislaus the third, King of Poland, Son of Iagello aforesaid,
by Hedwyga a Daughter of Hungary, to whom the Queen should be inter-married,
and the Posthume Child to be instated in Austria and Bohemia. This counsel, the
Infancy of the Prince and the Noise of the Turkish Arms did then advise;
whereupon a hasty Embassy was dispatched to Cracovia, Divisions in Hungary
about a new King
but as speedily followed with the news of her being delivered of a Son.

The Nobles at home now repented of their forwardness, but the Ambassadors
conscious to themselves how far they had gone, persisted in their Errand, and
notwithstanding the Turks instances to the Contrary, prevailed upon Uladislaus
to accept the Crown. Upon his approach into Hungary, Elizabeth, who had newly
brought out the Crown she had secretly purloyned from its place, and Crowned
her Son Ladislaus therewith (for whose good and just Government she and
Zecchius, with the Count of Cillia had pledged their Oaths) foreseeing the
danger, conveyed the Crown and her self and Son, to Frederick the third,
Emperor.

Soon after Uladislaus arrived at Buda, Uladislaus of Poland Innaugurated.
and having modestly declined the Government, gently taxing the Hungarians of
their Dissentions as the cause of so many Changes, was the more unanimously
Complemented with the Regal Title; Zecchius and Ladislaus Gara, the friends of
the Orphan Prince, being set at liberty performing their Offices at his
Coronation, solemnized with the Diadem taken from off the Image of St. Stephen.
His great friends to this Advancement were Nicholas Vylach Governor of
Chroatia, and John Huniades, who appeared like an auspicious star amidst the
many Factions in Hungary: For the Queen assisted by some Castellanes and
Governors of strong Holds, did cause great Troubles to the King, especially
Ladislaus Gara her former Partaker, waged War and tried the Fortune of Battle
in her Sons Cause, Albert's Relict wages war in right of her Son.
but was Defeated with great loss by Huniades and Vylach, as were afterward
Zechi and Gisera; but to the common and great loss and diminution of the
Strength of the Kingdom, notwithstanding that, Julian the Pope's Legate
interposed the Papal Authority, by which no more than a Cessation for a time,
could be obtained. The Death of the Queen which now happned, serving rather as
an incentive then allay to the passions of those who studied her deprived
Orphans right and Interest.

By this opportunity Amurath the second, Belgrade in vain Beseiged by Amurath.
had enlarged his Conquests in the extremest parts of Hungary, and was now in
person before Belgrade, Defended by John Aurane Brother of the Prince, or Lord
of Croatia, and so resolutely maintained by him, that after a Seige of seven
months in which all manner of Force by assault and mines were tried (but by the
Valor and vigilance of the besieged repulsed and Countermin'd to the loss of
Thirty thousand Men) the proud Turk was constrained to dislodge, when Invading
the other parts of Hungary, he took in Novigrod in the Confines of Servia,
abandoned upon his coming by the Defendants, from whence also he dispatched
Isaac Bassa of Semendria to make a further Incursion; the Hungarians by their
Discords being in no condition to withstand him, till at his return laden with
Booty and innumerable Christian Captives, Huniades having privily Collected an
Army and passed the Danow, met with him in the Province of Alba, Huniades his
Exploits and Atcheivements.
near to Synderovia, and there vanquished him. To redress this Discomfiture
Mesithes Bassa was employed to open a Passage into Transylvania by Valachia,
which at the instance of Huniades had newly Revolted, which he effected,
havocking and laying wast the Country, and having worsted Huniades at the
first Encounter, was again by him engaged with a sudden raised Army, and
totally routed, Himself, and his Son, with Twenty thousand Turks being slain
upon the place.

A Treaty was now with very unequal terms propounded; which Vladisla^s
rejecting, Abedin Beg was sent by Amurath to prosecute the same Design upon
Transylvania and Hungary, with an Army of Fourscore thousand Men, at whose
approach the Valachians being in no capacity to resist him, by the advice of
Huniades, secured themselves in the inaccessible Mountains and Hills of the
Country, while the Turk raged with all extremity upon what ever he found, till
suddenly set upon by Huniades with no more then Fifteen thousand Men at
Vaskapa, he was miserably overthrown, with the loss of Thirty thousand Men,
and his own life. For this Victory a three days Thanksgivins was appointed,
and the Ensigns and Spoils of the Enemy hung up in Churches, and Huniades
Proclaimed and extolled as the Bulwark and Defense of Christendom.

Hereby also the King was encouraged to make an Invasion into the Turkish
Territory, Uladislaus his Succesful Invasion of the Turkish Territory.
accompanied by Julian the Pope's Legate, and a multitude of Crusado's. At Buda
he passed the Danow, Huniades and George the Despot, advancing before him, who
by light skirmishes drove the Enemy back, until the whole Army was arrived to
the very tops of Mount Haemus, where there are two passes into Macedon and
Thrace, the one made by Trajan, the other by the River Saltiza, called by the
Turks, Clissira Isladina to this day; other parties of the Hungarians reducing
most of the Towns in Bulgaria.

Against them Amurath dispatched Casa^n Bassa or Caram Beg, with Turchan Beg,
with all the Forces of Romania and the Achanzes, (Soldiers serving without
stipend) who were by the desperate Valor of the Hungarians utterly Defeated,
His Victory over the Turks.
and Casan himself taken Prisoner. The Report of this disaster reaching Amurath
he summoned and amassed the whole Force of his Empire; but Winter being far in,
and the Earth bound up with Ice, while the King was upon his return, he
retreated likewise, having effected nothing Considerable, when perceiving by
the calamity of so many misadventures, that his Provinces must needs be
exhausted by the Continuance of the War, he submitted to the entreaty of a
Peace, Amurath begs a Cessation.
using thereto the Mediation of George the Despot to Huniades, and his to the
King, who being newly at Enmity with the Emperor Frederick, and his Paternal
Kingdom of Poland then in Faction and Troubles, consented to a Ten years
Cessation, upon this Condition, that George the Despot should be restored to
his Principality of Servia, his two Sons enlarged, and Prisoners freed on both
sides, that the Turk should quit Claim to Moldavia, but should retain Bulgary.

Amurath having thus avoided the danger that threatened him in those Quarters,
carried it with him upon Ibrahim the Caramanian King, in Asia the less, whom
he subdued and Vanquished but soon after received into favor. In the mean
while Eugenius the Pope, the Venetians and Greek Emperor, by many persuasions
had induced Uladislaus (a young Man not skilled in the affairs of Fortune) to
break the Truce made with an Infidel: Uladislaus persuaded by the Pope to break
his Truce with the Tu^k.
And though Huniades protested against it, as best able to judge of what would
happen, by informing the King that his Life and Scepter might be taken away,
but his Truth and plighted Faith was in his own keeping; and that the space of
life was short, but a blot of Perfidiousnesse everlasting; Yet the King relying
upon the Pope's Dispensation, (as Religion is the only Governor of our
Affections) and deceived with vain Auguries, and the advantages of his
Puissance, armed himself to his own Destruction.

For having embodyed his Pol^nian and Hungarian Forces he passed the Danow and
Betgrade, where Dracula the Prince of Moldavia having in vain labored his
desistance from the enterprise, joined also 4000. men with him. Of this
Expedition Amurath having intelligence sent him by Mahomet Beg Governor of
Nicopolis, to his Residence at Magnesia, streightwayes crossed over into
Europe, and at an obscure Village named Varna, but famous for this great
overthrow, joined Battle.

In the left Wing of the Christian Army Huniades, and one Michael Niger the
Duke of Scylagy, and Brother of Huniades, were placed. The fatal Battle of
Varna.
In the right wing stood Bobricius a Polonian Knight, in the main Battle the
King. The Turks first onset with great noise was upon the right wing, where
they opposed Camels and Dromedaries to the Horse, who being therewith
affrighted, and the Riders no less amazed, they were easily put to the rout:
but in the left wing, and the main body, the King and Huniades, had better
fortune, utterly discomfiting both the wings of the Infidels; only Amurath
himself with his Janissaries stood yet unmoved, who seeing the presentnesse of
the danger, calling Christ to be the Avenger of this Perfidy (Mr. Knols in his
Turkish History relates, that he pulled the Instrument of the Truce out of his
bosom, and held it up toward heaven) with great fury pressed upon the
Hungarians and made a very great slaughter, wherein Uladislaus against the
Disswasion of Huniades, rushing upon the Enemy, by the Fall of his Horse that
was run through, had his Head cut off by Cheser Beg; the rest of the Army being
disordered, and so hindering one another flight were for the most part slain
on the place. Huniades himself escaped by Valachia, into Transylvania, although
for a while detained by Dracula. There were reckoned to be slain of the Kings
side 9000, and of the Turks 30* thousand. This was the end of Uladislaus, whom
because Religion could not rule, the despiser of that Religion did destroy. The
Epitaph on him was this. Romulidae Cannas, ego Varnam clade not avi
Discite Mortales non temerare fidem;
Me nisi Pontifices jussissent rumpere foedus,
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis or a Iugum.


The Hungarians being thus deprived of their King, Ladislaus the 26. K.
conferred the Kingdom upon LADISLAUS the Son of Albert, whom they had so long
withheld from his right of Inheritance, entrusting the Government with
Huniades (surnamed Corvinus) with the Administration of it, both as to War and
Peace; who to be revenged of Dracula for his Detainer of him in his Flight,
seized him and his two Sons. He dispatched likewise an Embassy to Caesar,
concerning the Redelivery of the King and Crown which the Mother of the present
King had deposited with him, but neither intreat^es nor Force afterward, by
incursions into Austria, prevailed any thing. In the mean while the Turk
prosecuted his Success in Hungary with a Revenge worthy of so odious a
perjury, when Huniades in no Condition to oppose him, by hidden ways
Rendezvouzed an Army in Servia to recall the Enemy to the preservation of his
own Country. To his Assistance he invited first George the Despot; who
pretending the late Agreement, he drew in the Beg of Schodra (who was the
Famous George Castriot, called by the Turks, Scanderbeg.
Scanderbeg, the Son of John King of the Epirots or Triballi and had by fained
Letters of Amurath's Hand, possessed himself of Croja the Capital City, as by
his Valor and vigilance soon after, of most of the Kingdom; and maintained it
in a War of 24. Years) and encamped in the Plains of Cossova, where he engaged
the Turks three whole days together: the first two days he had the better of
them, but their Numbers prevailed in the third: he himself flying was taken
Prisoner by George the Despot, Huniades defeated in the Plains of Cossov^.
as an Infringer of his Oath; but upon the Hostage of his Son Ladislaus, set at
Liberty; which the Turk resenting, dispatched away Frigez Beg to Invade Servia;
to whose Releif Huniades seemingly reconciled to their Despot (now abominated)
but out of hatred to the name of the Turks, speedily advanced, and with a great
slaughter Vanquished the Enemy, taking the Beg himself. A Bohemi^^ Scuffle
followed this, but was presently Composed by the Victorious Fortune of
Huniades. At length the Emperor restored Ladislaus, whom the States of Hungary
complementd thereupon at Vienna, and Huniades renounced the Administration.

LADILAUS to auspiciate his Reign, came to Presburgh, but would trust himself
no further within the Kingdom, for Jealousies were fomented against Huniades
by Ulrick Count of Cilia, formerly Prefect of Austria; but ejected thence by
the Nobles, and received into favor by this King, who to compose the business
was at last induced to come to Buda. While he staid there Amurath vexed with his
repulse at Croja, had retired himself into a Monastery, and Mahomet his Son and
Successor, after a Seige of 50. days, took and Sacked Constantinople,
Constantinople taken by Mahomet.
to the shame and terror of Christendom: and having seized Servia, with the
Silver-Mine Towns therein, from George the Despot, bent his Force upon
Belgrade; which Furiously attaquing, and thundering against the Walls with his
Canons, Huniades came in have by Water, to the Releif of it; and having made
his way into the Town, by a vigorous Saley beat the Enemy out of his
Entrenchments which they fired, Belgrade besieged by him, Defeated there by
Huniades.
and cloyed and nailed his great Guns; whereupon Mahomet retired to his main
Camp, and thence next morning tormented and sick with the disappointment, fled
in have toward Macedonia, but was not pursued, because Huniades suspecting
likewise some Stratagem, contented himself with the Slaughter of Forty thousand
Turks. In this Conflict Huniades received a Wound whereof he Died; His^^amented
Death.
others say, of a Fever. He was by Birth a Valachian, and from the place of it
called Corvinu; as for the national glory of his Achievements he was called
Huniades: A person that with small power always worsted great Armies.

Ladislaus who terrified with the Turk's approach, had fled to Vienna, came
forward now to Belgrade, to see the back-steps of the Enemy: where resenting
the slaughter of the Count of Cilia by Ladislaus the Son of Huniades, though
often provoked thereunto, he caused him (by the Council of some ill men) to be
b^headed, and his Brother Matthias to be imprisoned. But the Year after, on the
very Anniversary of the said Fact, as he was Solemnizing his Marriage in
Bohemia, he Died there, and left another Vacancy or Interregnum in Hungaria.

In the beginning whereof Michael Szylagyi the Kinsman of Huniades (supplied
with good store of Money by his Sister Elizabeth) levied an Army in Title of
Matthias (who was newly sent by Ladislaus, A^ Interregnum in Hungaria.
in Custody, to George Pogyb^ad King of Bohemia) as King of Hungary, having in
Ladislaus's Life time procured many Friends that secretly favored Huniades and
his Family: Others also, for fear of his Power consented to his Election, at an
Assembly of the States held at Rakos, where his Army Guarded them. Matthias
saluted the King.
Pogybrad certified hereof, inviting his Prisoner to Dinner, and setting him
uppermost, aquainted him with the matter; and having Contracted his Daughter to
him, conducted him to Moravia, where he was Saluted King; and thence in great
Pomp and Magnificence conveyed to Buda, where he confirmed and restored all
former Privileges; and by his Care, Felicity, Virtue, and the Majesty of his
Name, united all Parties into a perfect Peace; which effected, he sent John
Vitesius the Bishop of Varadin, his adopted Father, to Frederick the Emperor,
to demand the Crown; which he, pretending the Kingdom due to himself, and
scorning the Youth of Matthias, refused; and hereupon ensued a German War,
enforced by the predatory eruption of John Gisera or Zisca the Bohemian, who
had twice worsted Huniades himself.

Frederick, Frederick the Em^erour mal^s War against him.
animated and incited by the Lord or Banus of Croatia, Invaded the Sabarian
Province, taking the Rebels to his Assistance, and wasted the Country far and
near, till Simon Magnus Commissioned and spirited by the King's early Courage,
met him in the Upper Hungary, where he Discomfited him; permitting and
conniving at the flight of the Rebels, who afterward proved Caesar's worst and
most dangerous Enemies. By this success Caesar was at last constrained to
yield to the Demands of Matthias, who persisted in a prosecution of them by
delivering the Crown, adopting also Matthias to his Son, upon Condition that if
he died without Issue, the Emperor should succeed to the Crown of Hungary. The
Bohemian War was ended with the same felicity, by Sebastian Rozgonius, who
hunted those predatory Thieves out of their lurking places, amidst Rocks,
Lakes, and other fastnesses; yet so that some years passed before Ziscra their
Chief Captain, could be engaged (several strong Holds and passes being
maintained by them) till driven to the Mountains of Poland, Matthias his War
with the Band^ts of the Mountains
whence he addressed himself by humble supplication to the King, and was received
by him into favor and Preferment. Telephus his Associate had not the same hap,
but prolonged a wretched life, in a Begging starving Condition. This is the
larger mentioned for that it lasted almost Five years before it was finished,
and obliged the utmost endeavors of the King, to the extirpation of so
villainous a race of Men, that disturbed the Peace and security of his Subjects.

The Turk during these Wars, had put in for his share by Invading the
Eastermost parts, The Turks make war against Matthias.
in Revenge of his Belgrade Defeat; but was so well received by Michael Szylagy
(somewhile before in disgrace with his Beneficiary the King his Nephew, by
usual Court detraction and Envy, and newly restored to all his Honors and
Commands) near to the Banks of Savus, by a Town called Tutach, that it was a
question whether there was more blood or water in that reach of the River. Haly
Beg who was then Bassa of Mysia and commanded that Army, flying to Synderovia
endeavored to repair his loss by a re-inforcement of his enterprise upon
Transylvania, but was overthrown again by Pancratius near Temeswar. Matthias in
pursuit of this Victory, seized Dracula Prince of Valachia, the Tributary of
the Turk: for by the Articles between Amurath the second, An Expedition into
Bosnia.
and Uladislaus, that investiture was to be sole right of the Kings of Hungary;
and detained him 10. years a Prisoner. From thence he marched to Bosnia, the
King whereof, Stephen, being also Despot of Servia, in right of his Wife the
Daughter of Lazarus deceased, Mahomet had caused as perfidiously as inhumanely
to be flead alive, the just reward however of his base and prodigious lust,
which divided his Sons against Him. Matthias proceeded as far as the Superior
^osnia, and those parts which stretch themselves toward Zara and Epidaurus,
and by the taking of Iaycia, reduced the whole Kingdom to his Hungarian
Scepter; Mahomet with thirty thousand men came to relieve it, but hearing of
Matthias his Approach sneaked cowardly home. Hereupon the Venetians (with other
Princes, by their Ambassadors) were instant, for the prosecution of the War
offering 50000. Crowns yearly, for the maintenance of it; which being
accordingly recommenced; Matthias frighted in the same manner at Mahomet's
appearance, repassed the Savus out of R^scia, where he had taken Streverich by
Emerick Sepusius, and turned his Army upon the Frangepanes, who being fortified
in the Alps of Croatia, refused obedience, but as soon as the King was arrived
at Zagrabia, they thought best to comply. He tamed also the revolting
Transylvanians, as he quieted the Seditious in Moldavia and Valachia, by the
slaughter of 7000 of them: But his Lieutenant Michael Scylagii, fought
unprosperously with the Turk, after a most bloody Battle, himself being
captivated, and although a Prisoner of War, yet put to death by those savage
Infidels.

A Bohemian War ensued, Matthias ^^alous for the Pope.
fomented and enflamed by Pope Paul the second, who instigated Matthias against
George Pogybrad his Father in Law, as an Heretic, for owning the Doctrines of
John Husse, etc. while an excellent opportunity against the Turk engaged in a
Syrian and Egyptian War, was by this means pretermitted. Matthias in this war
had the better of it, zealously executing the Edicts and Anathema's of the
Pope, against the Bohemians, Silesians, and Moravians; Nor would a Treaty of
Peace be hearkened to, the Papists giving out, that no Faith or Communion was to
be held with such Heretics. Whereupon Victorinus the Son of Pogybrade made
new Levies, but was unhappily worsted and imprisoned at Vissigrade, while
Matthias having subdued Spilberg and Olmitz was Master of Moravia, and Silesia
at his devotion, and was solemnly also declared King of Bohemia.

Pogybrad soon after dying, and by his misfortunes induced to favor Matthias
his succession to that Crown (his Son having been gratis set at liberty a
little before, upon the Composure of the troubles in Moravia) he transacted
with the States of Bohemia for his inves^iture in that Kingdom, but they had
disposed of it to Uladislaus Son of Casimir King of Poland. In revenge whereof
he issued like a Tempest out of Moravia into Bohemia: but the Pope being
neutral in the Concernments of two Catholic Princes, and the Turks upon the
banks of Savus at the Siege of Sabaczium, besides (which was worst of all) a
Conspiracy was hatching at home, he effected nothing.

This Coniuration was so general, A Treasonable conspiracy against Matthias.
by which Casimir was designed to this Crown, that but 9. of 70. Peers, or
Senators, were true to their Allegiance, among these Plotters the chief were
Vitesius the Archbishop, Ianus Pannonius, and Emericus Scepusius the former
favorers of, and reciprocally favored by, Matthias: the pretense of the
defection was, that the Church Revenues, and other profits of secular Offices,
were employed solely in the carrying on of War. Ladislaus at their invitation
came and encamped between Nitre and Vacia, and was magnificently received by
his Partakers, but Matthias upon the News of it speeding from Buda to
Strigonium, prepared for an Encounter, where by Scepusius, whom he reclaimed,
Ladislaus Defeated.
he so wrought upon Vitesius the Life of the Faction, that upon his
reconciliation, and indemnity promised to those that should return to their
Allegiance within three days, his Competitor was presently abandoned, and left
to reflect, and inveigh against the Levity of the Hungarians: nor was that all,
but being circumvented at Nitra, he hardly escaped with 700. of all his number,
the pursuit not being given over, till his Father by timely dispatches,
interposed his requests for his dismission. Notwithstanding Matthias was not
satisfied with this revenge, but continuing in the mountainous part of Poland,
watched an opportunity of further satisfaction; as he punished Vitesius and
Ianns, with other of the Accomplices in the Treason. While he staid hereabouts
Uladislaus stomaching the spoil of his Country, with a just Army opposed
himself; and so the business came to open War, Matthias his War in Poland.
which determined nevertheless by a private Stratagem in the most covert
places and ambushes of that hilly Country, in favor of Matthias, who by his
Lieutenants John Scepusius and Paul Kinifi, had also depopulated all the
Provinces as far as Cracovia, and brought a miserable desolation thereabouts.
By which means the Pole was glad to quit his pretenses to Moravia, Silesia, and
Lusatia, and to part with his Claim to the Crown of Bohemia.

During this Agreement, Solomon the Beglerbeg of Romania with a Hundred
thousand Men, having in vain attempted Scodra, came with an Army into Moldavia,
whom Stephen the Valiant Vaivod thereof overcame with so great a slaughter,
Schodra in vain besieged.
that scarce a sign remained of so vast a Multitude. To requite this victory,
Matthias besiged Sabarium, whereat happned diverse Encounters, the besieged
being Potent and Courageous, and the besiegers Resolute and adventurous; He
himself for better view, passing in a common habit within the reach of their
small shot, in a Boat, accompanied but with one Soldier who was killed with a
Bullet; Fortune by a peculiar care of him (as is her constant respect to such
persons) preserving him from the danger. In fine, by dissembling to rise from
the Siege, Sabarium taken by Matthias.
he lulled the Garrison into security and then surprised them; and for the
better fortification of the Castle, drew the River Savus round about it; and
thereafter supplied with money from the Pope for the better prosecution of the
War, laid all waste as far as Synderovia; and in order to an opportune and
commodious Siege thereof built three strong Castles, as a bridle to curb and
repress their forraging for provisions.

He was yet intent of carrying his Successes fnrther, having embarked to that
purpose on the Danow (Alibeg with a plundering Party about Temeswar, having
been also newly defeated, so that there appeared no rub to his Design) when the
arrival of his Queen Beatrice (who by Venice, Dalmatia, and Carniola had been
Honorably conveyed to Alba, and there Crowned, and the Marriage Celebrated at
Buda in the presence of all the Nobles) foftned and emasculated his Spirit, and
corrupted the Soldiery, by idling amidst the vanity and Luxury of the Court,
now addicted to sport and pleasure. Nor could the Calamitous Condition of
Moldavia (the Noble Vaivod whereof had in vain struggled against the Potent and
over-bearing Force of Mahomet, and saw his Country Vassaliz'd to that Cruel
Enemy) awaken Matthias out of this sensual stupidity; Matthias war against the
Emperor Frederick.
the Queen proving as another Capua to Victorious Hanibal, till such time as it
was almost too late to resist, being on a sudden attaqued by Frederick the
Emperor from the old grudge, although most ungratefully and unhandsomely, and
the Event was according. For Matthias rousing himself followed the Enemy into
Austria (where the Rascians in his service most cruelly raged) and took in
several Towns, and was now before Vienna, when the Emperor (of no Martial
disposition) desired an accommodation, which Matthias condescended to, so
Austria was again restored to Frederick. In this War the Pope and Venetians
withdrew their subsidy from Matthias as engaged against a Christian Prince,
whereupon ensued an aversness against that State, whose danger had linked their
Concern with his for some space of time before; and by that means they lost
Scodra, Croja, and the Promontory of Taenarus to the Turk upon very base
Conditions, or very Calamitous Conquest; that of Schodra especially.

The Peace was now to be confirmed, which was agreed upon before betwixt
Uladislaus and himself; and therefore both Kings appointed an Enterview at
Olmitz in Moravia, where they appeared with a most Splendid and pompous Train,
several Theaters and other august Temporary Edifices being Erected for the
Solemnity, where they treated one another most Magnificently, and gave great
Largesses to the People: Matthias not willing to be behind hand in State and
Grandeur upon such an Illustrious occasion: But whilst he diverted himself
here, Solomon the Beglerbeg of Greece being advantaged by a dry Summer, passed
his Army over the Fords of the Rivers Savus and Dravus, and coming as far as
Castle-Iron, laid wast the whole Country. The news of this made Matthias quit
his Court-ship, and with all Expedition to follow the Enemy, Solomon the
Beglerbeg of Romania defeated by him.
who making have away, he gave order to 16000. of his readiest Troops to pursue
him; the which Forces over-took him laden with Thirty thousand Captives, at
Verbos in Illyria, and so routed him, that the remains of his flying Army durst
not face about to Three hundred Croats, who alone pursued them; by which
Victory, Illyria was in a fair way to have been wholly assigned to this
Triumph, had not the Emperor by an Inroad toward Raab recalled him; which
Injury so incensed Matthias that he presently laid Seige to Mariaburg, and
would hardly desist from the Enterprise at the earnest entreaties of the Pope,
and Frederick's Ambassadors.

Mahomet the Great, having taken Scodra as aforesaid, was now returned to
Constantinople, and vexed with the disgrace of Solyman's Defeat, had
Commissioned Ali Beg, Isa Beg, and Balam Beg, with Sixty thousand Men for
Transylvania, who proceeded with Fire and Sword as far as Alba Iulia; within
five miles whereof Stephen Bathori, the Vayvod of Transylvania, and Paul Kinisi
Count of Temeswar, wtth a new levied Army of Hungarians, Valachians etc.
encountered them, and after a long dispute in which the River Marusus was
filled with Blood of both parties, Defeats the Turks in Transylvania.
by the Valor and encouragement of Kinisi totally overthrew them, Thirty
thousand Turks being slain upon the place. The fame of this Achievement made
the Pope (Apulia in Italy being sorely infested by the Turks) to entreat
Matthias as the only competent Help against those Infidels, to undertake the
Defense of those parts, when at the same time he ungratefully inter-medled
beyond his Authority, in the placing and preferring Bishops in Hungaria;
Matthias having substituted John the Cardinal of Arragon to be Archbishop of
Strigonium in place of John of Alemannia, his Enemy and Rebel.

About this time Died Mahomet, leaving his two Sons Bajazet and Zemes to strive
for the Empire; the latter being discomfited in two Battles, wherein he was
assisted by the Sultan of Egypt, fled to the Grand Master of the Rhodes who
sent him to Rome, where at the instance and great Bribes of Bajazet, he was
most unworthily poisoned by Pope Alexander the sixth; Matthias purposing to make
good use of this occasion, had solicited Caesar for a Confirmation and security
of the late Peace, which being delayed till the opportunity was lost, and the
Turks in motion this way, he Invaded Austria and possessed himself of many
Towns again (while Bajazet had terribly ruined and wasted Moldavia, His sucesse
in Austria.
and in requital thereof was Defeated by Lupus (the Noble and valiant Despot of
what remained in those parts) in two Battles:) and after a six months regular
Seige took in Vienna the Capital City thereof; as John Scepuusis his Leiutenant
mastered Neustria and other Fortresses.

The five years that Matthias lived afterward he wholly employed in Reforming
the manners of his Subjects, now addicted to Luxury and prone to all other
Vices; and in providing for the future Glory and Magnificence of the Succeeding
Kings, His Virtues and Commendations.
converting his Iron into a Golden Palace; and Designing to Build the City of
Buda after the Italian way. He also highly fa^oured Learned Men, and resolved,
upon the settlement of Austria by a lasting Peace, to employ all his power
against the Turks; whereto he was encouraged by many Princes, more especially
by the Snltan's of Egypt, who had lately Vanquished Ferhates Bassa, the
Beglerbeg of Caramania, and afterward Cheser Beg, and Achmet the Mahumetanized
Son of Stephen of Bosnia aforesaid, with such a slaughter that it was credited
to have exceeded that of Tamerlane. But while he prepared for those things
Death prevented him, by the increasing pains of the Gout. His Death.
A person of great Authority with all Princes, and worthy to be extolled for
his Military Experience, and his Acts of Peace; and so much the more Famed and
desired by Posterity, by how much his Successors were inferior to him in point
of Courage and vigilant Prudence.

Upon the Death of the King, Corvinus his bastard claims the Crown.
Corvinus the Bastard Son of Matthias, having been fed with hopes of his
Succession to the Crown, endeavored to effect it, while 3 great Competitors
were transacting their interest with the States of Hungary, viz. Ladislaus King
of Bohemia, Albert Prince of Poland, both Brothers and Sons of Cassimir and and
Maximilian King of the Romans; but in conclusion Ladislaus carried it by the
major voices, and by the instance and interest of Beatrice the Dowager Queen,
who had loved him in her Husbands Life time, and hoped now to be Married to
him, although she was by the Judgment of God disapointed of her Expectation.
Corvinus not brooking this, although he had articled upon the Cession of his
claim and delivery of the Crown, which he had got into his custody, for an
investiture as Lord of Bosnia, Chroatia, and Sclavonia, raised an Army by the
help of the Governors of those Provinces, but opposed at Sarviza by Stephen
Bathori and Kinisi, Corvinus defeated.
commissioned by the States then assembled in great fear at Pesth, he was
worsted after a dismal encounter (wherein brother engaged against brother) and
fled to Quinque Ecclesiae, where his Soldiers broke open his Treasure and
carried it away.

By this means the Kingdom was settled in those parts, His submission and
agreement.
and (Corvinus submitting upon indemnity to his partakers, and the restoring
of what had been taken from him) Uladislaus was Crowned at Alba Regalis, but
presently engaged in a War against his Competitor and brother Albert,who had
seized Cassovia, Hermanstaet.
Cibinium, and other places, and in fine joined battle, wherein by the prowess
of Vladislaus and the defection of the Cassovians, he was overcome, and
striving to renew the War, was thrice afterward beaten out of the field.
Maximilian's Enterprise was more powerful and fortunate, Vienna restored to
Maximilian with other places in Austria.
auspicated also by the Viennians, who weary of a Forraigners Yoke, admitted
his forces into the City, which Scepusius the Governor perceiving, he thought
it most advisable to depart secretly out of the Castle: and thereupon the other
places of Austria, returned to their former Lord, who proceeded and reduced
Vesprinium and Alba Regalis in Hungary, and had finished the conquest but that
his Germans not enduring the Climate and other discommodities of the Country,
mutined for their pay: in the interim Uladislaus had collected his Army and was
upon his march after Maximilian, recovering the Towns he had lost, and being
bent upon a further revenge was diverted by a horrid Invasion of the Turks as
far as the Territories of Varadin (then in division by civil broils) having
endangered Belgrade by mastering two of the Bulwarks. For which reasons
Vladislaus was induced to make peace with Maximilian, Uladislaus makes peace
with Maximilian.
though upon very dishonorable terms, by yielding Austria, Carinthia,
Carniola, and Styria, seized and possessed by Matthias, and delivering some
Castles of Croatia, and Sclavonia; in lieu whereof Caesar restored him unto
places taken this war in Hungary, upon condition of his succession, as was
accorded with Matthias.

At the diet held thereafter at Buda, the Kings marriage with Beatrice was
debated, but because of her sterility and in submission to the Pontifical
Authority, she was put by, and Ann the Daughter of the Prince of Anjou,
preferred to his bed. In the mean while Bajazet made great preparations both by
Land and upon the Ister, for an Invasion of Hungary, which caused double
Garrisons to be put into the frontier Towns of Severinum, Sabaczia, and Iaycia,
and an Army of 60 Thousand men under the conduct and supreme command of
Kinisius, to be instantly levied; Bajazet came first to Sophia, then to
Hadrianople by leisure, but dared not enter Hungary, Bajazet dares not enter
Hungary.
whither he dispatched Dandes Bassa to Uscopia, while he diverted to Maxastinum
designing upon Albania, and meditating a Truce with Uladislaus, which was
accorded to; nevertheless respecting more the utility then the faith of the
agreement, he sent away two Bassa's, the one into Valachia, the other to
beseige Severinum, the former was vanquished by that Vayvod, and the other* by
Kinisius, who also horribly slaughtered those ravenous pillaging Bohemians,
whom he had appointed for the guard of the Confines against that Enemy. His
Bassa's defeated.
Johannes Corvinus likewise valiantly repulsed the Turk from Iaycia, but
wearied with the refractory pride of the Frangepanes, and other Noblemen,
resigned his Government of Bosnia, Chroatia, and Dalmatia, in whose place
Emericus Drencenus was substituted by the King, who repressed the insolence of
those Grandees, now seeking for protection from the Turks: which occasion being
welcome to Iacup Aga, he presently made an Incursion into the limits of
Carinthia, and Carniola, and carried away a great prey and spoil by the
Confines of Germany, when Drencenus having reconciled Frangepanes, Diencenus
defeated by Jacup Aga.
with a sufficient Army for number encountered him, but Frangepanes again
revolting, the Hungarians were totally routed, and Drencenus himself taken
Prisoner.

This loss as is usual in such cases, was imputed to the sloth of the King by
the Nobles, when their base covetousness was the only cause of it; the Kings
revennue being hardly able to maintain the expense of his Family as became the
Dignity of a King, which poverty proceeded merely from his honesty, and begat
such a contempt of his Authority, that he could not make the Palatine desist
from the seige of one of Corvinus his Castles, till the noble youth himself
revenged the injury, and he was the rather thus slighted because of his
ignorance in the Hungarian tongue, answering nothing but Dobrse the same with
the Russes.
Well well to what ever story.

In the mean while Kinisius repaired this late loss by an expedition with
10000. men into Mysia, where he took two Castles the one of them by the
exemplary courage of a Chroat who alone maintained the rampire against the
Enemy till his Fellows came to his assistance; as by another Irruption into
Servia; Kin^sius successes.
having animated the King to a more vigorous prosecution of the War, and
brought him upon that account to Petri Varadin; whence Kinisi with 14000 men,
wasted and harrassed all the Turks Country as far as the Suburbs of Synderovia,
with such a terror that even Constantinople it self trembled for fear of his
approach. This noble person survived not long after, being in reference to the
present state of affairs another Huniades, His death.
dying also like him of a Fever. He so abhominated and resented the Turkish
barbabarities that he always retaliated upon them in a severer manner of
Torture and punishment. At last the King took courage by the good advice of his
friends and Counselors, and by force of Arms reduced and tamed those Seditious
Grandees of Chroatia, The King punishes his seditious Grandees.
the chief of whom were Peter Archbishop of Colocza, and Laurence Duke of
Syrmia, in whose Country the Kings Steward had been killed, this last he
dispossessed of all his Castles, and imprisoned at Buda, newly before pardoned
at the diet there, by which means all those troubles were composed, and a three
years Truce confirmed by Selymus, who had wrested the Turkish Empire from his
father Bajazet, which added something more to the Kingdoms Welfare.

About this time dyed John Corvinus, (his Widow intermarrying with George
Marquess of Brandenburgh) followed by Peter Gereb the Palatine (in whose Place
came Emericus Perenyi) and Stephen Vayvod of Moldavia, a person famous next
Matthias, for his services against the Turk and Tartars; in whose room
succeeded Bogdanus. At Buda a consult was managed by the Faction of Zapolianus
or John Scepusius the Vayvod, and the Eloquence of Verbeczius of forbidding the
Crown to be ever conferred on Forraigners; as the Siculi rebelled the same time
and killed the Collector of their dues to the King, but the Authors were
severely punished by Paulus Tomoraeus. Nor ever were the Hungarians more
deceived then in this Truce made with Selymus, relying whereon they became
defencelesse, for on a sudden all the Country as far as the River Dravus where
it joins with the Danow, was laid wast and desolate: To second this Calamity
the Countrymen and Boors rebelled against the Nobility, Insurrections and
Outrages in Hungary by the Clergy Soldiers.
and for the greater enforcement of their designs joined themselves with the
Forces raised by Thomas the Archbishop of Strigonium, against Bajazet's
Invasion, at the instinct of the Pope, to keep the War out of Italy at the
charge of Hungary. There being now upon the Peace again, no use for these
religious Soldiers, they began to be burdensome to the Noblesse, and admitted
of the Peasants as their Associates: by, and of, these no less then 70000 are
reported to have been slain in the space of four months, by which the sanctity
of these Crusado men may be guessed at. At last John the Vayvod tamed this
wicked Crew by intolerable Famine, and gave them the head of their Captain one
George Szekheli (notable formerly for his Valor) for food and victual.

Vladislaus to make up a stricter League with the House of Austria, journyed
now to Vienna, where he had conference with Sigismund of Poland, and
Maximilian, by whom, Mary his Neice by Philip, was betrothed to Lewis,
Ladislaus his Son, and Mary his Daughter to Charles or Ferdinand with a
Condition of succession in case of no Issue; against this contract and this
last clause Perinyi objected and though lame caused himself to be carried
through the Streets of Presburg, where he noysed his Dissent and refusal, and
the Invalidity of the Match, as done without his (principally) and the Nobles
Consent; but being won by the grant of the Office of Crown-keeper, just as he
should have subscribed the Instrument, he Died. In the interim John the Vayvod
elevated by his Success against Szekelehi, besieged Sarno a Garrison of the
Turks, but was so cowardly frighted that he fled and forsook his Great Guns, at
the news of the approach of Baly Beg, nevertheless by the Valor of Michael
Praxius who sustained the Van of the Enemy, The death of King Ladislaus.
they were recovered. King Ladislaus lived not long afterward, fitter indeed
for ease and quiet, then the Rule of the stubborn and Eff^ene Hungarians; but
whether out of Grief and vexation of mind, or the Common course of Nature, is
uncertain.

LEWIS his Son succeeded him, Lewis succeeds his Father Ladislaus and is the
29. King.
having according to the late Agreement, Married Mary the Sister of Charles the
fifth, by their Father Philip the first of Spain. In this Prince all things, as
his Birth, Succession, Beard, Wedlock, and Death, were praeproperous and Early.
At the same time died Maximilian, to whom, chiefly by the suffrage of Frederick
of Saxony, succeeded Charles the fifth, as did Solomon just after the
ratification of an eight years Truce succeed his Father Selymus: Divine
Providence so ordering it that those two great Potentates should Govern the
World together, and restrain each other by a mutual dread of one another Power
and Virtues.

Yet Solomon was so great an esteemer of his own Glory, and so unbounded in his
Conceits of it, that he demanded of Lewis the purchase of a Peace with him at a
certain Tribute, which being denied, he Invaded Hungary, and wrested Moldaviae,
and Valachia from that Dominion, together with the greatest part of Sclavonia.
Nothing withstanding his Arms there but Iaycia, Defended by the signal Valor
of Peter Keglevitius. These victorious proceedings caused Lewis to levy an Army
of 60000. Men; Belgrade taken by Solomon.
but his Exchequer not being sufficient to bear the Expense, they were as soon
dissolved. In the mean while Belgrade (so often maintained against the Turkish
power) was now gained by the Fortune of Solomon, and the Treachery of the
Governors, who would not admit the succor and Assistance, brought by Andrew
Bathori, into the Town. Hence the Conqueror having received a loss from
Stephen Bathori the Palatine, who defeated Pyrhus Bassa, then wasting Syrmia,
and contented with his former Success, The barbarous perfidy of Lewis
dispatched a Chiaux with offers of Peace to the King; but his Youthful mind
swayed by evil Counsel and corrupted with the luxury of George Marquisse of
Brandenburgh, was debauched into that perfidious baseness, that he Commanded
the Envoy to be privily put to Death at Tata, and for the concealment of the
murder, his body to be cast into the Fish Pond.

Solomon was then returned home to the Enterprise of Rhodes, and Lewis his
Leiutenant had had some successes against the Turks, especially Christopher
Frangepanes not only repulsed them from Iaycia, but beat them out of their
Trenches and took their Camp; as Tomori defeated Ferhates Begogli, while
Severinum was also reduced; but the Dissentions and Divisions that arose in
Hungary among the Nobility for the Title of Palatine, between Verbeczius,
Zobius, and their Party of the Multitude against Bathori legally so Created;
Divisions and Innovations about Religion in Hungary.
Besides that, the Reformed Religion now took footing in this Kingdom,
although endeavored by fire to be suppressed, but maintained by Prynius in the
County of Bodrogh and by Nadanyi at Chrysus; These concurrent mischeifs I say,
brought Solomon back into Hungary, declaring his intention of revenge for the
Death of his Messenger, which sudden appearance of his caused much dread and
terror, for that no present remedy could be thought on. Notwithstanding Lewis,
without any Aid from abroad resolved to encounter him with an Army of twenty
four thousand men, Lewis his unadvised rashness.
Commanded by the Archbishop of Colocza, and George Zapolianus, although
dissuaded by John Scepusius and Frangepanes, who would have had him withdrawn
his person at least, which however would save the Kingdom, and to have staid
till he had Collected the whole Force of his Kingdom; but such was his Heat
and Temerity, and the like proud humor of the Nobility (though it proved their
Common Destruction) the sign often of a great, The fatal Battle of Mohacz:
Lewis killed.
but now of an unhappy Resolution, that an Engagement ensued at Mohacz, where
the Hungarians were vanquished and put to a total rout. The King with his
Prelates and Nobles (to whom it was ignominous to fly and to survive their
Prince) being killed on the place.

At the news of this overthrow Buda was abandoned, the Queen with her best
movables flying to Presburg, whence she retired to Charles the fifth, her
Brother; who Deputed her to the Government of the Low Countries, where she
presided thirty years, and afterward weary of the World (like him) betook
herself to a Monastery, and was joined with him in Death. Buda taken by Solomon.
Solomon entering Buda, abstained from the Usurpation of the Regality, guessing
that a Kingdom so slightly gained, might as slightly be lost; but forbore not
the plunder of the Country, as much as lies betwixt the Balaton Lake, the
Danow, and Tybiscus, being miserably depopulated.

As to this Tragedy, and the Death of the King, there were many things that
portended it; as that he was Born without any Skin, which was supplied by the
Art of the Physicians. Besides a Spectrum appeared before the Gate of the
Castle of Buda demanding Conference with the King, which being not much
regarded, vanished without any presage. And now when as yet the safety of the
Kingdom was not dispaired of, Civil Wars subserved Fate and helped on the
general Ruin. Civil Wars ensue this Calamity.
The Supreme Power was unsociable, and Interest would not be joined by the
presentnesse of the danger. Armies were presently gathered, and as soon
dismissed; Fortune not admitting two to the Supremacy, and while all men stood
still at gaze, the Enemy took advantage to disperse them.

The Fourth BOOK.
While this Battle was fought at Mohacz, John Zapolyai Scepusius the Vayvod of
Transylvania, stayed at Szeged, and Cajoling the remains of the Nobility, came
to Buda, where he persuaded Perenyi the keeper of the Crown, John named King by
a Convention of the Hungaran Nobility at Alba Regalis.
to deliver it to him (conferring upon him therefore the Praefecture of
Transylvania) and thence speeded with them to Alba Regalis. A Convention being
here held, Verbeczius opened the present state of Affairs in favor of John,
who was by the Assembly accepted and styled King, having passed by Ferdinand;
who as well by the favor and good will of many, as by the Marriage of Ann the
Sister of Lewis, had a good Claim and Title to the Kingdom; wherefore John was
advised to begin the War against him, but he following milder then safer
Counsel, and the opinion of Frangepanes, dismissed his Forces, hoping to gain
the Kingdom by Largess and Bounty.

At the same, Bathori the Palatine, the perpetual Enemy of John, held a
Convention at Presburgh, where he maintained the Title of Ferdinand, by whom
Perenyus at the solicitation of Thurzo, and the Confirmation of his former
Title was brought over, and the Crown with the other Royal Ensigns conveyed
into his hands. Hereupon Ferdinand was Proclaimed and Inaugurated by Paul
Vardanus, and Encouragement given by the Hungarians readiness to assist him.
By which means John being forced to withdraw, Convocated his faithfullest
Friends to Gubaczium; but not judging it safest to rely upon them, fled to
Tockay, intending to call the Janissaries to his Aid* but while that was in
agitation, John beaten and dispossessed by Ferdinand.
Caczianerus an^ Felsius Discomfited his Captains with a most cruel slaughter
near the same Town, as others of his party were the second time vanquishe^ at
Hernad by the same Hand; where the Camp Royally stored fell into the Victors
hands, so that Tockay, Agria, Hatvanum, and all places as far as Buda
acknowledged Ferdinand; which mutation of affairs made John betake himself to
the Protection of John Tarnovius the Castellan of Cracovia; John flies for
shelter into Poland.
at whose entertainment of him, Sigismund of Poland Connived, but by no means
would assist him with Men and Money although his Brother in law, as
Conscientious of that League which was between Ferdinand and himself.
Caczinerus carrying in the mean time all places before him.

Nor was Frangepanes, John's firm Friend, much more prosperous in Illyria,
although he made potent opposition and bestirred himself vigourously in his
Cause, for being shot at the siege of Varasdin, which Paul Caprarius resolutely
Defended, he there with grief expired, and left that Province without any
further ado, in the Possession of Ferdinand. These lamentable distractions
gave occasion to the neighboring Garrisons of the Turks to Invade the same
Region and besiege Iaycia, which they reduced with many other places; the
Proprietor whereof Carlovitius, the last of the Torquati, dying at Medvevarium
greatly enriched the Family of the Noble Serini.

John thus turmoiled and stripped of his Kingdom, John complyes with the Turks
and joins Interests.
by the mediation of Lascus the Palatine of Siradia proffered to join Interest
with the Turk, having used also the diligent endeavors of Andrew Griti Son of
the Duke of Venice, for the accomplishment of this Design; a person of a narrow
Fortune, but vast hopes, who between Flattery and Crafty diligence, had gained
favor at the Port. At his instance Solomon (ambitious of Glory) by Conferring
a Crown he had won, and obliging such an Interest to his Service, Solomon
undertakes his Cause and Quarrel.
consented to the assertion of John's Quarrel, rather inclined thereto by the
unreasonable peremptorynesse of Hoberdanschus a rash man, Ferdinand's
Ambassador, who demanded restitution of all places, even Belgrade it self; to
which Solomon answered, that he would reply to this haughty Demand at the Walls
of Vienna. John was nevertheless not idle of himself, but having collected an
Army, for the furniture of which he pawned his Jewels, appointed Simon
Athinensis for his General, to whom adhered many Nobles. These Defeated
Liscanus and Revayus, Ferdinand's Captains, while John progressing to Lippa,
met the Grand Seigniour at Mohacz, who proceeded and came to Buda, yielded unto
him by the Treachery of the Germans. This City the Turk put into John's
possession, who now carried himself openly as King. Vienna besieged
Strigonium was next yielded by Varadanus commended to John's Clemency by some
friends: And now all Hungary resounded with the noise of these Victories as far
as Vienna, 1529.
whither Solomon was come and laid Formal siege thereunto; but by the Valor
of Philip Count Palatine, and Nicholas Count of Salms, and the Policy of
Ibrahim Bassa, who favored the Christians, and therefore retarded the great
Guns, The siege raised.
He was forced to rise after a month, with the loss of 80000 men; and thence
(having established John the Crown as it was carried up and down from its
depository at Visigrade, being taken with Perenyus, who by the Hostage of his
Son (Mahumetanized after) was hardly set at liberty: Solomon departed home)
when Rogendorf soon besieged K. John and Griti in Buda, but they were at last
relieved; Solomon also again returned into Hungary the next year and besieged
Guntzium, but prevailed not against the Courage and resolution of the
Governor: so that while he was engaged here, Charles the Emperor, and
Ferdinand, with an Army of 130000 men, came to fight him; but he terrified with
their approach, by two ways, hasted back again, the same Ibrahim advising it
for the destruction of one or both of the parties thus divided; but Charles
glad to see him gone made no use of the advantage; Solomon left Casnes with
15000 Horse behind him to plunder the Confines of Germany, but Frederick Count
Palatine, General of the Ayds of the Empire, met him, and put every man of them
to the Sword.

After this inglorious Retreat, K. John, whether indeed a Christian, or awed by
fear perceiving the Potency of Ferdinand, by Lascus besought his Peace, which
was suspended by a present Truce. The Commissioners of the two Kings (to
ascertain the Limits of their Dominions) met at Strigonium, which Town was
sequestered into the hands of the King of Poland, and Frederick of Saxony. Peace
concluded betwixt John and Ferdinand.
This good work took its desired effect, while new storms arose in Hungary
about establishing a person in the place of the Palatine Banfi newly Deceased,
which Dignity under the Title of Governor by the advice of Lascus to K. John,
was conferred on Griti, who with great Largesses had scrued himself into the
Esteem of the People; but was so hateful to the Nobles, and he Consciously
obnoxious to them, that by several Artifices he made the chief of them away.
Whereupon he returned to Constantinople in have, Griti's Designs.
upon pretense of making way to a Peace there, where his practices and
concealed reserved designs, pieces of which he had brokenly imparted, rendered
him suspect to John for his intimacy with the Divan. In the mean while Solomon
incited by his Dreams to an Expedition against the Persians, dispatched away a
Chiaux with the heads of the Peace, Solyman's terms of Peace.
which were, That Clement the Pope should be his Father; Charles and Ferdinand
his Brothers; John shall stand to equal Conditions, Corone, Bala, and Badra,
taken by the Valor of Andrew Doria, shall be recompensed to Charl^^ by other
places. But while the Emperor delayed to render those Towns, a most
ignominious Discomfiture of the Coronenses by Cayr^dine the Turks Admiral,
broke off the frustrated League; and so that agreement which might have been
easily purchased, rose to the price of the ruin of Hungary.

Griti was come back to Transalpina by Selistria accompanied with 3000. Men,
Griti' s End.
and every where proclaimed his Title of Governor, vapouring of his Virtues
which from a private Person had raised him to a Prince, and that to make Peace
betwixt Emperors, could be nothing less than a Divine and immortal action. As
he passed the Alps at Corona, he was accosted by Lascus with additional forces
out of Podolia, by whose assertion he was every where acknowledged as
Governor. Invested with this force and Power he sent for Cibacus, who was one
of those Nobles that had disallowed his Title, as vain and injurious while the
K. was living; who being betrayed by his Servant (corrupted by one Docius an
Instrument of Griti's by a silver Cup, the reward of his Treason, Cibacus
murdered by him.
who told him there was no danger if he went) npon his arrival the same night,
as he was fast asleep in his Tent, had his Head severed from his Body, and
carried to Griti to feed and satisfy his most Bloody and scelerate Revenge.
But Divine Justice was not far behind, for Stephen Maylat, and other Noblemen,
within eight days raising an Army of Sixty thousand Men, pursued Griti, who
conscious of his Vilanies and his Usurped rackt Authority, was upon the first
news of their Arming fled to Meggyesium, where by the defection of the
Townsmen, the Turks that were with him were all put to the Sword; his Agent
Docius Executed by the Axe, and Griti in his intended Escape taken by the
Valachians, and offered by them as a Victime to the Ghost of Cibacus.

King John being required by Solomon to Aid Griti, A Rupture between K. John
and Ferdinand
was nothing troubled when he heard of the news of this his Rivals Death; for
Griti's Design and last intendment was his Substitution to the Crown of
Hungary. He likewise for better security of the Peace, Imprisoned Lascus, but
put in mind of his former good Offices converted his restraint into Banishment.
And here followed a Rupture between John and Ferdinand, Leonard Cackei
delivering Cassovia in the Upper Hungary which was assigned to Ferdinand, to
King John; to requite which loss, the German attempted Transylvania; the
Szekelii, the relics of the old Huns, and the Siculi.
Szaszii, a Colony of the Saxons, Seated in a Province of that Principality,
being prone to Revolt from the H^ngarian. But when the Governors Nyari and
Bamfi by their plundering of Sacmar, had discovered the Conspiracy, the Design
came to nothing and John soon recovered that Town, with the loss o^ Gothard
Kunus his fast Friend, and a Tame white Heart which (like Sertorius) he had
always in his Company; the Death of whom made him so furiously revengeful,
that he put all the Prisoners to the Sword: while Felsius, Ferdinand's General,
successfully proceeded, and threatened Cassovia; to secure which John dispatched
away George Monachus, Peter Perenes, and Francis Debecus, with equal power and
Commission, whom Felsius by Delays (which begat a Discord between the Captains
as is natural in Competitions) so necessitated, Felsius the Emperors General's
success.
that forced to retire, he advantagiously set upon them, killing some and
driving other some into the River Tybiscus, aad together surprised Tokay. That
he gained not Cassovia, the Peace struck up at Vaccia was the only hinderance,
whereby both Kings were to hold what they then had in possession; the Issue of
John to enjoy Transylvania, John and Ferdinand Friends.
Opulia, and Ratibor; the League to be Offensive and Defensive, the one's
Enemies to be the others, and so contrarily, and to be obliged in the
prosecution of one another Designs; so that the Peace with the Turk was as
good as broken, or not at all regarded.

Hereupon Ferdinand to repress the incursions of Mahomet Bassa of Belgrade
(who had taken Posegum, Boczo, and Beriszlone in Sclavonia, and designing the
Siege of Clissia, had erected two Castles at Salonas for obstruction of relief)
sent away Peter Crusitius into Dalmatia, and Cackzianerus to Posega. Peter was
so fear stricken with Amurath Verbosanus, that many of his men dyed with mere
apprehension of the danger: The lamentable Defeat of Caczianerus and Lodronius
nor did Cackzianerus come off much more gloriously, being accompanied with
Lodowick Pecri, Lodronius, Albert Sliccus, Lodowick Rhaetus, John Ungnadius,
Bakitius, and other Commanders, with 8000 Horse, and 16000 Foot, all which he
led to Destruction. He was come as far as Valpone, and had laid Seige to
Essecum, not aware that he was included betwixt Posega the Enemies Garrison,
and the Danow, when Mahomet, Amurath, and Cassonus, guessing rightly that they
were distressed for Victual, invented a new way of Victory without fighting.
For when Cackzianerus perceived that neither the Governor of Zagrabia, no^ the
spoil of Herman Castle could afford a competence of victual, he resolved to
retreat to Valpone, in which march the way being before laid, and passes made
good against him, he was set upon by the Turks; Bakitius was killed in the
Streights, others pined with hunger, were wholly consternated. Cackzianerus,
Pecri, and Vnguadius, as a most shameful example, first flying away; The noble
Valor of Lodronius.
Lodronius only stood bravely to it, and fought to the last man; the rest
having no Commanders, either confused or pent up in narrow places, were slain
or taken Prisoners, the Camp and the Kings great Guns falling likewise into the
possession of the Enemy.

This unhappy Encounter and a designed Revolt thereupon stood Cackzianerus at
the price of his Head; for with the same success Mahomet and Amurath, took in
Dubicia, Iassenocium, and Soboczia, and brought a great dread upon both Kings,
besides that Solomon exasperated against Peter the cruel and feral Vaivod of
Moldavia, had at the same time by his arms substituted his Brother Stephen in
his place, Peter being fled to Csikium in Transylvani^. Hereupon Ferdinand and
John joined ^orces, the Germans amounting to 50, and the Hungarians to 30
thousand men; at the news whereof, Solomon by Letters upbraided John with his
perfidie, Solomon accuses J^hn of perfidy and Ingratitude.
and Arms taken against him his Father, and so known a Benefactor; that he had
aggravated his Defection by a War, and multiplied one wickedness by another;
on the other side John partly by words, and partly by gifts, endeavored to
excuse the fact, conscious to himself also of the slaughter of Griti, although
not yet charged to him. His Excuse
He pretended that he took Arms only to assist him his patron against Peter,
who^ he had besieged in Csikium, and to make good this particular d^d upon the
surrender send him Prisoner, to pacify Solomon, to Constantinople

Yet was not Moldavia thus settled, for Stephen being a like Tyrannical was
destroyed by a Conspiracy, and one Alexius the Son of Elias, formerly Prince,
was inducted in his place, but he out of Fear of the Turks, intending a revolt
to Ferdinand, was driven out by Peter, now restored again by Solomon to his
former Dignity, who being more sanguinous then before (punishing and torturing
his innocent Subjects, preventionally by the direction of this Politic, that
no wise Prince afflicts his People because they have, but because they should
not offend) His savage Government lasted not long, being succeeded therein by
Alexander.

About the same time King John married Isabel Daughter of the King of Poland,
New Troubles betwixt both Kings.
but while he mancipated himself to the pleasures of her bed, Stephen Maylat,
and Balassi, Governors of Dacia, quitted their Allegiance, and revolted to
Ferdinand, whom notwithstanding, by the sudden assistance of Valentinus
Tercock, he so quickly reduced, that they seemed to be engaged in the Plot, and
the defeat of it at the same instant. He dispossessed Balassius of several
Castles, but at this supplication gave him his Life; for either revenge or
oblivion follow punishment, and he that spares and is merciful, shows not only
his Clemency, but confirms His Dominion: He besieged also Forgarasse a Castle
of Maylats, The Death of John.
but being taken with a pain in his head, and gtown frantic therewith, at a
Town called Szar Sebessum, he died suddenly, having just before solemnized the
Birthday of his only Son John Sigismund.

The civil War which had been laid by the intervention of Treaties, now by the
death of one of the Treating parties broke out again; Essecius and Verbeczius
the Administrators, having recommended their Pupil to the Tuition and
Guardianship of Solomon, Solomon invited to be Guardian to his Son.
brought forth a Banner, the Staff of Honor, and Scymitar, the Ensigns of his
Investiture in the Kingdom, when they were indeed the Badges of Slavery, and
so counted and derided by other men. As to Ferdinand, he now thought it
seasonable, while yet the Peace was observed, by his Ambassadors and Heralds
to try the mind of the Turk and the Queen, willing rather to reduce the Kingdom
by fair means, than by bloodshed and War. Ferdinand' s Intrigues.
But understanding that Lascus his Orator with Solomon, was by him Imprisoned,
and nothing to be effected there, and that the Count of Salms was merely
delayed by Isabel the Queen, he proceeded to open Hostility, Leonard Felsius
his General reducing Vissegrade, Vaccia, and Pesth; but his attempt upon Buda
(the discord arisen between his Germans and Hungarians, and their private
Conferences with their Countrymen) unluckily disappoynted. More effectual was
the Eloquence of Perenyus, who being brought over to Ferdinand's side by
Szegessus his Ambassador at the Wedding of King John, where he set forth the
Power and Fortune of Charles the Emperor, now carried with him Alba Regalis to
the German party.

Nor was the Turk less active and stirring, Mahomet, Amurath, and Usref,
coming in the depth of Winter to the Assistance of George Mona^hus (who from
the King's Fire-maker or ^eweller, was advanced to the highest Dignities) and
Peter Petrovitius (assigned Guardians by the Testament of John to his Son
Sigismund) and presently attaqued Pesth; but by the Valor of Fotiscus* and
Speciacassius, whose vigorous Salleys the Turkish Camp could not endure, they
were repelled with great Loss. This so encouraged Ferdinand that Rogendorf was
sent to besiege Buda, Buda besieged by Rogendorf.
which Monachus and his adherents had re-fortified and made good the Walls and
Bulwarks with needful reparations, and now Countermined the besiegers, when
Thomas Bornemisza the Provost of the Town, and Peter Palcianus proffered to
deliver it to Revayus* the time and place appointed, none but Hungarians for
the better concealing the Design to be engaged in it. All things thus fairly
laid, and the General cocksure of the Town, Fortune showed him what presumption
and mistrust can do in the juncture of the greatest Military Affairs* For he
diffident of the Hungarians, and relying upon the constancy of the Germans, a^
the hour and place agreed on, clapped them into the City, who being betrayed by
their Tongue, were fallen upon by those who would have been their friends in
Peace; Defeated there.
and so numbers of them slain, and the rest repulsed. Nor did their ill fortune
stay here, for Mahomet and Ulumas Bassa of ^osnia, after a Naval Encounter,
while he loytered before Buda, landed upon him and over-threw his Army, when
Specia^acassius from Pesth fell upon the Victors, and abated the dishonor of
the Day by a like slaughter and terror brought upon the Enemy, but yet so that
the fame of Solomon arrogated to it self the Victory; for that Rogendorf
wounded with a Pole and flying for fear, died with grief and heartlesse; his
Fleet made shift to escape, but his Land Forces were wholly lost.

Solomon was now in person again in Hungary, Solomon in person again in Hungary.
and as a token of his affection to the young King, presented his Mother with a
Babylonish Garment, and Jewels of inestimable value, as he did her Son with
Horses richly Trapped, desiring him to be brought into his Camp, which request
was observed as a Command: whither being come, Valentinus Tercock one of his
prime Counselors, a man of a various and inconstant mind, Caeesses the Q. and
her Son.
was secured; the Child and the rest of his retinue was returned to his Mother.
Verbeczius Author of this Counsel of Solyman's Protection, survived not long
after, but troubled in Conscience with the evil thereof, gave notable proof of
his hearty repentance. In conclusion, Solomon by an Instrument conferred
Transylvania, Lippa, and Temeswar, to the Queen and his Pupil; when he swore by
God, Mahomet, his own Head and Sword, that he would render Buda to the Young
Prince; in which City he now placed Solomon Bassa for Governor in his own
Right and Title.

The Queen guided by the necessity of the Times, Buda put into the Turks
possession.
or afraid to dispute the business, accepted of the Conditions and quitted
Buda, ever since remaining in the Turkish power, as the Metrapolis of what they
hold in Hungary, where Solomon gave Audience to the Counts of Salms, and
Herbensteyn, Ferdinand's Ambassadors, of whom he insolently, demanded, that
their Master should presently yield Hungary to him as his Benefactour,
Solyman's insolent Demands to Ferd^nand
and pay him a Tribute for Austria. It was bootlesse to make any reply to ^uch
a formidable Neighbor, for that the Hungarians being deceived with this
ostentation and Show of their King, and by their own means disabled from
resistance, were not to be considered or relied upon. The Policy of Solomon
being herein agreeable to that of other Potentates; who to dissolve the present
State, pretend the Interest of the natural and rightful Princes, not that they
should Govern or have any Authority; but themselves having once gained the
People by such Arts, make not nice to retain them in subjection by the
extremest rigor and Violence, as having a pretended good Right by their former
voluntary Compliance and address to their auxiliary Arms.

The loss of Buda put all Germany into a Trepidation as apprehending the
vicinity of the danger. Aids offered Ferdinand.
At Spire and Ratisbone, two Aids were readily decreed; Maurice the young Duke
of Saxony, offering his Service with some voluntier Troops at his own Charge
and raising: Perenyus had got together Fifteen thousand Hungarians; and Paul
the third, sent Three thousand Men under the Command of Medigius afterward Pope
Pius the fifth, and Alexander Vitellius. Nor were Ferdinand's Forces of his own
levying fewer in number; Ioachim of Brandenburg being Constituted
Generalissimo. This was in the Year of our Lord 1542. 1542.
when Solomon by his Generals Ulumas, Amurath and others, timely opposed his
Arms. Pesth was the first place of Encounter, which Vitellius, and Sforza
Palavicinus having besieged by a Stratagem of a sudden flight thence, the Turks
were brought by the ambuscadoes of Perenyus, into an enclosure. Here the Turks
desperation showed its victorious Effect, though repressed by Maurice, and the
Courage of Count Nicholas Serini's Men* Pesth was hereupon reattempted, and
upon the point of Surrender when the Germans failed Vitellius; and through the
ill Conduct, or faint-heartednesse of Ioachim were upon their retreat and
departure. Perenyus was at the same time secured in Neustria, as well for his
present ambition upon the Crown, as his former designs of revolting to the
Enemy.

This Enterprise upon Pesth, Solomon vowed to revenge; to gratify which, his
Chief Commanders resolutely took in several Towns, Solyman's Su^cesses.
and among other Prisoners upon Surrender, at the delivery of Nana, Moreus the
great Bandit, who to save his life renounced his Religion. Other places,
particularly Valpone, bravely Defended by Michael Archius against his said
Generals, he in person reduced, as he did also Quinque Ecclesiae or 5 Kerchen,
Socklosiae, and Strigonium; Strigonium taken.
although such was the presumptuous Confidence of Lascanus, and Salamanca two
Spaniards, the Governors thereof, that they defied the joint Force of both
Emperors Armies, if engaged against the Town; but their brag and vapor was
well recompensed by Solomon, who kept his word of quarter for Life, no more
than they did their duty and Courage. Alba Regalis yielded to him.
Tata was next taken, and Alba Regalis, a very Defensible place, as standing in
a Morasse, and sacred for the Sepultures of the Kings of Hungary, which should
have spirited the Garrison; but by the Death of Varcocius the Governor and the
firing of the Suburbs, which against his advice were left standing to the
Enemies advantage, it came by storm and the pressing of the Turks upon the
Christians flying out of the said Suburbs into the City, into his hands: Most
of the Soldiers escaped over the Bogs: to the Burghers he showed himself a
fair and benign Conqueror:; while Ferdinand was employed among the Marcomanni
in raising of new Levies, a too late remedy to the bad estate of his Affairs.

And as if this had been the destined period of the Kingdom, Visigrade taken.
Mahomet Iahiogli the Bassa of Buda, and Ussan of Strigonium, having distressed
Visigrade for want of water, took in that town with many other places, which
tired out with the Calamity of the War, received the Turkish Yoke, as did
several places in Illyria from Ulamas enforced by the same Bassa, and the
rather for that Ferdinand had displaced Peter Keglevitius the Governor. In
whose room Count Serini was deputed as Bildensteyu for Styria, both of whom at
the Plain of Selnicia mee^ing with the Van of the Turks, had terms of a Truce
offered them, and agreed; but Ulumas coming in the very Juncture, the Enemy
took heart and treacherously Engaged them. Count Serini defeated by Ulumas.
Serini fled to Conscha, Bildensteyn in danger of drowning in his flight, was
preserved by the Gallantry and Valor of Stephen Balletitius. This Loss was
recompensed by the Defeat of the Garrison Forces of Strigonium, under Cufates
and Nasuff their Colonels, who having taken Leva (the Castle being yet notably
maintained by Melchior Balassi) in the arrogance of their Victory were set upon
by Nyari and put to the slaughter, a number of Captives being thereby also
redeemed out of their hands.

Yet by this never so unequal Balance of affairs, A Peace procured Ferdinand
did Ferdinand obtain a Peace of Solomon, being intent upon a more unjust
design, biased thereto by the Court of Rome: For he was now Famous for the
Smalchaldick war, which he managed with great renown to his Virtues, by which
he highly obliged those persons that suffered by the Council of Trent's
peremptory Decrees, and had no open or avowed patron, but Maurice the Elector
of Saxony. That War ended, Ferdinand held an Assembly of the States at Tyrnaw,
memorable for no other thing then the prosecution of two Noble Out-lawes, who
had licensed to themselves a power and Authority of Mischief by fortifying of
Advantageous places; their Names were Matthias Baso, who was taken at Muranum
by the Count of Salms (who built the Fortress of Szolnoc) and beheaded, and
Balassi his Son in law, who escaped into Transylvania.

And thither the next story leads us, George Monachus his designs
for George Monachus, the raised Favorite of K. John perceiving how
inconsiderable the Queens and her Sons Interest was like to prove in that pent
and precarious Principality, had privily ingratiated himself with Ferdinand,
renouncing his Master to the Count of Salms, and abjuring the Turk before
Andrew Bathori at Opulia, a greater Infidel and more perfideous himself.

The Queen and Petrovitius his Colleague were not ignorant of these his
practices, but could not remedy them; she therefore designed a Journey into
Poland, which George put by; but hasty of his Enterprise, seized the Treasury
and plundered it, and forced away the Queen from Cibinium, having Collogued the
Siculi and Saxons to be of his party. To the Nobles oposing themselves against
this upstart, as a person of a most sordid Extraction, Mahomet Bassa joined his
Troops; but he and his Confederates were soon vanquished, and George thereby
made Paramount in the Government, when by a temporary Peace he settled all
things in Statu quo; but diffiding and conscious of his demerits toward his
Pupil Prince, made an Agreement with Ferdinand, who thereby drew a War upon
himself, greater than the advantage of his present Acquist.

George was hereupon presently assisted by Ioh. Baptista Castaldus, Isabel the
Q. resigns her right and Interest.
Famous in the German war; Bathori the future Vaivod, Sirotinius, and Nadasdi,
and took in Alba, but restored the Q. her Treasure and rich movables, whom
Szasz Sebessius advised to quit the Crown and Transylvania, and to accept of
Opulia and an Hundred thousand Guilders in name of a dower; which the Queen not
daring to refuse, neither having command of her Person, her mind, or her
Kingdom, consented to; and so the Regal Ensigns were by her delivered to
Castaldus, while Petrovitius yielded Temeswar, Lippa, and other Towns, to the
same prevailing Enemy.

Solomon enraged at these proceedings, Solyman's resentment of these
proceedings.
imprisoned Ferdinands Ambassador at Constantinople, and sent away an Army
under Mahomet, Beglerbeg of Romania, Vlumas, Achomet and Cassonus into
Transylvania, with orders to reinstate the Queen and her Son, but under color
of their assistance to reduce the Kingdom and that Province to his own
obedience, who without any considerable opposition took in most of the Towns
between Temesus and Marusius, while George and Castaldus with other Commanders,
kept their posts about Varadin and those parts, although not inferior to the
enemy, by which means Lippa through the inconstancy of the Citizens, came into
the Turkish possession, Vlumas being placed Governor there: Temeswar was
likewise attempted but valiantly defended, for that George beseiged Lippa, and
St. Demetrius day was at hand, beyond which usually the Janissaries will not
continue in the field. At Lippa a Cardinals hat procured by Ferdinand was
presented to George, The fatal End of George.
who by distressing Vlumas for Provision, and repressing his Salleys, had
brought him to a Surrender, upon terms of free departure, which Castaldus
dissented from, gr^dging that George should arrogate the supreme Command to
himself: Nevertheless Vlumas having had some private conference with George
was dismissed with those terms, whom Balassi and Horvar contrary to Articles set
upon in his way, but so ineffectually that Vlamas made shift to bring his
broken forces to Adrianople to the provocation of Solomon, whom George would by
no means have so incensed: and hence Castaldus weary of a competitor took
occasion to inject suspicions into the head of Ferdinand, that George held
intelligence with the Turk, for which reason it was concluded between them that
he should be removed. To effect which, Sforza Palavicinus Andreas Lopez, Marcus
Ferrarus, with other Spaniards were appointed, Marcus in the morning twilight,
(as George quartered at Alwinez where he was underwriting some Petitions of his
Soldiers) rushing into his Chamber, ran him through, when Sforza with ten
others seconded that wound, and with the points and edges of their swords made
an end of him, George Monachus assassinated.
crying upon the name of Christ: a deserved end for the betrayer and deserter
of his Prince and Pupil, from whose Father he had received such benefits,
although the Assassinates themselves came after to very untimely ends. Pope
Julius heard this Fact with very great indignation, although palliated with his
defection, etc. nor would admit of those excuses, nor be pacified with bribes,
made and issued from that estate which George had left, and of which the
Assassinates were possessed,

The Turk being in a readiness for a War, The attempt of the Hungarians upon
Segedine.
Michael Toth imparted a design upon Segedine to Castaldus, who warned all the
Governors thereabouts to be assistant to the Enterprise, which succeeded with
good effect, the Town being taken, and the Castle standing upon its last
defense by the resolution of Hederbeg the Governor, when the Hayducks drunk
with the excellent Wines of Syrmia and Baronya with which the Town abounded,
were in their drunkenness surprised by notice given to Haly Bassa of Buda, by
a Pidgeon sent from Heder, and all the Heyducks put to the Sword, the Chief
Commanders who did all they could to prevent that excess (among whom was
Aldana Governor of Lippa, 1553.
and Berezus) hereby escaping, in lieu of whom the Turks light upon another
party under Nagy and Ter^ock, ignorant of what had happened, and captivated
them all, as they further enlarged this success by the taking of Vesprinium,
Vesprinium yielded to the Tu^ks.
delivered by Michael Ferreus (the chief Governor Peteone being excluded by
him) after a mutiny of the Garrison caused by his covetousness.

At the same time Elias (Son of Peter) Vayvod of Moldavia by these Alps,
invaded Hungary, and fa^ling into the richest and luxuriant parts of the
Country, was packing up a very great spoil, when Banfius and other Noblemen
surprised him, and stripped him of his booty. But a greater danger was feared
from Achomet, who took Temeswar, Lozoncius after a forward defense, by the
discord of the Germans, being forced to yield it upon terms, which in
remembrance of that perfidy used toward Vlumas were not at all regarded, Their
further successes.
and the Garrison put to the Sword. Twenty several other places were either
taken or yielded, which had been formerly in their possession, and all the
tract of ground between Temesus and Chrysus Niger, reduced to their obedience.
Lippa also, although Aldana the Governor had boasted of the strength of the
place, and his own resolution, was out of fear fired by himself, for which he
had lost his head, but for the intercession of Mary the Empress. Dregelum was
also taken, though so nobly defended by Sondius, that they gave his dead body
most honorable Sepulcher. Not to mention many other places, among the rest
Salgon, by a stratagem of a great Log from the next hill, which the Garrison
were made believe for a great Gun, so that it was with the Turks the same thing
to come and to Conquer.

At length Erasmus Theuffelus and Sforza Pallavicinus newly returned out of
Italy with 10000. men, Theuffelus and Pallavicinus defeated.
opposed themselves to this Torrent, but by their hastiness and impatience in
not staying for the Nobility at Fileek, and all the Elements conspiring their
Ruin (their Powder and Ammunition being blown up at Palastus) they were beaten
out of their Camp, and both Generals taken prisoners, Theuffelus denying
himself was sowed in a sack and drowned afterward in the Thracian Bosphorus,
and Sforza ransomed with 15000. Crowns, the other captives being set at so
cheap a rate, that a German was sold for a Peck of Barley. Szolnock was next
attaqued by Haly and Achomet, and notwithstanding either the promises or
Threats of Laurentius Nyari delivered to them by the faint hearted Garrison.
Thence the Enemy with a hundred and twenty five Thousand men came before Agria,
Agria nobly defended by Dobo and Neskeyus.
wherein were Governors Dobo and Neskeyus, who had in vain implored aid and
supplies from the Emperor, assisted by some Noblemen and 2000. Soldiers. It
was a sharp and daring Seige of both sides, the Defendants in a bravery opening
the Bolikian Gate and there after a fierce encounter slaying 3000. Turks, which
courage of theirs so disheartened Achomet that having lost 12000. great shot
against the Town he broke up from before it, Duke Maurice Ferdinands General
having spent a whole summer in his Station near Raab, without any thing of
moment effected against the Enemy. The Messengers of this success at Agria
were richly rewarded, and Dobo made Prefect of Transylvania, Nekessius by an
untimely and ungrateful accident was killed in a rustic Tumult by an Axe.

Ferdinand notwithstanding more afraid of fortune then desirous of Conquest,
preferred Peace, 1555.
to which purpose he commissioned Antony Veranczius, and Francis Zayus to the
Port, by whose means Malvezius the former Ambassador was set at liberty, but
he survived it not long, dying in his journey back again thither with a new
Commission. In his place Augerius Gislenius Busbequius was substituted, Count
Serini his Successes.
but nothing more then a truce of six months could be obtained. The War being
therefore continued, it was the good fortune as the valor of Count Nicholas
Serinus (Zrynyi by the Hungarians) to defeat Vlumas and Amurath of Clissa by
Toploczia, who bearing up from this discomfiture plundered and spoiled several
Towns at their retreat; while Hameza the Governor of Sezeserinum by a surprise
gained Filek.

Busbequius was now returned re infecta from Constantinople, without that
Ferdinand would relinquish Transylvania; and Alys a Chiaux being sent to
Bathori the Vayvod, commanded him to expel the Germans, a new Prince of
Hungary to be chosen, or the Queen restored; to which demands Bathori by the
connivence of Castaldus answered by the promise of a Tribute in the name of the
States, but for their wresting places out of the hands of those that had them
in possession it was not in their power. Hereupon Aly Bassa formerly Governor
of Buda, but now prime Vizier, beseiged Sigeth most nobly even to admiration
defended by Stansitius, and preferved by a diversion given the Enemy by the
Palatine Nada^di who beseiged some Towns of the Enemy which Toygon of Buda had
taken from the Heyducks, Enemies to both parties.

Aly thus necessitated to rise from Zigeth passed the Rinnia and came to meet
Nadasdi, Aly the Bassa of Buda Defeated.
but by the valor of Serini and Polbaylerus and the Auxiliary's of Telekessius
and Ruberius, and which is the main, the prudence and conduct of the General,
he was totally routed: when the Palatine suspecting reinforcement of the Enemy
or contenting himself with the rescue of Zigeth, returned to Chorgond, where he
joined his forces with young Ferdinand, who had obtained leave of his Father to
make Trial of his first Arms in this War. The same hereof bred so great
terror among the Turks, 1556.
it being also rumoured that the Christians overspread the whole plain, that
Aly Bassa was preparing for a flight, having with all earnestness summoned
Mahomet the Beglerbeg of Romania to his assistance, but when upon Nadasdi's
retreat, it was conceived that he fled, Aly returned to his Seige of Zigeth,
but with worse fortune; losing 10 Thousand men in the Trenches, the fruit of
his vain contempt of the Christians. His departure young Ferdinand by the
advice of Nadasdi suffered without any molestation, employing his Army to the
reduction of Corone, and afterward burnt down Graeco-galla, St. Martins and
many other places, in which the avarice of the Germans was so prodigious, that
they searched the very entrayls of their Enemy's for Gold, which they supposed
they might have swallowed.

But affairs went not on so prosperously in Transylvania, Dissentions ^n
Tran^ylvania between the Governors.
by reason of the misunderstanding between Dobo and Kendius the Governors
thereof, (for Castaldus either foreseeing the mischief or being called away by
Charles the fifth had quitted that Command) Dobo was constant to the King, Kendi
inclined to Isabel and out of that respect and fear of the Turks power always
impending, with a great party publicly rebelled, and called in the Queen (who
pretended to be unsatisfied of her agreement made with Ferdinand) out of
Poland, as he did likewise move Solomon for assistance who, commanded Cassonus
and the Vayvod of Moldavia to that service; but such was the diligence of Dobo
and his Partisans Tahy and Zaberdini that the Confederates were glad to sue for
a 15. days truce at the expiration whereof upon pardon they rendered
themselves: but their Inconstancy upon the next advantage, under new pretenses
engaged them in the same designs; for upon the departure of the Imperial
forces, Kendi and Balassi call in the Queen, and now their business was ripe
for Execution: for Huztum was at last yielded to Andrew Bathory, as Varadinum
at the Command of Ferdinand, being wearied out with these Troubles, with Tockay
by the revolt of Francis Nemeth to Isabel, were likewise delivered; And now the
rebellion was so far spread, that it was high time for Ferdinand to apply some
excellent hand to the Government, but the persons he named to it, proved very
insufficient by their personal evils. During this dispute it proved Dobo's
hard fortune, when things were past remedy, The Emperors ^osses in
Transylvania.
to be seized (at such time as he had news of his brothers captivity by, the
Turks, as calamity seldom comes alone) by Perenyi, with whom he had a
controversy about the Dignity of the Crown keeper, in which restraint he was
hardly used, to a very just but most envious imputation upon the faith of
Isabel, who had engaged for his Liberty. These losses were a little alleviated
by the good conduct of Emerius Telekessius deputed in the place of Puchamus the
former Governor, who reduced many places, and maintained others against Isabel
standing near the Tibiscus, but all was to no other effect then by those
struglings to strengthen the common Enemy against their Country.

For though the Enemies Effort in this juncture was distant as far as Illyria,
yet had it the better and facile execution, and although revenged at last by
Erd^edius the Successor of Serini to the Government; yet did it not any what
allay those Feuds at home, whereby Tata was gained by Hameza by stratagem, and
Komora, and Austria exposed to their Arms. The Princes of Germany were
therefore prayed to assist Ferdinand, who agreed to a double aid, the levying
of Forty eight thousand Men, who by the Turks cunning mention of a Peace
presently to be concluded, 1560.
squandred away a whole Summers time in their Quarters, at Raab to the great
burden of those whom they came to relieve, and did nothing worthy the noise of
the very preparation.

Transylvania altogether as unhappy, now groaned under the oppression of its
own Princess. Bebecus her great Friend and Councellor was now delegated to
Solomon at Constantinople, The Queens administration in Transylvania.
by whom he was favorably received, and honored with the Title of Governor;
and the Moldavian, and Valachian Vayvods subjected to him; by which his Power
became suspect to the Queen, as upon this account also, for that Petrovitius
and others, would have the young Prince conveyed to Varadin an University
(Cambray the French Ambassador urging the motion) for that it would be
dangerous to breed him to the Distaff, lest Effeminacy and Luxury should
corrupt his manners. Hereupon the Queen troubled, consulted with Nisovius a
Polonian, to put the Noble men to death, She puts sundry Noblemen of her party
to death.
which was agreed on: Petrovitius escaped a violent (by hasting to a sudden and
natural) end, having named the Queen and her Son, his Heirs. But Bebecus,
Francis, and Antonius Kendy, who had stickled so much for her Interest and
party, paid for their fondness with the loss of their lives, their
Executioners being prepared by Balassius, who for this Service was invested
with the Supreme Power of the Army; so sad and Calamitous was the face and
State of this Principality.

Soon after died Isabel, and Ioh. Sigism. her Son endeavored the procuring of a
Peace, The Death of Q. Isabel.
but his Ambassadors taunting oration, wherein they said that the King of
Hungary, meaning John, desired but the Bounds of the River Tibisous, (denoting
no more then Transylvania) frustrated that impertinent solicitation; and in the
mean while Balassius (who in diverse Encounters had received some brushes from
Telekessius, and had incurred the hatred of Transylvania) with the money
received for the payment of the Army, ran away to Caesar, bringing over with
him Sacmar, Rivulinum, and other Towns; with the person and Interests of
Nicholas Bathori. John made Complaints of this to the Port, that Peace was
pretended while War was prosecuted; but by the Sagacity and diligence of
Busbequius his Address and Intrigues was dismissed without remedy. Not to
mention the War in Moldavia betwixt Jacob Heraclides, Alexander, Visnovecsius,
and Thomsa, Competitors for that Vayvodship, wherein both John, and Ferdinand,
and Solomon were Concerned, for that it would be too large a Digression.

The Affairs of John grew worse and worse, for that Solomon had consented to an
Eight years Truce, after almost as many years solicitation. Stephen Bathori yet
stuck firm to his part, with Francis Nemethi, who now jointly Besieged Hadad,
the Town belonging to one Sulyoccus, a Noble man designing the part of
Ferdinand; John Sigismund worsted in Transylvania.
Zayius and Balassi came to the releif of it, when Bathori advised against any
Encounter; but Nemethi disdaining the name of a Coward would needs persuade
him; though to the loss of the whole Army, 24 Great Guns, with a Camp
excellently stored, and fifty three Ensigns, being taken from the
Transylvanians: The subjects whereof awaiting the Event of this Battle took
advice of Fortune. The whole Province was now in trepidation, and their
security designed in Poland, whither John Sigismund was upon his departure, had
not Christopher Bathori comforted him with the hopes of the Turks Assiastnce,
by whom he might one day gain Hungary also.

Accordingly Ibrahim Bassa of Buda, and Malchoczius of Temeswar, came with
Forces and freed Nemethum of the siege, but not from the fire which the South
Wind blew cross the water to the other part of the Town. At the same time
Zajus having carried away all the spoil and what was worth any thing set fire
to Zacmar which nevertheless defended it self against the Turks by the
obstinacy of Balassi shut up therein; whose Brother John coming to his releif
with a Thousand Men, Hasanes Beg so suddenly routed, as putting his hopes of
carrying the Town in this Exploit, that of the one side it would have been
judged there were no other than Beasts, as on the other side none but Men. Not
to pass by the Insolence of Arslanes Governor of Posega in Illyria for the
Turks, Arslanes defeated by Count Serini.
who having plundered all about Monozlone, had now pitched his silk and Golden
Tents under the soft murmur of the Confluents, and as if the Enemy were to be
Vanquished by his pleasures, was now diverting himself in all manner of Luxury,
when Serini and Tahi fell upon him, and without any difficulty took his Tent
furnished rather for Entertainment than Fight, and divided it among their
Soldiers.

So that this civil Conflagration, and the intermedling of the Turks, had
already ruined the People; in the Feilds was vastitude, in the Camp want and
penury, The calamitous condition of Transylvania and Hungary.
and the minds of men by their habitude to War, brutalized and transformed into
Savage Principles. A Peace therefore as the only and last remedy to this
perishing State, was procured by Busbequius, at the rate of the yearly Tribute
of Thirty thousand pound: while Ferdinand caused his Son Maximilian to be
Crowned King of Bohemia, and Elected Emperor, to confirm that Dignity in his
Family, as he did of Hungary likewise; the vanity of which Solemnity Ibrahim
Solyman's Ambassador beheld and derided, as a Prince Vassaliz'd and engaged to
his Master and deprived of so much of his Dominions, 1562.
although the Pomp was no way equal to the former Triumphs on that occasion. At
this Inaugauration the Hungarians were highly discontented that a Palatine was
not first Created according to Custom, and that the Germans were not dismissed
out of the Kingdom* but in vain: as was also the near Conclusion of a Peace by
the Embassy of Stephen Bathori from John to Ferdinand, the young man being
persuaded by bad Council, The death of Ferdinand.
to continue the War in Transylvania, the issue whereof was very unprosperous.
And now died Ferdinand of a Consumptive Fever. A Prince of a very singular
Modesty, Justice, and tenderness, having rescinded all the Edicts of Charles
the fifth, against the Protestants, and decreed to them Liberty of Conscience.
His unhappiness in war was rather imputable to the vast Power of his Enemies
and the inconstancy of his own Subjects, than his own insufficiencies, the
less observable, from the virtues and Imperial Endowments of his Son and
Successor Maximilian in his Kingdoms and the German Empire, Maximilian
succeeds in the Kingdom to his Father Ferdinand
which he adorned with his Justice and constant tenor of life as much as any
of his Predecessors in that Dignity.

Nor was he less studious of the Peace and Tranquillity of his Realms, agreeing
to the continuation of it at the instance of Sabanus the Envoy of Solomon
intent upon another War; but John disturbed this serenity by his Arms in
Transylvania, Stephen Bathori alluring the Zacmarians to his side, while he
himself recovered Hadad, Bathor, and St. Martin and forced other places to
Condition for a Truce of sixty days, as Zayus and Balassius being too weak to
encounter him were mustering at Cassovia, where they had been surprised and
Suppressed by John, 1564.
but for a storm of rain which hindered any possibility of marching, and sunk
his Carriages. Maximilian being informed of his Power, Maximilian's Successes
in Transylvania.
dispatched away Lazrus Suendius and Andrew Bathori to oppose him, Valuing the
Reputation of his first Enterprise as of great moment to his future Actions:
And at the same time sent Ambassadors with presents to Solomon. Suendius by the
advantage of the Ice, 1565.
took Toacky surrounded like a Peninsula, by the Confluence of the Tybiscus and
Bodrogh; Sacmar submitted it self as Erdoedium yielded; the like did
Szerenczium, and Rivulinum to Balassius, for that no releif was to be had from
the Turks, Solomon being engaged by Sea at the Seige of Malta, with a Fleet of
205 Sail. In fine by the humble Instances of Bathori Somlianus and Nisovius,
Suendius, was entreated to a Peace, but with very hard Conditions. John to
content himself with the County of Bihor, and to quit his pretenses to the
Regal Title, and to yield Munkacksum and Marmorussa. In Sclavonia, A Peace
concluded between John and Maximilian.
Mustapha the Bassa of Bosnia, having taken Crupa in sight, and to the ignominy
of Auspurgerus, who dared not to Encounter him, proceeded and stormed Novia,
and was thence prosecuting his Fortune with Fifteen thousand Men, when Petrus
Erdaedius but with Fifteen hundred so lustily accosted him, that he put him to
the Rout, and slew the Turks like so many sheep.

Nor did the Peace in Hungary stand firm and inviolable, for Hidajetes a new
Envoy or Chiaux Solomon, had demanded Tockay to be restored to John, by which
encouragement Bekessius and George Bebecus (the Son of him that was put to
death by Isabel, New troubles in Transylvania by the Turks.
who flying to Ferdinand was intercepted by the Turks, and begged of Solomon by
John, whom as his Benefactour he was obliged to serve) confer Counsels and
contrive a War; so that the Conclusion made between Suendius, Somlianus, and
Cracsianerus of Poland (who negotiated the accommodation by his Kings order)
although ratified, took not its Effect: Somlianus (for his prevarication with
John) in that Treaty, being committed to Custody. The War being commenced, the
Bassa of Buda, and Hasan Beg of Fueleck, assisted the Transylvanian, who
recovered Ieneon, Desvium, Vilagosvarum, Pancota, and lastly, after a difficult
siege, the strong Town of Zacmar; upon the Surrender whereof, Hasanes enraged
for the loss of Curtus his Major slain during the Seige, commanded the
Garrison to be put the Sword, after Articles of Life and Liberty. Swendius
although equal to the Enemy yet delayed engagement, proffered by Hasanes,
knowing a new Treaty was managed at Vienna, which new stated the Agreement,
Composed again.
viz. John to have all places taken from him restored, and to be honored with
some present from the Emperor.

But Caesar forbearing the the restitution of Tockay, and lingering in other
points to be performed on his part, Solymans last Expedition into Hungary.
Solomon now 80 years old, undertook his last Expedition into Hungary, and when
dissuaded thereto by Albert Vicius, and Hoszutothius, Maximilian's Ambassadors,
1566.
alleging there was no mischief intended by their Masters delay, he answered
in a juvenile heat, That the End of his Life was measured out to him, not by
his length of Years, but the Extent of Dominion. He was now arrived at Belgrade
(where the news of the Defeat of Arslanes and his dislodgement from the Siege
of Palotta by Thurn, met him) and there gave reception to John Sigismund,
having fetched him from the other side of the Danow in his own Barge, and
presented him with a stately Horse, richly set out, on which he was brought
through his Guard of Ianizaries to his own person; His enterview with John
Sigismund.
Sigismund himself had the Honor of his right hand joined with his, the rest
of his Train kissed Solyman's knee or the hem of his Vest. After some discourse
and thanks rendered for his many Kindnesses, and his Aid and assistance anew
implored against the Germans, he drew out a Petitionary paper containing the
Oath that Solomon had took concerning the redelivery of Buda, John requests
Buda to be delivered to him but in vain.
betwixt hope and fear of what would ensue such an Address. But such was the
generous freedom and clearness of Solyman's nature, that to rid him of the
anxiety he presently Commanded his Vizier Mahomet to conform in all things
with the desire and request of his Beneficiary. But Mahomet taxing the
Ingratitude of John, upbraiding him with his own tenderness, as having been
more a Father to him than Solomon, and taking it in scorn that he should keep
equal State with him before Company, so wrought upon Solomon by setting before
him how many Musselmens lives his Quarrel and that Place had cost him; and that
it was against the Law of Mahomet to yield it to the Christians; that not only
the City was not rendered to him, but he dismissed with a prohibition of any
further speech or sight of the Grand Seigniour. At the same time Portau Bassa
took Gyula which Ladislaus Kereczsenius for a while resolutely Defended; but
being corrupted by the Enemy against the advice and intimation given him of the
necessity of the Turks departure, Gyula betrayed to the Turks by the Governor
Kerecsenius.
by Stephen Bathori, delivered it upon terms, which the perfidious Enemy
observed not, how ever by the favor of the Night, and the Reeds growing
thereabouts, some few escaped. He himself, as a just reward for his Treason,
was by the Command of the Sultan, rolled down a Hill in a Barrel stuck full
with Nails.

Whose first attaque was upon the Town of Sigeth, Count Nicholas Serini
besieged in Sigeth.
wherein was Governor Count Nicholas Serini, with Two thousand five hundred
Men; an incompetent number to the Defense of the place, which diverted the
storm from Agria (at a Town near to which called Soklos the Bassa of Bosnia had
been slain) upon it self. All Military Experiments were practiced in this
Seige, the continual discharge of the Cannons so rarefying the Air, 1566.
that the noise of the Leagure was heard as far as Canisa. Aly Portau the
General of the Ordinance doing the part of a valourous and skilful Commander,
as well by diverting the Course of the River, as bringing his Men in person to
the breaches. Nor was Serini less active and Courageous filling the Grafts
with the slaughtered Carcasses of the Enemy; from the shame whereof arose
Indignation and resentment of their loss, Solomon in the 47. year of his Reign
dies at Quinque Ecclesiae three days before the surrender of Sigeth.
by which both Towns the old and the new were taken and Sacked. Aly Portau
surviving not that Effort, committed the prosecution of the Castle to Seysedin
Bassa now destitute of provision and wanting men the few Defendants being tired
out with constant duty. Three days before the Castle fell into the hands of
the Turk died Solomon, laboring with an anxious Expectation of its reduction,
and wearied with old Age, made more irksome by a pain in his Leg and
accelerated by the Flux. His Death was concealed by the Policy of Mah^met,
until Selym his Son should be seated in the Imperial Throne, and several
menacing Edicts fainedly given out to make the Turks desperate in the next
Assault; when Serini being disabled to hold out longer, opening the Gates and
encouraging his Soldiers to die with him (having put on a rich Suit with a
Hundred pieces of Gold in his Pocket, the reward of him that should kill him)
sallyed out with fury upon the Enemy, Zigeth taken.
and died nobly revenged in the midst of them, The Death of the Noble Count
Serini.
having slain during the Siege no less than Twenty some say Thirty thousand
men. The Head of this Famous person, was made a public spectacle one whole
day; and the next by Mustapha Bassa of Buda sent to the Count of Salms, and
interred at Csaktornya, but by the Imperial Army in veneration of his great and
admirable Actions solemnly attended to Abdua, and there deposited.

The said Army, consisting with the aids of the Empire, of 25 Thousand Horse,
and 80 Thousand Foot, paid chiefly with the money of Pope Pius the 5th. lay
encamped about Raab (where a sad Fire happened about this time) not offering to
stir to the relief of Sigeth, John Sigismund aided with an Army of Tartars.
nor to the suppression of John Sigismond who aided with a great body of
Tartars (his own Army amounting to 15000 men) had ruined the Ter^itories of
Patach Munkacks, and Bereckshez, sparing neither age nor Sex. Tockay was
defended against him by the valor of Jacob Ranuger, and Matthias Calvasius;
the same Tartars continued this their ravage of both sides the Tibiscus to the
County of Bodroch and Samosch, intending the like upon ^ihor, to such a
desolation of the Country, Their cruel rapine makes him engage and vanquish
them.
that John afflicted with the sight of it, when he could neither regain the
Captives nor persuade them to desist their cruelty, near to Debreczinum gave
them battle, and victoriously freed his people of these Locusts and Destroyers;
as, while Maximilian retired to Vienna having fortified Canisa, and thereafter
disbanded his Army, Mahomet took in Babozza, and with the honor of the
Campania retired to Belgrade, having met Selymus, in his return, at Valkovar,
who followed his Fathers Corpse (meanly attended in sign of humane frailty) to
Constantinople, where it was interred in a most magnificent Mosque built by
himself in his life time.

The War in Transylvania was yet maintained betwixt Maximilian and John by
their Generals Swendius, and Bebecus, who being inferior in strength to
Swendius thought by pretenses of his Revolt to the Emperor to gain time, but
the sagacity of Swendius disappointed his Plot, several Towns being taken from
John by Seige during this Intrigue which we may not here enumerate; John
therefore joined his Army with Hasan Bassa of Temeswar, who turned the Scale of
fortune and retook as many places, but in the midst of this successful
progesse he was violently afflicted with an arthritical distemper, Various
success^s in Tran^ylvania.
which like a Civil war in his Microcosme imperseded his bent to the
prosecution of his Quarrel: nor did Hasan at his departure meet with better
luck at his arrival at Dedesla, in the plunder whereof, his powder took fire
and blew up 400 Turks into the Air: by this means all parties were willing to a
composure, which Caesar (the equallest esteemer of fortune, as preferring the
commendation of his humanity, before the pleasure of revenge) had by his
Ambassadors Veranczius and Tieffenbach effected at the Port, Selym being intent
upon the Conquest of Cyprus.

It was now the year 1567. when this outward peace was blemished with a foul
and most nefarious design against the life of Max^milian, Sig^smunds soul
Practices.
with the seizure of Hungary, by Dobo and Balassius (men highly obliged to him,
and who had done him also many signal services) at the instigation of John
Sigismund but motioned to them by George Boscay. 1567.
It was discovered by George Rakoczi, and Ruberus by the divine peculiar
protection of Kings: of this Treason they were both by a public Solemn Trial
convicted and left to the disposal of Caesar, who (although Bal^ssius broke
prison and incited the Turks to new troubles, adding wickedness to
wickedness) pardoned them both with admirable clemency. So that neither way of
open War, nor close Treachery advantaging John, he ran into an extreme hardly
suppo^able, clapping up an offensive and defensive league against the Turk, and
to be managed as Caesar should upon occasion direct, thereby renouncing to the
friendship protection and favor he had received all along from the Ottoman
Family, 1570.
which caused diverse discourses and reflections upon him, (but to be a
Christian or not a Christian is of no concernment to the Law of Nations)
although Maximilian at the same time being urged by the Venetians and the Pope
to join with them in their league a while before the battle of Lepanto (when
the Turk lost 250 Sail of Ships and Galleys, and 25000 men, Vluzales
dexterously escaping with 30, and afterward by his Fabian delays, restored
their naval power) most religiously refused.

By this Peace it was concluded that John should enjoy with the Title of most
Serene Prince of Transylvania, The Peace betwixt Maximilian and Sigismund.
the Provinces of Bihor, Carasna, Marmarosse, and the exterior Szolnoc, to
have the same friends and enemies with Caesar, Selymus to be held in amity, and
this Treaty to be concealed; but if it should happen that John should be
expelled by the Turks out of Transylvania, he should then be invested in
Opulia; all former differences to be put in Oblivion and himself to be under
the Clientele of Maximilian.

With the confirmation hereof Bekessius was sent to the Emperor, where
understanding by Blaudrata that John could not live long, he designed the
Government to himself, delaying the ratification by pretenses of his
indisposition and grief (and thereby his incapacity) for the languishing
condition of his Prince; who being a Bachelor, and disappointed of the
marriage of Joan Daughter of Albert of Bavaria, added that grief to his other
distempers; which having horribly tortured him 54 days together brought him to
his death at Georgyen, The death of Sigismund.
and was the last accumulation of the ruins of this Family. A man of a sharp
and quick spirit, but infected with the Company of sordid and base people of
both Sexes, 1571.
and thereby prone to all vices, but of all those his contempt of Religion, was
the greatest and most notorious.

By his death Bekessius took courage to pursue his ambitious designs, Bekessius
his ambitious designs upon the succession, but conferred on Stephen Bathori.
relying on the Turk, and his interest in the Soldiery, but Selymus with the
good liking of Caesar also, having preferred Stephen Bathori, a man famous both
for war and peace to that Principality; Bekessius mad with rage and shame, that
he should be deceived in the opinion he cherished of the Soldiery (which he
had boasted abroad) who concurred with Fortune against him, posted to Fogarasse
and there laid up and secured John's Treasure, endeavoring all ways and means
to raise Enemies against Stephen; but the troubles of Mollavia by another
change of their Vayvods deferred the public eruption of the intended hostility
in which interval happened this Phanatick Story.

One Gregory Carachondius of Rivulinum, 1572.
Surnamed Black from the event of his exploit, under the specious vail of
sanctity and pretense of revelations had inveigled the vulgar in the head that
God would by him expel the Turk out of Hungary, A Phanatick story in Hungary.
hereupon having collected a rabble of 5000 men, (who admired him not only for
his spirit of Prophecy, but his strength of Arm, by which he would streighten
a Horseshooe) he marched to the Seige of Miklosum, where he said it was
revealed him that either the Walls would fall down of themselves, or the Turks
be b^rnt by Fire from heaven, which the Turks counterfeiting by setting Fire to
bundles of straw and reeds about the Castle, these mad Fellows took it for
fulfilling of his praediction, but when they perceived near at hand, that the
Walls and Castle stood, they drew off very melancholy, and were in that mood
set upon by Sazvares Governor of Szolnoc and miserably slaughtered:
notwithstanding their Captain would not desist, but pretending this loss to
have happened for their sins, he laid Seige to Zolnoc, where he was
disappointed in the same manner; from thence to Debreczinum where for contempt
of his authority, he commanded the Mayor to be hanged, but a Tumult preventing
the Execution, he was taken by the multitude and his Head chopped off, and showed
for a spectacle of whimsicall ambition. Yet was even this wild fellows death
(such the madness of the infected herd) endeavored to be revenged though after
a short politic connivence suppressed by Nicholas Bathori.

The like Scene almost was acted in Illyria by the Boors there, 1574.
who rebelled against the Nobility and Gentry, The same acted in Illyria.
who had held them indeed in very hard servitude; their number was Ten
Thousand, who proclaimed one Matthew Geubecz for the King, and unmercifully
handled their former Masters, tearing like Dogs those that resisted them. But
800 men easily routed them. And their K. being taken, had his flesh pulled off
with burning Pincers, and a red hot Iron Crown put upon his head, expiating by
that regal emblem his affront to the Regal Dignity.

Maximilian was now intent upon gaining the good will and favor of the Estates
toward the settling his Family in the Supreme Power, The seeds of new troubles
in Hungary.
having in his own sight caused his Son Rudolph to be crowned King at
Presburgh, notwithstanding that the Burghers generally grudged that the Germans
were not removed out of the Kingdom, nor a Palatine created according to
custom, besides that their liberties were infringed, etc. which inflamed at
last into Tumults and uproars.

Nor was Stephen Bathori's Government quiet or composed, As also in
Transylvania.
for Bekessius neither reducible by his menacing edicts, nor the entreaties and
persuasions of the Nobility, was now beseiged in Fogarasse, which being ill
manned, he privately upon a swift Asian horse escaped to Caesar, the Castle was
after delivered by Paul Giula afterward Secretary to Stephen, and with it all
the Treasure Bekessius had hoarded, Bekessius ruined.
Fortune and Prudence deserting him together, for while he coveted Titles
beyond his reach, he lost an ample estate, in his power to have preserved it.

Amurath the 3d. Succeeded Selymus in the Ottoman Throne, having seen five of
his Brothers strangled in his presence, but more humanely inclined to a Peace
with Christendom, as being by Dream admonished to a War against the Heretic
Persians. This Tranquillity stirs in Poland succeeded; for Charles the ninth of
France, dying, his Brother Henry newly made King of Poland, Affairs of Poland
relating to Hungary.
withdrew suddenly thence, and left the Poles in an Interregnum and vacancy, as
after they decreed at Warsaw, but could not agree about the Successor. The
Competitors were Caesar, John of Sweden, and Ivan Vasilowich Duke of Mosco, for
as yet Stephen Bathori minded not the matter, thinking it above his reach; but
Samuel Sborovius then in Exile in Transylvania, for the slaughter of Vapovius
Castellan of Primislaw, having every where proclaimed the worth of the person,
drew Peter Sborovius then Palatine of Cracovia, to his opinion; Stephen by
their Counsel therefore put in his Name and stood for the Election, by an
unusual felicity being in a short time a Baron, Prince, and King. Nor was he
unworthy of his Advancement. To detain him in Transylvania, Caesar Commissioned
Bekessius to attempt it, who came with such sudden secrecy as far as Radnot,
that Bathori knew not of an Enemy, although in the middle of his Principality,
and had been easily Conquered if Bekessius had not lost by delays what he had
gained by his good speed; for while he argued with Bathori about Articles of a
new Agreement, the form where of Bathori, Bathor^'s Successes.
thus surprised, desired to be mended and mitigated only, he called in Mahomet
the Governor of Lippa with his Forces to his Assistance, with which
Courageously he Vanquished Bekessius. The Hungarian Prisoners he released
freely, but his Transylvanian Rebels were thralled to the Turks. 1575.
Such the Calamity of Victory, even when it favors good men, whose natural
Clemency it perverts by its Revenge.

Bathori departing for Poland, quitted Transylvania to his Brother Christopher,
Elected K. of Poland His Generosity to Bekessius.
having Married near this time with Anne the Daughter of Sigismund Augustus his
late Predecessor in that Kingdom, whither Bekessius (fled from his
Discomfiture to Scepusium) with an admired Confidence soon after followed, and
in a prostrate manner addressed himself to the King, whose Generosity not only
forgave him, the most implacable of all his Enemies, but preferred him to the
Command of the Hungarian Forces then serving him against the Dantzickers
quarrelling for their Privileges, and the Muscovites, against both whom he was
very successful, driving the last of the two out of Livonia. In the mean time a
Quarrel and rupture happened betwixt the Turks and the Emperor about certain
Prisoners taken by a Stratagem of Balassi, in revenge whereof, Aly Beg of Alba,
A new Rupture with the Turks.
seized several Towns belonging to Balassi; and though Istuanfi the Emperors
Agent would have persuaded the Bassa of Buda that the League was still in force
and those particular actions not to be construed as a breach thereof, yet the
Turks prone to a new War, Invaded Illyria and brought a great Calamity upon it,
Defeating Auspergerus the Emperor's General with all his Army near Radonia,
and after took in and burnt Businium Czasium, Suacicium, and Szrinyum, as he
had before seized Topusca, Bonitium, and all the places between the Rivers of
Colapis, Dobra, and Meresnicia.

This Year 1576. Died Maximilian the Emperor, The Death of Maximilian.
worthily renowned to Posterity for his Moderation and Justice, to whose
Supreme Greatness, nothing was wanting but Fortune. Although he was very
constant to the Religion of his Ancestors, yet was he not therefore severe to
the Protestants, as requiring Piety only: That Speech of his to the Bishop of
Olomucza leing very memorable, That Christian Religion teaches rather to
suffer killing, than to kill; and that it is a grievous Impiety to lord it over
men's Consciences, which is the same insolence as to Invade Heaven.

RUDOLPHUS the second of that Name Emperor, Rudolphus the second succeeds his
Father Maximilian.
Succeeded his Father to a troublesome and more unquiet Government; for the
Turks playing fast and loose with the late Treaty of Peace, had made an
Irruption into Sclavonia, and taken Gonsdansc in Sclavonia, and spoiled their
silver Mines, and had opened a way for their Excursions into Carniola. To stop
which danger lest his patience might embolden the Enemy, Rudolphus dispatched
away his Uncle Charles to that Government (as he did delegate his Brother
Ernestus to the Care of Hungary) while he intended some respite from business
in Bohemia. 1579.
This Viceroyship the Hungarians highly stomached, requiring their Election of
a Palatine, and their Laws, and inveighing against the intrusion of this new
Example. Charles being arrived in Illyria, quietly reduced all the places taken
three years before by Ferhates of Bosnia, and founded Carolostad in memory of
his Victorys; the like Success had Battyani against Aly Beg of Sygeth, who
designing to disturb his Fortifications at Barcai in the very nick of the
Achievement of his Design, was by the Policy of Battyani encouraging his
flying Soldiers with the shout of The Enemy runs, wrested out of a complete
Triumph and made a Sacrifice to the Vindictive Sword. The same Event attended
Scanderbeg the Son of the Famous Ulumas Governor of Posega, by whose overthrow
Illyria was reduced in a manner to Rudolphus.

And as if Fate had treasured up her wrath against the Turk for this time,
Sasvares the Sanjack of Szolnoc, thinking to have trapt Colonitz and Bathori,
was caught himself; for having surrounded the Christians and oppressed them with
Multitudes, even to desperation of any escape, just as they were yiedling to
the Sword of the Enemy, came in to their rescue Rajbicius sent from Andrew
Barbelius the Governor of Agria, who flanking the Turks with his Musketeers
hemmed in Three hundred of them and slew them, The Turks vanquished
and took Prisoners Four hundred more, with thirteen Ensigns; which indignity
Sasvares proudly resenting as Dishonorable for a Musselman to be beaten by a
Christian, revengefully burnt and levelled several Towns, 1583.
and with a full prey was returning home when Serinus and Raibicius gave him
the second Course of the same Entertainment, He himself stripped of his
Vainglorious humor disguised in a Horse-rubbers habit hardly escaping to
Tybiscus.

The news of this overthrow was soon carried to Constantinople, whereat Sinan
Bassa the Prime Vizier, was transported into a most violent rage, increased by
another defeat given to Ferhates Bassa of Bosnia, who with Nine thousand Men
Invading Carniola, had been pitifully overthrown by the Count of Thurn and
Erdoedius falling on his Rear, and with the loss of Four men, 1584.
killing Four thousand: But these objections at the Port (as being done by way
of Reprizal and Defense, the Tucks being taken out of their bounds with
Christian Booty) Paulus Eyzingarus and Henry Lichtensteyn the Emperors
Ambassadors so solved and satisfied, that Amurath declared that they suffered
in their own wrong, nor would he support them therein, to the disturbance of
the Peace.

Soon after dyed Christopher Bathori Prince of Transylvania, who had enjoyed
his Government the quiettest of all his Predecessors, leaving his young Son
Sigismund to his Brother Stephen, who committed him to the Tuition of three
Noblemen, but they rivalling the power thereof to the detriment of the public
good, the Governance of the Prince was conferred upon John Geczi the Provost of
Varadin, 1585.
a person eminent for his wisdom and integrity of life: at which time an
Epidemicall Disease raged gradually through all the Parts of Europe, and in the
month of September infested Germany and Hungary, Prodigies in Hungary.
it was called the Morbus Vervecinus, for that like sheep, the diseased were
seized with a Cold and a Cough, there were also several Earthquakes at
Presburgh, Vienna, and Zagrabia. At Bihigium in Chroatia in the middle of the
night, a multitude of Ducks and Geese fought in the air, 1586.
and next morning some Thousands of them were found slain with mutual wounds
upon the grounds, affording plenty of good cheer to the Inhabitants.

These portents signified the frequency of military actions; Hasan Governor of
Sigeth depopulated all that hitherto untouched plat of Territory, Frequent
Military actions in Hungary.
lying between the river Mura and Dravus, and through the easy pursuit of
Count Serinus escaped with a great Booty over the Arrhabon to his Garrison.
Palfi requited this by counter-designing against Isaac of Alba, whom missing in
the dark, by day break he found and put to the rout. Nadasdi, Speciacassus,
Hussarus, and others took Coppanum from the Turks, and puffed up with the fortune
of the achievement would needs beseige Bnda, driving the Cattle away from
about the Town, but Ferhates now Bassa of Buda, so repayed their arrogance,
that with the Loss of 22 Ensigns, they fled for their lives.

But a greater war impended out of Poland, 1586.
Stephen Bathori being deceased, Affairs in Poland. December. 2. Anno Regni 10.
equally lamented by the Poles and Transylvanians; for the Sborovian Faction,
whom Stephen for their Crimes had depressed, (although his Raisers) had
deprived John Samoiscius (who had married Grisel the Kinswoman of Stephen) of
his Chancellorship in that Kingdom. At the next diet there appeared these
Competitors, Piestas, one of the Nobles, Theodor Duke of Musco, Maximilian the
Brother of Caesar, Sigismund Son of John the third King of Sweden, and the son
of the Tartar Cham, who pretended his power and sufficiency of Defending
Poland, his frugality and Continence; as to Religion, their Pope should be his
Pope, their Luther his Luther. In fine, Sigismund by the endeavor and Interest
of Samoyscius carried it from them all, the Sborovians laboring for
Maximilian, the Lithuanians contrarily proposing the decision might be by Lot;
but the Sborovians would by no means consent to it. In the mean while
Zamoyschus aided by John Geczi out of Transylvania took Cracovia and therein
the Regalia; Maximilian, Rudolph's Brother taken prisoner and civilly treated
by Samoyscius the Chancellor of Poland.
and lighting upon Maximilian at Clepardia, with the slaughter of a Thousand,
and three hundred prisoners, made him run to Bicini, where being in vain
persuaded to a safer refuge he was besieged and taken and Custoded in Rodlone;
his Brother a most unactive Prince regarding neither his Honor nor the danger.
The Pope was therefore entreated to take the Cause into his hands by his Nuncio
Aldobrandinus afterward Clement the eighth, who so managed the business, that
Maximilian for his Liberty with the further ransom of forty thousand Dollars,
quitted his pretenses to that Crown, to which by the vanity of Sborovius and
Stanislans, he had been a year so fondly wedded.

To return to Sazvares the busy Governor of Zigeth, 1587.
now upon another Excursion between the Rivers Mur and Cernicia, where he
ravaged with such insolence, that his Officers suspecting his Interception by
some Ambush or Engagement, advised him to some private way of retreat, which he
resecting and vapouring that he would Face Serini before his Garrison of
Canysa, was encompassed at Paulinum by the conjoined Forces of Nadasdi
Trautmansdorff, Battyani, and Serini, and there with the slaughter of Two
thousand, and as many Prisoners put to flight, he himself difficulty escaping,
and respiting a Death by the honor of the Sword to a glass of Poison,
S^svares defeated, poisons himself.
which to prevent Strangling at Constantinople, he took in his way thither, as
he was Commanded by the Grand Seigniour. The same Fate besel Ferhates Bassa of
Buda, who having raised the Contribution of the County to excessive rates,
thereby to satisfy his Rapine, and over and above to bribe out his oppression,
which the poor Peasants were unable to pay, was in his forcible levying of it
(though accompanied with Twelve thousand men) totally routed by Two thousand
five hundred Hungarians, under the Command of Sigismund Racockzi, Stephen
Homonai and other, Fe^hates Bassa Defeated by Racockzi.
between Hernad and Barsonyos, Two thousand killed and Four hundred taken, with
the loss of Six hundred. This Defeat cost Ferhates his Life, the just price of
his too eager Covetousness, as the Victory ascribed to the Hungarians was
particularly referred to those Liberties and Privileges they lately enjoyed by
the Concession of Rudolph at a late diet sometime before held in Presburgh.

But these were but pastime velitations and praeludia to the open War which
ensued, ^or Sinan and Osman Bassa having after many ill successes and losses
especially in the late fight at Masul in Persia, 1590.
Concluded a Peace with Mahomet Hodaband the King thereof, sought to piece up
in the West what was diminished from their Empire in the East, by transferring
the War into Europe, on which Sinan was so resolutely bent, that to remove all
opposition, he caused the Mufti zealously inclined against the Persian, to be
poisoned ata Banquet; and Hasanes of Bosnia was ordered to seek an occasion of
the Rupture, which he expiated with his own life. Military Actions in Illyria
by the rupture begun by Bassa Hasanes.
The Dance was begun by him in Illyria, where between Czisium and Ivanicia, he
committed terrible spoil, and took-several Towns; but upon his retreat to
Gradisca, Labohatius, and Michael Szekely, set upon a Regiment newly passed the
River Colapis, and cut it off in the view of Hasanes, who durst not make to
their relief. In the same havocking manner, Hasanes surnamed the Little, the
Governor of Sigeth, took Kiskamaromum by a sudden scalado, while the Other mad
with Revenge, and assisted by Rustan and Erdeogli, encamping near Colapis, took
Ranovicia and Gara, and founded Petrinia by a River of that name, which he
afterward finished. He stormed Siscia, but was beaten off by the Valor of
N^cholas Micacius, who incensed him yet further by a Stratagem, for pretending
a rendition of the Town, he received by Articles Five hundred Turks who were to
take possession, all of whom he put to the Sword. All these outrages did
Erdoedius the Emperors Governor, bear with till now, when taking Arms he
reduced Monozlone, and hence occasion was taken by the Turks to declare a War.

For Amurath being of himself sufficiently exasperated, was more enflamed by
Sinan, and therefore Commands were sent away to Hasanes to provide that the
Grand Seigniours Provinces received no damage, and if any were offered, to
revenge it; hereupon he besieged and took The place where the Prodigy of the
Ducks and Geese lately happened.
Bihigi^m, and by private ways making toward Erdoedius, surprised him, in his
expectation of supply and assistance, with his Camp and Great Guns. This loss
Charles the Uncle of Rudolph, the next Governor no way remedied, things
growing worse and worse every day in that Province, no less then Five thousand
Christians being trodden down and surcharged by numbers near Petrinia; Sciscia
was the second and third time attempted by Hasanes, such his thirst of Revenge
and the arrogance of his mind, with a battery of 24 Great Guns. When Fortune
changed her Countenance, The Exploits of Hasanes
for although the abundance of Rain that fell of a sudden saved him the first
of these times from an Engagement by Palfi and Nadasdi, 1592.
which was attributed to his Conduct, yet the next bout he escaped not so, for
having newly passed Colapis and arrived at Selinum, Erdoedius with other of the
Nobility, and 8000 Men, fell Courageously on him and shamefully Vanquished him,
12000 Turks being slain (so that Ordera and Colapis were discolored with
Blood) among whom was Mahomet the ^on of a Sister of Amuraths (whose Death at
her solicitation did not a little put forward the intended Expedition) many
Spahi, Hasanes rowed and drowned, 12000 Tur^s slain
Officers, and men of Note. Hasan himself thinking to have escaped over the
Bridge, already thronged with the flying remains, was with some of his
valientest Soldiers forced off the Bridge into the River and there drowned.
The Camp and rich Tents with all the Great Guns, Bag and Baggage came entirely
into the Conquerours hands. So God arose in the Revenge of this
perfideousnesse, being most wise to know, most equal to discern, and most just
to punish. Petrinia had been at the same time demolished by Erdoedius, but that
his Colleague having a longing eye upon a Peace, diswaded him.

Amurath the more incensed by Sinan and his Sister, swore by God and Mahomet,
he would be revenged, and thereupon denounced War against the Emperor, who
first deprecated the same by his Orator Poppelius whom with Presents he
dispatched to the Port, alleging that Invaders are justly punishable; but he
perceiving the Turks bent, openly declared, that if the War were brought upon
his Master, the Perpetual Law of Nature had directed and principled Men to
resist and repel Force and injury by any manner of Defense. To which the matter
being left, the money designed for the Tribute was staid at Vienna for better
uses, as on the other side the Ambassador was confined to a private house. The
War thus opened; Hasan now Beglerbeg of Gree^e, dislodged Serini and Ekenperg
obstinately bent upon the reduction of Petrinia, and by his peculiar fortune
took the often mentioned Siscia, the besieged being in no hope of relief.

Sinan being arrived in person, took Vesprinium yielded by Speciacassius sor
want of water, amidst so many Springs, but possessed by the Enemy: as Palotta
by the fear of Ornandius was rendered to him likewise. To obviate his further
progress Count Palfi, Serini, and Count Hardeck with 10000 Foot and 1000 Horse
of Veterane Soldiers made up instantly to 40000. by the Confluence of
Volunteers from all the Towns hastened to engage him, Sinan Bassa arrives in
Hungary.
but he retreating before them, and having stored his Garrisons, they set down
before Alba Regalis, the outward Town whereof was taken from Isaac the
Governor, by the valor of Peter Hussar, but while for want of great Guns the
Seige was protracted, Mehemet and Hasanes with 20000. select men came before
the Town unexpectedly, and there made a stand: Mohemet in contempt of the
Enemy, as of an undisciplined and rude multitude, declaring, that they should
have fair play for they Lives; but when both Armies came to be ranged in
Battalia, they were so afraid of each others Aspect and Order, that they stood
two hours gazing upon one another, without advancing a foot forward. At last
Palfi vigorously began upon the Janissaries (to whose valor encouragement is
given, Has^nes and Mehemet Bassa defeated at Alba Regalis.
both by Provision in their youth, and happiness hereafter if slain in Battle
the only incentive to great actions, as rewards and pensions are allowed to
prolifick parents according to the number of their Sons, who succed likewise to
their pay and stipend when deceased, by which means there arises a Love of
generation, and a vehement desire of dying) who so stiffly maintained their
Ground, that they covered it with their dead bodies rather then to flinch from
it living Serinus and Hardeck did likewise so press upon their Horse, that in
fine, 4000 of them, with 6000. of their foot were slain upon the place. The
news hereof being brought to Sinan he hasted away back to Constantinople, but
the reason of his sudden Departure was not to be guessed at. Nor did
Christopher Teiffenbach, Bathori, and Homonnai less bestir themselves,
prompted thereunto by Palfi, first reducing Sabaton by Rinia, then besieging
Filek the Garrison whereof troubled with a new disease of the Vertigo, at
Palsi's approach yielded themselves, as did ten strong places more, the last of
which was Palanka: all of them with Ca^sar's fortune, he came, see, and
overcame.

Matthias being made Governor of Hungary, 1594.
at which time also to the Duke of Parma succeeded Ernestus in the Government
of the Low Countries; Palfi and Hardeck to hold fortune by the Forehead,
resolutely and secretly attempted Novigrad, Novigrad and other places reduced
by the Hungarians and the Turks defeated.
the Governor Meheneth seeing as soon as hearing of them, who notwithstanding
manfully defended the place, till Matthias came into the Camp, to whom it was
honorably rendered the 42. year after its revulsion from the Hungarian Crown.
With the same Current of success Serini recovered Bersencia, Segusdium in
Illyria; and Tieffenbach forced Iasbrynium, and besieged Hatvan, which Hasan of
Buda attempting to relieve with ten thousand men, was there vanquished, and 25
Ensigns, with 17. great Guns left to the Victor.

But so speeded not Matthias, who with an Army of 50. thousand men besieged
Strigonium, Strigonium in vain besieged by Matthias.
for although he had intercepted their relief by the Danow, by the valor of
Francis Balassius, and was by the Treason of the Thracian Soldiers, possessed
of the old Town, as of the Mount of St. Thomas, by the fall of Caralibeg, and
Isaac the Governors yet by a supply of 500. Janissaries, who by negligence of
the guards slipped into the Town, and the news of the approach of Sinan the
Vizier from Constantinople, he broke up his Siege; although Maximilian in Trial
of his better fortune against the Turkish power in Illyria, had razed Petrinia,
and had recovered Rastowitz, Gora, and Siscia.

Sinan followed with a 100 thousand Turks, Raab besieged and taken by Sinan
Bassa.
and 60 thousand Tartars, having reduced Tata and St. Martin, came and
beleagured Raab, by the ancienter name called Iaurinum, governed by Count
Hardeck, who gloried that such a singular opportunity was afforded him, wherein
he might give proof of his Virtue: but these proved but magnificent words: for
Perliny's Mounts being taken by the resolute Courage of the Enemy, wherein (for
that Perlini was famous for fortification) the Garrison mainly confided, and
Valentinus Torus his Bulwark subverted by mine; the Defendants who had no
relyance now but upon Matthias, attending the Enemy near at hand, The boldness
and Courage of the Tartars
grew fainthearted. In the interim Cazy General of the Tartars, swimming the
river over against St. Vitus, was bravely received by Palfius on the other
shore, supplied with fresh men by Matthias, who at the same instant gave notice
to Hardeck to make a brisk Salley; He himself making so vigorous an impression
upon Sinan's Camp, reduced now to the number of 60 thousand, that without doubt
had not Palfi received a dangerous wound, and could have been assisted with
some naval power, the Turks had been overthrown; but being thus disappointed,
he drew off in some disorder to Ovarum, which Sinan made advantage of, and slew
a number of his men in his passing his bridge laid over the Danow. Hereupon
Hardeck and Perlinius not willing to wait two days longer for relief from
Matthias, Co^nt Hardeck the Governor and Perlini beheaded at Vienna.
delivered Raab, for which being seized, they were both condemned and beheaded
at Vienna. There were found in this well stored City 150 Guns; of the Garrison
6000 were slain, and 3000 dismissed. Thereafter Sinan forced Papa, but from
Commorra he was repulsed with a vast slaughter of his men, 1595.
in the opposite Isle of Czallok^es by the valor of Praunius and Starcitius,
and obliged to rise thence by the fear of the approach of Matthias;
notwithstanding at his return to Constantinople he boasted that he had reduced
Caesar to the necessity of entreating a Peace.

Indeed the Emperor sent Stanislaus Paulovius, and Wenceslaus Berca his
Ambassadors to the King of Poland, requesting him to take Arms with him against
the Enemy of the name of Christ; but Samoiscius the great Chancellor, and only
Minister of State, put them off contemptuously, telling them that his King was
in League with the Turks, and that Christ required he should observe it: nor
could they be ignorant what punishment both Divine and Humane attended the
breach of the Law of Nations. 1594. November.
Sigismund Bathori was more pliable. Geczi his Tutor was newly dead, leaving
him at the age of 17. years under the protection of the Turks, (by which his
Provinces had flourished in all Prosperity) and a full Exchequer, but his
youthful mind transporting him to the desire of Martial Employment, restrained
only by his Faith given to Infidels, His Confessors persuaded him to send to
Rome to Pope Urban the Seventh for Satisfaction of his Conscience, Young
Sigismund the Prince of Transylvania headily engages against the Turks.
whether he were bound to pay them Tribute or no? when by the Jesuits Oracle,
who are never without a new device to perplexe and interrupt the general
Commerce of the World, he was easily solved and freed from all manner of
Obligation. After this discharge or dispensation, to color his taking up Arms,
he objects against Sinan Bassa, his Pride, Arrogance, and several injuries
sustained from him by his people, and therewith summons a Diet or Assembly at
Sebessum, where he opened his purpose, but the Estates generally dissenting,
and objecting the just defeat of Vladislaus at Varna, though absolved by Pope
Eugenius, and that if Glory were the incentive to the War, he should remove all
impiety with which Glory could not consist: but if wealth was aimed at the
Enemy was more potent, nor could it advantage any man when gained by infamy; He
dissolved this Convention, His Declaration thereof to the estates; and their
disallowance.
and called another at Thorda, where he declared that he believed in the Roman
Catholic Church, by which being set at liberty, he was ignorant how he could
yet be obliged to his Conditions with the Turks; but perceiving the same party
to be too potent here also, he withdrew his presence, and having packt up his
rich movables, and committed the Administration to his Uncle Balthazar,
withdrew out of the Principality with Iosica his Chancellor to Kuevara.

Transylvania straight multiplied into Division, for Sigismund protested he
would renounce the Government unless the Turk were abandoned by the Estates,
bidding the people to follow some few factious persons, and see what would come
of it; whereupon the vulgar in a rage, by a brute instinct readily complied
with this Princes will, none daring so much as to mutter against it, and sent
away Gabriel Kendi with two other Nobles to bring him back to Claudianopolis,
where by the instigation of Stephen Bockskay Governor of Varadin, and Gasper
Cornissius Governor of Marmorusse, His cruel proceedings with the refractory
Nobility.
he was highly incensed against the chief of the refractory Noblemen, whose
blood he thirsted and liberally shed. Their Names were Stephen Lazar, and
Michael Kalmandi, Captains of his Guard, Alexander one of his former Tutors,
and Prince of the Senate, Gabriel Kendi, John Ifju, Gregory Barnomiza, the Son
of him who was so renowned for his Service at Agria, and John Forro the heads
and Ornaments of the Kingdom, all of them (such the rash fury and cruelty of
Sigism^nd) of a sudden, and without any Trial or Cause shown, beheaded in the
Market place of the said City. They all suffered with exemplary Constancy,
rather gratulating then grudging at their fortune, not a word coming from,
though reproached by Sigismund as they went to execution, in any unseemly
regestion or Complaint. Not long after to satisfy his blood thirstinesse,
Strangles his own Uncle Balthasor with others.
his own Uncle Balthasor Bathori, Lupus Kovasoczi, once his Tutor, Francis
Kendi, and John Bornamisza, were strangled at Gyula, whose large and
inestimable Revenues he seized to himself; Lonyas, Salanczi, Szylvasi, Gerendi,
obtained pardon for the same fault. Sigismund boasted of this cruel fact as his
Justice, and while all other men trembled at the sight of it, he with a dire
Countenance unmoved beheld their Tragedies.

This perpetration over, by Stephen Booskay, he confirmed the League with the
Emperor against the Turks, having engaged Aaron and Michael the Vayvods of
Moldavia and Valachia, in the same confederacy. By that conclusion betwixt the
Emperor and him, it was agreed that Sigismund should hold and enjoy all Dacia
without any tribute by the Title of High and Mighty Prince, His League with the
Emperor.
as also what he should recover and take from the Turks in Hungary, without any
pretensions by the Emperor, but his Family extinguished Transylvania should be
united to Hungary; He should Marry Maria Christina Daughter of Charles the
Archduke; and if it should happen that he were beaten by the Turks, that he
should have a retreat into Bohemia or Silesia.

While this was transacting, Amurath the grand Signior dyed, and Mahomet his
eldest Son succeeded, having solemnized his Fathers Funerals with the death of
18 of his Brethren strangled by a Bow string, Mahomet the 3d. succeeds his
Father Amurath.
which scelerate beginning of his Reign the Christians success noted to the
world: for Caesar having implored aid throughout Germany and Italy, was
supplied after this large manner. The Pope sent 1000. Horse, and 12000. The
large supplies given the Emperor.
Foot under his General Sigismund Francis Aldobrandin, Florence 1000 Horse,
and 3000. Foot, Ferrara 1500. Mantua 1000. Tyrol 4000. Bavaria 3000. Foot,
Bohemia 2000. Horse, 600. Dragoons, and 6000. Foot, Sile^ia 1500. Horse, 2000.
Foot, Austria 2000. Horse, 6000. Foot, Franconia 1000 Horse, Suevia 4000 Foot,
the Nobility of the two last places and of the Rhine by themselves 4000 Foot,
which were numerously increased by the Hungarian Army under Count Palfi. Count
Mansfield Gene^all.
Matthias was made by the Emperor Generalissimo, and under him Charles Count
Mansfield (upon this occasion created a Prince) who had lately done the King of
Spain excellent Service under Ernestus in the Low Countries; Nor was he himself
unfurnished of an Army, carrying with him under his own Ensigns, by the Conduct
of Adolph Swartzenburgh, etc. a 1000. Curassiers, 1000. Dragoons, and 6000.
Walloon Foot out of Flanders.

With this noble Army (and most strictly disciplined) sufficient to terrify
the world, having traversed the County about Alba to amuse the Enemy, he came
at last and clapped down before Strigonium, and presently erected Castles a
futlong distant from one another on the Mount of St. Thomas for the security of
his Camp. 1584.
Twice by the tumultuary onset of the Hungarians and Walloons, were the Walls
attempted and they repelled, but the Walloons enraged with the repulse,
Strigonium besieged by Count Manfeld. The Courage of the Walloons
renewed it of themselves singly, possessed the rampire and drove the Enemy
into the Inner Town, while Palfius took the Fort of Parcanum, on the other side
the Water opposite to Strigonium and razed it, and with the same Success
defeated their releif under Hasan the Beglerbeg, and the Bassa of Buda
amounting to Thirty thousand men, his own Forces making no more than the tenth
part of them. He was engaged in an Ambuscade, but desperation not only saved
his own Men but put the Enemy to flight, nevertheless he must have fallen by
their fresh numbers but that the Walloons came readily and unexpectedly to his
assistance.

But the Turks through very fear, The Turks attempting the releif of the Town
defeated, 14000. slain.
and the consideration of the loss of the Town, came on very boldly (Mansfeld
having taken the Charles Bulwark) and engaged the besiegers in a most terrible
and bloody fight; but such was the cheerful readynesse of the Christians,
advantaged by those Castles aforesaid, which grivously annoyed the Turk with
shot, that 14000 of them were slain and their Camp taken. Immediately after
which glory accrued to those other felicities and accomplishme^ts of the Noble
Mansfeld, he fell sick of a surfeit by too greedy eating of Melons a common
Disease among the Germans in Hungary) and died before the Town, Mansfeld dies
of a Surfeit.
much lamented and honored by all men. The Seige was nevertheless continued
by Matthias, who had newly welcomed the Duke of Mantua to the Camp, and the
water-Town gained when the same defeated Turks endeavored again its releif
(their Life and Honor being concerned in it) but were routed by the Walloons
again under Oberenprucius, Turks again defeated.
who came opportunely to the Relief of Nadasdi beset with their whole Power,
and too late expecting the Succor of Charles Burgrave: which being told
Mahomet the Governor of Strigonium, distressed also for Water, Strigonium
yielded
he yielded the City the fifty second year after its Captivity by Solomon; and
now Vissigrade, Vaccia, and all the Towns as far as Pesth, resounded with this
Victory, which dismissed Matthias to Vienna, having placed Palfi Governor of
Strigonium, and sent Maximilian with part of the Army into Upper Hungary to
have an eye to the Affairs with Triffenbach in those parts.

In Illyria, Serinus and Hebberstain took Babocza; Erdoedius, etc. Petrinia,
restored to the Turks with Rastowitz and Gara. Greater was the Effort as
greater was the Power of Sigismund, who having solemnized his Nuptials at Alba
Iulia, with the two Vayvods had shook off the Turkish Yoke, and had
ignominiously treated his Envoy. For his General George Barbelius and his
united Nobility, took in a great number of Towns; Sigismund's Enterprises and
Successes conjoined with the two Vayvods of Valachia and Moldavia.
Michael the Vayvod of Valachia, and Albertus Kyrali sent him as his Assistant
by Sigismund carrying the War further to prevent Sinan's Design upon them at
home. By them Floccium near Nicopolis was seized, Arsena burnt, and Selistria
plundered; Achomat the Eunuch sent by Sinan to their seizure with Twenty five
thousand men, they engaged and totally routed, so that Thrace seemed to be
joined to Germany, and probably enough, if there had been as much Prudence in
retaining as there was Valor in getting of it. Michael returned to Bucorestum,
but Kyrali sliding over the Danow now frozen, warmed his fingers with the fire
of several noted ^owns in Bulgaria.

Sinan like a Tempest departed from Constantinople with menaces and curses
against these Revolters, Sinan Invades Hungary.
took Bucor^st, and Fortified Tergowist the Metropolis of Valachia; Michael and
Kyrali as unable to resist, passing over the untrodden Alps ^o Novigrad. In
whose pursuit, Sinan being himself engaged, sent away Twelve thousand men to
make an Invasion upon his Country, Ten thousand of whom were presently slain,
and a Consternation brought upon the whole Turkish Camp; even Sinan himself was
meditating of a flight, and hardly retained by the memory of his past actions,
for he was so far forward, that he was crowded off the Bridge, straightened with
runnawayes, and two* of his teeth beaten out; the shame whereof converted into
Desperation, whereby he drove Michael into his furthest retreats amongst Rocks
and Precipices: to which streights reduced, he experimented the present
deliverance of Almighty God, Michael the Vayvod distressed.
being rescued by the advance of Sigismund with an Army of Twenty thousand
Horse and thirty thousand Foot, enforced by the Siculi, Cosacks, and
Valachians, upon promise of Liberty. By the notable Valor of these Siculi,
Tergovist was regained, it being not advisable to leave any place possessed by
the Enemy in their Rear. The news of this recovery made Sinan fly to
Bucorestum, which Town he burned, and destroyed all manner of Provision,
thinking want and Hunger would have stopped Sigismund's pursuit, and in great
have passed the Danow, but not with such speed; for Sigismund being at his
heels surprised Eight thousand Turks, Sinan Bassa defeated as he in flight
passed over the Danow Sinan's Death.
the Reer-guard of those Christians he was carrying into Captivity, of this
side the River, every man of whom were presently put to the Sword and killed in
a moment. Sinan hereupon partly with Grief and old Age, and not without
suspicion of poison, breathed out his unhappy Soul, obnoxious to the revenge of
the Bassa's for the arrogance and insolence of his great Fortune, which is
subject not only to others Envy, but men's own miscarriages and misdemeanors.
Sigismund entrusting the reduction of the Army to Boczkay, arrived at
Stephanopolis, where he displaced Aaron from his Vayvodship of Moldavia as
suspect of Perfidy, and settled Stephen Resvan; Revolutions in Moldavia.
but him, John Samoiscius provoked by the slaughter and cruel usage of some
Podolians, overcame and Vanquished after two or three successful Encounters,
and having taken him drove a Stake through his Groyns and set him aloft for a
spectacle, substituting in his place Jeremy Mogilla, 1594.
as Tributary to the Turk, O^^ob.
but Beneficiary to the Kingdom of Poland. Nothing is to be mentioned of
Maximilian, but that he in vain besieged Szolnoc, being destitute of firing in
a very cold and unseasonable Autumn, followed by a most rigorous Winter.

This February, 1596.
Sigismund disquieted with the Care of the future, as the hatred of his past
affairs, journyed to Prague to the Emperor, where he was honorable received;
but during his stay there was seized with a Fever which turned to the Small
pox; at which time the Siculi Rebe^led, pretending they were deceived of their
promised Liberty, but were by Boczkay soon reduced and severely punished.
Dalmatia had a share of these Troubles, Berthusius a Knight of Rhodes, having
intelligence that Ibrahim Bassa Governor of Clissa, was at the Mart of Drilon,
having acquainted Lencovitius with his Design, with Five hundred Segnians by a
Hole in the precipice of the Rock not observed by the Turks, crept into the
Fortress, and mastered the Turks, whom they slew betwixt sleeping and waking.
Ibrahim mad at this loss, came and besieged it with Apardi Bassa of Bosnia,
whom Lencovitius with 5000 men drawn out of the adjacent Garrisons drove with
much gallantry out of their Trenches and Leagure, with a total rout; but too
secure of an unfledged victory, was by the unexpected return of Ibrahim (who
had collected his scattered dispersed remnants among the Hills and Woods)
himself discomfited, The Christians unsuccessful attempt on Clissia.
remembering nothing of the Encounter but the Prey they had lost: Lencovitius
got into Clissia, whence fearing the want of water, he escaped with 200 men,
leaving the rest to the Sword or Captivity; and Clissia fainting with thirst
lost to the Bargain.

While Caesar was busied at his Diets held at Prague, Vienna, Presburgh, and
Ratisbone, as Sigismund at Claudianopolis, Clausenburg.
the noise of Mahomets vast preparations had terrified all those parts of
Christendom. To be before hand with him therefore, Herbersteyn, and
Dracovitius the Successor of Erdoedius (a man whose noble Acts had raised him
beyond all Accessions of Felicity, so that he had nothing to fear but Fortune)
invested Constanicia, attempted to be relieved by Apardis of Bosnia, but he was
beaten and the Town taken; with the like Fate Achomet the Eunuch with 20 noised
to be a 100 thousand men, coming too late to his Assistance, besieged Petrinia
jointly with him; to the relief hereof Drascovitius, Lencovitius, Erdeodus, and
Heberstayn, assayed to pass the Colapis, but neither Ford nor Bridge being
feasible, they retreated toward the head of the River, The Turks defeated
before Petrin^^ in Illyria.
which the Enemy mistaking for a Flight, suddenly by swimming and wading passed
over in pursuit of them, but was so gauled in his passage by Musket shot, and
so well received at his Landing, that happy was he could get back again, in
which endeavor many of them perished.

At Siscia^ the Christians found passage, and the Enemy besieging it, whose
Scouts they put to flight, sending with them the terror and rumor of a numerous
Army, with which they advanced and besieged the besiegers, who valorously
attempted to break through, or to carry the place, but were at last, what by
the Bullets from the Castle, and the Sword from the Camp, reduced to the
Discretion of the Victor. Only Aphus and Odaverdus, Achomet's Assistants
escaped away.

In Hungary the balance of ill Fortune we^^ equal, The Affairs o^ Hungary.
Solomon Bassa of Temeswar, and En^nehan of Belgrade, besieged Lippa, whence
the obstinacy of the besieged, and the fame (...) Barbelius had repulsed them,
and Sigismun^ subdued Nagylachum at the same time, toge^ther with the Tartar
Cham, (who in mo^ savage manner destroyed the Country) in the great plain
betwixt Belgrade and Temeswar, a^ pursued him almost 30. miles: Maximili^ also
besieged Hatvanum aided by Swartzr^^burgh, his forces amounting to 20000. Foot,
and 15000. Horse: the Governor of this place was Arslanes the Son of
Saralibeg^, a youth of great virtue above his Age, who by a fortunate and
vigorous Salley so terrified the General of the Ordnance that he abandoned his
Battery. The Siege of Harvanum, taken by M^ximilian.
He was incited the more to this Gallantry, by his Mother Fatima, a Woman of a
virile and noble Spirit, who set before him the reward of Victory or an
Honorable glorious Death, if vanquished; but such was his fatal oversight,
that while his men wearied with toil and anguished with wounds, were taking
their repose by his order, and had abandoned their Stations, the Christians
entered, and with Turkish Cruelty put them all to the Sword. Arslanes making a
resolute opposition fell not unrevenged.

This Slaughter at Ha^vanum, Agria expiated; for Sultan Mahomet with 200
thousand men, a greater number then Solomon e're brought into Christendom,
being arrived at Belgrade sent away Gyaffer Bassa an Eunuch before him to that
place, the Christians as accustomed to the War, being no way daunted at his
approach. Agria yielded to Sultan Mahomet in person.
His first Assault was with great constancy and courage repelled, and the
maintenance of the Town resolved on by Tersco, Nyari, and Kinski the
Commanders, but the Germans and Walloons being afraid of their Lives, articled
and delivered it, although they saved not their lives thereby, being first
stripped and then put to the Sword. Nyari hiding himself in their Camp, as
Barisonius and Kinnski in the Belgrade Tower, escaped away in the night. At
length Maximilian came to Rimaszombathum, and at Rimaszecsum Sigismund Bathori
joined his Forces with him, amounting to 32 thousand Horse, and 28 thousand
foot.

At Keresture both Armies engaged, and the Turks by the valor of the Fronteers
of Swarzemburgh's, The Battle of Keresture betwixt Mahomet and Maximilian.
Palfi's, and Kyrali's Brigades, with the loss of 8000. men, and 43. great
Guns, were driven back to the Camp, which Mahomet opposed to the Christians;
Maximilian seeing the presentnesse and heat of the Soldiers, 1596. 26. Oct.
passed over the Morasse before him, and came to succor his Companions.
Hereupon ensued in the Turks Camp, great lamentation and fear, Mahomet himself
flying to Szolnoc, while the slaughter was continued upon his men. And now
without dispute the Turk had been totally routed, when the Christians
neglecting the pursuit, and disorderly rifling their Camp, were themselves put
to flight. It is reported that there were not above 500. Turks that made this
first resistance, by whose hardness Cicala Bassa straight collected 40.
thousand more, and furiously prosecuted this turn of Fortune, slaying these
Camp pillagers like sheep: of whom (by mere fear only) 10. others say 20
thousand were missing, with all the Baggage which fell to the Enemy: so that a
brave victory was slot by Covetousness. Nor did the Enemy carry away an
unbloodyed Conquest, leaving behind him twenty, others write, fifty thousand
slain. Mahomet returns to Constantinople.
Mahomet to Constantinople, and Maximilian troubled in mind (and having
gathered his dispersion) to Vienna, while Serini worsted the Governor of
Zigeth (puffed up with this Event) at his siege of Babocza, and Palfi confirmed
the wavering Towns of Strigonium and Vacia.

Sigismund to be installed and honored with the Order of the Godlen ^leece,
took a journey to Prague, appearing much troubled at this unhappy issue of the
War, Sigismunds despondencies and fluctuations.
and the Conscience of his Facts, being by nature more difficile to blot out
the memory of them, than to commit them in his anger; and therefore now he
resigned his Principality for fear of the Turk, and his own Concerns to
Maximilian, although advised by Caesar that the affections of the People were
more inclined to a Prince of their own Nation, and that the present exigence of
affairs could not but cause some discontents in the State; notwithstanding he
persisted in his Humor, and gave a Divorce to his Wife, Conditioning for the
Principality of Opulia, fifty thousand pounds, and a Cardinals Hat to be
obtained for him by the Emperor; he seeming to loath the unstable state of
Greatness, being yet himself the ficklest of all.

Maximilian stood more firmly to his business resolving to recompense his late
loss; and suddenly (accompanied by Palfi and his other Generals) forced Tata
with a Petard, and besieged Papa; the Governor whereof Semendrus had sent him
word to know, whether he that had dared to fight with Mahomet would try his
force upon his Castle? if so, let him but come and give him liberty to draw his
sword given him by the Sultan; and to a person of such Valor and boldness as
him, the Gates should be opened. This Garrison being forced at last to render,
the Walloons in Revenge slew most of them, the rest were saved by the means of
the abovenamed Commanders. Maximilian likewise beleagured Raab; but such was
the Confidence of Aly Bassa the Governor thereof, Vascia's suuccesses in
Hungary.
that he set open the Gates and drove the Cattle out of the Town to graze,
showing much jollity at the business; for soon after came Mahomet the Vizier,
with 80000 Men, and took Vacia and Tata, after a siege of five weeks, and
Maximilian being of no Competent Force to oppose, having done sufficiently by
Defeating the Tartars a little while before, retreated to Csallokena, where he
encamped, and built several Castles to secure his Entrenchments which Mahomet
attempting, was by the Courage of Colonitzius and Nadasdi, with loss
disappointed; as was Sigismund Bathori with 14 thousand before Temeswar, from
whence he was dislodged by a numerous Multitude of Turks and Tartars; but yet
so easily that he took Chanada in his return home.

The Estates being assembled at Presburgh, Stephen Szulai, Nicholas Istua^fi,
and Bartholomew Pecfi, were delegated to receive the Government from Sigismund,
as being fully resolved for a Private Life, by the Examples of Dioclesian, who
retired to Salonas, and Charles the fifth, to the Monastery of Iustus; but with
greater Moderation than Constancy: passing now from Kovasockzium thorough
Hungary into Silesia: So the Hungarians, Siculi, and Saxons, swore Allegiance
to the Emperor, against whom the Turk having effected nothing by his Chiauxes,
Palfi's and Swarzemburgh's Successful Enterprise upon Raab.
threatened an Army of Three hundred thousand Men; but Fortune had otherwise
disposed a kindness for him at hand, by prompting Swarzemburg and Palfi to the
recovery of Raab, by the Device of a Petard and the secret close conveyance of
the Design. Swarzemburg to this purpose chose out 2050 of his most daring
Soldiers, and Palfi 3000; these without Drum or Trumpet passed over the
Memphon Woods in the silence of the night being guided by Felnemeth newly
discharged out of the Prison of that place: but nothing contributed so much to
the Success of this Enterprise as the Confidence of the Enemy, who boasted,
that When the Weather-co^k upon one of the Towers should crow out, then Raab
should be regained by the Christians. Being thus arrived unseen or unheard, to
the Walls of the Town, Babacurtus to whom the lesser Petard was entrusted,
found the outward Gate, and that leading to Albae (by the fatal negligence of
the Enemy) not locked up, which he straightwayes opened, when they all took it
for an Omen that the Presence of God was with them, and that he had been by
Prayers interessed in the attempt. To the inward Gate the Petard was applied
which shivered it in pieces, and broke the Bars and Hinges, making way for
Babacurtus and Oberenpruccus, to enter and gain the Market place. Swarzemburgh
stayed at the Gate careful of the Event, as to avoid Confusion among one
another, and to secure them of Aid; and now the Enemy half naked ran to Arms;
but as if cold water had been poured upon them, Raab surprised and taken after
a sharp and bloody Dispute.
were as soon stupefied and amazed; yet at the last raged with such fury in
revenge of their unavoidable death, that three Ianizaries put five hundred to
flight. In this hazzardous juncture Palfius came to the succor of
Swarzenburgh, and one of his Horsemen refusing to alight, dismounted first
himself, and by his example animated the rest to follow him. A Bloody fight
being now renewed, Haly Bassa was slain, and the opened-day discovered an
entire Victory to the Christians. A very great spoil was here divided; an
Hundred eighty eight Great Guns sent to the Emperor, by whom Babacurtus the
messenger was rewarded with 4000 Gulders, and a 1000 anually; Swarzemburgh with
a hundred thousand Gulders, and the Town of Hustopecsium and Government of
Raab; Palfius because it was a service due to his Country, was very well
content with a Cup worth a thousand pound.

But in Transylvania Fortune showed her self partial in respect to this her
indulgence at Raab. Michael the Vayvod of Valachia, a Valiant Prince, had
voluntarily embraced the present state of the Emperors Affairs, by a League
ratified with his Commissioners at Tergovistium, by which the Sons of Michael
were to succeed their Father in the Principality; to acknowledge the Emperor
without any Tribute; his Family failing, the Estates shall have the power of
Election; the League to be offensive and defensive. This affair so happily
transacted in Valachia, was crossed by another in Transylvania. Sigismund
resumes ^be Principolity of Transylvania by means of B^^zkay.
Sigismund with his usual inconstancy (his Crimes suffering him no where to be
at quiet, but hurrying him from place to place) in a disguise arrived in
Transylvania, and came to Claudianopolis, pretending nonpayment of his Pension,
and other dis-satisfaction; and was there by the Magistrates received as their
Prince, as to whose Government they had been accustomed. The like did Stephen
Bosskay Captain of the Guards, who partly with persuasions, and partly with
terro^r, Awed his Colleague Cornisius and Moses Szekely Governor of the Siculi,
to a Compliance with the Faction; the Force and armed Power whereof constrained
the Commissioners abovenamed, who had in vain expected Sigismund Racockzi the
Emperors General, to swim with the present Current of Affairs, and to
Complement his return to the Government; which the Vulgar so madly entertained
that they were ready to limb Cornisius for putting them in mind of their Oath
to the Emperor. The Commissioners were soon after summoned to appear before
Sigismund, which as necessity required they obeyed, to whom he (as his Custom
was) excused the business, Sigismund's Excuses.
complaining that the Principality of Opulia answered not the promises made
concerning it: but nevertheless he would continue his faith to the Emperor;
and so dismissed them to Cassovia.

The Province thus in Commotion, The Turks intermeddle and besiege Varadin but
repulsed.
Mehemeth Satergis Bassa with 60000 Men, came to fish in those troubled waters;
and although deprecated by Sigismund, laid Siege to Varadin; the Governor
whereof George Kyraly maintained it in the Right of the Emperor, who sent to
him with supplies Nyari and Rederus. Thirty days the City was besieged, at the
Expiration whereof the Turks incommodated with Rain and tempestuous weather
were forced to rise: as did Matthias the same day, and by the same intemperance
of the Weather from Buda, having besieged it just so many days together; but
he lost not the whole Expedition as did the Turk, for in the beginning thereof
he took Palotta, Vesprinium, and other places.

Sigismund thus Established endeavored his reconciliation with the Emperor,
and received his Wife again, so that there was again a right understanding, by
the Clemency and good nature of Rudolphus, established between them; insomuch
that he sent Basta with an Army to aid him against the Turks. But another Freak
taking him in the head, while he seemed to intend a firmer and stricter Union,
having substituted his Uncle, Cardinal Andrew Bathori, and the Bishop of Varmia
(by the Policy of Samoiscius, Sigismunds new practices.
who designed upon these Provinces) to the Government, he himself again
repudiated his Wife, and breaking off the Treaty with Caesar, privily fled into
Poland. by which means the Principality was engaged in great Troubles; for the
Cardinal presently possessed himself of the whole Country, whereupon ensued
Hostility betwixt him and Maximilian; Basta with his Army moving from Cassovia
to the Expulsion of Bathori, having obliged Michael the Vayvod of Valachia to
be constant to his late League; who the better to conceal his Design, pretended
to take part with the Cardinal, buying Powder and Bullets in his Country which
he intended to use against him; and first took Corona, and drew the Siculi to
his party, and in a sudden encounter, (but obstinately maintained) put Andrew
to flight, who hoping to escape over the Oytozian Alps into Poland, was there
torn in pieces by the Siculi. This Event determined the Allegiance of the
Transylvanians to Maximilian, by his Commissioners Michael the Vayvod, and Basta

Mahomet the Grand Seigniour being deterred by his Mother and his Chief
Sultana, from going any more in person to the War, having been so nearly
endangered at Keresture, that in his flight for have he lost his Turbant,
committed the Expedition to Ibrahim his Chief Vizier. To be ready prepared
against this Invasion, Zwarzemburg, Palfi, and Nadasdi, reduced Tata, Alba
Regalis attempted by Petards in vain.
and attempted Alba Regalis by Petards clapped to the Gates; but their Design
being discoverd, the Garrison salleyed out and routed the Frenchmen that had
the orders of the Engine, and seized one of the Petards, which was carried to
Buda, where the Barbarians, not daring to discharge it, Bastinadoed the
Frenchmen they had taken to the Experiment, when it flew into pieces and
miserably mangled and killed the standers by.

Ibrahim being arrived, Ibrahim the chief Viziers Expedition into Hnngary.
pretended peace and gave notice thereof to Palfi, whereupon Deputies met in
the Island of Vizze, equally distant between Strigonium and Buda. The Turk
demanded Fileck, Strigonium, Novigrad, Raab, with future security; the
Christians stand to their just possession of them; that Peace would be welcome,
but not upon such terms. Ibrahim perceiving no advantage could be expected this
way, the Christians also declining Battle, made an Irruption into the Country,
and most barbarously laid wast all that Tract of Ground which lies betwixt the
Rivers Waegh, Nitre and Ippolus; multitudes of Sick and Diseased persons at the
Pesthenian Bathes, were abandoned to the Cruelty of the Enemy, and crawling in
the Roads made most horrible lamentations. Nor spared he any place Sacred, or
Profane, or Condition of men; of whom with Children and Infants crying after
their Parents, His ravaging Crueltys
he carried 3000 away into Captivity. This Desolation Swarzemburg helplessly
beheld, although instigated by Palfi to set upon those ravenous Miscreants; but
he was loath to hazard his Army. Palfi himself therefore impatient of the
Insolence, set upon a Party of Six thousand at Palankin, and destroyed them;
and upon the retreat of Ibrahim, with the highest rage burnt down, and took in
several Towns, and among the rest Coppan, and Dombo.

It was now the Year 1600. famous for the great Jubilee of Clement the eighth,
The end of Michael the valiant Vayvod of Valachia.
when Michael the Vayvod of Transylvania, elated with his prosperous Successes,
ambitiously affected the Sovereignty of all Dacia, and by keeping Transylvania
in his Power began to be suspected by the Emperor, as he was likewise hated by
other of his Neighbors for his Invasion of Moldavia, in prosecution of his
Quarrel against Sigismund; who to revenge his Uncles Death, did now instigate
Samo^schus to send Aid to Jeremy of Moldavia, and to furnish him with an Army
for an Expedition into Transylvania, in which he was assisted by Moses Sz^kely,
Francis Vas, and Gabriel Bethlen (better known to the English by the name of
Bethlehem Gabor) Michael having timely notice of their Embodying (leaving his
Wife and his Son Peterschones in Transylvania) speedily passed over the Alps,
and at Nester fell unexpectedly upon Jeremy and Sigismund, and made a great
slaughter of the Poles and Cossacks, with the Discomfiture of thirty thousand
of his Enemies. By this Victory he possessed himself of Suchava and all
Moldavia* and horribly havocked Bessarabia, Russia, and Podolia.

Samoyscius impatient of this Insolence, Samoyscius his revenge against him.
having Collected an Army at Bosorum, wrested the Victory out of the Victors
hands, and drove him out of Moldavia iuto the abruptnesses of the Mountains by
the River Sereczinum, whither having also pursued him by the incess^nt
diligence of the Cossacks, he thence drove him round into Transylvania from
whence he first began the War; when judging it neither safe nor necessary to
engage his Polish Army in an Enemies Country, he Deputed Michael Szekhely to
follow him and to seize the Principality. This Basta opposed, sending Csaka as
from the Emperor, to bid them desist from Invasion of his Dominions; to which
when Samoyscius answered that there was no other Design, but to prosecute
Michael as the Common Enemy and only Cause of these Troubles by the Turks;
Basta enough offended against Michael, offered his own Army to his suppression,
upon the same account as Csaki managed his Commission to Samoyscius, Michael
defeated flies to Prague.
to gain the Principality to himself. The Vayvod understanding this
Conjunction, sent to desire leave that he might be heard in his own defense,
which being denied, he levied an Army of Twenty thousand men; but was again
Defeated and forced to fly to Tergovistia, whence (being betwixt the Hammer and
the Anvile, Basta and Moses Szekeheli) he escaped over the Severine Alps to
Prague, where he hoped to vindicate and clear his actions, as Csaki foolishly,
Csaki' s Intrigues.
yet impudently labored, in the absence of Maximilian, for his Investiture in
Transylvania; not Considering that Dignity is not hastily to be desired and
prosecuted, although by a person of great Merits: Time must be attended in
which it may appear that by such preferment a man has rather given then
received a benefit.

As the distempers of the Great ones were monstrous, The French mutiny at Papa.
so was the malign dispositions of the Soldiery. The French Garrison of Papa
mutyning for their Pay, had seized and secured the Governor Michael Marochi,
and slew all that opposed them, Conditioning with the Turk, for their Arrears,
to deliver them the Castle; but the Turk, either mistrusting them, or too
tenacious of his money, made no use of the advantage. News hereof being brought
to Swarzemburg, he laid Siege to them, losing a great many men by a fierce
Eruption of the French, who knew what they might trust to if taken, wherein
himself also was slain by a Bullet. Rederus succeeded him in the Supreme
Command, who beat the French back into the Town and there closely shut them up;
but he also died of a sudden Disease before the surrender, and left the
Achievement to Nadasdi; who having reduced them to a dog-hunger, and starved
them to skin and bone, Their punishment.
made them yield the place; at which time some few were by the pittyful
Soldiers knocked on the head, the rest were tortured to death with most
Exquisite Cruelties, some of them Choked to death upon the Wheels of a
Water-mill, after many Descents and Ascents; some Roasted with a slow Fire; and
others given to the Dogs.

Transylvania is our next Stage, Sigismund resumes his Principality.
troubled with a smatch of the same disloyalty to the Emperor; who delaying
his answer to their Commissioners, Sigismund again stepped in and recovered the
Principality, vacating those Powe^s and Instructions given them to treat. Next
he imprisoned Cornifius, Pancratius, Senegus, and others, who favored the
Emperors Title. This afforded an occasion to Michael's Restitution, who being
dismissed from Prague with a substitutory Command and Power, and seemingly
reconciled with Basta by the mediation of Gonzaga Governor of Varadin, jointly
engaged Sigismund and his Generals Barbelius (lame with the Gout and Cramp) and
Moses Szekehely, as their Army (in a Confusion and without any care) was
descending from the Mountain of Doroslone, Sigismund Defeated.
and soon put them to flight. Here were slain Ten thousand, and a hundred and
thirty Ensigns taken. This new Success so Exalted the mind of the Vayvod that
he could in no wise brook Basta's Superiority (by so many prosperous accidents
transported indeed from a just and moderate man, to very ungoverned and
rapinous actions.) They were both at Claudiopolis where the old Grudge seemed
to have been wholly forgotten, when Basta by a crew of bloody Walloons caused
him to be assassinated; The Vayvods assassinated.
and his Companions and followers to be dispersed and to fly for their lives;
by which Artifice and impudence together, he imposed on the Emperor that he
was killed in a fair manner and upon a just Quarrel, which the Emperor was
glad to dissemble, while from this impune and flagitious fact he took courage
to proceed to greater and more dedecorous and base practices.

For now under color of Heresy and Schism and the care of the Emperor's
Revenue; whatever Silver or other moneys could be discovered was seized by him,
so that the People when they looked for a protection, perceived their was no
such thing meant them by this Stork, who pilled and fleeced them to their skin;
Glory is cherished by industry; when there is no room for that, Virtue her self
is very unpleasant, and where rewards attend the vicious, scarce any will be
good gratis. Bistricia had refused to open the Gates to him, which he forced
and basely plundered, seizing all their best wealth in money and attire to his
own use, and then gave it a spoil to his Soldiers, who left not a Covering to
the Women. Nay, so miserable was the Calamity of the Transylvanians at this
time, that they were near famished, all their Cattle being driven into Silesia;
and one measure of Wheat sold at 25 Guilders, which money would have bought
formerly two hundred. Sigismund's and the Transylvanians Breach of League with
the Turks severely punished.
Thus by leisurable degrees did the Divine Justice and indignation proceed to
punish and revenge the breach of their League with the Turks, the heavynesse of
the infliction computing for the delay of it. Sigismund fled to Brassone to
excite and engage the Turks, in which affair after he had fruitlesly employed
Moses Szekelehy, he began to sink and despond and finally cast himself upon the
Emperor, of whom after a Truce condescended to by Basta, he obtained pardon,
and a yearly Revenue of 50000 Guilders, with the Principality of Lobkowitz
which maintained him among the Bohemians to an old and unreverenced Age.

But the stirs in Transylvania ceased not with him: for another intestine War
was kindled by Moses Szekelehi and Bethlen Gabor, in pretense of asserting
their Country, but really, it was a Turkish Design: these two Basta
encountered between Alba Iulia and Varadgya, and after a Bloody dispute put
them to flight: both the Captains escaped, but whither? to Bectessus the Bassa
of Temeswar, as more humane then the German Christians; whose outrages and
their Generals uncontrolled power and insolence was solely imputable to the
sloth and degenerous idleness of Rudolph. Basta used this Victory with all
extremity of Fire* and Sword, to such a ruin and destruction of the
Commonalty, Gentry and Nobility, that they wished for Turkish and Tartarian
Slavery.

The State of Styria in the Western parts of Hungary was alike Calamitous,
Affairs in Illyria.
groaning under the Tyranny of the Enemy and the pressures of their lawful
Sovereign. Ibrahim Bassa with the Aga of the Janissaries with a body of them
amounting to twenty four thousand, arrived at Mohacz intending the siege of
Strigonium; but at the entreaty of Nasaff Governor of Sigeth, whose
Contributaries Herbensteyn had severely handled; they first blocked up and took
Babocza, and then besieged Canysa, where George Paradyser was Governor (the
same who persuaded the surrender of Clissia in Illyria) who with the height of
Courage maintained it against the Turks, after he had sustained great loss by
the blowing up of his Powder, which was supplied to him by George Serinus; and
at the same time came Matthias the Archduke, and Philip Emanuel Duke of
Mercoeur, with 25, others say but Fourteen thousand to his releif. This Duke
did excellent service against the Enemies Horse, and in his last Encounter with
them gave them so notable a Defeat, that it was not doubted but that the Enemy
would rise and be glad to be gone; but Provision being scarce in their Camp (of
which the Turks are always frugal and yet better provided) they were forced to
forsake the Town, and that in such haste and disorder, that Paradyser daunted
therewith (although he knew the necessity of the Turks departure) for that the
Horse had nothing but a few Leaves to feed upon, and was encouraged to hold out
till their return, Canysa yielded to the Turks by Paradyser for which he lost
his head at Vienna.
delivered the place to the Enemy, upon Condition of a free departure, which
brought him to Vienna, where being publicly Convicted he lost his head upon a
Scaffold, Ibrahim after this Acquist was very solicitous about a Peace, but
while it was negotiated he died.

Ferdinand, afterward Emperor, the Nephew of Rudolphus by Charles his
Brother, was at this time Governor of Styria, Carniola, and Carinthia; he in
the Year 1660. had Married Mariana the Daughter of Will. Duke of Bavaria, which
Lady being a zealous Catholic, would not enter the Limits of his Dominions
until purged of Haeresie, and the Libertys granted to those of the Augustan
Confession were taken away; which the Archduke at the instance of the Jesuits
rescinded, and by Oath obliged himself to the Pope that he would severely
handle the Professors of the Protestant Religion within his Dominions, and
hereupon they were either banished and forced from their Houses, Ferdinands
outrages against the Protestants
or plundered and killed, with such inhumanity that the Papists blowing up their
Churches with Gunpowder, raged against the bones of the dead and the graves of
them, common and allowed to all men; insomuch that what the Turks had spared,
was not spared by them.

To these outrages, the Protestants opposed the Treaty at Passaw* and
challenged the assurance and faith plighted by the Archduke himself, by which
in 1581. he confirmed his Fathers Agreement with the States, during which space
of eighteen years and upwards, he had received the sum of Nine hundred thousand
Florens of the Rhine, the price of their Liberty of Conscience; but
notwithstanding this manifesto they were commanded to depart, and those that
stayed spoiled and undone. No hopes of redress appearing, and the rumor of
Bozckay's proceeding in Hungary in favor of the Religion inviting them
thither, they forsook their Country and prosperously Seated themselves there.
To omit the barbarity practiced on the inhumed Corpse (as the demolishing of
their Churches at Gratz) of William Zimmerman the Protestant and an eminent
Minister of the place, which they threw into the River Mur.

But Ferdinand's success was answerable to this injustice, Canysa besieged by
Ferdinand
he was engaged in the siege of Canysa (assisted therein by Aldobrand the Popes
Legate with his Italian Forces) wherein none but Roman Catholics by the advice
of Sigismund Count of Thurn, afterward drowned, were suffered to be listed,
lest the impiety of the Protestants might cause the Enterprise to miscarry. The
Governor of the Town was Hasanes, who with 800 men and as many more received
from Zigeth and Buda, (by the negligence of Orphus Gallonius the General of the
Ordinance) resolutely maintained it; this Orphus in filling the ditches with
Wood from the adjoining Forest (which work went slowly forward) was shot with
a Culverin bullet and killed. Nor did Caesar Porta his Successor make much
more haste or speed, being tired out with the Enemies salleys: no more then the
relief from Matthias to animate his cousin, which consisted of 6000 men led by
Christoph. Roseworm, and the Duke of Mercoeurs Leiutenant General: for by the
unexperience of the General and Officers (who failing of their reinforced
attempts had no mind to venture again) they protracted so long, till cold
Winter with storms and frosts made them desert their stations (a thousand
Horsemen being frozen stiff in one nights time) being also surcharged with
snow, The siege broken up.
hunger, weariness, and which is worst of all, over-watching in at^^nding the
industrious Enemy; who now by their departure gained their Ordinance; and
satisfied their Cruelty upon the sick and wounded persons left behind. Thus the
Protestants, who were scandalized from being present, were saved from the ruin
that involved the Papists.

Far more renownedly did the Duke of Mercoeur deport himself at Alba, which he
besieged with twenty thousand Men; Christopher Roseworm with great labor and
diligence passing a thousand men over the Bog to the Subburbs, two whereof the
Insulary and the Destiacan were easily gained, others being encouraged by the
adventure to follow them. Alba Regalis taken by the D. (...) Merc^ur.
The Enemy having nothing but the City to defend made a resolute resistance,
but was in fine beaten off the Walls, and the Town regained in the 58 year
after it had been taken by Solomon. This Victory the licentiousness of the
Soldiers greatly blemished, the City being ransacked by them, where they
spared not the bones of the Kings from which the Turks had Religiously
abstained. The new Garrison consisting of a thousand German Foot, and six
hundred Hungarians, was committed to the Government of Marcus Insulanus, famous
for his Defense of Varadin, and Michael Vatai.

The report of this loss being brought to Hasanes, he joined with the Vizier
Bassa, resolving to attempt Mercoeurs Camp, to whose rescue very opportunely
came Matthias; the fight was managed with equal spirit and strength till the
Hungarians began to flinch, at which time Amurath Bassa of Buda, with Mahomet
Beg were slain with a Bullet, which changed the fortune of the day, and put the
Turks to flight. There were slain 5000. of them, but yet they gave not over
their design, for the next year, the noble Duke of Mercoeur being dead at
Norimberg, Hasanes returned to Alba, and before the Governors had repaired the
ruins of the Fortifications, was close at the Walls, whereupon the Germans
basely betrayed the Town. The Garrison was dismissed, but Insulanus and Vatai
being interrogated, if the Delivery was made with their Consent, (...) regained
by the Turks.
to which they answered peremptorily in the Negative, were both of them laid
hold on, and made Captives, the Turks saying, That their promise was made to
the willing, nor were they obliged to them with whom they had made no Contract.

To maintain this violent Turkish War the Estates of Germany proffered 80
months pay to the Emperor, whose General Roseworm, to recompense the loss of
Alba, besieged Buda, while Althamius who succeeded Palfi in the Government of
Strigonium valiantly gained Pesth; Buda being hereby hard put to it, Hasan with
30 thousand men came to besiege it, The Sieges of Buda and Pesth.
and had beaten Roseworm, who passed the Danow to encounter him, to the very
walls of Pesth, when Matthias came in and rescued him: but they parted so
equally that both Sieges were carried on at the same time, in which nothing was
memorable but an Engagement of Craczius, the General of the Horse, with the
Turks, in which he was worsted, until Hasan for want of Provision departed for
Belgrade, and left Roseworm in his old leagure.

The Christians were much animated at the sight of it, taking in after him
Colocza, Paxus, and other places 60. miles below Buda, by the Heyducks; and the
Budenses the more spirited and quickened to a resistance, as they made appear in
their Salleys and resolute Eruptions, seizing their very Cannons, and nailing
up their touch holes, which was acted while Roseworm was playing at Cards, and
careless of the matter; This dishonor was seconded with a greater danger,
Oner and Ibrahim Beg having drained the Garrisons of Alba, Sygeth, and Canysa,
came afresh to their relief, but after a sharp Conflict they were overthrown by
Nadasdi, etc. While Collonicz sustained and repelled the besieged. Buda's Seige
broke up.
Notwithstanding such was the unclemency of the weather, by showers, frost, and
snow, that Matthias cursing the place where he had been so often unfortunate,
was forced to draw off to Winter quarters, leaving Albert Princestayn to the
defense of Pesth.

The Plague and Earthquakes in H^ngary and Austria this year denoted the
ensuing mutations in the Kingdom; 1603.
for the Tartars and Turks by a most sudden irruption laid wast all the
Country, extending Westward to Papa, the Mountain of Camenesum, and what ground
lies between the rivers Dravus and the Mur to Perlatum, not without the
indignation of Count George Serini, then lying on his death bed. Transylvania
was in the usual variable condition, there was a general famine, with a
scarcity of money, and all other mischiefs arising thence; the Soldier demanded
his pay and provision, which being not to be had, a defection followed, and the
Army marched to Zacmar. Upon their departure, Moses Szekhelij was constituted
Prince, and did Homage to Mahomet, and aided by Bectessus the Bassa of
Temeswar, and the affections of the people took in Caransebesse, Alba Inlia,
Claudiapolis, Hermanstad.
Cibinium, and soon after possessed himself of all Transylvania, but this good
fortune lasted not long, Radulo the Vayvods Successes against the Rebels in
Transylvania.
for Radulo the Successor of Michael in the Vaivodship of Valachia a friend of
the Emperors, and who made good his predecessors League, surprised him by
night, routed his Turks and Tartars, and sent 30. Standards to Prague. There
were slain in this Fight Moses himself, with many Nobles, and 4000. others,
revenged in part soon after by the defeat of the Count of Solms who was sent
Prisoner to Constantinople, the reciprocation of which ill fortune, befell the
aforesaid Bassa of Temeswar, and Albertus Nagii, whom Henry Duval Count of
Tampyrium, and Lewis Rakoczi totally vanquished, and again recovered
Transylvania to the Emperor, who by the advice of John Molard, and Nicholas
^rukhayser, appointed a Decemvirate for the Government of the Province, which
continued till annulled by Boczkay.

Things succeeded as prosperously in Hungary, but the Covetousness of the
Governors spoiled all; Nadasdi and Collonicsius subdued Laccu^^ and
Bolondvarum, and cruelly wasted the Country in revenge of the late irruption,
and before Amurath of Buda could join with Hasanes, forced him to fight and
routed him, at last came Hasanes, and faced Roseworm encamped at Strigonium,
who no way declining the Encounter, which lasted till Evening with great fury,
put the Infidels to the run, (the great Guns having peppered the Janissaries)
with the loss of 7000 men.

The fruit of this victory was the reduction of Hatvanum, newly restored to the
Turk, and the firm Munition and strengthening of Pesth. This year Sultan
Mahomet, Sultan Mahomet dies.
unable to go or scarce stand upon his Legs by reason of his fatness, died
among his Concubines, Pathick boys, and Troops of Eunuchs, 1603
leaving his Son Achmet a stripling to the Succession in the Government, who
presently applied himself to Peace. In order whereto Commissioners met in the
Fields near to Rakos, but the Turks insisting on the Restitution of Strigonium
and Raab, and the Emperor demanding Canysa, the Treaty came to nothing.

The year 1604. began with the old grievances in Transylvania concerning
Religion, and the great Church of Cassovia, that had been granted by Basta to
the Cannennicks of Amna, Persecution against the Protestanes in Transylvania.
besides that John Barbianus the Count of Belgiocosa and the Emperors
Governor in that Town by his Jesuiticall and most severe inquisition was
horribly dreaded by the Protestants, an infinite number of whom he had banished
out of their Country: About this time came an Ambassador from Hodabanda King
of Persia, offering his assistance against the Turk, in this j^ncture of the
minority of Achmet, and advising the Christians to Unity, which so encouraged
Rodolph, that he resolved to employ all his Forces against that Enemy. Basta
was therefore placed in the Command of Roseworm, thought too slow in the
service, Barbianus made Governor of Transylvania, and Collonicz in the Room of
Thurzo of that part of Hungaria which lies beyond the Danow to Dravus. Hasanes
hearing of these preparations took the field and frighted the Governor out of
Pesth and the Garrison out of Hatvanum, Strigonium was by him in vain beseiged,
and thereby the Turkish power had in Contempt, for that the Hungarians
perceived they were more oppressed by their own Soldiers and the feuds of
their Commanders, then they were by their Enemies.

This, and some other Instigations and instincts concerning their privileges,
the insolence of the Germans and the late Inquisitions, caused them to adhere
to Stephen Bocskay, then appearing in Transylvania, to which Province the Turks
had preferred Gabriel Bethlen, but he modester in prosperous then adverse
fortune, had passed it to Bocskay, Bocskay appears in Transylvania.
and made himself a Partisan to his Designs, having with Bectessus of Temeswar,
attempted Lippa: but while he lingered there, Lewis Racokzi, and the Count of
Tampirium, surprised their Camp and made a great slaughter, the Bassa and
Bethlen made a shift to escape half naked and half a sleep; Bethlen leaving his
Clothes to be ransacked; where were found some Letters with the Heads of the
Conspiracy agreed upon between Bocskay and himself, which were afterward
confirmed by some of the Prisoners.

Barbianus, the matter being so full of danger, instantly hasted to the Camp at
Rokomaza, and put the Soldiers in readiness, and summoned Bocskay, The
Imperiallists worsted by Bocskay.
who made many tergiversations and delays but denied the Confederacy. This
increased the suspicion, and advised Barbianus to put it to a speedy decision
by battle. The Heyducks were at first induced to take up arms with him, but
understanding the peril of their Religion, although their Commanders had been
newly ensnared by an Oath of fidelity to Caesar, they revolted to the
Confederates. Thereafter ensued a fight at Adorjanyum, where Bocskay prevailed
against Becsius one of the Emperors Generals, by a casual firing of his
Train of Powder, and took his Camp richly furnished, which ill success so
ferretted Barbiani shut up by forces on every hand, and informed likewise that
Valentine Homonnai was declared for Bocskay, Bocskay's appearance in
Transylvania^ assisted by the Nobility.
that he departed from Tockay, as he fled before from Varadin (mistrusting the
defense of both places) and came to Cassovia where John Bocacius the Mayor of
the City being a Lutheran denied him entrance, whose examples Eperjessum,
Cibini^m the less and other places soon after followed. Bocskay departing for
Cassovia, sent before him Blasius Lippai (whom for his brute valor he raised
from a sordid degree to a great Command, and afterward for his insolence
beheaded him, and reduced his Wife to her former condition) who was wellcomed
and the Magazines and Treasures afterward opened to Bocskay, soon after
saluted and presented there with all the Princely Ensigns and Ornaments by
Rako^zi, Homonnai, Nyari and other the chieif Noblemen; In the mean while
Blasius Lippai befieging Barbianus in Scepusium, was repelled by the valor of
Thurzo, as Blasius Nemethus the Captain of the Heyducks ranging for prey, was
intercepted by Basta, defeated, and his head struck off.

Basta with 15000 men shook the confidence of the confederates, whereupon they
strengthened themselves with the assistance of Mahomet the Grand Vizier, and
encountered the Imperiallists at the River Moldava, where although they stood
the first shock yet were they not able to endure the firm constancy of the
Germans; who thereupon recovered Szendreira and freed Ruberus beseiged in
Tockay: Basta being thus every day victorious admonished Bocskay, to lay down
his Arms, and frame and compose his seditious mind to his Duty and Aleigeance;
to which Bocskay answered, that war was better than Peace unless Transylvania
were left wholly to him; and the Generals, Governors, and Castellanes of
Hungary be all of that Nation, that the foreign Soldiery be put out of the
Realm, and the free Exercise of Religion allowed. But this Confidence of Basta
was soon blasted, for his Coveteousnesse having made him odious to his
Soldiers who were without pay, Basta deserted by his Soldiery for want of Pay.
they fell into a Mutiny and assaulted him in his Quarters (the Convoy of
twenty nine Wagons laden with money and Cloth for the Soldiery, themselves
having stolen and carried them away, part into Poland, and part to Bocskay:)
nevertheless having something pacified the Soldiers he attempted Cassovia but
in vain, and thence retreated to Leuchovia, his Army deserting him in the way;
insomuch that Francis Redei with a small party of 2000 Heyduhks, and the bent
of the People, took in twenty Towns: besides many Castles betwixt the Rivers
Sayon, Ippolus, and Waegh, revolted to him.

These Successes caused the Emperor to send away the Bishop of Vesprinium, and
Sigismund Forgacz his Ambassadors to Bocskay, to whom (the Turk being very
observant and intent upon his actions) he at the first audience publicly
professed, that if they were sent from the Hungarian Nobility, their Embassy was
welcome and acceptable to him; but otherwise, Bockskays ^nswer to the Emperors
Ambassadors.
if they came from the Emperor it was to no purpose, for that he had engaged
so far that he could not possibly recede. At a Diet held at Szerencsium soon
after, he laid down the Causes of his present undertaking, namely, the Defense
of Religion, the Liberty and safety of the People. At the end of which Oration
he was confirmed by the Estates in the Principality, and the Roman, Lutheran,
and Calvinian Doctrines received promiseuously. The Chief Praefecture of
Transylvania, and the Supreme Command of the Army was conferred, the first on
Sigismund Rakoczi, the latter on Valentine Homonn^^

From this Diet in (...) he returned into Transylvania, where he was met with a
Turkish Chiaux, who presented him with the usual Ensigns of the Investiture
from the grand Seigniour, to whom he dispatched ^way Stephes Corlatus, and
George Kikedi, his Ambassadors with the Homage and Presents, the more envious,
for that some German Youths were added thereunto. From Cassovia, Rocskay
invited Stephen Illyeshazi (fled for his Treason) out of Poland, His success^s.
and by the valor of the Heyduckes took Trincinum, F^eleck, Zackmar; as Nitria
by the inconstancy of the Garrison was delvered to Francis Redei by Sigismund
Forgacz the Bishop of the place. Which losses with want of money so disabled
Basta, besides that he was in great danger of his life, that he fled to
Presburgh, where Collonitz endeavored to relieve him, but his Soldiers turned
sides; Tyrnaw hereupon yielded, and Stanislaus and Christopher Thurzo submitted
to Redejus.

Hence the War was carried into Moravia by Eight thousand Heyducks and a
thousand Turks, Commanded by Dengelegius who brought away 4000 Captives thence;
and Tockay was at the last extremity delivered by Reuberus, whose Fidelity and
Valor Bocskay himself commended. The Revolt of the Isle of Csallockoes
followed this rendition, Presburgh attempted and Austria invaded by Bockskay^
Partys.
and gave advantage to 6000 of the Confaederates (so were Bocskay's party
called) to make an attempt upon Presburgh (burning in their way thither St.
George and other Towns) whence being rejected by Basta, they turned their
Invasion upon Austria, which they destroyed as far as Prinquelia. At the same
time Nemethus to enlarge this Devastation passed the Da^^bius at Sabaria, to
whom Nadasdi and other Noblemen for fear of their own Territories, joined
themselves; and even to the wonder of the Barbarians, sacked all that Tract of
ground lying betwixt Layla and Arrhabon, pretending Religion as the incentive
to this im^ane Cruelty; although they unmercifully tortured the reformed
Ministers, and sold very Infants for Slaves to the Turks, to such a
detestation, that God caused Blood to drop out of Gold paid by a Turk to a
Christian for one of those Captives.

This Country Desolated, he fell next into Styria, The like ravage made in
Styria by Nemethus and others.
and barbarously used the Town, situated betwixt Arrhabon, Pingua, and
Lappinicia; and had almost shook the Allegiance of Drascovitius the Governor of
Illyria; but he recovering himself, and assisted by: Trautsmandorf, raised an
Army of ten thousand men and drove Nemethus out of Sclavonia together with his
Partakers, among whom were some Tartars, to Zigeth, Coppan, and other their
respective Holds and Garrisons: by which mean^ Drascovitius gained to himself
great Authority and Renown. But these most horrid Divisions hastened the Common
Ruin; for Mahomet the now prime Vizier, who had delivered Strigonium himself to
the Christians, besieged it in person, which Bocskay quarrelled, alleging
that by his League with them no City in Hungary ought to be taken by the Turks;
but being not Master of himself, he sent Homonnai either at the request or
Command of Mahomet with 6000 men: S^rigonium (...) again to the Tu^ks 1605. in
the th^^d year of the reign of (...)
and not long after the Town within ten years of its reduction, was delivered
by William Oetingensis and his Germans; who diffiding in the Hungarians dismissed
them out of the Town, not to this only disadvantage, for they presently
thereupon joined with Redejus against the Emperor, to whom Ersek^yvarum was
yielded by the consent of Matthias, upon the promise of Rodejus that it should
not come into the Tark^ ^^ands, but be restored when ever the Wa^ should be
composed.

Mahomet the Vizier now summoned Boczkay to Buda, to the Solemnization of the
Marriage of the Bassa of that City, who met him on his way as far as Rakos, and
introducted him in State, Boczkay does Homage to the great Vizier at Buda for
Transylvania.
where Boczkay did Homage for Transylvania, and submitted it under the
protection of the Turks: whereupon he was presented with a Crown as King also
of Hungary (supposed to have been the Constantinopolitan Emperors, or the
Despots of Thrace) and a Sword embellished with Gold, Jewels, and other
Ornaments; all which (except the Crown) Boczkay accepted, but that he refused,
acknowledging Caesar to have been duly crowned, for which his modesty was
worthily praised, however he may be justly taxed of Sedition and Rebellion. By
reason of this fealty the Vizier made him Tribute free for ten years, those
expired, the yearly Tribute of ten thousand Guilders to be paid at the Port for
the Upper Transylvania, at which agreement the Janiza^^es made great
acclamations of Felicity, as expecting a Donative and Gratuity.

A Diet was soon after held by Boczkay at Corpona, whither came Sigismund
Forgacz from Caesar, with Conditions of Peace, to which the Turk engaged by the
Rebel Bassa's of Aleppo and Caramania, was inclinable also in his own behalf,
having first seen Boczkays Propositions. This Overture came to a Conclusion at
Vienna, managed by Illyeshazi and Mlasodo^itius, on the part of the
Transylvanian Caesar consenting to whatsoever Propositions, as knowing Boczkay
must ere long dye without Issue. The Emperor makes Peace with Bocskay, the
reason thereof.
The Terms were, a general and mutual Amnesty and Oblivion, a Toleration of the
Roman, Lutheran, and Calvinian Professions, a Palatine to be elected by the
Votes of the Hungarians; the Chambers and new Courts to be abolished; The
Treasury to be regulated by new Commissioners, the Hungarians to redeem the
Castles pawned to the Germans; The Government to be administered by Hungarians;
but Raab and Comorra may be governed by deserving Germans; All Transylvania,
with that part of Hungary which Sigismund Bathori enjoyed, to belong to
Boczkay, together with the Lordships of Tockay, Sacmar, etc. Which for want of
Issue, The Articles of the Peace.
shall revert to Caesar: if the Peace be not concluded with the Turk they shall
join Arms; Bishops descended of the Nobility to have Voice and place in
Counsel, others not. This was ratified by the Dep^ties of all the upper
Hereditary Provinces of the Emperor and firmed by the eminentest Nobility of
both sides. Varadin was herewith yielded to Bocskay, having all along been
stoutly defended against him by Baptista Pecsius, as St. George and B^zinium
were rendered to Illyeshazi.

The Peace was also concluded with the Turk for 20. years. Peace with the Turk
also.
Achmet the Sultan to call Caesar Father, he Achmet Son, both to be saluted by
the name of Caesar's; all differences arising to be composed by the Governors
of Raa^ and Buda. The Castles and Fortresses to stand, The Conditions of it.
but no new ones to be built, only the Hungarians may repair Vaccia; Caesar
shall pay this year 200 thousand Imperials, but nothing afterward; every three
years the Emperors shall interchange Presents, and a faithful friendship shall
be consolidated between them. This Transaction was followed by the Death of
Boczkay, who professed himself willing to dye, so that he had had the
opportunity of purging himself, before the World and the Empire, of Sedition.
He declared Valentine Homonnai by his last Will, for Prince of Transylvania,
which Homonnai gaped after, but the Transylvanians chose Sigismund Rakoczi,
Bocskay dies and appoints Homonnai for his successor but the people choose
Rakoczi.
and although he made great reluctance pretending several Excuses, yet at last
they compelled him to Clausenburgh, and made him assume the Principality, while
Homonai mad with rage, having plundered Boczkay's treasures committed to him,
retired to Ungnade; by whose Example Szecfi and Paul Nyari shared the like
entrustments among themselves, the deserved and desired End of Goods got by
Violence and Oppression.

Just before the Confirmation of this Turkish Peace, an Ambassador from Persia,
came to Prague, and there by extolling his Masters power, and his resolution of
destroying the O^toman Name and Nation, put a demur to the ratification, which
passed not till somewhat after, when Matthias the Brother of the Emperor, was
possessed of the Crown of Hungary; The Turk was instant to have it finished,
and stormed exceedingly at the delay, for that Serdar Bassa who had possessed
himself of Aleppo, Damascus, and Tripoli, with a formidable power, under smooth
and dutiful pretenses threatened Constantinople.

In the mean while (and the licentious rapines of the Heyducks upon all such
Intervalls) Matthias, Matthias gains to himself the Crown of Hungary.
his Brothers Viceroy, prepared his way to the Crown of Hungary, urged
thereunto by Illyeshazi, whose interest Rudolphus had used at the Diet at
Ratisbone to prefer Ferdinand the Nephew of Charles his Brother; Hereupon
Soldiers were listed by Matthias, to obviate the designs of the Spaniards, who
would advance Ferdinand as more Catholic then himself: with these, under
pretense of repressing the Heyducks, he came suddenly to Presburgh, and was
received into the Castle by the Archbishop and Cardinal Pazman and Illyezhazi,
at whose instances he possessed himself of the Crown. By him the late Articles
of Vienna were confirmed (the Hungarians being obstinate to those terms) and
upon that score Austria and Moravia also joined with him, and vowed to live and
dye in his Cause.

Having from hence raised an Army of 20. thousand men, he marched to Prague,
where the Emperor delaying of his Grants to the Bohemians, (who had armed
themselves in vindication of their Religion, and the same Privileges with the
Papists) found himself so disappointed, that he condiscended to the
Inauguration of Matthias, Matthias allows the Hungarians their Privileges.
in the kingdom of Hungary. He arrived at Presburgh the 22. of October, where
he allowed the privileges aforesaid, the Election of a Palatine within a year
after the others Decease, which Dignity had been vacant 46. years, ever since
Nadasdi, together with the expulsion of the Jesuits. From thence he went to
Cassovia, at which Diet held there, Sigismund Racockzi, as Prince of
Transylvania did him Fealty, and soon after resigned the Principality to
Gabriel Bathori, having gained the Confirmation from Achmet, and an
uninteressednesse from Matthias. In all things, Rakoczi' s Modesty.
he showed himself a person of great Justice and Modesty, in declining his
assistance of the Rebels in Poland, and transferring this Sovereignty to
another, when he was so beloved and courted by the people.

To pass by new commotions and discontents of the Hungarians about their
Religion now invaded and infringed, but vindicated by the Elector of Saxony,
and other Protestant Princes, who by arming themselves overruled Matthias; we
return to matters of State: Illyezhazi the new Palatine, built a new Fabric in
the Castle of Presburgh, for the Conservation of the CROWN; and Collonicsius
was advanced to a higher Dignity in that Kingdom, which had hitherto been in
no condition to respect his merit. As to war it had its divertisement in
Transylvania; Radulo the noble Vayvod of Valachiae, refused Homage to Bathori,
who incensed thereat (and designing the Seizure of all Dacia which the Turks
had promised to Boczkay) raised a puissant Army such as was hardly seen there
before, Prince Bathori defeated by Radulo Vayvod of Valachia.
and gave him Battle at Brassovia, where he was totally routed by the valor of
the said Vayvod; which opportunity Matthias in Confederacy with that gallant
person, so improved, that he possessed himself of Clausenburgh, and other chief
Holds by his General Forgacz, while Bathori betook himself to the Mountains.

This Enterprise was the more easily carried on against him, for that his
prodigious Lust made him odious to his Subjects, whose beautifullest Wives and
Daughters he frequently and most openly vitiated. Notwithstanding such was his
Fortune, He recovers his Losses again. His infamous lust.
that he beat Forgacz out of his Dominions, and forced him to hide himself in
the Woods of Bohemia, after he had suffered very great Extremities. Yet the
same Vicissitudinary fortune undid Bathori, betrayed by his Ambassador Andrew
Geczi to the Grand Seigniour, who designed the Principality to himself, and
whom the Bassa of Buda would have confirmed, but that Bathori betook himself
(such the Reciprocation of these Interests) to the Protection and Friendship of
Matthias, now elected Emperor of Germany, by whose assistance the at instance
of Thurzo the Palatine in the room of Illyeshaeci Geczi was overthrown, and at
the same time Bethlen Gabor substituted by the Turks to the same Dignity, at
the price which Bathori had paid for it.

He enraged with this affront (besides that he was a man of a most incredible
strength) ravagely fell upon his poor Subjects, who yet again bore with him
while he renewed his debaucheries, whose vengeance every one of the Nobles
incited. At this Juncture Bethlen made use of the Turks power and subdued
Lippa, Aradum, and other places, whose rendition made Bathori, suspectfull of
all people, to betake himself by a speedy flight from Clausenburg to Which he
rode in one day being distant 150 English miles.
Varadin, where admitted into the Castle, consultation was held concerning him
by the Nobles, who advised Gregory Nadanyj, and George Szylasi to assassinate
him, and they after some reluctancies of Conscience animated by the mortal
jealousy of Decsius a Preacher of the Calvinist Faction, Prince Bathori
assassinated by some of the Nobles.
whose Wife Bathori most leudly loved, at the second resolution assaulted and
slew him in the street of Varadin called Velenze, as he was going to the Baths.

Bethlen was immediately acknowledged by the Transylvanians, and confirmed for
his presents and acknowledgments, both by the Turk and Emperor. His first Act
was the vindication of Bathori's death, by the popular fury permitted upon his
Assassinates, whom he summoned to the dyer (with a salvo statu) then held at
Medgysium. Achmet in preparation for War in Hungary dies 1617.
At the same time Achmet was ready at Adrianople with an Army to invade Hungary,
but the Emir of Sidon (who derives himself from Godfrey of Bu^loyn) gave him a
diversion; as did the Cossacks plague him in the Euxine Sea, by burning 24 of
his Galleys, and infesting Thracia also by Land, but the chief remora of all
was His death in the year 1617. Mustapha his brother succeeded him, but was
presently deposed, and Osman Achmets Son aged 16 years was saluted Emperor,
Sultan O^man strangled.
who survived not long after, being strangled by Daout Bassa. Not to mention
the War now commenced between the Emperor and the Venetians about Pyracies
committed by the Uschock^ and Chroats upon their Maritine Territories, as
public in a discourse by it self, which war was managed with great resolution
by both parties in Dalmatia and Friuli.

The event of this unkind war, redounded to a good and amicable understanding
between Matthias and Ferdinand, who was now adopted to the Crown, provided that
he intermedled not during the life of the Emperor; and the next year he was
Crowned King of Hungary, at which time three Suns appeared denoting the
mischeifs (if they may be so construed) that befell his Dominions in the
ensuing War of Bohemia, The Emperors Matthias dies.
first managed by Ernest Count Mansfeld for the reformed, and Count Bucquoy for
the Emperor Matthias, who wearied with a lingering and continual distemper
having lived 62 years, and governed Hungary 12, as Germany 7 years, deceased
with the blessings of a Peace to his Subjects.

FERDINAN the 2d. by the endeavors of Matthias being elected King, Ferdinand
the 2d. K. of Hungary.
administered the Government Government by many alterations, the cause of which
changes was the same with the usual excesses of arbitrary Innovation, for he
recalled the Jesuits in hatred of the Protestants, and very much infringed the
Articles of Bocskay, which made them have recourse to the Count of Thurn then
in Arms near Vienna.

At the same time the Bohemian Estates prevailing no more as to Liberty of
Conscience, The Bohemian War in Brief.
conferred the Kingdom on Frederick Count Elector Palatine, who animated by
his Wife the only Daughter of James King of England, (of whose assistance
together with the Dutch, he was made confident, as assured of a nearer help
from Bethlen Gabor upon the same account of Religion) accepted thereof: The
Hungarians raised hereupon by Teiffenback, thrust themselves into Silesia, more
intent upon the prey then studious of the cause, while Bethlen having repulsed
Homonnai, who had introduced the Jesuits into Claudiopolis, either hung or
banished them, publishing a Proclamation against the entertainment or reception
of any of that Society. Bethlen Gobor takes part with Frederick K. of Bohemia.


And now in pursuance of his Confederacy with Frederick the Count Palatine, he
rushed into Hungary, with an Army of 18000 men, and 18 great Guns, where
meeting with a discontented part of the Nobles by the infringment of the
abovesaid Articles, and strengthened by them, he took in Cassovia by his
Lieutenants Redei and Szecsi, and by fair words cajoled Andrew Docrius the
General of Upper Hungary by pretense of peacemaking into a Captivity in
Transylvania wherein he dyed. Bethlen' s successes in Hungary.
This proceeding so frighted the Jesuits and Friars, that they made what have
they could out of his way, so many places rendering themselves (led by the
examples of the Mine Towns, of which Rosnoboyana was the first) as Fileck,
V^^zia, Tyrnaw, Nitria, Posing, etc. that they knew not where to be secure,
only Comorra and Raab firmly Garrisoned by Austrians withstood his Fortune.

Part of the Army therefore was employedin an irruption into Moravia, the other
being joined with Thurn beseiged Presburgh, wherein was the Palatine of Hungary
with a small Garrison, and some Troops of Bucquoy in the Suburbs, the which he
presently cut off, and thereupon the City yielded it self with the Crown and
other regal Ornaments, and gave him liberty by the seizure of some interjacent
places, as Viscetus and Eberstorph to carry the terror, with the sight of his
Arms, to Vienna.

But here the misfortune that befell George Rakoczi, whom he had left his
Vicegerent in Transylvania, impeded his further Progress: George Honnonnai a
firm adherer to the House of Austria, having fled from his late defeat into
Poland, with a fresh supply thence, returned and encountered Rakoczi, by whom he
was worsted; but recruited with present supplies engaged him again, which fight
had lasted two days, when Homonnai by the counterfeit of a flight drew him
into his ambushes and there discomfited him, Rakoczi his Vice Roy defeated by
Homonnai.
the foot were all of them slain, Rakoczi and the Horse escaped by flight. This
emergency recalled Gabor from Vienna, after he had caused himself to be
proclaimed King of Hungary in defyance of Ferdinand, and contracted a firmer
league with the Bohemians, to the designation of higher matters.

Ferdinand was absent at the diet at Franckfurt, when the Bohemians revolted,
where having complained, as also to the Kings of France and England of their
insolence, he appointed Maximilian of Bavaria his General the Duke of Saxony
and the Catholic Elector being also made sure to his Interest, and besides a
truce was concluded on with Gabor to Michaelmasse. And now ready for a war in
Germany, the French suspended it by their interposition at Ulms.

That not proving durable, Ioachim Ernestus the Marquess of Anspach, The
Marquess of Anspach his Treachery.
was entrusted by Frederick with the charge of the Palatinate and the
Government of Heydelberg, who being ready to engage with Maximilian, was not
only diverted and recalled by Spinola's arrival, who took in Oppenheim,
Baccharach, and other places, but corrupted also by his Gold, although the
Prince of Aurange had engaged to his assistance. The Treachery of the Marquess
of Anspuch.
Maximilian freed of this Enemy, marched to Prague with an Army of 25 Thousand
men, attended with Count Bucquoy, whose Troops in the night surprised the
Hungarians, sent to aid the Palatine by Bethlen, that were quartered upon the
White-hill and carried away 1500 Horses after a great slaughter committed on
the Riders. This ominous defeat so heightened Maximilian that he dared the Enemy
to an engagement, against the advice of Bethlen, who would have had the
Bohemians temporize till he could personally assist them, but such was the
Palatines fate, that a battle ensued, wherein at first by the rout of the young
Prince of Anhalt, the Bohemians seemed to be fortunate, but the sudden flight
of 8000. Hungarians altered the Case, The King of Bohemia defeated at Prague.
and gave the Imperiallists a complete victory. Frederick with his Princess
fled to Vratislavia, and Bohemia as not long after Moravia and Silesia accepted
of the Emperors Conditions.

Bethlen summoned a Diet in Hungary at Ersekuyvarum, Bethlen styled King of
Hungary.
where partly betwixt Force and good will he was again Proclaimed King, the
Majesty of which Title his Valor (as having been two and forty times present
in Battle) Magnificence and Popularity very well suited, and now he began to
Act as a King* Tampirius Generalissimo of Hungary therefore opposed his Army
consisting of ten thousand men, and by Water and Land laid Siege to Presburgh,
and took the Suburbs and the Fort before them; Tampiri slai^.
but while he unwarily viewed the Castle he was slain with a Dart. The Fall of
the General made the Soldiers desert the siege, and suffer Bethlen to Ravage
Austria, where he had effected great matters, but that the overthrow of his
Confederates at Prague spoiled his Designs. The Elector Palatine being yet at
Uratislavia in the Marquisate of Silesia, did very much urge him to proceed and
to continue his Successes, for that speedily he would bring an Army out of
England and Denmark to his Assistance. And indeed Ernestus Count Mansfield,
Brother of Charles that was so Famous for the Siege of Strigonium, having
gained Pilsa and Taborum, was advanced into the Palatinate, and had reduced
things there to some better Conditlon; Bohemia lost.
but in the mean while Bohemia was quite lost, the Palatine proscribed, the
Jesuits restored, and the Reformists driven out of the Kingdom.

The French King endeavored a Peace between the Emperor and Bethlen at
Hamburg, 1621.
but with no success; for Gabriel would neither renounce his Regal Title nor
give way to the Estates of Hungary to transact with Ferdinand, but called in an
Army of Turks and Tartars, by which means he drew Envy upon himself, and the
Estates grew eager against his Government and returned to their former
Allegiance. George Szecsi was first received into favor, who drew a great many
with him; and took Francis Redei away perforce, who languished away for grief
not long after. As to matter of Action, Charles ^ongaevall Count of Bucquoy,
having subdued and tamed the Moravians, with an Army of 2200 men, and 22 Great
Guns marched directly against Bethlen, who retreating into Transylvania, and
the German and Hungarian Garrisons diffe^ing among themselves, recovered
Presburg, with Tyrnaw, Ovarum, Schutt, and all that Tract of Ground as far as
Newhausel, Newhausel besieged by Bucq^oy.
which he also besieged, and brought it to extremity; when Stanislaus Thurzo
salleyed out upon the Foragers, and lighting upon Bucquoy, who too rashly
engaged in their assistance killed him after sixteen wounds, his Horse being
shot under him; his dead body with the slaughter of many Imperialists, was
brought off and redeemed from the Hungarians, Bucquoy slain.
and in the beginning of July enterred at Vienna.

By his Death the Affairs of Caesar were shaken, 1621.
for the Walloons refusing another General, gave opportunity to the Enemy of
reducing many places; Gabriel having raised a new Army and overthrown the
Nobles of Hungary; Ersekuyvarum was also abandoned by the Garrison: so that
finding the Kingdom naked and destitute of Defense, Gab^iel's new Later^
prises in Hungary.
he joined with the Count of Thurn and the Marquisse of I^gerendorf and forced
Tyrnaw; Presburg he in vain attempted; whence by the Invitation of Iagerendorf
he made an Irruption into Moravia, and seized and pillaged several places; but
being opposed here by the Emperors new Generals, Esterhasius, Wallensteyn and
Hanibal Donaw, who set upon him on every side, (and Iagerendorf departed from
Silesia, as his Transylvanians for want of Provision were privily slipped home)
he bethought himself of a Peace, which at the instance of his Ambassadors was
first treated of at Oedinburg, but Conc^uded at Szentmicklosium, A Peace
betwixt Gabor and the Emperor.
whereby Bethlen retaining Tockay and Cassovia, with seven other Lordships in
Hungary, was to yield up and resign the Crown with all other places and Cities
in that Kingdom; 1622.
to forbear the Regal Title and be content with the Name of Roman Prince,
should enjoy Opulia and Ratibor, the State of Religion, and the Jesuits to be
restored to the places they were in before. Thus the Elector Palatine was
disappointed here also, as Mansfield, and Christian Duke of Brunswick had been
unsuccessful against Tilly, so that driven out of his Haereditary Countries, he
fled into Holland; The Electoral Dignity was conferred on Maximilian of
Bavaria; when, the Estates of the Empire perceived that the Power they had
given the Emperor was used by him against themselves.

Iagerendorf being expelled out of Silesia, again implored Bethlen to the
assistance and Support of the Churches; whereupon the flame of the but newly
quenched Conflagration broke out again. Bethlen delivered Vaczia to the Turks,
with whom and the Tartars to the number of eighty thousand excited by the Count
of Thurn, A new Rupture on the part of Bethlen G^b^r
he Invaded Hungary; pretending first Religion, then the Money not paid, nor
the Conditions of the Treaty at Oedinburg performed. At Tyrnaw he defeated the
Regiment of Tieffenbach, and falling into Moravia drove Swarzemburg before him
and besieged him in the Metropolis, building four great Bulwarks before that
part of the City where the only Egresse was, and keeping strong Guards on that
side where it was Fenced with the Lake and Woods: nevertheless Swarzemburg by
a frugal apportioning of the Allowance of Provision, held out the place till
the Winter, when the Grand Seigniour being rightly informed of the Quarrel by
Caesar, with the menace of his Scymitar, recalled Bethlen; and the Turks and
Tartars impatient of the delay and the Cold, refused to obey him, altho^gh some
of them were therefore hanged up: Gabor deserted by the Turk renews the Peace
with disadvantage.
Besides the aids out of Germany appeared not, so that he was compelled to make
a Truce, and the Garrison (almost famished) delivered from the Siege. His Title
of The Roman Prince, or Prince of the Romans, was abolished; his Coadjutors the
Turks, left to get home as well as they could, in which return many were
stripped and slain, and satisfied for their fellows cruelty, and plunder.

In the beginng of May this year the Peace was confirmed, 1624.
and redintegrated: Iagerendorf quite disseised of Silesia, and Thurn expelled
out of Moravia, and Bethlen deprived of that part he held in Hungary, but
restored to Opulia, and Ratibor taken from him in the beginning of these
Troubles: And lastly, the Kingdom of Hungary acknowledged her old Sovereign,
Ferdinand Ernestus Eldest Son of Ferdinand the second, Ferdinand the 3d. K. of
Hungary.
being Crowned at Ovarum, where were present his Father, his Queen and
Children, Caraffa the Popes Nuncio, and the Spanish and Florentine Ambassadors;
Bethlen also sent his thither, being taken up with the Solemnity of his
Nuptials with Catharine the Daughter of John Sigismund Marquess of
Brandenburgh, who was Married at Alba Iulia. 1626.
At this Diet at Ovarum, great was the Unanimity and Concord of the Estates, by
whose resolutions the Guards and Forts against Canysa were strongly fortified,
the License of Polygamy restrained, the Road secured, and the Tribute and Tax
duly settled, and other things enacted which concerned the safety of the
Kingdom. Ezterhesius was substituted to the Dignity of Palatine in the room of
Thurzo.

Next succeeded the Coronation it self: The Regal Diadem, Robes, Sword, and
Globe, with the noise of the Cannon, and the gladsome Acclamation of the People
(wishing all happiness to the King and Kingdom thus restored) were conveyed
from Presburg in this Order; First went the German Trumpeters, then the Barons,
the Masters of the Horse with their Squadrons Armed Cap a pe; next followed the
Hungarian Noblemen, the Deputies or Governors of Dalmatia, The Coronation of
Ferdinand the third.
Sclavonia, and Croatia; then the Servants of the Palatine covered with the
skins of Leopards and Tigers, then the Palatine himself in the middst between
the German and Hungarian Barons, the Crown and the other Royal Ensigns being
laid upon a Chariot. The Cardinal Peter Pazman, and Archbishop of Strigonium,
put the Crown on the King's Head in the Great Church; where were present a
great Confluence of Scholars to attend the Cardinal, from the Colleges of
Vienna, and Tyrnaw, and elsewhere; the Hungarians being here asked if they did
accept him for their King, with one Voice answered, We do; We will and require
it, let the King live and Reign long, and Govern us. The King (the Divine
Service performed) turned his Chair toward the People, and laying the Sword of
St. Stephen upon their shoulders, Created four Knights; when mounting his
Horse, in an Hungarian Habit he galloped up a little Hill, and there
brandishing his Sword four times to the four Quarters of the World, thereby
declared his Majesty and his Empire: Medals of Gold and Silver being at the
same time thrown among the People. For Conclusion, he was Nobly treated at a
most sumptuous Royal Feast by the Nobles.

A new Storm over-clouded this Serenity: Bethlen instigated by Count Mansfield
in the Month of July, New stirs and an Invasion into Hungary by Bethlen
invaded Hungary again, whither the said Count joined with the Duke of Weymar
(being beaten out of Germany, the Netherlands and Bohemia) was bending his
forces, but both of them although additioned by forces from Bethlen, who
resented his loss of Opulia and Ratibor, were vanquished by Wallensteyn. Who
being afterward recoyled by the Turks about Nitria, fought with dubious
fortune against the said Mansfeldians, still recruiting upon every Disaster, as
if they had been the Sons of Antaeus.

But upon the news brought to Bethlen that 40. thousand Tartars his
Confederates were slain in Poland, 1627.
he found it high time to bethink of Peace, by which on shameful Conditions he
departed out of Hungary, and quitted his Confederates Mansfield and Weymar,
renouncing also his Tartarian friendship, with an Obligation to free all
Christian Captives with the Turks. Mansfield suspecting this Collusion, with
his most expedite and nimble Troops hasted to the Venetians, leaving the rest
of his forces to Weymar, The Death of Count Mansfeld.
but taken in Bosnia with a Flux, proceeding (as some report) from poison he
took into his bowels, he expired his busy and versatile Soul there. Weymar
also having possessed himself of Hohenwold and Iabelunca, and designing his
Efforts upon Hungary, discontented with those practices of the Transylvanian,
And of the Duke of Weymar.
soon wasted away, aged 32. years, much beloved and lamented by his party for
his moderate, yet valiant actions and deportment in Silesia. Him Bethlen
followed, tortured with such an excessive pain in his feet, that he commanded
the soles of them to be lanced, to give passage to the fluid humor; to this
was added the Disease of the Holy Fire, Sacer Ignis
which gave occasion to the Papists Invectives, that all the Elements conspired
against him, being persecuted with fire, And of Bethlen Gabor.
water, iron, etc. and that his end was worthy of his Actions. He bequeathed to
each of the Emperors a Horse, with Jewels, Anno 1628.
Trappings, and Furniture, worth 40. thousand Guilders, to his Wife a 100
thousand Guilders and as many thousand Imperials, and Florens, with 3
Royalty's, to hold and enjoy for her life; having given this testimony of
Caesar, that it was a very hazzardous thing to war with him, as a person who
was neither deprest with adverse nor lifted up with prosperous fortune.

By his Death Cassovia, Tockay, and all the places granted to him for his Life,
reverted to the Emperor; and his Widow, although proclaimed Prince of
Transylvania, yet wanting Title and Right as being a Stranger, whether
spontaneously, or against her Will, quitted the Administration, having procured
Stephon Czakius whom she loved, to be named for Prince, and indevoured at the
Ottoman Port to have him invested; but the Transylvanians rejecting the
Princess, were divided into two other parts, some would have Stephen Bethlen,
the Brother of the deceased Gabriel; Divisions in Transylvania about Election
of a new Prince
others stood for George Rakoczi, whose fortune and wonderful felicity, carried
it from all his Competitors, Catharius the Agent at Constantinople,
prevaricating and acting for Rakoczi, as did several Castellans by the
liberality of the Princess granted unto Csakius, who took fortune to their
Counselor, Csakius speeds thither; and comes to Muncacksum, given him by the
same hand and desired admission, but John Balling the Governor of the Place
presenting the Ordnance against him, told him he had delivered it to Rakoczi,
and had received the Hereditary Government of it for his rendition.

Bethlen at the same time possessed himself of most of the other places in
Transylvania, 1631.
but by the detestable disloyalty of his Son Stephen, and his Son in Law David
Zolyomi, and the disaffection of all foreign Princes, he was forced to abandon
his pretensions, for Rakoczi invited by those two persons came to Varadin,
where by their Suffrage and Advancement, he wrested the Principality from
Stephen, Rakoczi established Prince of Transylvania.
created Prince thereof, who being of a mild and quiet disposition, and more
desirous of a private Life, by his own Interest promoted Rakoczi, against
Czakius, and forgave his Son and Son in Law, not forgiven by God the just
Avenger of their unnatural offense, (he himself receiving the name of
Governor:) for not long after his Son Stephen, Unnatural Disloyalty punished.
a youth otherwise of great learning and virtue, having been bred up with his
brother Peter at Leyden, dyed at Ecsedium, his body being horribly eaten up
with Worms: David Zolyomi was committed to perpetual Imprisonment by Rakoczi,
whom he had helped to prefer.

Caesar likewise had dispatched Esterhasius the Palatine of Hungary, with a
strong Army to possess himself of Transylvania, but before his Arrival Rakoczi
had settled himself; and by Stephen Bethlen the Governor of Dacia, pro hac
vice, in an Irruption into Hungary, overthrew him and took several Cities; the
Sultan himself, while yet the Peace was in force betwixt him and the Emperor,
of his own accord sending 10000. men to Ersekuyvarum to his assistance, in
testimony of his affection to, and approbation of Rakoczi, who wasted the
Country on purpose to divert Esterhasius; wherefore the Emperor not willing
to bring a greater War upon himself, Rakoczi incensed against the Emperor.
by designing upon others, presently acquiesced. But this provocation
determined not so on the part of Rakoczi, whose offense thereat, the Swede by
an Embassy to him, so aggravated (finding the German War like to rest upon his
own single Shoulders) by other fetches of the common Cause of Religion, etc.
that Rakoczi began to arm, intending at once to be revenged of Caesar,
Esterhausius, and Cszakius together, and to that purpose made sure of the
protection and favor of the grand Seigniour, who assented to his proposed
Enterprise, and Commanded the Bassa of Buda and the Moldavians to assist him
therein.

Csakius no less vigilant in his affairs, being supplied with money by Gabors
Widow, pressed an Engagement with Rakoczi, and continued and renewed it five
several times by the indifference of Fortune, Csakius forces his peace from
Rakoczi.
yet so distastful to Rak^czi, that he was willing to a Peace, whereby Csakius
was to enjoy what he held in Transylvania without any molestation.

This Province thus settled, arose another intestine Feud; Stephen Bethlen with
Peter his Son, had killed a Kinsman of Rakoczi's, and suspecting his Revenge,
had gathered an Army of Turks and Tartars, and brought them to Gyula, out of
mere fear intending to take upon him the Government, which he had for
quietness before resigned. Rakoczi detesting this wavering faith of the Turks
submitted to the Austrians, from whom he was supplied out of Silesia with three
Regiments of Foot and one of Horse; against those the Turks opposed themselves,
but by the cunning and Policy of James Gyori (a person skilled in their
Language who pretended to be faithful to Bethlen, Turks assist against R^koczi
and are defeated.
and betrayed his and their Designs to Rakoczi) and by the valor of Sigismund
Cornicsius, twenty five thousand of them were slain at Szalcula.

Soon after David Zolyomi having leavyed 2000. Horse to the assistance of the
King of Sweden, to whose War in Germany the Transylvanians were very much
affected, Rakoczi either true to the Emperor, or suspecting this as ^ome
design for his Father in law, disbanded all his Troops. This injury stuck so
close to Zolyomi that he resolved to kill him as he was a hunting, The
vengeance that pursued David Zolyomi.
but his Conscience reclaiming, he warned Rakoczi that he should forbear
hunting on his prefixed day, but to send some armed men, to such places, where
they should find the Assassinates prepared for the Execution, who being
accordingly discovered and slain, 1633.
Solyomi, bound in Chains of the weight of 50 pound was cast into a most
squalid and doleful dungeon, which had one only prospect against a Wall by a
Window, of a Cubits length and breadth, where he was kept from any humane
converse the whole course of his life: so that in what he sinned by advancing
Rakoczi before his Father in law in that he was thus severely punished,
alleviated only by the honorable respects showed him by Vrbanus Reoti the
Governor of the Castle, who labored all he could for his Enlargement; but
neither Caesar's entreaties could prevail in that point.

Bethlen, Bethlen raises a new war against Rakoczi
when he could neither obtain Oblivion and indemnity for his late actions, nor
procure his Son in law's deliverance, invited the Turks again, who had excused
their late Expedition in behalf of Bethlen, protesting their exact observation
of the Peace; but the Palatine versed in those frauds of the Infidel listed the
Heyducks, and watched every event. Many Encounters happned betwixt Rakoczi and
bethlen, and oftentimes with loss to the Turks, which so vexed the Sultan that
he Commanded the Vizier to be flead alive. But at last the business was
composed by the mediation of Friends, and Bethlen restored acknowledge Rakoczi,
whom the Turk again Confirmed.

Ferdinand the second, 1637.
being now Deceased, his eldest Son the third of that name, succeeded him in
all his Dominions, and seemed to have restored to Hungaria and Transylvania, a
most blessed Peace; had it not been for the Jesuits who raised new Troubles:
For the Catholic Nobles grudged that the Protestants by the former War had
extorted some things in favor of their Religion, and the Lutherans had built a
very beautiful Church at Presburg, Troubles about Religion in Hungary.
which Caesar resenting had sent his inhibition, and disallowed his former
concessions. The Protestants hereupon addressed themselves to Rakoczi as their
Sanctuary and Anchor, who had been also offended with the Emperor upon this
account: There was found at Varadin in the Vault of Ladislaus and Sigismund, a
Treasure, with a Crown, Scepter, and Jewels, one of which being a Diamant (as
my Author has it) was as big as a Hens Egg set in a locket, which glittered
and shone like a lighted Torch, there being an Anathema added that no man
presumed to meddle with them, while the necessity of the Castle should require
it: These Ferdinand demanded, but Rakoczi refused them. Add to this a worser
Evil; It happned that so ne Hungarian Nobles, as Forgaczi, Illyeshazi,
Maintained and abetted by Rakoczi.
and others, turned Roman Catholics, and some Catholics obtained Lordships
where the Protestant Religion was before exercised, which they took upon them
to restrain, 1639.
and converted their Churches to Catholic uses.

These innovations and the force that obtruded them, Rakoczi desired the
Emperor to remove, and to observe those Immunities and Privileges which he
and the Estates had confirmed to the Protestants; but the Emperor, either not
valuing Rakoczi, or secure of Hungary (for that the Turk engaged in the East,
1642.
had Concluded a Peace for twenty years) put him off with continual delays;
Rakoczi sl^ghted by the Emperor.
and raised an Army of Hungarians against the Swede, who nevertheless would
not stir out of their Country. Rakoczi on the other side held Intelligence
with General Torstenson then in Silesia, and resolved to Arm, having in vain
mediated but for the restitution of three hundred Protestant Churches shut up
by the Emperor; besides that there was a present Pique and grudge between him
and Homonnai, who had driven away all the Protestants out of his Government,
and had seized the Wines of Tockay, which were to be sent as the Annual present
to the Grand Seigniour.

There was at this time at the Transylvannia Court, 1644.
the Ambassadors of Poland, Sweden, France, and Austria; the last of whom being
slightly dismissed, Rakoczi Proclaimed open War against Ferdinand the third,
War proclaimed by Rakoczi against Ferdinand
and with 70000 men Invaded Hungary; the Reasons of which, published in a
Manifesto were these; That since the last nineteen years, Hungary had been
reckoned among the Hereditary Provinces, That Civil and secular Offices were
conferred upon Ecclesiastical Persons, and Lands of maintenance assigned them;
and Protestants put by from all places, and Jesuits introduced, against their
Consent and Will. His manifest and successes.
His first Effort was upon the Castles of Homonnai, which he ruined and
demolished, committing great slaughter and rapine, using F^re and Sword to
Extremity. Next he compelled Cassovia to a surrender, in vain defended by Count
Forgacz. To oppose his further progress the Emperor dispatched away Count
Buchain with twenty thousand men, while the Palatine was employed in raising
Eight Thousand Hungariaus; the first Encounter proved not so prosperous to the
Transylvanian; but the continual revolt of the Hungarians was cheaper then
Victory, which now favored him in his repulse of Adam Forgacz, from
Rimaszombathum; Buchain was advised by Nadasdi to make a diversion by the way
of Agria into Transylvenia, and so hem him in by getting below him; but in this
he only trifled away time, while Rakoczi (most of the strong places being
possessed by the Catholic party) besieged Tyrnaw, which at last opened its
Gates to General Douglasse and his Son Sigismund, where the Bishops and
Noblemen (now Crest-fallen) humbly entreated Canysius the Protestant Preacher
of the place, to mediate with the Victor that he would take them into his
Clemency; which was granted at his intercession.

And now Rakoczi distrusting this eager favor of Fortune, Rakoczi yields to a
Peace with the Emperor.
inclined to a Composure, which Caesar more desirous of, both for that the
Climate agreed not with his foreign Soldiery, and the huge price of grain, the
unsuccessful siege of Cassovia, 1645.
with the forced retreat of Bouchain to Presburgh, readily consented to, and
hastily concluded, to the great vexation and anger of the Swede. This Peace was
Proclaimed on St. Bartholomew's Day, by which seven Lordships in Hungary were
confirmed to the Transylvanian, 90 Churches restored to the Protestants, and
the rest of their Privileges confirmed to them.

Torstenson thus forsaken of his Confederate was abandoned by his Fortune,
General Torstenson abandoned by Rakoczi.
and forced to rise from the siege of Prunna. In the mean while died the
Palatine* to whom Drascovitius was substituted, and the Instrument of the
Transylvanian Pacification was made public, Ferdinand the 4th. K. of Hungary.
notwithstanding both parties in Hungary were as imbittered as ever about the
Extermination of the Jesuits, and ready to draw one upon another. The next year
Ferdinand the fourth, was Crowned King of Hungary, 1646.
the Peace continuing with the Turks, but so fallaciously that three hundred of
them were got privily into Raab, Raab designed upon by the Turks.
where being discovered by a Woman, they were all of them slain and the City
preserved by the Divine favor and protection.

In the Year 1648 died Prince Rakoczi, to whom Succeeded his Son George; as
Ferdinand the fourth, Crowned King of the Romans, Rakoczi's and Ferdinands
Death.
a Prince of more Hopes then Glory, after he had lived to the age of 22 years,
Deceased in the Year 1653. and Leopold Ignatius his Brother succeeded him in
all his Dignities, Kingdoms, and Dominions

In the Year 1656 the Swede having Invaded Poland, The Swedes invade Poland.
and almost Conquered the hither part (so that the many Garrisons he was forced
to Man, had almost drayned his Army) by his Ambassadors invited Prince Rakoczi
to the Spoil and his Assistance; and such was the evil Fate of Transylvania,
and Rakoczi in particular, that allured by the great advantages the Ruin of
that Kingdom promised him, he Confederated himself with the Swede, Rakoczi
joins with him.
maintaining Correspondencies and intrigues with all his Allies, particularly,
with the pretended Protector of England, to whom he sent an Envoy to transact
his Concerns of Money; to the payment whereof the King of Sweden had by pact
obliged the said Usurper, the consideration and satisfaction whereof, are of no
great moment to this discourse.

The Transylvanians betaking themselves to their Arms, from which they had been
longer disused than throughout the whole series of their History (the Turks
having been sometime before engaged against the Persians, and lately against
the Venetians, and laboring with their own mis-carriages and errors of
Government) little imagined they should wear them so long (if ever it be their
hap to put them off without parting with their Liberty and Religion) and to
such a Calamitous Defense of their own Country. In fine, an Army of 16000 men
was presently raised and put under the Command of Backos Gabor, which were the
Van of those Forces that Rakoczi intended for this Expedition, The
Transylvanians ravage Poland.
himself following in person with another Army; who as soon as they were
entered Poland in most horrible manner fell a ravaging and Sacking the Towns,
and pillaging the Churches, and defacing the beauties thereof in hatred of the
Roman Catholic Religion; so that a fearful Desolation was made as they passed.

To pass by other occurrents of his proceedings in this Kingdom, Cracovia
taken by the Swedes and Rakoczi.
after he had joined with the Swedes, the Enterprise of Cracovia may suffice
for instance of his Hostility in this Kingdom, which he besieged, and after a
short Defense had it surrendered to him (the Swedes and he, demolishing almost
the City of Casimir, built on the other side the Weysel) it being one of those
places which was to be assigned him with the Palatinate thereof, for his share,
in recompense of his Service. This place in the balance of the Swedish Fortune
being besieged by Field Marshal Lubomirsky, Rakoczi came to its relief, and
gave a notable Defeat to the Pole, Rakoczi's actions in Poland.
who raised his siege and fled before him. The said Prince afterward embodying
with the Swedes in Lithuania, took in the strong City of Biscia Litinsky being
there personally present with the King of Sweden, and where he took his last
leave of him, returning to Samoysch, to secure his footing and maintain what he
had gotten; but the Danish War interveening and calling the King of Sweden away
to the Defense of his own Kingdom; and the Duke of Brandenburgh falling off
likewise, and renouncing that Kings Interest; besides that, the Pole had newly
made a League with the House of Austria, who upon Caution and Articles were to
supply him with an Army of 16000 men, then upon their March out of Silesia;
Deserted by the Swede.
Rakoczi perceived that the whole brunt of the War was like to fall upon him,
now deserted and abandoned by all his Partakers.

And therefore he thought it high time to apply himself to the ways of Peace
(the Turk having also countermanded him sometime before at the instance of the
Polish Ambassador at Constantinople, Rakoczi commanded by the Grand Seigniour
to retire out of Poland.
who it was thought, had bribed Rakoczi into that disfavour and hatred with the
Grand Seignior, who now peremptorily Commanded him, he having delayed to comply
with his first Orders of return, so surrender his Principality to his Cousin
Reada or Radus) and in tendency thereunto made offer of a surrender of all
those places he had taken during this War, And to surrender his Principality.
thinking thereby also to have satisfied the Tukish Emperor, provided he might
have safe egresse out of that Kingdom, which was now very hazzardous, for that
the Poles and Austrians had waylaid him in the mountainous passages by which
he must needs return.

But the Poles so stomached the loss and prejudice they received from him
causelessly, especially his Church-robberies, that they delayed him with an
answer to this effect: That being tied to such Articles with the House of
Austria, and the King of Hungary, they could make no Agreement without them:
which artifice being understood by Rakoczi, more Forces drawing likewise
against him; besides that, another party of 12000. of them had Invaded his
Dominions in Hungary, and in Revenge burnt down thirty six Villages; he
resolved to make his way with his Sword while there was a possibility of
effecting it, which with much difficulty and hazard, Fights his way out of
Poland.
being several times set upon, and forced to fight his way; by good Guides and
happy Conduct he achieved, but brought a sorry Army home in Comparison of what
he marched out with.

This same year Died the Emperor Ferdinand the third, 1657.
leaving behind him two Sons, Ignatius Leopol^us, and Charles Joseph; the
eldest of whom being a minor, The death of Eerdinand the 3d. Emperour^
much canvasing there was about the Election of a Caesar; for that by the
Custom and Golden Bull of the Empire no person under the Age of eighteen years
(of which he lacked one) is Capable of being chosen to that Dignity.
Notwithstanding he had been Crowned King of Hungary soon after the Death of his
Brother Ferdinand (who as was mentioned before Deceased in 1653.) with the
usual Solemnities, which we forbear to recite, because mentioned at large
before.

Prince Rakoczi being thus retreated into Transylvania, was there again by a
Chiaux Commanded to resign the Principality to Radus; but he, hoping either to
make his Peace at the Port with the usual Purchase, and so countermine his
Enemies, or trusting at last to his Interest in the Soldiery, and his People,
and his own Abilities (as indeed he was a Prince very well skilled in Military
Affairs, and of personal Valor, and great Spirit) delayed any such surrender,
but strengthened himself all that he could, and dispatched away Ambassadors to
crave Aid of the Neighboring Princes against this threatened Encroachment of
the T^rks, but the Pole and the Austrians had conceived such rancour against
him, the first for his Invasion, and the other for his League with the Swede,
that they abandoned him to his Fortune.

Nevertheless the Princes of Moldavia, and Valachia, promised their
assistance, as their Common Cause; while the Turk disturbed at home this Year
1658. by the Mutininies of the Janissaries and the Insurrections of the Bassa of
Aleppo, The Vayvod of Valachia worsted in his Quarrel.
permitted Rakoczi to be quiet; but the next year he thrust in an Army by way
of Valachia, against whom that Vayvod making opposition was by them totally
routed, and eight thousand of his men slain, and he forced by a timely
submission and great Presents and promises of Hostility against Rakoczi, to
purchase his Peace and Establishment in his Dignity.

Soon after the Bassa of Buda being Commanded upon the same service, marched to
Lippa, and thence to Arad Town and Castle, whose Suburbs the Transylvanians
fired, which the Turks Officers who had the Avantgurd perceiving and supposing
the Enemy had deserted the Place, in great have and disorder marched to the
quenching of the Flame; but the Transylvanian and Hungarian Forces not far
distant, making advantage of this Rout, and falling upon them in the smoke,
Turks Defeated at Arad.
so routed them that they were driven back to their Body with great loss,
where being received in with their Wagons with which they were barricado'd,
the whole Army of Rakoczi advanced, and with their Great Cuns so shivered them,
that they were compelled to forsake their Camp, and to fly, in which many of
them perished in the River Mor. There were here taken Prisoners, Mustapha Beg,
the Bassa of Agria, the Coll. Aga of the Janissaries, the Aga of Buda, and Aga
of Lippa, the Beg of Waitzen was drowned, with many other men of note. For this
defeat the grand Seignior threatened to flea the Bassa of Buda, if he did not
presently bring him Rakoczi's head, and forthwith Imprisoned the Emperors and
the French Kings Ambassadors.

In 1660. the Turk sent a greater Force then before, into Transylvania. In the
mean while Prince Rakoczi marched with a considerable Force before Hermanstad,
and it came to a Bloody Encounter, The Turks again defeated at Hermanstadr.
wherein Rakoczi deported himself valiantly, killing 17 men with his own hand;
and so the Infidels for That Bout were forced to quit the Field, and leave the
Victory to the Transylvanians, leaving likewise upon the Place, 6 or 7000
Turks, and Tartars. Rakoczi in the persuit received five wounds, and five days
after this Fight (June the sixth) he was brought to Great-Waradiu, The death of
Rakoczi.
where he departed this Life.

The fall of this Prince balanced the Advantage of the Tictory, and
exceedingly animated the Turks, who pressing more and more eagerly upon the
Transylvanians, drove them every where to their strong Holds: Whereupon General
Souches had Order from Vienna, to draw toward Transylvania, and make it good
against the Turks; and he forthwith marched thither with a considerable Body,
and possessed himself of several Holds.

July the 14 of the same year, the Turk with 100000 Men laid close Siege to
Great-Waradin, which was stoutly defended by one Colonel Gaude a Scotchman,
the Governor of the Town. During the Siege, the Turk sent abroad strong
Parties to subdue smaller Towns, forcing the People unto several works, as the
building of Bridges, and the Like, putting them to the Sword at last for their
Reward: At one time killing 150 Christians, and at another, Loading 20 Wagons
with Christians Heads which they carried away.

On the 6 of August, That brave Soldier and Governor Colonel Gaude was slain
by a shot, Varadin yielded.
and (the Besieged being left without any hope of Relief) This strong place
surrendered unto the Turk upon Accord; being a passage into Transylvania,
Hungary, and Poland.

After the death of Rakoczi, his Cousin Radus being disliked of by the Turk as
unfit for his designs, there started up one Barckay a ^reature of the Turks,
making himself Prince of Transylvania, whom the Turk protected and supplied
with Forces, whereby he undertook to reduce several places, siding in pretense
with General Souches (who well understood this violence of the Turks, to be a
design not only upon Transylvania, but also upon the Empire it self,) and
making large promises under hand, that whatsoever he got by the Turkish Aid,
was meant for the good of the Emperor, to whom he intended a just and
Honorable Restitution, reserving only Waradin to remain under the Power of the
Prince of Ttransylvania; but the matter proved otherwise in the end.

Toward the end of this Year, a Blazing-Starre appeared with the Tail toward
Dalmatia, and the Head toward Transylvania, which the ensuing Calamities
portended sadly of the War.

Soon after This, the Labolizish Peasants Rebelled against the Christians in
Transylvania, whom they partly put to the sword, some they took Prisoners, and
others they sold to the Turk, the right Successor of Rakoczi was Remini Ianos
(by many Transylvanians received and entertained for such) who was bitterly
persecuted by Barckay and the Turks.

In 1661. Ianos fought them at Thassabat, Remini Janos the successor of Rakoczi
oppressed with numbers.
and made a great slaughter: but at last, oppressed with Numbers, he left
Transylvania, and retreated to Tockay. And now it appeared that the Turks
Business was not to stop there, but to fall also upon Hungary. Whereupon his
Imperial majesty granted Commissions for the raising of an Army, which was
dispatched part of it into Transylvania. In the Interim; Count Nichola Serini
began to look to himself, and raised a strong Fort on the Wall over against
Canischa Naming it Serinswar: getting together a strong Body of Croats, and
other Nations, that lay heavy upon the Quarters thereabout: which the Turks
stomach'd not a little, however they carried it fair at present, and a while
they talked of nothing but Peace, but at last they brake out into high
expressions, that they would have Serinswar demolished, Count Serini punished,
and Transylvania subjected to the Power of the Turk by way of Reparation. None
of which followed; but the Christians looked upon it as every man's Interest to
do his best to defend himself against the Ambition and Outrages of This common
Enemy; A Warbegun in Hungary.
and there being nothing now to be expected but a great Turkish War, which
was already begun by Parties; the Christians entered upon the Borders of Turkey,
drawing toward Stul-Weissenburg, and Offen: and they subdued Zamock, Warda,
Erzy, and Hirr: all these being inconsiderable Houses, and Castles, which with
their Defenders were blown up, and fired.

While this was doing, the Turks gathered together a Mighty Army consisting of
Asiatick, African, and Europaean people. To this numerous Army, they had
likewise provided an incredible proportion of Victuals, Ammunition, and
Artillery. Nevertheless, several Treaties were set a foot, which the Turk so
long insisted upon, till he had gained his End, and drawn a formidable Power
into the Field, to break in upon the Christians, who labored as much as in
them lay, to preserve the Peace; seeming to take small notice of the Turks
hostile preparations. The Army of the Christian: in Hungary co^sisted of 38000
German Soldiers, who had the Turks for their Open, and the Hungarians for their
Private Enemies (the Animosity being so great, that many times it came to
Blows betwixt the Germans and the Hungarians.) These Troops finding themselves
under many inconveniences, partly from the Hungarians, who denied
accommodation to the Germans, and partly from Diseases arising from the
disagreement of the Climate, were much weakened and diminished. Hungary is
questionless a very brave Country, and abounds in Wine and other Fruits; which
taken to Excess, breed dangerous Surfeits. The Hungarians in their deportment
are generally Grave, and Modest, but being Affornted by the Germans, and others
not of their own Religion, they are Apt to Revenge, and hard to be Reconciled.

Toward the Month of October, The German Army moulders away.
the Dutch Army was exceedingly pestered with Surfeits, so that betwixt those
that dyed; a Number that lay sick, and others that were carried out of the
Country, it fell to a low Ebb: and moreover; being then as far as Clausenburg,
in Transylvania, they were put to some distress for Victuals and Forage: the
Enemy increasing daily more and more against them for in those Parts the
Turkish Power was strongest. About this time, the Upstart Prince Barckay fell
into disgrace, and the Turk preferred one Apaffi to that dignity in his stead.
Against Him, Remini Ianos bore up, Opposing him, and his Promoters in the head
of 8000 men, and fortune so far befriended him in the first Engagement, as to
deliver his great Enemy Barkay into his hands, whose Head he caused to be
struck off, and then for a while the people flocked in to him, and Augmented
his Army; yet neither their aid nor his valor availed him when being surrounded
on all sides, and striving to clear his passage, he seemed only careful how he
might fall with Honor: for his Army through many skirmishes, Diseases, and
great Scarcity of Provision, was melted away, and hope of Succor there was
none left; the German Army by the like Accidents being weakened and put to a
Retreat. Upon these Terms it was, that he committed himself to places of more
security, J^mes forced to desist from his Claim.
and in Sakmar, He with others, expected the Issue of the Treaty. But the
Turks, (as has been said already) making use of a Treaty only for their own
advantage, put themselves into a stronger posture: In the mean time discharging
their Choler with great indignation, as well against the Valiant Venetians,
(that have held them tack so long in Candia) as against the neutral Valachians;
and now and then against the half-conquered Transylvanians; but not a word all
this while, nor so much as a look of displeasure against Hungary.

This Deceit of a Treaty lasted till the Year 1663. and then the Fury of these
Infidels brake out, not only upon Transylvania, and Hungaria; but upon some of
the Emperors Hereditary Countries also.

Upon July the 17. the Grand Vizier came in great Pomp and Magnificence to
Offen, The Turks appear with a formidable Army in Hungary.
encamping himself in the Pesterfield, being four German miles in Compass. His
Army was upward of a hundred thousand men, above one hundred great Guns, and of
Wagons, and Beasts, a number not to be believed. His first work was to lay two
Ship-bridges over the Danube; the one near to Gran, and the other not far from
Parkham. His forces being quartered about those parts in Prodigious Multitudes,
it was as yet doubtful, whether he would fall upon Newhausel, or Raab; having
his eye indifferently upon both, and lying still for a good while without
action. But the design had showed it self much sooner, if a continual fall of
Rain, and the Overflow of the Danube had not hindered him: However at length, he
passed some Thousands of his Army over the Bridge near Parkham toward the side
of Newhausel; when immediately a Report was spread by some of the Pesants that
were turned to the Turk, that the River had torn their Shipbridges, and that
those 4000 Turks that had passed over, were now Cut off from the Main body.
This Rumor it was that inveigled the Governor of Newhausel (Count Forgatz)
into a Courageous but an unhappy Resolution, which was to fall upon those 4000.
Turks, upon the supposition, that the Miscarriage of the Bridge had cut off
their Retreat. It is very true, that he was earnestly dissuaded form that
Attempt, Count Forgatz defeated.
and told, that the Body was greater then he imagined, but still persisting in
his Resolve to fight them, upon the 28 of July, with his Hungarians, Hussars
and Heyducks, and 11 Troops of Germans, and 500 Musketeers (in all 6000
strong) he marched up to them, and finding the Enemy four times stronger then
he expected, became sensible of the Abuse although alas! for the Infidels
having gotten certain Intelligence of the Christians design, and of their
coming, caused the Bridges presently to be repaired, which they had purposely
disordered, and marching over with a strong power surrounded them. The
Hungarians and Hussars, that were appointed to stand for a Reserve, seeing the
Enemy come on so strong, betook themselves to flight; but the Germans and
Heyducks that gave the Onset behaved themselves stoutly, and sold a dear
Victory to the Turks. At last by Multitudes they were overcome, and those that
could not get away were miserably Cut, and Mangled. Forgatz, and some few
others escaped to Newhausel. This Combat lasted about three hours, and about
3000 of the Germans, and Heyducks were put to the Sword.

After this Victory, the Turks being therewith encouraged, and the Christians
not a little dejected, the Enemy made ready to lay a Formal Siege unto
Newhausel: which after many Attempts and Approaches they Battered so furiously,
The Siege of Newhausel.
that Frederick and Serin-Sconces were beaten to the ground, and with
incredible Labor and delving, raised a Mount of Earth so high that from
thence, they could command the Town, and beat the besieged from the Walls.

Whereupon the Hungarians whispered one another to Surrender, (out of a fear to
dispute it any longer) which moved the Garmans likewise to speak of an Accord,
and sent to the Grand Vizier demanding honorable Conditions, whose Answer was,
that they should set down their own Terms, leaving only their Great Guns in the
Fort.

On the 26' of September the Christians marched out with 2422 Sound, An
Invasion into Moravia.
and Armed men, and four Piece of Ordnance. At this Surrender, the Enemy got
seventy Piece of Ordnance; great store of Arms, Powder, Wine, Meal, and Corn.
In the mean while, some 1000 of Tartars, Moldavians, and Valachians, as bad
Brutes as the worst of the Infidels, drawn hither in hope of plunder, made
their way over the Waegh by force, putting those Christians to the Sword that
Guarded the Pas^, and so crossing the Mountains, they entered into Moravia, and
the parts about Olmitz, which Towns, together with a great number of the
neighboring Villages, they burnt to the Ground. Their Guides and Leaders they
had from among the Boors of the Country, who most unnaturally and treacherously
showed them the ways and passes, and had therefore for their pains some share
of the booty.

This Havoc lasted in Moravia 10 days, and then they passed over the
March-stream into Austria (at which time, the Country People with their best
movables were fled to Vienna.) At length, having laden themselves with all
manner of Booty, they returned to the Camp at Newhausel, where they exposed the
Men and Beasts, which they had taken up in several places, to common-sale in
the Market: While these things were doing, the Turks busied themselves against
the Fort Serinswar, and by way of Stratagem attempted Clausenburgh in
Transylvania; but at both Places they were repulsed with loss and shame. At
which time Count Serini with a considerable Body of Croatians, Count Serini
made Generalissimo.
and other neighboring People; made a sudden Incursion into Turkey, to the
great damage of the Infidels. At his Return the said Count was made
Generalissimo of all the Emperors forces, then rendezvouzed at Presburgh under
their former General Montecuculi.

Newhausel being reduced, which was supposed, and vainly hoped, would have
disappointed the Turks progress, and success for this year (being declined so
far as the depth of Winter) the Grand Vizier undertook some farther Conquest;
and with his Army, leaving a sufficient Garrison, and other numbers to repair
and better fortify the Fort, by bringing the River Niutre round about it,
marched toward Presburgh, the Capital City or Mehropolis of Lower Hungary, and
with his approach gave out ^umours of his resolution to attaque it, relying on
his first Fortune, and those popular insinuations he had spread abroad of his
reality, justice, and tenderness to such places as should come into his
Masters Protection, with which thriving Artifice he had already gained upon the
credulity of most of the Pesants and indefensible places.

Besides the Honor of the place, The Grond Vizier's aspect upon Presburgh.
as the Repository of the Crown of Hungary (which the Hungarians most
Religiously reverence, as placing the safety and Glory of their Nation therein,
and which being seized, would have Entitled the winner and wearer to the
Kingdom) the convenience thereof as freeing his way to Vienna, on one part;
and to Commorra, Raab, or Newhausel on the other; and contrarily incomodating
his attempt upon the Island of Schut, by its Neighbourly Correspondence and
Assistance in case of Danger, where at present the General Count Serini was
enquartered, was a great motive and enticement to an Attempt against it. But
such had been the Vigilance and Care of Count Strozzi, a Famous and experienced
Soldier, in providing and furnishing the City, wherein the hope of the
Kingdom was concerned, and his Courage, and all other excellent qualities of a
Governor, so known and believed by this Discreet Vizier, that contenting
himself with the submission of Modern, St. George, Posing, and other places
that lay open and exposed to his Power, and the bravery and gallant Designment
of so high an Enterprise, with the unimpeded conduct of the Affair; he
retreated honorably: and as if he had proceeded so far merely upon a plot and
Design to surprise some places by his sudden Return, Niutra taken by the
Vizier.
he presently invested Niutra, a place near Newhausel, and as well Fortified,
and more respected, because of its Ecclesiastical Concernment, as being a
Bishops See; and by terrifying Menaces and preparations for a storm, soon
wrought upon the Defendants to a Surrender, who by the Articles thereof were
conveyed to Presburgh.

The speedy and lucky Event of this rendition, Tyrnaw likewise and other places.
was effectual to his practices on other places; for upon the same score
Tyrnaw, and some other Towns thereabouts, opened their Gates and submitted to
him, upon his Common terms of Religion and Liberty; which Success invited him
to the siege of Schinta, a very strong and considerable Fortress, and a
Magazine of a great and the best quantity of the Emperors Artillery; but by
the Fidelity and Valor of the Governor and his men, was repulsed thence, and
glad to abandon the Enterprise, for that October was more than half spent, and
the Climate did much incommodate his Asian and African Soldiery.

Therefore to provide them of warmer Winter Quarters, Comes before Schinta in
vain.
to keep them well and in health against the Spring, he repassed his Great Guns
with some of his Army, over his Ship-bridge to Gran or Strigonium, rum ouring
that when he had disposed of those unuseful pieces in the depth of Winter, he
would return himself with his Europeans to prosecute the War; but in fine, he
passed over his whole Army, being followed in his Rear, in expectation of
advantage, The Vizier departs out of Hungary.
by General Serini, who having parted with General Montecuculi (conjoined in
attendance of the Newhausel Design upon the Island of Schut) did at last cut
off some six hundred Janissaries, with two hundred Pesonio's, or Baggage people,
engaged in the defense thereof, which they resolutely maintained, by
barricadoing themselves among the Wagons, so that Serini's Hussars were forced
to alight and follow them a foot in their advantages, and there Courageously
slew them. This was some expiation of that Defeat given to Count Forgaz very
near the same place, His rear attaqued.
as a fortnight before his Brother and he had Defeated two great parties, but
not with so great success. This happned about the last of October, and so
those parts of this side the Danow, conceived some joyful hopes of a respit
till the coming of the Spring.

But the Vizier by those other after accessions had so strongly fixed himself,
by leaving a Garrison of 4000. men in Newhausel, and 1500 in Niutre, besides a
body of 10000. men to be ready to assist upon all occasions, that the
Christians are still kept to their Arms, to attend their motion and to Guard
themselves. And to increase the Danger, Apaffi the Prince of Transylvania,
Apaffi appears for the Turks.
whom they looked upon as under a Constraint of Compliance with the Turks, and
a secret well-wisher to the Christian Cause, discovered himself a Declared and
professed Enemy, being inveigled with an investiture of those places taken this
Campagnia, and upon the total Conquest, with the Crown of Hungary* For as soon
as they were rid of the Infidels, he wi^h his half Christians, Valachians,
Moldavians, intermixed with Tartars, and his own plundering Transylvanians,
undertook the Lieutenant-ship of the Winter War; those Nations being better
able, as inured to the Climate, to undergo the extremities of the weather.

Apaffi's first Design was upon the Berg Towns, (...) Actions
or Mine-Hills, whence the Hungarian Gold is fetched, which as soon as he had
parted with the Grand Vizier, then retreating to Belgrade, he attempted, and
this the easier for that there was no resistance in readiness to oppose him;
the Forces that were raised by the Counts of Cochary and Tekelly, in the Upper
Hungary, for the most part (for that the Lower was already joined with Serini,
He Attempts the Mine Towns.
or awed by the Turks) were a little before (maugre the Enemies Design of
impeding them) already arrived to the gross of the Army; which also for want
of necessaries for Man and Horse, devoured by the Turks was now dispersed into
Quarters.

The two first obstacles of his Design upon the Mine-Towns; and which barred
his entrance, were the two Towns of Levents and Novigrad, reputed one of the
prime places of Upper Hungary; Levents was also well appointed, Novigrad and
Leventz yielded to Apaffi.
having in it a Castle Manned with Courageous Soldiers, and firmed with thick
Walls, flankers, and Turrets, that accordingly gave the Enemy a rude and
unwelcome entertainment, but their numbers being not to be wearied, and no
Relief to be expected by the besieged, it was yielded by Agreement, and the
Articles, according to the modern Policy of the Turks, punctually observed.

From thence Apaffi marched to Novigrad, lying further in Upper Hungary, which
after a stout but short resistance not without suspicion that the Governor was
of Apaffi's party (more obvious now by his retreat into the Enemies Country,
and the neutrality or rather assistance of the whole Province, as to the
generality, toward Apaffi) was rendered likewise and the Garrison dismissed, but
not into Christian quarters, being set to work, and enjoined to be in a
readiness to assist their late Besiegers.

The Enemy encroaching thus upon the Mine Towns, some Regiments which could be
best got together, were sent to enforce them, and to hinder the enemy from
settling their Winter Quarters in those places, which were nevertheless much
despaired of, for that Apaffi with his Aids threatened Cass^via the Metropo^is
of Upper Hungary with a present siege, Apaffi seizes some of the Mine Towns.
as he did in effect beleagure Fillek, some ten miles distant, prejudging that:
the Christians* if once able to take the Field, would carry the War into these
Quarters, of which therefore they would betimes possess themselves; and
therefore notwithstanding the prevention aforesaid, they soon after seized on
Shoninitz, Cre^nitz, and other Towns of the Mines; and by threatening Letters
and Summons terrified the People thereabouts to an acquiescence and submission
under their Command: They faced likewise Tockay (the strongest Hold of all)
with Parties; but neither their Courage, Multitudes, Practices, or Hopes,
served them to the Adventure of a siege.

Naverthelesse to countenance such resolutions, they spread rumors abroad, as
if the Grand Vizier would presently return, and Orders were indeed to that
purpose dispatched to the Magistrates of^ Frystad to make ready two Bridges over
the Waegh, so broad as that whole Squadrons might pass over there a breast,
upon the design of another Irruption into Moravia.

This news caused Count Serini, who till then continued in the Island uf Schut*
observing the Designs of them at Newhausel, to put himself into motion, which
presented him with some considerable booties (but inconsiderable parties)
designed for Constantinople; Count Serini moves from his Quarters.
and that was all he was able to do; the Auxiliaries of the Empire amounting in
all not to above 8000. men, under the Command of the Count of Hohenlo, (whose
Ancestors were famous in the Low Country War) by their surfeits upon the Fruits
of the Country, which are in great abundance in the Hereditary Dominions,
being so Diseased that they were in no condition or capacity for any field
service; to increase these Auxiliaries the Swedes were near their arrival from
Bremen, with seven hundred Horse well mounted; but now like to have met with
some danger at Erford, as the Hessen Darmsted Ayds perished with a greater
misfortune upon the Danubius in their passage to Vienna.

Neither were the Frontire Garrisons better Conditioned, by want of many
necessaries, even Raab, and Commorra, where the Officers that surrendered
Newhansel had been newly acquitted, so that amidst so many exigences and
streights every thing was feared to excess. The Emperor himself was at this
time departing from Vienna to the Diet he had summoned at Regenspurgh, The
Emperor to the diet at Regensburg.
to Consider with the Princes of Germany of some quick expedient to redress
those evils, leaving the Archduke Charles Joseph, to Govern in his absence,
who (to add affliction to misery) is since Deceased, The Death of the Archduke
Charles Joseph.
and the direct Line of the Imperial Family (save in the Person of the present
Emperor) totally extinguished; a matter of no small moment to some Designs in
the world, especially since the Pope and the French were so near a Rupture; yet
to alleviate the present distress, Providence was pleased to bestow on the
Vigilance and Conduct of Count Serini, a very remarkable success. Some Forces
of Apaffi intermingled with Tartars, and many Turks, pursuing their Design of
another Invasion into Moravia; having also an eye upon the Island of Schut, had
privily laid a Bridge over the River Mur, and had passed two thousand Horse
already over it; of which Serini having good and timely notice by a discharge
of a Cannon, he rose from his post, and with his Troops so fiercely charged
them, that betwixt surprised and dismayed, and fairly worsted, they betook
themselves back to the Bri^ge, where rancountring with numbers of their fellows
passing over in great haste to them, they could neither go forward, nor
backward, but were forced to take the River, which spared none: there escaped
very few of those two thousand. This was done in the morning, November. 27. when
Serini brought two field pieces and 300. of his Foot to face the Enemy, The
Turks defeated in their passage over the Mur, by Count Serini.
who stood on the other side the Water and managed a revengeful Skirmish all
the day long, and then retreated toward Canisia, from whence they are dreaded
to reinforce this their first attempt, being exceedingly enraged at this
disgraceful disappointment.

There was mention made in the Diet, of Mars. Turenne to succeed in the Supreme
Command in Hungary, by means of an Invitation and request to the French King,
but it was more out of complement to oblige that King, then any such resolution
of the States of the Empire, who have found it the greatest difficulty of the
whole affair as to the Ricks aid, to satisfy the Pretensions and Ambitions of
their own Princes to that Command, and in fine have concluded without
constituting any Generalissimo, but left the Army to their distinct Generals
of Horse and Foot. The Emperors General is Count Mountecuculi, the Field
Marshalls are the Paltsgrave of Sultzbach for Horse, and General Spar a Subject
of the Marquess of Brandenburg, of Foot. Over the Ayds, the General of Horse
is Leopold Marquess of Baden; of Foot, Vlrick Duke of Wittenberg, with Count
Fugger M. Genesis of Horse, Duke Adolph of Holstein, Duke Gustave of Durlach, (the
Younger House of Baden) and Baron de Souches Major General of Foot.

The Ayds of the four Circles of the Rhine without their Auxiliaries will
amount to 28000 men, The force of the Empire sum^ed up.
the other circles out of which the hereditary Provinces of Austria, Bohemia,
and are to be excepted will make as many more, which with the 13000 advanced by
the Pope, and the French Forces, and the aforenamed Auxiliaries will make up a
body of 80000 men, besides the Emperors own Army, which will amount and is to
be made up to 40000 men Effectif.

In the mean time of these consultations at Regensburg, Apaffi the Prince of
Transylvania, was driving on his designs in that Province, Several places
revolt in Transylvania to Ap^ffi.
working upon the Emperors necessities and the discontents of the Garrisons of
Zekelkeyt and Clausenburg, which in conclusion for want of pay, dismissed their
Officers and submitted the Towns to Him, having been held by the Emperor ever
since the Troubles and death of Prince Rakoczi. Zacmar also wavered, but was
happily reclaimed by some moneys that came opportunely, to satisfy the
Soldiers.

The year proving very mild and gentle in the depth of winter, had frustrated
many designs of the Tartars, who had taken up their Quarters in Hungary to be
ready for some Invasion, whereupon overburdening the places and Garrisons they
were in, and provisions growing scarce, after some quarrels 'twixt the Turks
and them for victual, they dispersed themselves for better accommodation. At
the same time Count Nicholas Serini the Emperors General took advantage of
this their separation, and the benefit of a sudden Frost, and with his Army
consisting of between 30 and 35000 men, among whom were the German ayds under
Count Hohenlo, made an Invasion into the Turks Country, Count Serini's
expedition into the Turks Country.
in the lower Hungary and parts of Croatia, as far as Esseck near the
conjunction of the Danow and the River Dravus, a place infamous for the descent
of Caczianerus King Ferdinand's the First's General, and the noble Lodr^^us,
defeated there hard by, by the policy of the Turks, as mentioned before.

This Bridge it the only passage the Turks have, besides sudden shifts by
boats, etc. for conveyance from Belgrade, otherwise called Greek We^ss^nburg,
and those parts possessed by the Turk, both for Wagon and Artillery, so that
the (...) Count well knowing what disadvantage the breaking down thereof would
cause to the Turks designs at the approaching Campagnia, resolved to destroy it
or render it unserviceable to the Enemy; and fortune so favored the
Enterprise, The Bridge of Esseck burnt by him.
that Maugre all opposition made by the Enemy, he in one night and day had so
maimed and disjoynted it, that a great part of it fell into the Dravus, the
rest being set on Fire toward the Turks side, but hastily quenched by them;
since when they have been very busy in repairing it, the Grand Vizier storming
exceedingly, that it was no better defended, and (for which he has called the
Officers appointed to maintain it, into question for their lives) but it is
judged impossible, that it can be reedifyed this Summer, so as to be made able
to bear Carriages, which will be a great stop to the Turks progress by way of
lower Hungary.

Count Serini having finished this exploit with so good success, Count Serini
lays waste the Country round about.
laid waste all the Country round about of this (that is) the Northern side of
the Dravus, betwixt that and the Danow, among which were many places formerly
the possessions of his noble Ancestors (who enjoyed a (...) and plentiful
reven^ue in those parts, increased by the additions of the patrimony of the
Carlovitii and Torquati, which fell-likewise to them) but now thralled to those
Infidels; insomuch that some have reckoned ^1000 Vil^ages burnt by him, but the
Turk^sh desolation has scarce left so many for him to destroy.

This work being over, and having thus revenged himself for the spoil of his
Fortunes, he thought it time to return; for that there were several confident
rumors that the Enemy with a great body was marching after him, although it
proved a mere lie raised and industriously spread by the Turks for fear of
further mischief to be done them by his staying in those parts, where h^s name
was grown most formidable, and the effects of his conduct highly dreadful.

But yet he made not such have, but that in his way home he made a halt at
Quinque Ecclesiae and summoned it, The Town of Quinque Ecclesiae stormed and
sacked by him.
which the Tow^men seemed to entertain, and by that means drew some of his
Forces not suspecting Hostility under reach of their Cannon, which they
furiously discharged upon them, and killed some Eminent Officers and men of
valor; which Action so incensed Serini, that he gave order for a present
storm, by which the Town was mastered and entered, and the plunder thereof given
to the Soldiers, and soon after sacked and set on Fire, the Soldiers and such
as escaped, flying into the Castle, which held out and was in prudence given
over by the Genera^l, whose men having been so much toyled and wearied already
were in no condition for a Seige, and a sudden attempt was improbable of
success. Here were slain many Officers, the greatest number whereof was of the
Germans under Count Holenlo.

From hence, passing by Zigeth (the Town and Castle whereof were so famously
defended by his Grandfather as too tite and tedious a piece of work) he fell
upon Segess a Town distant Westward two Hungarian miles (18 English) from
Zigeth, S^gess taken and Garrisoned by him.
which he took by assault, with the loss of more Officers of note, requited
upon the Turks by a promiscuous slaughter of them all (as for Tartars no
quarter was any where allowed them) and there he left a Garrison in the very
midst of the Enemies Country and came home by Canysia, Count Strini's
honorable Return.
which place he had designed to besiege, but his Army being much diminished,
the Enterprise is laid aside, till he shall be recruited with new Levyes,
answerable to so great an undertaking, in which affair he is at present
employed; but it is feared the sudden appearance of the Grand Seignior who will
open this Campagnia in person, will put him on other Councels and designs.

FINIS.

