Epistolae Ho-Elianae.

FAMILIAR LETTERS Domestic and Foreign;

Divided into sundry SECTIONS, Partly Historical, Political, Philosophical,
Upon Emergent Occasions: By James Howell Esquire One of the Clerks of His late
Maties most Honble Privy Council.

The second Edition, enlarged with diverse supplements, and the Dates annexed
which were wanting in the first, With an Addition of a third volume of new
Letters.

Ut clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus. London, Printed by W. H. for
Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

These ensuing Letters contain for their principal subject a faithful relation
of the privatest passages that happened at Court a good part of King James'
reign, and that of His late Majesty. As also of such foreign affairs which had
reference to these Kingdoms;

Viz. Of
THe Wars of Germany, and the transactions of the Treaties about restoring the
Palanat, with the House of Austria and Sweden. The Treaty and traverses of the
Match with Spain. The Treaty of the Match with France. An exact survey of the
Netherlands. Another of Spain, Italy, France, and of most Countries in Europe,
with their chief Cities and Governments. Of the Hans Towns, and the famous
quarrel twixt Queen Elizabeth and them. Diverse Letters of the extent of
Christianity, and of other Religions upon Earth. Diverse Letters of the
languages up and down the Earth. Accounts of sundry Embassies from England to
other States. Some pieces of Poetry wherewith the Prose goes interlarded. Diverse
new opinions in Philosophy descanted upon. Passages of former Parlements, and
of this present, etc.
Among these Letters there goes along a Legend of the Authors life, and of his
several employments, with an account of his Foreign Travells and Negotiations;
wherein he had occasion to make his address to these Personages, and Persons
underwritten.

Letters to Noblemen.
TO His late Majesty. To the Duke of Buckingham To the Erl of Cumberland To the
Erl of Dorset To the Erl of Rutland To the Erl of Leicester To the Erl of
Sunderland To the Erl of Bristol To the Erl Rivers To the Erl of Strafford To
the Erl of Carberry* To the L. Vicount Conway, Secr. To the L. Vic. Savage To
the L. Herbert of Cherberry To the L. Cottington To the L. Mohun To the L.
Digby. To the Lady Marchioness of Winchester To the La. Scroope To the Countess
of Sunderland To the La. Cornwallis To the La. Digby* To Bishop V sher, Lord
Primat of Ireland To B. Field To B. Duppa To the B. of London To B. Howell.
To Knights, Doctors, Esquires, Gentlemen and Merchants.
TO Sir Robert Mansell To Sir James Crofts To Sir John North To Sir Edward
Spencer To Sir Kenelme Digby So Sir Peter Wichts To Sir Sackvill Trever To Sir
Sackvill Crow To Sir Arthur Ingram To Sir Thomas Lake To Sir Eubule Theloall To
Sir Alex. Ratcliff To Sir Edward Savage To Sir John Smith To Sir Will:
Saint-Geon To Sir Thomas Savage To Sir Fran. Cottington To Sir Robert Napier To
Sir Philip Manwayring To Sir Bevis Theloall. To Doctor Mansell To Dr. Howell To
Dr. Prichard To Dr. Wicham To Dr. I. Day. To Mr. Alderman Clethero To Mr.
Alder. Moulson To the Town of Richmond. To Mr. R. Altham To Mr. D. Calawall To
Cap. Fran. Bacon To Mr. Ben. Johnson To Mr. End. and Cap. Tho. Porter To Mr.
Simon Digby To Mr. Walsingham Gresley To Mr. Thomas Gwyn To Mr. John Wroth To
Mr. William Blois To Mr Robert Baron To Mr. Thomas More To Mr. John Savage To
Mr. Hugh Penry To Mr. Christoph. (...) To Mr. R. Brown. To Mr. William Martin
To Cap. Nicholas Leat To Mr. R. Brownrigg. To Mr. John Batty To Mr. Will.
Saint-Geon To Mr. James Howard To Mr. Ed. Noy To Mr. William Austin To Mr.
Rowland Gwyn To Mr. Will. Vaughan To Mr. Arthur Hop^on To Mr. Thomas Jones To
Mr. I. Price To Captain Ol. Saint-Geon.
With diverse others.

To His Majesty.
SIR,
THese Letters addressed (most of them) to Your best degrees of Subjects, do,
as so many lines drawn from the Circumference to the Center, all meet in Your
Majesty, who, as the Law styles You the Fountain of honor and grace, so You
should be the Center of our happiness. If Your Majesty vouchsafe them a Gracious
Aspect, they may all prove Letters of credit, if not credentiall Letters, which
Soverain Princes use only to Authorize: They venture to go abroad into the vast
Ocean of the World, as Letters of Mart, to try their Fortunes; and Your Majesty
being the greatest Lord of Sea under Heaven, is fittest to protect them, and
then they will not fear any human power. Moreover, as this Royal Protection
secures them from all danger, so it will infinitely conduce to the prosperity
of their voyage, and bring them to safe Port with rich returns.

Nor would these Letters be so familiar, as to presume upon so high a
Patronage, were not many of them Records of Your Own Royal Actions; And it is
well known, that Letters can tresure up, and transmit matters of State to
posterity, with as much Faith, and be as authentic Registers, and safe
repo^itories of Truth, as any Story whatsoever.

This brings them to ly all prostrat at Your Feet, with their Author who is

Sir, Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject and Servant, HOWELL.

To the knowing READER. OF Familiar Letters.
LOve is the life of Friendship, Letters are
The life of Love, the Load-stones that by rare
Attraction make souls meet, and melt, and mix,
As when by fire exalted gold we fix.
They are those winged Pestillions that can fly,
From the Anartic to the Artic sky,
The Heralds and swift Harbengers that move
From East to West on Embassies of Love;
They can the Tropics cut, and cross the Line,
And swim from Ganges to the Rhone or Rhine,
From Thames to Tagus, th^nce to Tyber run,
And terminat their journey with the Sun:
They can the Cabinets of Kings unscrue,
And hardest intri^acies of State unclue;
They can the the Tartar tell, what the Mogor
Or the great Turk does on the Asian shore,
The Knez of them may know, what Prester John
Does with his Camells in the torrid Zone:
Which made the Indian Inca think they were
Spirits who in white sheets the A^r did tear.
The luckie Goose saved Joves beleagred Hill Capitol.

Once by her noise, but oftener by her Quill:
It twice prevented Rome, was not o*re-run
By the tough Vandal, and the rough hewn Hun. Live. Powder Plot.

Letters can Plots though mo^lded under ground
Disclose, and their fell accomplices confound,
Witness that fiery Pile which would have blown
Up to the Clouds, Prince, Peeple, Peers, and Town,
Tribunalls, Church, and Chapel, and had dride
The Thames, though swelling in her highest prid^,
And parboyl'd the poor Fish, which from her Sand^
Had been tossed up to the adjoining Lands.
Lawyers as Vultures had soared up and down,
Prelates like Magpi^s in the Air had flown,
Had not the Eagles Letter brought to light,
That Subterranean horrid Work of night.
Credentiall Letters, States, and Kingdoms tie,
And Monarchs knit in ligues of Amity;
They are those golden Links that do enchai^
Whole Nations, though discinded by the Main;
They are the soul of Trade, they make Commerce,
Expand it self throughout the Univers.
Letters may more than History enclose,
(...) choicest learning, both for Verse and Prose;
^ey knowledge can unto our souls display,
^ amore gentle, and familiar way,
^e highest points of State and Policy,
^e most severe parts of Philosophy
^ay be their subject, and their Themes e^rich
^ well as private businesses, in which
^nds use to correspond, and Kindred greet,
^rchants negotiat, the whole World meet.
^n Seneca's rich Letters is inshrin'd
(...) ere the Ancient Sages left behind:
^y makes his the secret symptoms tell
^ those distempers which proud Rome befell,
(...) in her highest flourish she would make
(...) Tyber from the Ocean homage take.
^at Antonin the Emperor did gain
^re glory by his Letters, than his reign,
(...) Pen out-lasts his Pike, each golden lin^
^is Epistles do his name inshrine,
(...) clius by his Letters did the same,
(...) they in chief immortallize his fame.
^ords vanish soon, and vapor into Air,
^e Letters on Record stand fresh and fair,
(...) tell our Nephews who to us were dear,
(...) our choice friends, who our familiars were.
^he bashful Lover when his flammering lips
^er, and fear some unadvised slips,
(...) boldly court his Mistress with the Quill,
(...) his hot passions to her Breast ^still;
Pen can furrow a fond Femals heart,
pierce it more than Cupide feigned dart:
Letters a kind of Magic virtue have,
And like strong Philtres human souls inslave.
Speech is the Index, Letters Ideas are
Of the informing soul, they can declare,
And show the inward man, as we behold
A face reflecting in a Crystal mould:
They serve the dead and living, they become
Attorneys and Administers: In somm,
Letters as Ligaments the World do tie,
Else all commence and love 'twixt men would die.
J. H.

An Extract of the Heads of the choicest matters that go interwoven amongst
the Letters of the first Volume.
The first Section.
OF Abusers of Familiar Letters. Page. 1 Of Somersets fall, and Buckinghams
rise. 4 ^listris Turner executed in yellow starch at Tyburn, and Sir Gervas
Elwayes on Tower Hill, his memorable caution against swearing, and the Lo. Will.
of Pembr^ks noble act to his Lady and children. 4 Sir Walter Rawleigh's sorry
return from Guiana, Count Gondamars violent prosecution of him, and a facetious
Tale of Alphonso King of Naples, etc. 7 Of the study of our Common Law, and
what Genius is aptest for it. 16 ^he true manner of the surrendry of the
cautionary towns, Flishing and Brill. 18 The force of Letters. 20 A Letter of
love. 26 Some choice Observations of Amsterdam. 9. 13, 14 Of the University of
Leyden, and a clash 'twixt Arminius and Baudius. 14 Of Grave Maurice Prince of
Orange, and of his regul^ course of life. 1^ Of Antwerp, and her Cittadell. 2^
Of France, of Normandy, and the City of Rouen. 2^ Of Paris, and an odd
mischance that befell a Secreta^ of State there. 2^ Of Luines the the Favorite.
2^ An exact Relation from an eye-witnes of the assass^ not committed on the
person of Henry the Great 3^ His rare Perfections, and diverse witty Speeches
(...) his. 3^ An exact Relation of that Monstrous death of the Man quis of
Ancre by an eye-witnes. 3^ Of St. Malos, and the Province of Britany, the
vicini^ of their Language with the Welsh. 3^ Of Rochell and the humors of the
peeple. 3^ The strong operations of love, and a facetious Tale (...) the Duke
of Ossunas. 37 Of the Pyreney Hills. 38 Of the noble City of Valentia, and
various effects (...) the Sun. 4^ Of Alicant and the Grapes thereof. 4^ Of
Carthagena. 4^ Of Scylla and Charybdis, Mount Aetna, and the vulga^ Greek, etc.
4^ Of the admirable City of Venice, her Glass Furnaces, with a speculation
raised thereon, her renowned Arsenall and Tresury, her age and constitution, her
famous Bucentoro, with a Philosophical notion arising thence, etc. from 45 to
6^ Of the virtue of Letters. 52 A Letter of gratitude. 53 Some witty sayings of
Spaniards. 60 Some witty Observations of Rome, the manner of creating
Cardinals. 61 Of foreign Travel. 67 Of the gentle City of Naples. 65 A saying
of King James. 68 A resemblance 'twixt the old Lombards and the Welsh. 68 A
witty saying of Lewis the 11. 70 Of Florence, Genoa, Luca, etc. 70 Of Milan,
and the Duke of Savoy. 73 Of the Italian Tongue. 74 Of the humor of the Italian.
85 Of the hideous mountains the Alps, and of Lion in France. 77 Of Geneva, and
a strange thing that happend at Lion. 79 The six famous Verses made of Venice.
59 A notable magnanimous Speech of a Turk. 56
The second Section.
MY Lord Bacons opinion of Monsieur Cadenet the French Ambassador about little
men. 2 Two Letters of Endearments. 3 A notable saying of the La. Elizabeth. 4
Of Sir Robert Mansels return from Algier. 11 Queen Anns death and the last
Comet. 7 M. of Buckingham made Lord Admiral, etc. 13 The beginning of the
Bohemian Wars. 4 The Palsgraves undertaking that Crown. 4 Prague lost. 5
Spinola's going to the Palatinat, the manner of taking Oppenheim, and the
unworthines of the Marq. of Ansbuck the German General. 9 The strange wonder
in Holland, of a Lady that brought forth as many Children as days in the year,
etc. 14 Of the sailing Wagon. 1^ An elaborat survey of the seventeen
Provinces, the ground of their quarrel with the Spaniard, the difference of
Government, and humors of peeple, from 15 to 26 The difference 'twixt the
Flemin, Walloon, and Hollander. 26 The last French Kings piety to his Mother.
29 Phlebotomy much used in France. 33 A congratulatory Letter for Marriage. 27
A Satirical Play in Antwerp about the Prince Palsgraves proceedings. 28 Wars
'twixt the French King and the Protestants. 31 A famous Speech of St. Lewis. 33
Of the French Favorite Luines, and his two brothers Cadenet and Brand. 47 The
strange story of the Maid of Orleans, and how the English were revenged of her.
36 A facetious passage of the Duke of Espernon. 38 The opinion of a French
Doctor of English Ale. 34 The French Polette. 37
The third Section.
GOndamars first audience about the Spanish Match, and the ill Augury that
befell. 49 Sir Henry Montague made Lord Tresurer; a facetious question asked
him. 41 Cautions for traveling Italy. 43 K. James his sharp answer to the
Parliament from Newmarket about the Spanish Match, etc. His facetious Speech of
my Lady Hatton. 44 Of the Synod of Dort. 54 Archb. Abbots disaster to kill a
Keeper etc. 49 The French Kings proceedings against the Protestants, and the
death of Luines. 56 Of the Infanta of Spain, and her two brothers. 51 The bold
manner of Petitioning the King of Spain. 52 Some comendable qualities of the
Spaniards. 54 Of the old Duke of Larma. 54 Material thinks of the Match. 55
The witty Speech of the Marquis of Montesclares. 57 Of Count Mansfields notable
retreat to Breda, his chiefest exploit. 58 Of our Prince his arrival at the
Court of Spain, his usage there, and some passages of Gondamars. 60 Of his
comportment in courting the Lady Infanta, etc. 64 A witty saying of a Spanish
woman. 63 Of their baiting of Bulls with men. 64 Verses upon the Prince his
wooing. 66 The monstrous manner of Osman the great Turks death, with some
Observations thereon. 70 Of his omino^s dream, and the grand Visiers Prediction
to Sir Tho. Roe. 73 A Discourse 'twixt our Prince and the King of Spain. 74 Of
our Prince his departure thence. 76 How matters stood after his departure. 77
Preparations made for the wedding day. 79 The Earl of Bristolls Audience upon
his receiving a new Commission. 80 Probabilities that the Spaniard intended a
Match with England. 79 My Lo. Pagetts witty Speech in Parliament. 80 Of the
Bishop of Halverstadt. 81 The notable Plot the two Spanish Ambassadors invented
to demolish the Duke of Buck. 82 The high proffers that were made the Earl of
Bristoll, if he would stay in Spain. 97 Of the manner of the proceedings of the
Spanish Match by way of comparison. 83 The breach of the Spanish Match by a
Philosophical comparison. 83 An Abstract of the Spanish Monarchy, of its
growth, of the soil, and the humor of the Inhabitants, from 87 to 93 Of things
happened at the siege of Bergen op Zooma. A pleasant Tale of a lame Captain. 94
Of the virtue of Familiar Letters. 96 Of that stupendous Monument the Escurial.
96 Of the late famous Duke of Ossuna, diverse passages. 98 Of writing by Cipher.
99 A memorable Passage of the Jesuits. 98 A facetious Tale of a Soldier. 100
This third Section contains diverse intrinsecall Passages more, of the Treaties
both of Match and Palatinat.

The fourth Section.
OF the Jewels that were left in the Court of Spain, to be presented at the
Betrothing day. 101 Of the fruitfulnes of friendship. 103 Of Count Mansfelt. 104
An exact Relation of his late Majesty's death by an eyewitnes. 106 Of my Lo:
Verulam after his fall. 108 Cautions for Marriage. 109 The disasterous death of
young Prince Frederic. 110 Of the Treaty of a Match with France, and of
Cardinal Richelieu. 111 How lively Letters represent the inward man. 112 The
Capitulation of the Match with France. 114 Of Monsieurs marriage. 115 The rare
perfections of the late Marchioness of Winchester. 116 Of Grave Maurice's
death, and of the taking of Breda. 117 The sorry success of our Fleet to Cales
under the Lord Wimbledon. 119 Some advertisements to the Duke of Buckingham
before the Parliament. 121 The true nature of love. 12^ Of Count Mansfelt. 124
Cardinal Richelieu's first rise. 111 A facetious saying of the Queen of France
touching Co: Mansfelt. 124 A clashing 'twixt Buckingham and Bristoll. 124 A
Comparison 'twixt the Infanta and the Daughter of France. 126 A facetious
Pasquil in Rome. 125 The speedy conclusion of the French Match, and a facetious
tale of the Pope. 125* Her Majesty's arrival in England. 126 The dissolution
of the Parliament at Oxon, and of the Lord Keeper Williams. 127 Of the Renvoy of
her Majesty's French servants, etc. 130 The reasons alleged for Lone-monies.
131 A memorable example in the person of a Spanish Captain, how strangely a
sudden conceit may work within us. 132
The fifth Section.
A Northern Letter. 135 Our breach with France, and our ill success at the Isle
of Rets. 139 The Lord Denbighs sorry return from before Rochell, 140 Of the
Wars in Italy, about the Duchy of Mantoua. 137 A circumstantiall relation of
the D. of Buck death by an eyewitness. 141 The Lord of Lindseys return from
before Rochel, the taking and dismantling of her by the French King. 143
Colonel Grayes quick device to save his life out of a saltpit. 139 A
methodicall Incitement for an Oxford Student. 144 Of the taking the great
Royal Ship, the Holy Spirit of the French, by Sir Sackvil Trever. 145 A
dehortatory letter from swearing, with examples of all sorts. 147 A Hymn
thereupon. 149 The properties of a Footman. 151 Of Ben Iohnsons Genius. 154 Of
tardy Courtesies. 156 Some amorous Sonnets of black eyes, etc. 158 A check
against habit of drinking. 162 A Poem upon the British language. 164 A witty
reply to Sir Ed: Coke by a Country man. 155 A character of Sir Posthumus Hobby.
156 The first rise of the Lord Strafford. 156 The King of Swedens first rushing
into Germany. 165 The King of Denmarks ill success against Tilly, and the
favorable peace he obtained. 165 Of a ragged illegible hand. 166 The proud
inscription the French King left upon a triumphant Pillar, on one of the Alpian
hills. 167 Of Sir Ken: Digbies Exploits against the Venetian Galleasses, etc.
168 A geere put upon Sir Tho. Edmonds being Ambassador in France. 169 Another
geere of the French Ambassador. 169 Of Sir Tho. Wentworth's violent rising up.
170 Of the King of Swedens monstrous Progres, his clashing with the English and
French Ambassadors. 173 A Letter of thanks. 172 A description of an
Ollapodrida. 174 Of the Spanish Inquisition. 178 The death of the Queen Dowager
of Denmark, His Majesty's Grandmother, the richest Princess of Christendom,
etc. 175
The sixth Section.
AN exact relation of the Erl of Leicesters Embassy to the King of Denmark and
other Princes. 188 Some remarkable passages in the Danish Court. 183 Of Hamburgh
and the Hans Towns, their beginning, and the famous quarrel they had with
Queen Eliza. 184 The marvelous resemblance of Holsteyn men with the English,
etc. 187 The King of Swedens related by an eye-witnes, his aversion to the
English, etc. 193 The Palsgraves death. 193 The late Pope's compliance with
him. 191 A strange apparition happened in the West, about a dying Gentleman.
194 Of Noy the Attorney, and of ship money. 196 Of the Lord Westons Embassy to
Italy, and a clashing 'twixt my Lord of Holland and him. 196 The Queen Mothers,
and Monsieurs retirement to Flanders. 195 A Christmas Hymn. 197 Of the
condition of the Jews squanderd up and down the World, how they came to be so
cunning and hateful, from whence they expect their Messiah, etc. 202 (...) The
sudden comfort of Letters. 203 Of a strange Pattent given a Scotchman. 203 Of
Attorney Noy's death, and the od will he made, etc. 204 The arrival of the
Prince Elector, and of Prince Rupert to England, their designs. 205 Monsieur
steals from Brussells. 206 A Herald of Arms sent from France to denounce War
against Spain. 206 Of Mountmorencys death. 206 A memorable example of the
force of affection in the person of a French Lady. 207 Of Peter van Heyns
mighty Pla^e prize, etc. 210 Of judgments fallen upon disobedient children.
211 The Earl of Arondels return from the German Diet. 212 Lorain taken by the
French. 212 Of Translations. 213 The young Prince Electors ill success in
Germany, and Prince Rupert taken Prisoner, etc. 215 The most tragical death of
the Erl of Warfuzee at Liege. 216 Upon Ben Iohnsons death. 217 A method in
devotion. 217 Razevil com from Poland Ambassador. 210 The Scots Comanders
returning from Germany, flant at the English Court. 210 Of the Sovereign of the
Sea, her dimensions, and charge. 222 Of King Edgar his mighty Navall power, and
lofty title, etc. 222 Of the heat and medicinal virtu of the Bath. 225 The
splendour of the Irish Court. 226 Of a memorable passage in Suidas touching our
Savior. 227 Of Edinburgh. 228 A dispute 'twixt a Vintner and a Shoemaker about
Bishops. 229 Of that furious Navall fight 'twixt Oquendo and the Hollanders in
the Downs. 231 Of Chimistry. 232 The revolt of Catalonia, and the utter
defection of Portugal from the Spaniard. 233 The doleful casting away of
Captain Limmery's ship valued at 400000* pounds. 234 Of a hideous Serpent found
in a young Gentleman's heart in Holborn, and other ill-favored auguries. 235 Of
monstrous profane Epithets given the French Cardinal. 236 Some facetious
passages of the old Duke of Espernon. 238 Of comfort in captivity. 240 Of a
miraculous accident happened in Hamelen in Germany. 240 Of the calamities of
the times, 241 Of self examination. 243 Of Merchant Adventurers. 245 Of the
late Popes death, and the election of this by the Spanish faction, his
propensity to Peace, and the impossibility of it. 246 Marquis Pawlet his
ingenious Motto. 248 Of the Ape of Paris applied to these times. Of affliction.
249 Of a true friend. 250 Of a strange peeple lately discovered in Spain. 251 Of
Moderation and Equanimity* 253 Of the fruits of affliction. 253 Of Wiving. 254
Epistolae Ho-Elianae.
Familiar LETTERS:
I. To Sir J. S. at LEEDS Castle.
SIR,
IT was a quaint difference the Ancients did put twixt a Letter, and an
Oration, that the one should be attird like a Woman, the other like a Man: The
latter of the two is allowd large side robes, as long periods, parenthesis,
similes, examples, and other parts of Rhetorical flourishes: But a ^etter or
Epistle, should be shortcoated, and closely couchd; a Hungerlin becomes a
Letter more hansomly then a gown* Indeed we should write as we speak; and
that is a true familiar Letter which expresses ones mind, as if he were
discoursing with the party to whom he writes in succinct and short terms. The
Tongue and the P^n are both of them Interproters of the mind; but I hold the Pen
to be the more faithful of the two: The Tongue in udo posita, being seated in a
moist slippery place may fail and falter in her sudden extemporal expressions;
but the Pen having a greater advantage of premeditation, is not so subject to
error, and leaves things behind it upon firm and authentic record. Now,
Letters, though they be capable of any subject, yet commonly they are either
Narratory, Objurgatory, Consolatory, Monitory, o^ Cougratulatory. The first
consists of relations, The second of reprehensions, The third of comfort, The
last two of counsel and joy: There are some who in lieu of Letters write
Homilies, they Preach when they should Epistolize; There are others that turn
them to tedious tractats; this is to make Letters degenerat from their true
nature. Some modern Authors there are, who have exposed their Letters to the
world, but most of them, I mean among your Latin Epistolizers, go fraighted
with mere Bartholomew ware, with trite and trivial phrases only, listed with
pedandic shreds of Shool-boy verses. Others there are among our next transmarin
neighbors Eastward, (...), write in their own language, but their style is so
soft and (...) that their Letters may be said to be like bodies of lo^se slesh
without sinews, they have neither joyn^ of art, nor (...) in them: They have a
kind of simpering and ^ank hectic expressions made up of a bombast of words and
finical affected complement* only: ^ cannot well away with such sleazy stuff,
with such cobweb-compositions, where there is no strength of matter, nothing
for the Reader to carry away with him, that may enlarge the notions of his
soul: One shall hardly find an apothe^m, example, simile, or any thing of
Philosophy, History, or solid knowledge, or as much as one new created phrase,
in a hundred of them; and to d^aw any observations out of them, were as if one
went about to dis^il cream out of froth; Insomuch that it may be said of them,
what was said of the Echo, That she is a mere sound, and nothing else.

I return you your Balza^ by thi^ bearer, and when I found those Letters,
wherein he is so familiar with his King, so flat, and those to Richelieu, so
puffed with profane hyperboles, and larded up and down with such gross
flatteries, with others besides which he sends as Urinals up and down the world
to look into his water, for discovery of the c^azie condition of his body, I
fo^bore him further: so I am

Your most affectionate servitor, J. H.
H'^stminster, 25. Julii., 1625.
II. To my Father, upon my first going beyond Sea*
SIR,
I Should be much wanting to my self, and to tha^ obligation of Duty, the Law
of God, and his Handmaid Nature has imposed upon me, if I should not acquaint
you with the course and quality of my affairs and fortunes, specially at this
time, that I am upon point of erossing the Seas to eat my bread abroad. Nor is
it the common relation of a Son that only induced me hereunto, but that most
indulgent and costly Care you have been pleased (in so extraordinary a manner)
to have had of my breeding (though but one child of fifteen) by placing me in a
choice methodicall School (so far distant from your dwelling) under a lear^ed
(though lashing) Master; and by transplanting me thence ^o Oxford, to be
graduated; and so holding me still up by the ^hin, until I could swim without
Bladders. This Patrimony ^f liberal Education you have been Pleased to endow
me withal, ^ now carry along with me abroad, as a sure inseparable Tre^ure; nor
do I feel it any burden or encumbrance unto me at all: And what danger soever
my person, or other things I have about ^e, do incur, yet I do not fear the
losing of this, either by Ship^rack or Pirates at Sea, nor by Robbers, or Fire,
or any other Casualty ashore: And at my return to England, I hope, at leastw^ ^
shall do my endeavor, that you may find this Patrimony im^roved somewhat to
your comfort.

The main of my employment, is from that gallant Knight Sir Robert Mansell,
who, with my Lord of Pembrook, and diverse ^ther of the prime Lords of the
Court, have got the sole Patent ^f making all sorts of Glass with Pit-cole,
only to save those ^uge proportions of Wood which were consumed formerly in
the Glass Furnaces: And this Business being of that nature, that ^e Workmen
are to be had from Italy, and the chief Materials from Spain, France, and other
Foreign Countries, there is need ^f an Agent abroad for this use; (and better
then I have offered their service in this kind) so that I believe I shall have
Employment in all these Countries, before I return.

Had I continued still Steward of the Glasse-house in Broadstreet, where
Captain Francis Bacon has succeeded me, I should in a short time have melted
away to nothing, amongst those hot Venetians, finding my self too green for
such a Charge; therefore it has pleased God to dispose of me now to a
Condition more suitable to my years, and that will, I hope, prove more
advantageous to my future Fortunes.

In this my Peregrination, if I happen, by some accident, to be disappointed of
that allowance I am to subsist by, I must make my address to you, for I have
no other Rendevous to flee unto; but it shall not be, unless in case of great
indigence.

Touching the News of the Time: Sir George Villiers, the new Favorit, tapers up
apace, and grows strong at Court: His Predecessor the Earl of Somerset has got
a Lease of ninety years for his life, and so has his articulate Lady, called
so, for articling against the frigidity and impotence of her former Lord. She
was afraid that Coke the Lord chief Justice (who had used extraordinary an and
industry in discovering all the circumstances of the poisoning of Overbury)
would have made white Broth of them, but that the Prerogative kept them from
the Pot: Yet the subservient instruments, the lesser flies, could not break
through, but lay entangled in the Cobweb; amongst others, Mistress Turner, the
first Inventress of yellow-Starch, was executed in a Cobweb Lawn Ruff of that
color at Tyburn, and with her I believe that yellow-Starch, which so much
disfigured our-Nation, and rendered them so ridiculous an^ fantastic, will
receive its Funeral. Sir Gervas Elwayes, Lieutenan^ of the Tower, was made a
notable Example of Justice and Terr^ to all Officers of Trust; for being
accessory, and that in a passi^ way only to the murder, yet he was hanged on
Tower Hill: an^ the Caveat is very remarkable which he gave upon the Gallow^
That people should be very cautious how they make Vows (...) heaven, for the
breach of them seldom pass without a Judgment, whereof he was a most
ruthful Example; for being in the Low Countries, and much given to Gaming, he
once made a solemn Vow, (which he brake afterward) that if he played abov^
such a sum, he might be hanged. My Lord ( William) of Pembrook di^ a most noble
Act like himself; for the King having given hi^ all Sir Gervas Elway's estate,
which came to above 1000 pound (...). he freely bestowed it on the widow and
her children.

The later end of this week, I am to go a Shipboard, and first (...) the
Low Countries. I humbly pray your Blessing may accompany me in these my Travels
by Land and Sea, with a con^uance of your prayers, which will be as so many
good Gales to ^ow me to safe Port: for I have been taught, That the Parents
Be^udictions contribute very much, and have a kind of prophetic virtue ^o make
the child prosperous. In this opinion I shall ever rest,

Broad-street in London, this 1. of March, 1618. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

III. To Dr. Francis Mansell, since Principal of Jesus* College in Oxford.
SIR,
BEing to take leave of England, and to lanch out into the world abroad, to
Breath foreign air a while, I thought it very ^andsom, and an act well becoming
me, to take my leave also of ^ou, and of my dearly honored Mother Oxford:
Otherwise both ^f you might have just grounds to exhibit a Bill of Complaint,
or rather, a Protest, against me, and cry me up, you for a forgetful friend;
she, for an ungrateful Son, if not some spurious Issue. To ^revent this, I
salute you both together: you, with the best of my ^ost candid affections; her,
with my most dutiful observance, and thankfulness for the milk she pleased to
give me in that Exuberance, had I taken it in that measure she offered it me
while ^ slept in her lap: yet that little I have sucked, I carry with me ^ow
abroad, and hope that this course of life will help to concoct (...) to a
greater advantage, having opportunity, by the nature of ^y employment, to study
men as well as Books. The small time I ^upervis'd the Glasse-house, I got
amongst those Venetians some ^atterings of the Italian Tongue, which, besides
the little I have, ^ou know, of School-languages, is all the Preparatives I
have made ^or travel. I am to go this week down to Gravesend, and so ^mbarque
for Holland: I have got a Warrant from the Lords of ^he Council to travel for
three years any where, Rome and S. Omer excepted. I pray let me retain some
room, though never so little, in your thoughts, during the time of this our
separation, and let our souls meet sometimes by intercours of letters; I
promise you that yours shall receive the best entertainment I can make them,
for I love you dearly dearly well, and value your friendship at a very high
ra^e: So with apprecation of as much happiness to you at home, as I shall
desire to accompany me abroad, I rest ever,

Your friend to serve you, J. H.
London this (...) of March, 1618.
IV. To Sir James Crofts, Knight, at S. Osith.
SIR,
I Could not shake hands with England, without kissing your hands also: and
because, in regard of your distance now from London, I cannot do it in person,
I send this paper for my deputy.

The News that keeps greatest noise here now, is the return of Sir Walter
Raleigh from his mine of Gold in Guiana the South parts of America, which at
first was like to be such a hopeful boon Voyage, but it seems that that golden
mine is proved a mere Chymer^ an imaginary ai^y mine; and indeed, his Majesty
had never any other conceit of it: But what will not one in Captivity (as Sir
Walter was) promise, to regain his Freedom? who would not promise not only
mines, but mountains of Gold, for Liberty? and it is pity such a knowing
well-weigh'd Knight had not had a better Fortune; for the Destiny (I mean that
brave Ship which he built himself of that name, that carried him thither) is
like to prove a fatal Destiny to him, and to some of the rest of those gallant
Adventurers which contributed for the setting forth of thirteen Ships more, who
were most of them his kinsmen and younger brothers, being led into the said
Expedition by a general conceit the world had of the wisdom of Sir Walter
Raleigh; and many of these are like to make Shipwreck of their estates by this
Voyage. Sir Walter landed at Plymouth, whence he thought to make an escape; and
some say he has tampered with his body by Physic, to make him look sickly,
that he may be the more pitied, and permitted to lie in his own house. Count
Gondamar the Spanish Ambassador speaks high language, and sending lately to
desire Audience of his Majesty, he said he had but one word to tell him, his
Majesty wondering what might be delivered in one word; when he came before him,
he said only, Pirates, Pirates, Pirates, and so departed.

It Is true that he protested against this Voyage before, and that it could not
be but for some praedatory design: And that if it be as I hear, I fear it will
go very ill with Sir Walter, and that Gondamar will never give him over, till
he has his head off his shoulders; which may quickly be done, without any new
Arraignment, by virtue of the old Sentence that lies still dormant against him,
which he could never get off by Pardon, notwithstanding that he mainly labored
in it before he went; but his Majesty could never be brought to it, for he
said he would keep this as a Curb to hold him within the bounds of his
Commission, and the good behavior.

Gondamar cries out, that he has broke the sacred Peace twixt the two
Kingdoms, That he has fired and plundered santo Thoma a Colony the Spaniards
had planted with so much blood, near under the Line, which made it prove such a
hot service unto him, and where, besides others, he lost his eldest son in the
Action; and could they have preserved the Magazin of Tobacco only, besides
other things in that Town, something might have bin had to countervail the
charge of the Voyage. Gondamar alleges further, that the enterprise of the
mine failing, he propounded to the rest of his Fleet to go and intercept some
of the Plate-Galeons, with other Designs which would have drawn after them
apparent acts of Hostility, and so demands Justice: besides other disasters
which fell out upon the dashing of the first design, Captain Remish, who was
the main Instrument for discovery of the mine, pistol'd himself in a desperate
mood of discontent in his Cabin, in the Convertine.

This return of Sir Walter Raleigh from Guiana, puts me in mind of a facetious
tale I read lately in Italian (for I have a little of that Language already)
how Alphonso King of Naples sent a Moor who had been his Captive a long time,
to Barbary, with a considerable sum of money to buy horses, and to return by
such a time. Now there was about the King a kind of Buff^n or Jester who had a
Table Book, or Journall, wherein he was used to register any absurdity, or
impertinence, or merry passage that happened about the Court. That day the Moor
was dispatched for Barbary, the said Jester waiting upon the King at supper,
the King called for his Journall, and asked what he had observed that day:
thereupon he produced his Table Book, and amongst other things, he read how
Alphons^ King of Naples had sent Beltran the Moor, who had been a long time his
Prisoner, to Morocco (his own Country) with so many thousand Crowns, to buy
horses. The King asked him why he inserted that: Because, said he, I think he
will never come back to be a Prisoner again, and so you have lost both man and
money. But if he do come, then your Jest is marred, quoth the King: No Sir; for
if he return I will blot out your name, and put him in for a Fool.

The Application is easy and obvious: But the world wonders extremely, that so
great a wise man as Sir Walter Raleigh would return to cast himself upon so
inevitable a Rock, as I fear he will; and much more, that such choice men, and
so great a Power of Ships, should all come home, and do nothing.

The Letter you sent to my Father, I conveyed safely the last week to Wales. I
am this week, by Gods help, for the Netherlands, and then I think for France.
If in this my foreign employment I may be any way serviceable unto you, you know
what power you have to dispose of me; for I honor you in a very high degree,
and will live and die,

London, 28. of March, 1618. Your humble and ready Servant, J. H.

V. To my Brother, after Dr. Howell, and now Bp. of Bristol, from Amsterdam.
BROTHER,
I Am newly landed at Amsterdam, and it is the first foreign earth I ever set
foot upon. I was pitifully sick all the Voyage, for the Weather was rough, and
the wind untoward; and at the mouth of the Texell we were surprised by a
furious Tempest, so that the Ship was like to split upon some of those old
stumps of trees wherewith that River is full; for in Ages passed, as the
Skipper told me, there grew a fair Forest in that Channel where the Texell
makes now her bed. Having bin so rocked and shaken at Sea; when I came ashore I
began to incline to Copernicus his opinion, which has got such a sway lately
in the World, viz. That the Earth as well as the rest of her fellow Elements,
is in perpetual motion, for she seemed so to me a good while after I had landed
He that observes the site and position of this Country, will never hereafter
doubt the truth of that Philosophical Problem which keeps so great a noise in
the Schools, viz. That the Sea is higher then the Earth, because as I sailed
along these Coasts, I visibly found it true; for the Ground here which is all
twixt Marsh and Moorish, lies not only level, but to the apparent sight of the
ey far lower then the Sea, which made the Duke of Alva say, That the
Inhabitants of this Country were the nearest Neighbors to Hell (the great
Abyss) of any people upon Earth, because they dwell lowest: Most of that
Ground they tread, is plucked as it were out of the very Jaws of Neptun, who is
afterward pennt out by high Dikes, which are preserved with incredible charge,
insomuch, That the chief Dike-grave here, is one of the greatest Officers of
trust in all the Province, it being in his power, to turn the whole Country
into a Salt lough when he list, and so to put Hans to swim for his life, which
makes it to be one of the chiefest part of his Letany, From the Sea, the
Spaniard, and the Devil, the Lord deliver me. I need not tell you who preserves
him from the last, but from the Spaniard, his best friend is the Sea it self,
notwithstanding that he fears him as an Enemy another way; for the Sea
stretching himself here into diverse Arms, and meeting with some of those fresh
Rivers that descend from Germany to disgorge themselves into him through these
Provinces, most of their towns are thereby encompassed with Water, which by
Sluices they can contract or dilate as they list: This makes their Towns
inaccessible, and out of the reach of Cannon; so that Water may be said to be
one of their best Fences, otherwise I believe they had not been able to have
born up so long against the Gigantic power of Spain.

This City of Amsterdam, though she be a great Staple of News, yet I can impart
none unto you at this time, I will defer that till I come to the Hague.

I am lodged here at one Mounsieur De la Cluze, not far from the Exchange, to
make an Introduction into the French, because I believe I shall steer my course
hence next to the Country where that Language is spoken; but I think I shall
sojourn here about two months longer, therefore I pray direct your Letter^
accordingly, or any other you have for me: One of the prime comforts of a
Traveller is to receive Letters from his friends, they beget new spirits in
him, and present joyful objects to his fancy, when his mind is clouded
sometimes with Fogs of melancholy; therefore I pray make me happy as often as
your convenience will serve with yours: You may send or deliver them to Captain
Bacon at the Glass house, who will see them safely sent.

So my dear brother, I pray God bless us both, and send us after this large
distance a joyful meeting.

Your loving brother, J. H.
Amsterdam, April 1. 1617.
VI. To Dan. Caldwall Esquire. from Amsterdam.
My dear Dan.
I Have made your friendship so necessary unto me, for the contentment of my
life, that happiness it self would be but a kind of infelicity without it: It
is as needful to me, as Fire and Water, as the very Air I take in, and breath
out; it is to me not only neoessitudo, but necessitas: Therefore I pray let me
enjoy it in that fair proportion, that I desire to return unto you, by way of
correspondencee and retaliation- Our first ligue of love, you know, was
contracted among the Muses in Oxford; for no sooner was I matriculated to her,
but I was adopted to you; I became her son, and your friend, at one time: You
know I followed you then to London, where our love received confirmation in the
Temple, and elsewhere. We are now far asunder, for no less then a Sea severs
us, and that no narrow one, but the German Ocean: Distance sometimes endear's
friendship, and absence sweetneth it, it much (...) the value of it, and makes
it more precious: Let this be verified in us, Let that love which formerly used
to be nourished by personal communication, and the Lips, be now fed by
Letters; let the Pen supply the Office of the Tongue: Letters have a strong
operation, they have a kind of art like embraces to mingle souls, and make them
meet though millions of paces asunder; by them we may converse and know how it
fares with each other, as it were by entercours of spirits. Therefore amongst
your civil speculations, I pray let your thoughts sometimes reflect off me
(your absent self) and wrap those thoughts in Paper, and so send them me over:
I promise you they shall be very welcome, I shall embrace and hug them with my
best affections.

Commend me to Tom Bowyer, and enjoin him the like: I pray be no niggard in
distributing my love plentifully amongst our friends at the Innes of Court; Let
Jack Toldervy have my kind commends with this caveat, That the Pot which goes
often to the water, comes home cracked at last; therefore I hope he will be
careful how he makes the Fleece in Cornhill his thorowfare too often. So may
my dear Daniel live happy, and love his

J. H.
From Amsterdam, April the 10. 1619.
VII. To my Father, from Amsterdam.
SIR,
I Am lately arrived in Holland in a good plight of health, and continue yet in
this Town of Amsterdam, a Town I believe, that there are few her fellows, being
from a mean Fishing Dorp, come in a short revolution of time, by a monstrous
increase of Comerce and Navigation, to be one of the greatest Marts of Europ:
It Is admirable to see what various sorts of Buildings, and new Fabrics, are now
here erecting every where; not in houses only, but in whole Streets and
Suburbs; so that it is thought she will in a short time double her proportion in
bigness.

I am lodged in a French-mans house, who is one of the Deacons of our English
Brownists Church here; it is not far from the Synagog of Jews, who have free and
open exercise of their Religion here: I believe in this Street where I lodge,
there be well near as many Religions as there be houses; for one Neighbor knows
not, nor cares not much, what Religion the other is of, so that the number of
Conventicles exceeds the number of Churches here. And let this Country call it
self as long as it will, the united Provinces one way, I am persuaded in this
point, there is no place so Disunited.

The Dog and Rag Market is hard by, where every Sunday morning there is a kind
of public Mart for those commodities, notwithstanding their precise observance
of the Sabbath.

Upon Saturday last I happened to be in a Gentleman's company, who showed me as I
walked along in the Streets, along Bearded old Jew of the Tribe of Aaron; when
the other Jews met him, they fell down and kissed his Foot: This was that
Rabbi, with whom our Countryman Broughton had such a dispute.

This City, notwithstanding her huge Trade, is far inferior to London for
populousnes; and this I infer out of their weekly Bills of Mortality, which
come not at most but to fifty or thereabout; whereas in London, the ordinary
number is twixt two and three hundred, one week with another: Nor are there
such Wealthymen in this Town as in London; for by reason of the generality of
Commerce, the Banks, Adventures, the Common shares and stocks which most have
in the Indian and other Companies, the Wealth doth'diffuse it self here in a
strange kind of equality, not one of the Bourgers being exceeding rich or
exceeding poor; Insomuch, that I believe our four and twenty Aldermen, may buy
a hundred of the richest men in Amsterdam. It is a rare thing to meet with a
Beggar here, as rare, as to see a Horse, they say, upon the Streets of Venice,
and this is held to be one of their best pieces of Government; for besides the
strictnes of their Laws against Mendicants, they have Hospitals of all sorts
for young and'old, both for the relief of the one and the employment of the
other; so that there is no object here to exercise any act of charity upon.
They are here very neat, though not so magnificent in their Buildings,
specially in their Frontispices, and first Rooms; and for cleanlines, they may
serve for a pattern to all People. They will presently dress half a dozen
Dishes of Meat, without any noise or show at all; for if one goes to the
Kitchen, there will he scarce appearance of any thing, but a few covered Pots
upon a Turf-fire, which is their prime fuel; after dinner they fall a scowring
of those Pots* so that the outside will be as bright (...) the inside, and the
Kitchen suddenly so clean, as if no meat had bin dressed there a month before:
They have neither Well or Fountain, or any Spring of Fresh Water, in, or about
all this City, but their Fresh Water is brought unto them by Boats; besides
they have Cesterns to receive the Rainwater, which they much use: So that my
Laundresse bringing my Linen to me one day, and I commending the Whiteness of
them, she answered, That they must needs be White and Fair, for they were
washed in Aqua Coelestis, meaning Skie-water.

Twere cheap living here, were it not for the monstrous Accises which are
imposed upon all sorts of Commodities, both for Belly and Back; for the
Retailer pays the States almost the one Moity as much as he paid for the
Commodity at first, nor does any murmur at it, because it goes not to any
Favourit, or private Purse, but to preserve them from the Spaniard, their
common Enemy as they term him; so that the saying is truly verified here,
Desend me, and spend me: With this Accise principally, they maintain all their
Armies by Sea and Land, with their Garrisons at home and abroad, both here, and
in the Indies, and defray all other public charges besides.

I shall hence shortly for France, and in my way take most of the prime Towns
of Holland and Zealand, specially Leyden (the University) where I shall sojourn
some days. So humbly craving a continuance of your Blessing and Prayers, I rest

May the 1. 1619. Your dutiful S^, J. H.

VIII. To Dr. Tho. Prichard, at Jesus College in Oxford, from Leyden.
SIR,
IT is the Royal Prerogative of Love, not to be confined to that small Local
compass which circumscribes the Body, but to make his Sallies, and Progresses
abroad, to find out, and enjoy his desired object, under what Region soever:
Nor is it the vast Gulf of Neptun, or any distance of place, or difference of
Clime, can bar him of this privilege* I never found the experiment hereof, so
sensibly, nor felt the comfort of it so much, as since I shook hands with
England: For though you be in Oxford, and I at Leyden, albeit you be upon an
Island, and I now upon the Continent, (though the lowest part of Europ) yet
those swift Postillions my thoughts find you out daily, and bring you unto me:
I behold you often in my Chamber, and in my Bed; you eat, you drink, you sit
down, and walk with me* and my fantasy enjoyes you often in my sleep, when all
my senses are locked up, and my soul wanders up and down the World, sometimes
through pleasant Fields and Gardens, sometimes through odd uncouth places, over
Mountains and broken confused Buildings. As my love to you does thus exercise
his power, so I desire yours to me may not be idle, but roused up sometimes to
find me out, and summon me to attend you in Jesus College.

I am now here in Leyden, the only Academy besides Franiker of all the United
Provinces: Here are Nations of all sorts, but the Germans swarr^ more then any:
To compare their University to yours, were to cast New-Inne in counterscale
with Christ-Church College, or the Alms Houses on Tower Hill to Suttons
Hospital. Here are no Colleges at all, God-wot (but one for the Dutch) nor
scarce the face of an University, only there are general Schools where the
Sciences are read by several Professors, but all the Students are Oppidanes: A
small time and less learning, will suffice to make one a Graduate; nor are
those Formalities of Habits, and other Decencies here, as with you, much less
those Exhibitions and Support for Scholars, with other encouragements; in so
much, that the Oxonians and Cantabrigians -- Bona si suae norint, were they
sensible of their own felicity, are the happiest Academians on Earth: yet
Apollo has a strong influence here; and as Cicero said of them of Athens,
Athenis pingue coelum, tenu^ i^genia, The Athenians had a thick Air, and thin
Wits; so I may say of these Lugdunensian^, They have a gross Air, but thin
subtle Wits, (some of them) Witness else Hernsius, Grotins, Arminius, and
Bandius; of the two last I was told a Tale, that Arminius meeting Baudius one
day disguised with Drink (wherewith he would be often) he told him, Tu Baudi
dedecoras nostram Academiam, and tu Armini nostram Religionem. Thou Baudius
disgracest our University; and thou Arminius our Religion. The Heaven here has
always some Clowd in his countenance; and from this grossness and spissitude
of Air proceeds the slow Nature of the Inhabitants, yet this slownesse is
recompensed with another benefit; it makes them patient and constant, as in all
other actions, so in their Studies and Speculations, though they use

-- Crassos transire Dies, lucemque palustrem. I pray impart my Love liberally
amongst my Friends in Oxford; and when you can make truce with your more
serious Meditations, bestow a thought, drawn into a few Lines, upon

Leyden, May the 30. 1619. Your J. H.

IX. To Mr. Richard Altham, at his Chamber in Grayes-Inne.
Dear Sir,
THough you be now a good way out of my reach, yet you are not out of my
remembrance; you are still within the Horizon of my Love: Now the Horizon of
Love is large and spacious, it is as boundless, as that of the imagination;
and where the imagination rangeth, the memory is still busy to usher in, and
present the desired object it fixes upon: it is love that sets them both on
work, and may be said to be the highest sphere whence they receive their
motion. Thus you appear unto me often in these Foreign Travels, and that you may
believe me the better, I send you these Lines as my Ambassadors (and
Ambassadors must not lie) to inform you accordingly, and to salute you.

I desire to know how you like Ployden; I heard it often said, That there is no
study requires patience and constancy more then the Common Law, for it is a
good while before one comes to any known perfection in it, and consequently to
any gainful practice. This (I think) made Jack Chaundle^ throw away his
Littleton, like him that when he could not catch the Hare, said, A pox upon her
she is but dry tough meat, let her go: It is not so with you; for I know you
are of that disposition, that when you mind a thing, nothing can frighten you
in making constant pursuit after it, till you have obtained it: For if the
Mathematics with their Crabbednesse, and intricacy, could not deter you, but
that you waded through the very midst of them, and arrived to so excellent a
perfection; I believe it is not in the power of Ployden, to Dastardize or Cow
your Spirits, until you have overcom him, at least wise have so much of him as
will serve your turn. I know you were always a quick and pressing Disputant in
Logic and Philosophy, which makes me think your Genius is fit for Law, (as the
Baron your excellent Father was) for a good Logitian makes always a good
Lawyer: and hereby one may give a strong conjecture of the aptness or
ineptitude of ones capacity to that study and profession; and you know as well
as I, that Logitians who went under the name of Sophisters, were the first
Lawyers that ever were.

I shall be upon uncertain removes hence, until I come to Roue^ in France, and
there I mean to cast Anchor a good while; I shall expect your Letters there
with impatience. I pray present my Service to Sir James Altham, and to my good
Lady, your Mother, with the rest to whom it is due in Bishopsgate Street, and
elsewhere: So I am

Yours in the best degree of Friendship, J. H.
Hague 30. of May, 1619.
X. To Sir James Crofts: from the Hague.
SIR,
THe same observance that a Father may challenge of his child, the like you may
claim of me, in regard of the extraordinary care you have bin pleased to have
always, since I had the happiness to know you, of the course of my Fortunes.

I am now newly come to the Hague, the Court of the six (and almost seven)
confederated Provinces; the Counsel of State with the Prince of Orange, makes
his firm Residence here, unless he be upon a march, and in motion for some
design abroad. This Prince ( Maurice) was cast in a mould* suitable to the
temper of this people: he is slow and full of warines, and not without a
mixture of fear, I do not mean a pusillanimous, but politic fear: he is the
most constant in the quotidian course and carriage of his life, of any that J
have ever heard or read of; for whosoever knows the customs of the Prince of
Orange, may tell what he is a doing here evry hour of the day, though he be in
Constantinople. In the morning he awaketh about six in Summer, and seven in
Winter; the first thing he does, he sends one of his Grooms or Pages, to see
how the wind sits, and he wears or leaves off his Wascot accordingly, then he
is about an hour dressing himself, and about a quarter of an hour in his
Closet, then comes in the Secretary, and if he has any private or public
Letters to write, or any other dispatches to make, he does it before he stirs
from his Chamber; then comes he abroad, and goes to his Stables if it be no
Sermon day, to see some of his Gentlemen or Pages (of whose breeding he is very
careful) ride the great Horse: He is very accessible to any that has business
with him, and shows a winning kind of familiarity, for he will shake hands
with the meanest Boor of the Country, and he seldom hears any Commander or
Gentleman with his Hat on: He dines punctually about twelve, and his Table is
free for all comers, but none under the degree of a Captain uses to sit down
at it; after dinner he stays in the Room a good while, and then any one may
accost him, and tell his tale; then he re^res to his Chamber, where he answers
all Petitions that were delivered him in the Morning, and toward the Evening,
if he goes not to Counsel, which is seldom; he goes either to make some
visits, or to take the Air abroad, and according to this constant method he
passes his life.

There are great stirs like to arise twixt the Bohemians, and their elected King
the Emperor, and they are com already to that height, that they consult of
deposing him, and to choose some Protestant Prince to be their King, some talk of
the Duke of Saxony, others of the Palsgrave: J believe the States here, would
rather be for the latter, in regard of conformity of Religion, the other being
a Lutheran.

I could not find in Amsterdum a large Ortelius in French, to send you, but
from (...) I will not fail to serve you.

So wishing you all happiness and health, and that the Sun may make many
progresses more through the Zodiac, before those comely Gray hairs of yours go
to the Grave, I rest

June the 3. 1619. Your very humble Servant, J. H.

XI. To Captain Francis Bacon, at the Glassehouse in Broad-street.
SIR,
MY last to you, was from Amsterdam, since which time I have traversed the
prime parts of the united Provinces, and ^ am now in Zealand, being newly come
to this Town of Middl^ borough, which is much crest-faln since the Staple of
English Clo^ was removed hence, a^ is Flishing also her next Neighbor, since
the departure of the English Garrison: A good intelligent Gentleman told me the
manner how Flishing and the B^ill, our two Cautionary Towns here were redeemed,
which was thus: The nin^ hundred and odd Soldiers at Flishing, and the
Rammakins ha^ by, being many weeks without their pay, they borrowed diver^ sums
of Money of the States of this Town, who finding no hope^ of supply from
England, advice was sent to the States-Generall (...) the Hague, they
consulting with Sir Ralph Winwood our Ambassador (who was a favorable
Instrument unto them in this business, as also in the match with the Palsgrave)
sent Instructions to the Lord Caroon, to acquaint the Earl of Suffolk (then
Lord Treasurer) herewith; and in case they could find no satisfaction there, to
make his address to the King himself, which Caroon did, His Majesty being
much incensed, that his Subjects and Soldiers should starve for want of their
pay in a Foreign Country, sent for the Lord Treasurer, who drawing his Majesty
aside, and telling how empty his Exchequer was, His Majesty told the
Ambassador, that if his Masters, the States, would pay the money they owed him
upon those Towns, he would deliver them up; The Ambassador returning the next
day, to know whether his Majesty persisted in the same Resolution, in regard
that at his former audience, he perceived him to be a little transported, His
Majesty answered, That he knew the States of Holland to be his good friends and
confederats, both in point of Religion and Policy; therefore he apprehended not
the least fear of any difference, that should fall out between them, in
contemplation whereof, if they desired to have their Towns again, he would
willingly surrender them: Hereupon the States made up the sum presently, which
came in convenient time, for it served to defray the expencefull progress he
made to Scotland, the Summer following. When that Money was lent by Queen
Elizabeth, it was Articled, that Interest should be paid upon Interest; and
besides, that for evry Gentleman who should lose his life in the States
Service, they should make good five pounds to the Crown of England: All this
His Majesty remitted, and only took the principal; and this was done in
requital of that Princely Entertainment, and great Presents, which my Lady
Elizabeth had received in diverse of their Towns, as she passed to Heydelberg.

The Bearer hereof, is Sigr. Antoni^ Miotti, who was Master of a
Crystall-Glasse Furnace here a long time, and as I have it by good
intelligence, he is one of the ablest, and most knowing men, for the guidance
of a Glasse-Work in Christendom; Therefore according to my Instructions, I send
him over, and hope to ^ave done Sir Robert good service thereby. So with my
kind respects unto you, and my most humble Service where you know ^is due, I
rest

Your affectionate Servent, J. H.
June the 6. 1619.
XII. To Sir James Crofts: Antwerp.
SIR,
I Presume that my last to you from the Hague came to safe hand: I am now come
to a more cheerful Country, and amongst a People somewhat more vigorous and
mettald, being not so heavy as the Hollander, or homely, as they of Zealand.
This goodly ancient City me thinks looks like a disconsolat Widow, or rather
some superannuated Virgin, that had lost her Lover, being almost quite ^erest of
that flourishing Commerce, wherewith before the falling off of the rest of the
Provinces from Spain, she abounded to the envy of all other Cities and Marts of
Europ. There are few places this side the Alps better built, and so well
Streeted as this, and none at all so well girt with Bastions and Rampasts,
which in some places are so spacious, that they usually take the Air in Coaches
upon the very walls, which are beutified with diverse rows of Trees, and pleasant
Walks. The Cittadell here, though it be an addition to the Statelines and
strength of the Town, yet it serve^ as a shrewd Curb unto her, which makes her
chomp upon the Bit, and Foam sometimes with anger, but she cannot help it. The
Tumults in Bohemia now grow hotter and hotter, they write how the great
Council a^ Prague fell to such a hurliburly, that so^ of those Senators who
adherd to the Emperor, were thrown ou^ at the windows, where some were maimed,
some break their Necks. (...) am shortly to bid a farewell to the Netherlands,
and to bend m^ course for France, where I shall be most ready to entertain an^
commands of yours. So may all health and happiness, attend yo^ according to the
wishes of

Your obliged Servant, J. ^*
July 5. 1619.
XIII. To Dr. Tho. Prichard at Oxford, from Rouen.
I Have now taken firm footing in France, and though France be one of the
chiefest Climats of Complement, yet I can use none toward you, but tell you in
plain down right Language, That in the List of those friends I left behind me
in England, you are one of the prime rank, one whose name I have marked with
the whitest Stone: If you have gained such a place amongst the choicest friends
of mine, I hope you will put me somwher amongst yours, though I but fetch up
the rear, being contented to be the i^fima species, the lowest in the
predicament of your friends.

I shall sojourn a good while in this City of Rouen, therefore I pray make me
happy with the comfort of your Letters, which I shall expect with a longing
impatience: I pray send me ample advertisement of your welfare, and of the rest
of our friends, as well upon the Banks of Isis, as amongst the British
Mountains. I am but a fresh* man yet in France, therefore I can send you no
news, but that all is here quiet, and it is no ordinary news, that the French
should be quiet: But some think this Calm will not last long, for the Queen
Mother (late Regent) is discontented being restrained from coming to the Court,
or to the City of Paris, and the Tragical death of her Favourit, (and
Foster-Brother) the late Marquis of Ancre, lies yet in her stomach
undisgested: She has the Duke of Espernon, and diverse other potent Princes,
that would be strongly, at her devotion (as it is thought) if she would stir. I
pray present my service to Sir Eubule Theloall, and send me word with what
pace, Jesus College new Walls go up: I will borrow my conclusion to you at this
time of my Countreyman Owen.

Uno non possum quantum te diligo versu
Dicere, si satis est distichon, ecce duos.
I cannot in one Verse my love declare,
If two will serve the turn, to here they are.
Whereunto I will add this surname Anagram.

Yours whole I. Howel.
Aug. 6. 1619.
XIV. To Daniel Caldwall Esquire. from Rouen.
MY dear Dan. when I came first to this Town, amongst other objects of
contentment which I found here, whereof there are variety, a Letter of yours was
brought me, and 'twas a She Letter, for two more were enwomb'd in her Body, she
had an easy and quick deliverance of that Twin; but besides them, she was big
and pregnant of diverse sweet pledges, and lively evidences of your own love
toward me, whereof I am as fond as any Mother can be of her child: I shall
endeavor to cherish and foster this dear love of yours, with all the tenderness
that can be, and warm it at the fuel of my best affections, to make it grow
evry day stronger and stronger, until it comes to the state of perfection,
because I know it is a true and real, it is no spurious or adulterated love: If
I intend to be so indulgent and careful of yours, I hope you will not suffer
mine to starve with you; my love to you needs not much tending, for it is a
lusty strong love, and will not easily miscarry.

I pray when you write next, to sond me a dozen pair of the best White Kidskin
Gloves, the Royall-Exchange can afford; as also two pair of the purest White
Wosted Stockins you can get of Women size, together with half a dozen pair of
Knifs. I pray send your man with them to Vacandary the French Post upon
Tower Hill, who will bring them me safely. When I go to Paris, I shall send you
some curiosities, equivalent to these; I have here enclosed returned an answer
to those two that came in yours, I pray see them safely delivered. My kind
respects to your Brother Sergeant at Court, to all at Batter say,' or any where
else, where you think my Commendations may be well placed.

No more at this time, but that I recommend you to the never failing Providence
of God, desiring you to go on in nourishing still between us, that love, which
for my part,

No Traverses of Chance, of Time, or Fate,
Shall ere extinguish till our lives last date;
But a^ the Vin^ h^ lovely El^ (...) wire,
Grasp b^th our Hearts, and flame with fresh desire.
Rouen, Aug. 13. 1619. Yours J. H.

XV. To my Father from Rouen.
SIR,
YOurs of the third of August, came to safe hand in an enclosed from my
Brother; you may make easy conjecture how welcome it was unto me, and to what a
height of comfort it raised my spirits, in regard it was the first I received
from you, since I crossed the Seas; I humbly thank you for the blessing you
sent along with it.

I am now upon the fair Continent of France, One of Natures choicest
Master-peeces; one of Ceres chiefest Barns for Corn; one of Bacchus prime
Wine-Cellars, and of Neptu^s best Salt Pits; a complete self-sufficient
Country, where there is rather a superfluity, then defect of any thing, either
for necessity or pleasure, did the policy of the Country correspond with the
bounty of Nature, in the equal distribution of the Wealth amongst the
Inhabitants; for I think there is not upon the Earth, a richer Country, and
poorer peeple. It Is true, England has a good repute abroad for her fertility,
yet be our Harvests never so kindly, and our Crops never so plentiful, we have
evry year commonly some Grain from hence, or from Danzic, and other places
imported by the Merchant: Besides, there be many more Heaths, Commons,
Bleak-b^rren-Hills, and waste Grounds in England, by many degrees, then I find
here; and I am sorry our Country of Wales, should give more instances hereof,
then any other part.

This Province of Normandy, once an Appendix of the Crown of England, though it
want Wine, yet it yields the King as much desmeans as any one of the rest: The
lower Norman has Syder for his common drink; and I visibly observed, that they
are more plump and replet in their bodies, and of a clearer complexion then
those that drink altogether Wine. In this great City of Rouen there be many
Monuments of the English Nation yet extant. In the outside of the highest
Steeple of the great Church there is the word GOD engraven in huge Golden
Characters, evry one almost as long as my self, to make them the more visible.
In this Steeple hangs also the greatest Bell of Christendom, called d' Amboise;
for it weighs near upon* forty thousand pound weight. There is also here Saint
Oen, the greatest Sanctuary in the City, founded by one of our Compatriots, as
the name imports: This Province is also subject to Wardships, and no other part
of France besides; but whither the Conqueror transported that Law to England
from hence, or whither he sent it over from England hither, I cannot resolve
you. There is a marvailous quick trade beaten in this Town, because of the great
Navigable River Sequana (the Seine) that runs hence to Paris, whereon there
stands a strange Bridge that ebbs and flows, that rises and falls with the
River, it being made of Boats, whereon Coach, and Carts may pass over as well
as men: Besides, this is the nearest Mercantil City that stands twixt Paris and
the Sea.

My last unto you was from the Low Countries, where I was in motion to and fro
above four months; but I fear it miscarried in regard you make no mention of it
in yours.

I begin more and more to have a sense of the sweetness, and advantage of foreign
Travel: I pray when you com to London, to find a time to visit Sir Robert, and
acknowledge his great favors unto me, and desire a continuance thereof,
according as I shall endeavor to deserve them. So with my due and daily
Prayers for your health, and a speedy successful issue of all your
Law-businesses, I humbly crave your blessing, and rest.

Your dutiful Son, J. H.
September. the 7. 1619.
XVI. To Cap. Francis Bacon, from Paris.
SIR,
I Received two of yours in Rouen with the Bills of Exchange, there enclosed,
and according to your directions I sent you those things which you wrote for.

I am now newly com to Paris, this huge Magazin of men, the Epitome of this
large populous Kingdom, and rendevouz of all Forreners. The structures here are
indifferently fair, though the Streets generally foul all the four Seasons of
the year, which I impute first to the Position of the City being built upon an
Isle (the Isle of France, made so by the branching and serpentin course of the
River of Seine) and having some of her Suburbs seated high, the filth runs down
the Channel, and settles in many places within the body of the City, which
lies upon a flat; as also for a world of Coaches, Carts, and Horses of all
sorts that go to and fro perpetually, so that sometimes one shall meet with a
stop half a mile long of those Coaches, Carts, and Horses, that can move
neither forward nor backward by reason of some sudden encounter of others
coming a crosse-way; so that oftentimes it will be an hour or two before they
can dis-intangle: In such a stop the great Henry was so fatally slain by
Ravillac. Hence comes it to pass, that this Town (for Paris is a Town, a City,
and an university) is always dirty, and it is such a dirt, that by perpetual
motion is beaten into such a thick black onctious Oil, that where it sticks, no
art can wash it off of some colors, insomuch, that it may be no improper
comparison to say, That an ill name is like the Crot (the dirt) of Paris, which
is indelible; besides the stain this dirt leaves, it gives also so strong a
sent, that it may be smelt many miles off, if the wind be in ones face as he
comes from the fresh Air of the Country: This may be* one cause why the Plague
is always in some corner or other of this vast City, which may be called as
once S^ythia was Vagina Populorum, or (as mankind was called by a great
Philosopher) a great Molehill of Ants: Yet I believe this City is not so
populous as she seems to be, for her form being round (as the whole Kingdom is)
the Passengers wheel about, and meet oftener then they use to do in the long
continued Streets of London, which makes London appear less populous then she
is indeed; so that London for length (though not for latitude) including
Westminster, exceeds Paris, and has in Mi^hnelmas Term more souls moving
within her in all places. It Is under one hundred years that Paris is become so
sumptuous, and strong in Buildings; for her houses were mean, until a Mine of
White Stone was discovered ^ard by, which runs in a continued Vein of Earth,
and is dug out with ease being soft, and is between a White-Clay and Chalk
at first, but being pullied up, with the open Air it receives a Crusty kind of
hardness, and so becomes perfect Freestone; and before it is sent up from the
Pit, they can reduce it to any form: Of this Stone, the Louvre, the Kings
Palace is built, which is a vast Fabric, for the Gallerie wants not much of an
Italian mile in length, and will easily lodge 3000 men, which some told me, was
the end for which the last King made it so big, that lying at the fag end of
this great mutinous City; if she perchance should rise, the King might power
o^t of the Louvre so many thousand men unawares into the heart of her.

I am lodged here hard by the Bastile, because it is furthest off from those
places where the English resort; for I would go on to get a little Language as
soon as I could. In my next, I shall impart unto you what State-news France
affords, in the interim, and always I am

Your humble Servant, J. H.
Paris, 30. of March, 1620.
XVII. To Richard Altham Esquire; from Paris.
Dear Sir,
LOve is the marrow of Friendship, and Letters are the Elixir of Love; they are
the best fuel of affection, and cast a sweeter odor then any Frankincense can
do; such an odor, such an Aromatic perfume your late Letter brought with it,
proceeding from the fragrancy of those dainty Flowers of eloquence, which I
found blossoming as it were in every Line; I mean those sweet expressions of
Love and Wit, which in every period were intermingled with so much Art, that
they seemed to contend for mastery which was the strongest: I must confess,
that you put me to hard shifto to correspond with you in such exquisit strains
and raptures of Love, which were so lively, that I must needs judge them to
proceed from the motions, from the Diastole and Systole of a Heart truly
affected; certainly your heart did dictat every syllable you writ, and guided
your hand all along: Sir, give me leave to tell you, that not a dram, nor a
doze, not a scruple of this precious love of yours is lost, but it is safely
tresur'd up in my Breast, and answered in like proportion to the full, mine to
you is as cordial, it is passionat and perfect, as love can be.

I thank you for the desire you have to know how it fares with me abroad; I
thank God I am perfectly well, and well contented with this wandering course of
life a while, I never enjoyed my health better, but I was like to endanger it
two nights ago; for being in some joviall company abroad, and coming late to our
lodging, we were suddenly surprised by a crew of Filous of night Rogues, who
drew upon us, and as we had exchanged some blow^, it pleased God, the
Chevatieur de Guet, an Officer, who goe^ up and down the Streets all night a
horseback to prevent disorders, passed by, and so rescued us; but Jack White
was hurt, and I had two thrusts in my Clock. There Is never a night passes, but
some robbing or murder is committed in this Town, so that it is not safe to go
late any where, specially about the Pont-Neuf, the New Bridge, though Henry the
Great himself ^ies Centinell there in Arms, upon a huge Florentine horse, and
sits bare to every one that passes, an improper posture me thinks to a King on
horseback: not longsince, one of the Secretaries of (...) (whereof there are here
always four) having bin invited to the Suburbs of Saint Germains to supper,
left order with one of his Laquays, to bring him his horse about nine, it so
happened, that a mischance befell the horse, which lamed him as he went a
watring to the Seine, insomuch, that the Secretary was put to beat the hoof
himself, and Foot it home; but as he was passing the Pont-Neuf with his Laquay
carrying a Torch before him, he might ore hear a noise of clashing of Swords,
and Fighting, and looking under the Torch, ^d perceiving they were but two, he
bad his Laquay go on; they had not made many paces, but two armed men with
their Pistols cocked, and swords drawn, made puffing toward them, whereof one
had a paper in his hand, which he said, he had casually took up in the streets,
and the difference between them was about that Paper; therefore they desired
the Secretary to read it, with a great deal of complement, the Secretary took
out his spectacles, and fell a reading of the said Paper, whereof the substance
was, That it should be known to all men, that whosoever did pass over that
Bridge after nine a Clock at night in Winter, and ten in Summer, was to leave
his Cloak behind him, and in case of no Cloak, his Hat. The Secretary starting
at this, one of the Camerades told him; That he thought that Paper concerned
him, so they unmantled him of a new Plush Cloak, and my Secretary was content
to go home quietly, and en Cuerpo. This makes me think often, of the excellent
Nocturnall Government of our City of London, where one may pass and repasse
securely all hours of the night, if he give good words to the Watch. There is a
gentle calm of Peace now throughout all France, and the King intends to make a
progress to all the Frontier Towns of the Kingdom, to see how they are
fortified. The Favourit Luines strengthens himself more and more in his
minionship, but he is much murmured at in regard the access of Suitors to him
is so difficult, which made a Lord of this Land say, That three of the hardest
things in the world were, To quadrat a Circl^, to find out the Philosophers
Stone, and to speak with the Duke of Luines.

I have sent you by Vacandary the Post, the French Bever and Tweeses you writ
for: Bever-hats are grown dearer of late, because the Jesuits have got the
Monopoly of them from the King.

Farewell dear child of Virtue, and Minion of the Muse^, and continue to love

Paris, 1. of May. 1620. Your J. H.

XVIII. To Sir James Crofts; from Paris.
SIR,
I Am to set forward this week for Spain, and if I can find no commodity of
embarcation at Saint Malos, I must be forced to journey it all the way by Land,
and clammer up the huge Pyreneyhills, but I could not bid Paris adieu, till I
had conveyed my true and constant respects to you by this Letter. I was
yesterday to wait upon Sir Herbert Croft at Saint Germains, where I met with a
French Gentleman, who amongst other curiosities, which he pleased to show me up
and down Paris, brought me to that place where the late King was slain, and to
that where the Marquis of Ancre was shot, and so made me a punctual relation of
all the circumstances of those two acts; which in regard they were rare, and I
believe two of the notablest Accidents that ever happened in France, I thought
it worth the labor to make you partaker of some part of his discourse.

France as all Christendom besides (for there was then a truce twixt Spain and
the Hollander) was in a profound Peace, and had continued so twenty years
together, when Henry the fourth fell upon some great Martial design, the
bottom whereof is not known to this day; and being rich (for he had heaped up
in the Bastile a mount of Gold that was as high as a Lance) he levied a huge
Army of 40000 men, whence came the Song, The King of France with forty
thousand men, and upon a sudden he put this Army in perfect equippage, and some
say he invited our Prince Henry to come unto him to be a sharer in his
exploits: But going one afternoon to the Bastile, to see his Tresure and
Ammunition, his Coach stopped suddenly, by reason of some Colliers and other
Carts that were in that narrow street; whereupon one Ravillac a lay Jesuit (who
had a whole twelve month watched an opportunity to do the act) put his foot
boldly upon one of the wheels of the Coach, and with a long Knife stretched
himself over their shoulders who were in the Boot of the Coach, and reached the
King at the end, and stabbed him right in the left side to the heart, and
pulling out the fatal Steel, he doubled his thrust; the King with a ruthful
voice cried out, Ie suis bless (I am hurr) and suddenly the blood issued at
his mouth: The Regicide villain was apprehended, and command given, that no
violence should be offered him, that he might be reserved for the law, and some
exquisit torture. The Queen grew half distracted hereupon, who had been crowned
Queen of France the day before in great triumph; but a few days after she had
something to countervail, if not to overmatch her sorrow; for according to
Saint Lewis law, she was made Queen Regent of France during the Kings Minority,
who was then but about years of Age: Many consultations were held how to punish
Revillas, and there were some Italia^ Physicians that undertook to prescribe a
torment, that should last a constant torment for three days, but he escaped
only with this, His body was pulled between four horses, that one might hear
his Bones crack, and after the dislocation, they were set again, and so he was
carried in a Cart standing half naked, with a Torch in that hand which had
committed the murrher; and in the place where the act was done, it was cut off,
and a Gauntlet of hot Oil was clapped upon the stump, to stanch the blood,
whereat he gave a doleful shrike, then was he brought upon a stage, where a new
pair of Boots was provided for him, half filled with boiling Oil, then his body
was pincer'd, and hot Oil powered into the holes; in all the extremity of this
torture, he scarce showed any sense of pain, but when the Gauntlet was clapped
upon his Arms to stanch the Flux at which time he of reaking blood, gave a
shrike only; He boar up against all these torments about three hours before he
dyed: all the confession that could be drawn from him, was, That he thought to
have done God good service, totake away that King, which would have embroiled
all Christendom in an endless War.

A fatal thing it was, that France should have theee of her Kings com to such
violent deaths, in so short a revolution of time. Henry the second running at
Tilt with Monsieur Montgomery, was killed by a Splinter of a Lance that pierced
his eye: Henry the third, not long after, was killed by a young Friar, who in
lieu of a Letter which he pretended to have for him, pulled out of his long
sleeve a Knife, and thrust him into the Bottom of the belly, as he was coming
from his Close stool, and so dispatched him, but that Regicide was hacked to
pieces in the place by the Nobles: The same destiny attended this King by
Ravillac, which is become now a common name of reproach and infamy in France.

Never was King so much lamented as this, there are a world not only of his
Pictures, but Statues up and down France, and there is scarce a Market Town, but
has him erected in the Market place, or ore some Gate, not upon Sign-posts, as
our Henry the eight; and by a public Act of Parliament which was confirmed in
the Consistory at Rome, he was enti^led, Henry the Great, and so placed in the
Temple of Immortality. A notable Prince he was, and of in admirable temper of
body and mind, he had a graceful facetious way to gain both love and aw, he
would be never transported beyond himself with choler, but he would pass by
any thing with some repartie, some witty strain, wherein he was excellent: I
will instance in a few which were told me from a good hand. One day he was
charged by the Duke of Bovillon to have changed his Religion, he answered, No
cousin, I have changed no Religion, but an Opinion; And the Cardinal of Perron
being by, he enjoined him to write a Treatise for his Vindication, the Cardinal
was long about the work, and when the King asked from time to time where his
Book was, he would still answer him, That he expected some Manuscripts from Rome
before he could finish it: It happened, that one day the King took the
Cardinal along with him to look on his Workmen, and new Buildings at the
Louvre; and passing by one corner which had bin a long time begun but left
unfinished, The King asked the chief Mason, why that corner was not all this
while perfected? Sir, it is because I want some choice Stones; no, no, said the
King, looking upon the Cardinal, It is because thou want'^ Manuscripts from
Rome. Another time, the old Duke of Main, who was used to play the drol with
him, coming softly into his Bedchamber, and thrusting in his Bald-head, and
Long-neck, in a posture to make the King merry, it happened the King was coming
from doing his Ease, and spying him, he took the round Cover of the
Close-stool, and clapped it on his Bald-Sconce, saying, A^ Cousin, you thought
once to have taken the Crown off of my head, and wear it on your own; but this
of my Tail shall now serve your turn. Another time, when at the siege of
Ami^ns, he having sent for the Count of Soissons (who had 100000 Franks a year
Pension from the Crown) to assist him in those wars, and that the Count excused
himself, by reason of his years, and poverty, having exhausted himself in the
former wars, and all that he could do now, was to pray for his Majesty, which
he would do heartily: This answer being brought to the King, he replied, Will
my Cousin, the Count of Soissons, do nothing else but pray for me, tell him
that Prayer without Fasting, is not available; therefore I will make my Cousin
Fast also, from his Pension of 100000. per annum.

He was once troubled with a fit of the Gout, and the Spanish Ambassador coming
then to visit him, and saying he was sorry to see his Majesty so lame, he
answered, As lame as I am, if there were occasion, your Master the King of
Spain, should no sooner have his foot in the stirrup, but he should find me on
Horseback.

By these few you may guess at the Genius of this spritfull Prince, I could
make many more instances, but then I should exceed the bounds of a Letter. When
I am in Spain you shall hear further from me, and if you can think on any thing
wherein I may serve you, believe it Sir, that any employment from you, shall be
welcome to

Your much obliged Servant. J. H.
Paris, 12. of May, 1620.
XIX. To my Brother Dr. Howell.
BROTHER,
BEing to morrow to part with Paris, and begin my journey for Spain, I thought
it not amiss to send you this, in regard I know not when I shall have
opportunity to write unto you again.

This Kingdom since the young King has taken the Scepter into his own hands
does flourish very much with quietness and Commerce; nor is there any motion or
the least tintamar of trouble in any part of the Country, which is rare in
France. It Is true, the Queen Mother is discontented since She left her Regency,
being confined, and I know not what it may com unto in time, for she has a
strong party, and the murdering of her Marquis of Ancre will yet bleed as some
fear.

I was lately in society of a Gentleman, who was a Spectator of that Tragedy,
and he pleased to relate unto me the particulars of it, which was thus: When
Henry the fourth was slain, the Queen Dowager took the Reins of the Government
into her hands during the young Kings Minority; and amongst others whom she
advanced Signor Conchino, a Florentin, and her Foster-Brother was one; Her
countenance came to shine so strongly upon him, that he became her only
confident and favourit, insomuch, that she made him Marquis of Ancre, one of
the twelve Marshals of France, Governor of Normandy, and conferred diverse
other Honors, and Offices of trust upon him, and who but he; The Princes of
France could not endure this domineering of a stranger, therefore they leagued
together, to suppress him by Arms; The Queen Regent having intelligence
hereof, surpised the Prince of Conde, and clapped him up in the Bastile; the
Duke of Main fled hereupon to Peronne in Pycardie, and other great men put
themselves in an Armed posture, to stand upon their guard: The young King being
told, that the Marquis of Ancre was the ground of this coffeehouse,
commanded Monsieur de Vitry, Captain of his Guard, to Arrest him, and in case
of resistance, to kill him: This business was carried very closely till the next
morning, that the said Marquis was coming to the Louvre with a ruffling train
of Gallants after him, and passing over the Drawbridge at the Court-Gate,
Vitry stood there with the Kings Guard about him, and as the Marquis entered, he
told him, that he had a Commission from the King to apprehend him, therefore he
demanded his Sword; the Marquis hereupon put his hand upon his Sword, some
thought to yield it up, others to make opposition; in the mean time Vitry
discharged a Pistol at him, and so dispatched him: The King being above in his
Gallery, asked what noise that was below, one smilingly answered* nothing Sir,
but that the Marshall of Ancre is slain; who slew him? The Captain of your
Guard; why? Because he would have drawn his Sword at Your Majesty's Royal
Commission, then the King replied, Vitry has done well, and I will maintain
the act: Presently the Queen Mother had all her Guard taken from her, except
six men and sixteen Women, and so she was banished Paris, and commanded to
retire to Blois: Ancre's Body was buried that night in a Church hard by the
Court, but the next morning, when the Laquays and Pages (who are more unhappy
here then the Apprentises in London) broke up his Grave, tore his Coffin to
pieces, ripped the Winding Sheet, and tied his Body to an Asses Tail, and so
dragged him up and down the Gutters of Paris, which are none of the sweetest;
they then sliced off his Ears, and nailed them upon the Gates of the City, they
cut off his Genitories (and they say he was hung like an Ass) and sent them
for a present to the Duke of Main, the rest of his Body, they carried to the
New-Bridg, and hung him his Heels upwards, and Head downwards upon a new
Gibbet, that had bin set up a little before to punish them who should speak ill
of the present Government, and it was his chance to have the Maidenhead of it
himself: His Wife was hereupon apprehended, imprisond, and beheaded for a Witch
some few days after upon a surmise, that she had enchanted the Queen to dote so
upon her Husband; and they say the young Kings Picture was found in her Closet
in Virgin-Wax, with one Leg melted away; a little after a process was formed
against the Marquis (her Husband) and so he was condemned after death. This was
a right act of a French popular fury, which like an angry torrent is
irresistible, nor can any Banks, Boundaries, or Dike^ stop the impetuous rage
of it. How the young King will prosper after so high, and an unexampled act of
violence, by beginning his Reign, and embr^ing the Walls of his own Court with
blood in that manner, there are diverse censures.

When I am settled in Spain, you shall hear from me, in the interim, I pray let
your Prayers accompany me in this long journey, and when you write to Wales, I
pray acquaint our friends with my welfare. So I pray God bless us both, and
send us a happy enterview.

Paris, 8. of September, 1620. Your loving Brother, J. H.

XX. To my Cousin W. Vaughan Esquire from Saint Malo.
Cousin,
I Am now in French Britany, I went back from Paris to Rouen, and so through
all low Normandy, to a little Port called Granville, where I embarked for this
Town of Saint Malo, but I did purge so violently at Sea, that it put me into a
Burning Feavour for some few days, whereof (I thank God) I am newly recovered,
and finding no opportunity of shipping here, I must be forced to turn my
intended Sea voyage to a long land journey.

Since I came to this Province, I was curious to converse with some of the
lower Bretons who speak no other Language but our Welsh, for their radical
words are no other, but it is no wonder for they were a Colony of Welsh at
first, as the name of this Province does imply, as also the Latin name*
Armorica, which though it pass for Latin, yet it is but pure Welsh, and
signifies a Country bordring up the Sea, as that arch Heretic was called
Pelagius, a Pelago, his name being Morgan. I was a little curious to peruse the
Annals of this Province, and during the time that it was a Kingdom, there were
four Kings of the name Hoell, whereof one was called Hoell the Great.

This Town of Saint Malo has one rarity in it, for there is here a perpetual
Garrison of English, but they are of English Dogs, which are let out in the
night to guard the Ships, and eat the Gardens up and down the Streets, and so
they are shut up again in the morning.

It will be now a good while before I shall have convenience to send to you, or
receive from you; howsoever, let me retain still some little room in your
memory, and sometimes in your meditations, while I carry you about me
perpetually, not only in my head, but in heart, and make you travel all along
with me thus from Town to Country, from Hill to Dale, from Sea to Land, up and
down the World; and you must be contented to be Subject to these uncertain
removes and perambulations, until it shall please God to fix me again England;
nor need you, while you are thus my concomitant through new places evry day, to
fear any ill usage as long as I farewell,

St. Malo, 25. of September, 1620. Yours (...), J. H.

XXI. To Sir John North Knight. from Rochell.
SIR,
(...) Am newly com to Rochell, nor am I sorry that I went somewhat out of my
way to see this Town, not (to tell you true) out of any extraordinary love I
bear to the people; for I do not find ^em so gentle and debonnair to strangers,
nor so Hospitable a^ ^e rest of France, but I excuse them for it, in regard it
is com^only so with all Republic and Hans Towns, whereof this smells ^ery rank*
nor indeed has any Englishman much cause to love (...) Town, in regard in Ages
passed, she played the most treacherous part with England of any other place of
France. For the Story tells us, That this Town having by a perfidious stratage^
(by forging a counterfeit Commission from England) induced the English
Governor to make a general Muster of all his Forces ou^ of the Town; this
being one day done, they shut their Gate^ against him, and made him go shake
his ears, and to shift for his lodging, and so rendered themselves to the French
King, who sen^ them a blank to write their own conditions. I think they have
the strongest Ramparts by Sea of any place of Christendom; no^ have I seen the
like in any Town of Holland, whose safety depends upon Water. I am bound to
morrow for Bourdeaux, then through Gascogny to Toulouse, so through Languedoc
ore the Hill^ to Spain; I go in the best season of the year, for I make an
Autumnall journey of it. I pray let your Prayers accompany me all along, they
are the best Offices of Love, and Fruits of Friendship* So God prosper you at
home, as me abroad, and send us in good time a joyful conjuncture,

Rochell, 8. of October, 1620. Yours, J. H.

XXII. To Mr. Tho. Porter, after Cap. Porter, from Barcelone.
MY dear Tom, I had no sooner set foot upon this Soil, and breathed Spanish
air, but my thoughts presently reflected upon you: Of all my friends in England,
you were the first I met here, you were the prime object of my speculation; me
thought the very Winds in gentle whispers did breath out your name, and blow it
on me; you seemed to reverberat upon me with the Beams of the Sun, which you
know has such a powerful influence, and indeed too great a stroke in this
Country: And all this you must ascribe to the operations of Love, which has
such a strong virtuall force, that when it fastneth upon a pleasing subject, it
sets the imagination in a strange fit of working, it imployes all the faculties
of the Soul, so that not one Cell in the Brain is idle, it busieth the whole
inward man, it affects the heart, amuseth the understanding, it quickneth the
fancy, and leads the will as it were by a silken thread to cooperat with them
all: I have felt these motions often in me, specially at this time, that my
memory fixed upon you: But the reason that I fell first upon you in Spain, was,
that I remembered I had heard you often discoursing how you had received part of
your education here, which brought you to speak the Language so exactly well: I
think often of the Relations I have heard you make of this Country, and the
good instructions you pleased to give me.

I am now in Barcelona, but the next week I intend to go on through your Town
of Valencia to Alicant, and thence you shall be sure to hear from me further,
for I make account to Winter there. The Duke of Ossuna passed by here lately,
and having got leave of Grace to release some slaves, he went aboard the
Cape-Gallie, and passing through the Churm^ of slaves, He asked diverse of them
what their offenses were, evry one excused himself, one saying, That he was put
in out of malice, another by bribery of the Judge, but all of them injustly;
amongst the rest, there was one sturdy little black man, and the Duke asking him
what he he was in for, Sir, said he, I cannot deny but I am justly put in here,
for I wanted money, and so took a Purse hard by Tarragona to keep me from
starving; The Duke with a litte staff he had in his hand, gave him two or three
blows upon the shoulders, saying, You Rogue what do you do amongst so many
honest innocent men, get you gone out of their company; so he was freed, and
the rest remained still in statu quo prius, to tugg at the Oar.

I pray commend me to Signor Camillo, and Mazalao, with the rest of the
Venetians with you, and where you go aboard the Ship behind the Exchange, think
upon

Barcelona, 10. of November, 1620. Your J. H.

XXIII. To Sir James Crofts.
SIR,
I Am now a good way within the Body of Spain, at Barcelona, a proud wealthy
City, situated upon the Mediterranean, and is the Metropolis of the Kingdom of
Catalunia, called of old Hispania ^raconensis: I had much ado to reach hither,
for besides the monstrous abrup^es of the way, these parts of the Pyreneys that
border upon the Mediterranean, are never without Thieves by Land (called
Ba^doleros) and Pirates on the Sea side, which li^ sculking in the Hollows of
the Rocks, and often surprise Passengers unawares, and carry them slaves to
Barbary on the other side. The safest way to pass, is to take a Bordon in the
habit of a Pilgrim, whereof there are abundance that perform their vows this way
to the Lady of Monserrat, one of the prime places of pilgrimage in Christendom;
It is a stupendous Monastery, built on the top of a huge Land Rock, whither it
is impossible to go up, or come down by a direct way, but a path is cut out
full of windings and turnings; and on the Crown of this Craggy-hill, there is a
fl^, upon which, the Monastery and Pilgrimage place is founded, where there is a
Picture of the Virgin Mary Sunburnt, and Tanned, it seems when she went to
Egypt; and to this Picture a marvallous confluence of people from all parts of
Europe resort.

As I passed between so^ of the Pyrency Hills, I observed the poor Labradors,
some of the Country people live no better then bruit Animals in point of food,
for their ordinary commons is Grass and Water, only they have always within
their Houses a Bottle of Vinegar, and another of Oil, and when Dinner or Supper
time comes, they go abroad and gather their Herbs, and so cast Vinegar and Oil
upon them, and will pass thus two or three days without Bread or Wine, yet
are they, strong lusty men, and will stand stiffly under a Musket.

There is a Tradition, that there were diverse Mines of Gold in Ages passed
amongst those Mountains: And the Shepherds that kept Goats then, having made a
small fire of Rosemary stubs, with other combustible stuff to warm themselves,
this fire grazed along, and grew so outrageous, that it consumed the very
Entrails of the Earth, and melted those Mines, which growing fluid by
liquefaction, ran down into the small Rivelets that were in the Valleys, and so
carried all into the Sea, that monstrous Gulf which swalloweth all, but seldom
disgorgeth any thing; and in these Brooks to this day some small Grains of Gold
are found.

The Viceroy of this Country has taken much pains to clear these Hills of
Robbers, and there has bin a notable havoc made of them this year; for in
diverse Woods as I passed, I might spy some Trees laden with dead Carcases, a
better Fruit far then Diogenes Tree bore, whereon a Woman had hanged her self,
which the Cynic cried out to be the best bearing Tree that ever he saw.

In this place there lives neither English Merchant or Factor, which I wonder
at, considering that it is a Maritim Town, and one of the greatest in Spain;
her chiefest Arsenal for Galleys, and the Scale by which she conveys her Moneys
to Italy; but I believe the reason is, that there is no commodious Port here for
Ships of any burden, but a large Bay. I will enlarge my self no further at this
time, but leave you to the guard and guidance of God, whose sweet hand of
protection has brought me through so many uncouth places and difficulties to
this City: So hoping to meet your Letters in Alicant, where I shall Anchor a
good while, I rest

Yours to dispose of, J. H.
Barcelona, 24. November. 1620.
XXIV. To Dr. Fr. Mansell, from Valentia.
SIR,
THough it be the same glorious Sun that shines upon you in England, which
illuminats also this part of the Hemisphear; though it be the same Sun that
ripeneth your Pippins, and our Pomgranets, your Hops, and our Vineyards here,
yet he dispenses his heat in different degrees of strength; those Rays that do
but warm you in England, do half roast us here; those Beams that irradiat
only, and guild your Honey-suckled fields, do scorch and parch this chinky
gaping soil, and so put too many wrincles upon the face of our common Mother
the Earth. O blessed Clime, O happy England, where there is such a rare
temperature of hear and cold, and all the rest of Elementary qualities, that
one may pass (and suffer little) all the year long without either shade in
Summer, or fire in Winter.

I am now in Valentia, one of the noblest Cities of all Spain, situat in a
large Vegue or Valley, above threescore miles compass; here are the strongest
Silks, the sweetest Wines, the excellenc'st Almonds, the best Oils, and
beutifull'st Femals of all Spain, for the prime Courtisans in Madrid, and
elsewhere are had hence: The very bruit Animals make themselves Beds of
Rosmary, and other Fragrant Flowers hereabouts; and when one is at Sea, if the
Wind blow from the shore, he may smell this soil before he come in sight of it
many leagues off, by the strong odoriferous sent it casts; As it is the most
pleasant, so is it also the temperat'st Clime of all Spain, and they commonly
call it the second Italy, which made the Moors, whereof many thousands were
disterr'd and banished hence to Barbary, to think that Paradise was in that
part of the Heavens which hung over this City. Some twelve miles off, is old
Sagun^o, called now Morvied^e, through which I passed, and saw many Monuments
of Roman Antiquities there, amongst others, there is the Temple dedicated to
Venus, when the Snake came about her Neck, a little before Hannibal came
thither. No more now, but that I heartily wish you were here with me, and I
believe you would not desire to be a good while in England. So I am

Your J. H.
Valentia, March the 1. 1620.
XXV. To Christopher Jones Esquire at Grays-Inne.
I Am now (thanks be to God) come to Alicant, the chief Rendevouz I aimed at in
Spain; for I am to send hence a commodity called Barillia to Sir Robert
Mansell, for making of Crystall-Glasse, and I have treated with Signor
Andriotti a Genoa Merchant for a good round parcel of it, to the value of 2000
pound, by Letters of credit from Master Richant, and upon his credit, I might
have taken many thousand pounds more, he is so well known in the Kingdom of
Valentia. This Barillia is a strange kind of Vegetable, and it grows no where
upon the surface of the Earth, in that perfection, as here: The Venetians have
it hence, and it is a commodity whereby this Maritim Town does partly subsist,
for it is an ingredient that goes to the making of the best Castile-Soap: It
grows thus, it is a round thick Earthy shrub that bears Berries like Barbaries,
but twixt blew and green, it lies close to the ground, and when it is ripe,
they dig it up by the roots, and put it together in Cocks, where they leave it
dry many days like Hey, then they make a Pit of a fadom deep in the Earth, and
with an Instrument like one of our Prongs, they take the Tuffs and put fire to
them, and when the flame comes to the Berries they melt, and dissolve into an
Azure Liquor, and fall down into the Pit till it be full, then they dam it up,
and some days after they open it, and find this Barillia-juyce turned to a Blew
stone, so hard, that it is scarcc Mall^able, it is sold at one hundred Crowns a
Tun, but I had it for less; there is also a spurious Flower called Gazull that
grows here, but the Glass that is made of that is not so resplendent and clear.
I have bin here now these three Months, and most of my Food has bin Grapes and
Bread, with other Roots, which have made me so fat, that I think if you saw me,
you would hardly know me, such nourriture this deep Sanguin Alicant Grap gives.
I have not received a syllable from you since I was in Antwerp, which
transforms me to wonder, and engenders odd thoughts of Jealousy in me, that as
my body grows fatter, your love grows lanker toward me; I pray take off these
scruples, and let me hear from you, else it will make a schism in friendship,
which I hold to be a very holy league, and no less then a Piacle to infringe
it, in which opinion I rest

Your constant Friend, J. H.
Alicant, March 27. 1621.
XXVI. To Sir John North, Knight.
SIR
HAving endured the brunt of a whole Summer in Spain, and tried the temper of
all the other three Seasons of the year, up and down the Kingdoms of Catalunia,
Valentia, and Murci^, with some parts of Aragon, I am now to direct my course for
Italy; I hoped to have embarked at Carthagena, the best Port upon the
Mediterranean, for what Ships and Galleys get in thither, are shut up as it
were in a Box from the violence and injury of all Weathers, which made Andrea
Doria being asked by Philip the second, which were his best Harbors? He
answered, June, July, and Carthagena, meaning, that any Port is good in those
two months, but Carthagena was good any time of the year. There was a most
ruthful accident had happened there a little before I came, for whereas five
ships had gone thence laden with Soldiers for Naples, amongst whom there was
the Flower of the Gentry of the Kingdom of Murcia; those Ships had hardly
sailed three leagues, but they met with sixteen fails of Algier, men of War,
who had lain skulking in the Creeks therabouts, and they had the winds, and all
things else so favorable, that of those five ships they took one, sunk
another, and burnt a third, and two fled back to safe Harbor; the report hereof
being bruited up and down the Country, the Gentlewomen came from the Country
to have tidings, some of their Children, others of their Brothers, and Kindred,
and went ^earing their Hair, and houling up and down the streets in a most
piteous manner: The Admiral of those five ships, as I heard afterward, was
sent for to Madrid, and hanged at the Court gate, because he did not fight: Had
I com time enough to have taken the opportunity, I might have bin made, either
food for Hadocks, or turned to Cinders, or have bin by this time a slave in the
Bannier at Algier, or tugging at an Oa^; but I hope God has reserved me for a
better destiny; so I came back to Alicant, where I lighted upon a lusty
Dutchman, who has carried me safe hither, but we were near upon forty days in
voyage; we passed by Mallorca, and Minorca, the Baleares Insulae, by some Por^s
of Barbary, by Sardinia, Cor^ica, and all the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea;
we were at the mouth of Tyber, and thence forced our course for Sicilie; we
passed by those Sulphurous fiery Islands, Mongibel, and Str^mbolo, and about
the dawn of the day we shot through Scylla and Charybdis, and so into the Phare
of Messina, thence we touched upon some of the Greek Islands, and so came to our
first intended course, into the Venetian Gulf, and are now here at Malamocca,
where we remain yet aboard, and must be content to be so, to make up the month
before we have pratic, that is, before any be permitted to go a shore and
negotiat, in regard we touched at some infected places: For there are no people
upon Earth so fearful of the Plague, as the Italians, specially the Venetian,
though their Neighbors the Greeks hard by, and the Turks, have little or no
apprehension at all of the danger of it, for they will visit and commerce with
the sick without any seruple, and will fix their longest finger in the midst of
their forehead, and say, their destiny and manner of death is pointed there.
When we have gained y'^n Maiden City, which lies before us, you shall hear
farther from me: So leaving you to his holy protection who has thus graciously
vouchsafed to preserve this ship, and me, in so long and dangerous a voyage, I
rest

Yours J. H.
Malamocco, April the 30. 1611.
XXVII. To my Brother Dr. Howell, from a Shipboard before Venice.
BROTHER,
IF this Letter fail, either in point of Orthography or Style, you must impute
the first to the tumbling posture my body was in at the writing hereof being a
shipboard, the second to the muddinesse of my Brain, which like Lees in a
narrow Vessel, has been shaken at Sea in diverse Tempests near upon forty
days, I mean natural days, which include the nights also, and are composed of
four and twenty hours, by which number the Italian computes his time, and tells
his Clock, for at the writing hereof, I heard one from Malamoeca strike one and
twenty hours: When I shall have saluted yonder Virgin City that stands before
me, and has tantaliz'd me now this sennight, I hope to cheer my spirits, and
settle my Pericranium again.

In this voyage we passed through, at least touched, all those Seas, which
Horace and other Poets sing of so often, as the Iornian, the Aegean, the
Icarian, the Tyrrhene, with others, and now we are in the Adrian Sea, in the
mouth whereof, Venice* stands like a Gold Ring in a Bears Muzzle: We passed
also by Aetna, by the Infames Scopules, Acroceraunia, and through Scylla and
Charybdis, about which the ancient Poets, both Greek, and Latin, keep such a
coyl, but they are nothing so horrid or dangerous, as they make them to be;
they are two white keen-pointed Rocks, that lie under water diametrically
opposed, and like two Dragons defying one another, and there are Pylots, that in
small Shallops, are ready to steer all ships that pasle: This amongst diverse
other, may serve for an instance, That the old Poets used to heighten and hoise
up things by their ayrie fancies above the reality of truth: Aetna was very
furious when we passed by, as she uses to be sometimes more then other,
specialy when the wind is Southward, for then she is more subject to belching
out flakes of fire (as Stutterers use to flammer more when the wind is in that
hole) some of the sparkles fell aboard of us; but they would make us believe in
Syracusa now Messina, that Aetna in times passed, has eructated such huge
gobbets of fire, that the sparks of them have burnt houses in Malta, above
fifty miles off, transported thither by a direct strong wind: We passed hard by
Corinth, now Ragusa, but I was not so happy as to touch there, for you know

Non cuivis homini contingit adire corinthum: I conversed with many Greeks, but
found none that could understand, much less pratically speak any of the old
Dialects of the Latin-Greek, it is so adulterated by the vulgar, as a Bed of
Flowers by Weeds; nor is there any people, either in the Islands, or on the
Continent, that speaks it conversably, yet there are in the Merea seven
Parishes called Zacones, where the Original Greek is not much degenerated, but
they confound diverse Letters of the Alphabet with one sound; for in point of
pronunciation there is no difference 'twixt Upsilon, Iota, and Eta.

The last I received from you was in Latin, whereof I sent you an answer from
Spain in the same Language, though in a courser Dialect: I shall be a guest to
Venice a good while, therefore I besire a frequency of correspondence between us
by Letters, for there will be convenience evry week of receiving and sending;
when you write to Wales, I pray send advise, that I am come safe to Italy,
though not landed there yet: So my dear Brother, I pray God bless us both, and
all our friends, and reserve me to see you again with comfort, and you me, who
am

Your loving brother, J. H.
May the 5. 1621.
XXVIII. To the Honorable Sir Robert Mansell, Vice Admiral of England, from
Venice.
SIR,
AS soon as I came to Venice, I applied my self to dispatch your business
according to instructions, and Mr. Seymor was ready to contribute his best
furtherance: These two Italians who are the Bearers hereof, by report here, are
the best Gentlemen-Workmen that ever blew Crystal, one is allied to Antoni^
Miotti, the other is Cousin to Mazalao; for other things they shall be sent in
the Ship Lion, which rides here at Malamocca, as I shall send you account by
conveyance of Mr. Symns: Herewith I have sent a Letter to you from Sir Henry
Wotton, the Lord Ambassador here, of whom I have received some favors, He
wished me to write, that you have now a double interest in him; for whereas
before he was only your Servant, he is now your Kinsman by your late marriage.

I was lately to see the Arsenall of Venice, one of the worthiest things of
Christendom; they say there are as many Galleys, and Galeasses of all sorts,
belonging to Saint Mare, either in Course, at Anchor, in Dock, or upon the
Carine, as there be days in the year; here they can build a complete Gally in
half a day, and put her a float in perfect Equippage, having all the
ingredients fitted before hand, as they did in three hours, when Henry the
third passed this way to France from Poland, who wished, that besides P^is, and
his Parliament Towns, he had this Arsenal in exchange, for three o^ his
chiefest Cities: There are three hundred people perpetually hero at Work, and if
one comes young, and grows old in Saint M^es service, he has a Pension from
the State during life: Being brought to see one of the Clarissimos that governs
this Arsenall, this huge Sea Store* House, amongst other matters reflecting
upon England, he was saying, That if Cavaglier Don Roberto Mansell were now
here, he thought verily the republic would make a proffer to him to be Admiral
of that Fleet of Galleys, and Galeons, which are now going against the Duke of
Ossuna, and the Forces of Naples, you are so well known here*

I was, since I came hither, in Murano, a little Island, about the distance of
Lambeth from London, where Crystall-Glasse is made, and it is a rare sight to see
a whole Street, where on the one side there are twenty Furnaces together at
work; They say here, that although one should transplant a Glasse-Furnace, from
Murano to Venice her self, or to any of the little assembly of Islands about
her, or to any other part of the Earth besides, and use the same Materials, the
same Workmen, the same Fuel, the self same Ingredients every way, yet they
cannot make Crystal Glass in that perfection, for beauty and Iustre, as in
Murano; some impute into the quality of the circumambient Air, that hangs ore
the place, which is purified and attenuated by the concurrence of so many fires
that are in those Furnaces night and day perpetually, for they are like the
Vestall fire which never goes out; And it is well known, that some Ayrs make
more qualifying impressions then others, as a Greek ^old me in Sicily, of the
Air of Egypt, where there be huge common Furnaces to hatch Eggs by the thousands
in Came^s Dung; for during the time of hatching, if the Air happen to come to
be overcast, and grow cloudy, it spoils all; if the Sky continue still serene
and clear, not one Egg in a hundred will misca^ry.

I met with Camillo your Consaorman here lately, and could he be sure of
entertainment, he would return to serve you again, and I believe for
lesse-salary.

I shall attend your commands herein by the next, and touching other
particulars, whereof I have written to Captain Bacon: So I rest

Venice, May the 30: 1621. Your most humble and ready Servant, J. H.

XXIX. To my Brother, from Venice.
Brother,
I Found a Letter of yours that had lain dormant here a good while in Mr. Symns
hands, to welcome me to Venice, and I thank you for the variety of news wherewith
she went sreighted; for she was to me, as a Ship richly laden from London uses
to be to our Merchants here, and I esteem her Cargazon at no less a value, for
she enriched me with the knowledge of my Fathers health, and your own, with the
rest of my Brothers, and Sisters, in the Country, with diverse other passages
of contentment; besides, she went also ballasted with your good instructions,
which as Merchants use to do of their commodities, I will turn to the best
advantage, and Italy is no ill Market to improve any thing; the only proceed
(that I may use the mercantil term) you can expect, is thanks, and this way I
shall not be wanting to make you rich returns.

Since I came to this Town I dispatched sundry businesses of good value for Sir
Robert Mansell, which I hope will give content: The art of Glasse-making here
is very highly valued, for whosoever be of that profession, are Gentlemen ipso
facto, and it is not without reason, it being a rare kind of knowledge and
chemistry, to transmute Dust and Sand (for they are the only main Ingredients)
to such a diaphanous pellucid dainty body as you see a Crystal-Glasse is, which
has this property above Gold or Silver or any other mineral, to admit no
poison; as also, that it never, wastes or loses a whit of its first weight,
though you use it never so long: When I saw so many sorts of curious Glasses
made here, I thought upon the complement which a Gentleman put upon a Lady in
England, who having five or six comely Daughters, said, He never saw in his
life, such a dainty Cupboard of Crystall-Glasses; the complement proceeds it
seems from a saying they have here, That the first handsome Woman that ever was
made, was made of Venice-Glasse, which implies Beuty, but brittlenes withal
(and Venice is not unfurnished with some of that mould, for no place abounds
more with Lasses and Glasses) but considering the brittlenes of the Stuff, it
was an odd kind of melancholy in him, that could not be persuaded, but he was
an Urinal, surely he deserved to be pissed in the mouth: But when I pried into
the Materials, and observed the Furnaces and the Calcinations, the
Transubstantintions, the Liquefactions that are incident to this Art, my
thoughts were raised to a higher speculation; that if this small Furnace-fire
has virtue to convert such a small lump of dark Dust and Sand into such a
specious clear Body as Crystal, surely, that gran Universall-site, which shall
happen at the day of judgment, may by its violent-ardor vitrifie and turn to
one lump of Crystal, the whole Body of the Earth; nor am I the first that fell
upon this conceit.

I will in large my self no further to you at this time, but conclude with this
Tetrastic which my Brain ran upon in my Bed this morning.

Vistrea sunt nostrae comissa negotia curae,
Hoc oculis speculum mittimus ergo luis:
Quod speculum? Est instar speculi mea littera, per quod
Vivida fraterni cordis imago nitet.
Adieu my dear Brother, live happily, and love

Ven: the 1. of June, 1621. Your Brother, J. H.

XXX. To Mr. Richard Altham at Grayes-Inne, from Venice.
Gentle Sir,
-- O dulcior illo Melle quod in ceris Attica ponit apis. O thou who do in
sweetness far excel,
That Iuycc the Attic Be store's in her cell.
My dear Dick,

I Have now a good while since taken footing in Venice, this admired Maid^
City, so called, because she was never deflour'd by any enemy since she had a
being, not since her Rialto was first erected, which is now above twelve Ages
ago.

I protest unto you at my first landing, I was for some days ravished with the
high beuty of this Maid, with her lovely countenance, I admired her magnificent
buildings, her marvailous situation, her dainty smooth neat streets, whereon you
may walk most days in the year in a Silk-Stockin, and Sattin-Slippers, without
soiling them, not can the Steets of Paris be so foul, as these are fair. This
beutious Maid has bin often attempted to be vitiated, some have courted her,
some bribed her, some would have forced her* yet she has still preserved her
chastity entire; and though she has lived so many Ages, and passed so many
shrewd brunts, yet she continues fresh to this very day without the least
wrinkle of old Age, or any symptoms of decay, whereunto political bodies, as
well as natural, use to be liable. Besides the has wrestled with the greatest
Potentats upon Earth; The Emperor, the King of France, and most of the other
Princes of Christendom in that famous league of Cambray would have sunk her,
but she bore up still within her Lakes, and broke that league to pieces by her
wit; The gran Turk has bin often at her, and though he could not have his will
of her, yet he took away the richest Jewel she wore in her Cornet, and put it
in his Turban, I mean the Kingdom of Cypres the only Royal Gem she had; he
has set upon her skirts often since, and though she closed with him sometimes,
yet she came off still with her Maidenhead, though some that envy her
happiness, would brand her to be of late times a kind of Concubin to him, and
that she gives him ready money once a year to lie with her, which she minceth
by the name of present, though it (...) indeed rather a tribut.

I would I had you here with a wish, and you would not desire in haste to be at
Grayes-Inne, though I hold your walks to be the pleasant'st place about London;
and that you have there the choicest society. I pray present my kind
commendations to all there, and my service at Bishops-gate-street, and let me
hear from you by the next Post: So I am

Ven: 5. Iun. 1621. Entirely yours, J. H.

XXXI. To Dr. Fr. Mansell, from Venice.
GIve me leave to salute you first in these Sapphics.

In^^^^^ tendens iter ad Britannam
Ch^^ta* te paucis volo, (...) gressum,
Verba Mansello, been noscis illum,
talia perfer.
Finibus long patriis Hoellus
Di(...), quantis Venetium superb^
Civitas (...)
distat ab urbe
Plurimam mentis tibi vult salutem,
Plurimum cordis tibi vult vigorem,
Plurimum sortis tibi vult favorem
Regis and Aulae.
These wishes com to you from Venice, a place where there is nothing wanting that
heart can wish: Renowned Venice, the admiredst City in the World, a City that
all Europ is bound unto, for she is her greatest Ram part against that huge
Eastern Tyrant the Turk by Sea, else I believe he had overrun all Christendo^
by this time: Against him this City has performed notable exploits, and not
only against him, but diverse other: She has restored Emperors to their
Throne, and Popes to their Chairs, and with her Galleys often preserved Saint
Peter's Bark from sinking: for which, by way of reward, one of his Suceessors
espo^s'd her to the Sea, which marriage is solemnly renewed evry year in solemn
Profession by the Doge, and all the Clarissunos, and a Gold Ring cast into the
Sea out of the great Galeasse, called the (...), wherein the first Ceremony was
performed by the Pope himself, above three hundred years since, and they say it
is the self-same Vessel still, though often put upon the Carine, and trimmed*
This made me think on that famous ship at Athens; nay, I fell upon (...)
abstracted notion in Philosophy, and a speculation touching the body of man,
which being in perpetual Flux, and a kind of succession of decays, and
consequently requiring ever and anon, a restoration of what it loses of the
virtue of the former alim^nt, and what was converted after the third concoction
into blood and fleshy substance, which as in all other sublunary bodies that
have internal principles of heat, uses to transpire, breath out, and wast
away through invisible Pores by exercise, motion, and sleep, to make room still
for a supply of new nourriture: I fell, I say, to consider whither our bodies
may be said to be of like condition with this Bucentore; which though it be
reputed still the same Vessel, yet I believe there is not a foot of that Timber
remaining which it had upon the first Dock, having bin as they tell me, so
often plank'd and ribb'd, caulk'd and peec'd: In like manner our bodies may be
said to be daily repaired by new sustenance, which begets new blood, and
consequently new spirits, new humors, and I may say new flesh, the old by
continual deperdition and insensible transpirations evaporating still out of
us, and giving way to fresh; so that I make a question, whither by reason of
these perpetual reparations, and accretions, the body of man may be said to be
the same numericall body in his old age that he had in his manhood, or the same
in his manhood, that he had in his youth, the same in his youth that he carried
about him in his childhood, or the same in his childhood which he wore first in
the Womb: I make a doubt, whither I had the same identicall, individually
numericall body, when I carried a Calf-Leather Sachell to School in Hereford,
as when I woar a Lamskin Hood in Oxford, or whither I have the same mass of
blood in my Veins, and the same Flesh now in Venice which I carried about me
three years since, up and down London streets, having in lieu of Beer and Al^,
drunk Wine all this while, and fed upon different Viands; now the stomach is
like a crusible, for it has a chymicall kind of virtue to transmute one body
into another, to transubstantiat Fish and Fruits into Flesh within, and about
us; but though it be questionable, whither I wear the same Flesh which is
fluxible, I am sure my Hair is not the same, for you may remember I went
flaxen-hair'd out ^of England, but you shall find me returned with a very dark
Brown, which I impute not only to the heat and air of those hot Countries I
have eat my bread in, but to the quality and difference of food; but you will
say, that hair is but an excrementitious thing, and makes not to this purpose;
moreover, me thinks I hear yon say, that this may be true, only in the blood
and spirits, or such fluid parts, not in the solid and heterogeneall parts: But
I will press no further at this time this Philosophical notion which the ^ght
of Bucentor^ infused into me, for it has already made me exceed the bounds of
a Letter, and I fear me to trespass too much upon your patience; I leave the
further disquisition of this point to your own contemplations, who are a far
riper Philosopher then I, and have waded deeper into, and drunk more of
Aristotle's Well; but to conclude, though it be doubtful whither I carry about
me the same body or no, in all points that I had in England, I am well assured,
I bear still the same mind, and therein I verif^ the old verse.

Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. The Air, but not the mind
they change,
Who in Outlandish Countries range.
For what alterations soever happen in this Microcosm, in this little World,
this small bulk and body of mine, you may be confident, that nothing shall
alter my affections, specially toward you, but that I will persever still the
same,

The very same, J. H.
Ven. 25. Iun. 1621.
XXXII. To Richard Altham, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I Was plunged in a deep fit of melancholy, Satum had cast his black influence
ore all my intellectuals, me thought I felt my heart as a lump of Dow, and
heavy as Lead within my Breast; when a Letter of yours of the third of this
month was brought me, which presently begot new Spirits within me, and made
such strong impressions upon my Intellectuals, that it turned and transformed
me into another man. I have read of a Duke of Milan, and others, who were
poisoned by reading of a Letter, but yours produced contrary effects in me, it
became an antidot, or rather ^ most Soverain Cordial to me, more operative then
Bezar, of more virtue then Potable Gold, or the Elixir of Ambar, for it wrought
a sudden cure upon me: That fluent and rare mixture of love, and wit, which I
found up and down therein, were the Ingredients of this Cordial; they were as
so many choice Flowers, strw'd here and there, which did cast such an
Odoriferous sent, that they revived all my sence^, and dispelled those dull
fumes which had formerly ore clouded my brain: Such was the operation of your
most ingenuous and affectionat Letter, and so sweet an entertainment it gave
me: If your Letter had that virtue, what would your person have don; and did
you know all, you would wish your person here a while; did you know the rare
beuty of this Virgin-Clty, you would quickly make love to her, and change your
Royal Exchange for the Rialto, and your Grayes-Inne. Walks for Saint Marks
place for a time. Farewell dear child of Virtue, and minion of the Muses, and
love still

Ven. 1. July 1621. Your J. H.

XXIII. To my much honored friend Sir John North Knight. from Venice.
Noble Sir,
THe first office of gratitude is, to receive a good turn civilly, then to
retain it in memory and acknowledge it, thirdly, to endeavor a requital, for
this last office, it is in vain for me to attempt it, specially toward you,
who have laden me with such a variety of courtesies, and weighty favors, that
my poor stock comes far short of any retaliation; but for the other two,
reception and retention, as I am not conscious to have bin wanting in the first
act, so I shall never fail in the second, because both these are within the
compass of my power; for if you could pry into my memory, you should discover
there a huge Magazin of your favors (you have bin pleased to do me present and
absent) safeiy stored up and coacervated, to preserve them from mouldring away
in oblivion, for courtesies should be no perishable commodity: Should I attempt
any other requital, I should extenuat your favors, and derogat from the worth
of them* yet if to this of the memory, I can contribut any other act of body or
mind, to enlarge my acknowledgments toward you; you may be well assured, that
I shall be ever ready to court any occasion, whereby the world may know how much
I am

Ven: 13. Iul. 1621 Your thankful Servitor, J. H.

XXXIV. To Dan. Caldwall Esquire from Venice.
My dear D.
COuld Letters fly with the same Wings as Love uses to do, and cut the Air
with the like swiftnes of motion, this Letter of mine should work a miracle,
and be with you in an instant; nor should she fear interception, or any other
casualty in the way, or cost you one penny the Post, for she should pass
invisibly: but it is not fitting, that paper which is made but of old Ragg's
wherewith Letters are swadled, should have the same privilege as Love, which is
a spiritual thing, having something of Divinity in it, and partake^ in ^elerity
with the Imagination, then which there is not any thing more swift you know, no
not the motion of the upper sphere the (...) mobile, which snatcheth all the
other mine after it, and indeed the whole Macrocosm all the world besi^es,
except our Earth (the Center,) which upper sphere the Astronomers would have to
move so many degrees, so many thousand miles in a moment; fince then, Letters
are denied such a velocity, I allow this of ^ine twenty days, which is the
ordinary time allowed twixt Venice and London, to com unto you, and thank you a
thousand (...) over for your last of the tenth of June, and the rich Venison
Feast you made, as I understand not long since, to the remembrance of the, at
the Ship Tavern: Believe it Sir, you shall find that this love of yours, is not
ill employed, for I esteem it at the highest degree, I value it more then the
Treasury of Saint Mark, which I lately saw, where amongst other things, there is
a huge Iron Chest as tall as my self, that has no Lock, but a Crevice, through
which they cast in the Gold that is bequeathed to Saint Mark in Legacies, whereon
there is engraven this proud Motto.

Quando questo scrimio S' Aprira,
Tutto'l mundo tremera.
When this Chest shall open, the whole World shall tremble; the Duke of Ossuna,
late Viceroy of Naples, did what he could to force them to open it, for he
brought Saint Mark to wast much of this Tresure in the late Wars, which he made
purposely to that end, which made them have recours to us, and the Hollander
for Ships, not long since.

Amongst the rest of Italy, this is called the Maidin City (notwithstanding
her great number of Courtisans) and there is a Prophecy, That she shall continue
a Maid until her Husband for sake her, meaning the Sea, to whom the Pope
married her long fince, and the Sea is observed not to love her so deeply as he
did, for he begins to shrink, and grow shallower in some places about her; not
does the Pope also, who was the Father that gave her to the Sea, affect her as
much as he formerly did, specially since the extermination of the Jesuits; so
that both Husband, and Father, begin to abandon her.

I am to be a guest to this Hospitable Maid, a good while yet, and if you want
any commodity that she can afford (and what cannot she afford for humane
pleasure or delight?) do but write, and it shall be sent you.

Farewell gentle soul, and correspond still in pure love with

Ven: 29. of Iul. 1621. Your J. H.

XXXV. To Sir James Crofts Knight. from Venice.
SIR,
I Received one of yours the last week, that came in my Lord Ambassador W^ttons
Packet, and being now upon point of parting with Venice, I could not do it
without acquainting you (as far as the extent of a Letter will permit) with her
Power, her Policy, her Wealth, and pedigree: She was built of the ruins of
(...) and Padoua, for when those swarms of tough Northern peeple overran Italy,
under the conduct of that Scourge of Heaven Attila, with others, and that this
soft voluptuous Nation after so long a desuetude from Arms, could not repel
their fury, many of the ancient Nobility and Gentry fled into these Lakes and
little Islands, amongst the Fishermen for their security; and finding the Air
good and commodious for habitation, they began to build upon these small
Islands, whereof there are in all threescore, and in tract of time, they
conjoined and leagued them together by Bridges, whereof there are now above 800.
and this makes up the City of Venice; who is now above twelve Ages old, and
was contemporary with the Monarchy of France; but the Signory glories in one
thing above the Monarchy, that she was born a Christian, but the Monarchy not.
Though this City be thus hemmed in with the Sea, yet she spreads her Wings far
and wide upon the shore; she has in Lombardy six considerable Towns, Padova,
Verona, Vicenz^, Brescia, Cromo, and Bergamo; she has in the Marquisat, Bassan
and Castelfranco; she has all Friuli and Istria; she commands the shores of
Dalmatia and Slavonia; she keeps under the power of Saint Mark, the Islands of
Corfu (anciently Corcyria) Ceptalonia, Zant, Cerigo, Lucerigo, and Candy (Jove's
Cradle;) she had a long time the Kingdom of Cypres, but it was quite rent from
her by the Turk, which made that high spirited Bassa, being taken prisoner at
the battle of Lepanto, where the gran Signor lost above 200 Galleys, to say,
That that defeat to his great Master was but like the s^aving of his Beard, or
the pairing of his Nails; but the taking of Cypres was like the cutting off of
a Lim, which will never grow again: This mighty potentat being so near a
Neighbor to her, she is forced to comply with him, and give him an Annual
present in Gold: She has about thirty Galleys most part of the year in course
to scowre and secure the Gulf; she entertains by land in Lombardy, and other
parts 25000. Foot, besides some of the Cantons of Suisses whom she gives pay
unto; she has also in constant pay 600. men of Arms, and evry of these must
keep two Horses a piece, for which they are allowed 120. Ducats a year, and
they are for the most part Gentlemen of Lombardy: When they have any great
expedition to make, they have always a stranger for their General, but he is
supervis'd by two Prov^ditors, without whom he cannot attempt any thing.

Her great Counsel consists of above 2000 Gentlemen, and some of them meet
evry Sunday and Holyday, to choose Officers, and Magistrates; and evry Gentleman
being passed 25. yeer^ of Age, is capable to sit in this Counsel: The Doge or
Duke (their Soverain Magistrate) is chosen by Lots, which would be too tedious
here to demonstrat, and commonly he is an Aged man who is created, like that
course they hold in the Popedom. When he is dead there be Inquisitors that examine
his actions, and his misdemeanors are punishable in his Heirs: There is a
surintenden^ Counsel of ten, and six of them may dispatch business without the
Doge, but the Doge never without some of them, not as much as open a Letter from
any Foreign State, though addressed to himself, which makes him to be called by
other Princes, Testadi legno, Ahead of Wood.

The wealth of this Republic has bin at a stand, or rather declining since the
Portugal found a road to the East Indies by the Cape of good Hope; for this
City was used to fetch all those Spices, and other Indian Commodities, from the
gran Cayro down the Nile, being formerly carried to Cayro from the Red Sea,
upon Camels and Dromedaries backs, threescore days journey; And so Venice used
to dispense those Commodities through all Christendom, which not only the
Portugal, but the English, and Hollander, now transport, and are Masters of
the Trade. Yet there is no outward appearance at all of poverty, or any decay in
this City, but she is still gay, flourishing, and fresh, and flowing with all
kind of bravery and delight, which may be had at cheap rates. Much more might
be written of this ancient wi^e Republic, which cannot be comprehended within
the narrow enclosure of a Letter. So with my due and daily Prayers, for a
continuance of your health, and increase of honor, I rest

Ven: 1. of August, 1621. Your most ^umble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXXVI. To Robert Brown Esquire, at the Middle Temple, from Venice.
Robin,
I Have now enough of the Maiden City, and this week I am to go further into
Italy; for though I have bin a good while in Venice, yet I cannot say I have
bin hitherto upon the Continent of Italy, for this City is naught else but a
knot of Islands in the Adriatic Sea, joined in one body by Bridges, and a good
way distant from the firm Land: I have lighted upon very choice company, your
Cousin Brown, and Master Web, and we all take the R^ of Lombardy; but we made
an order amongst our selves, that our discourse be always in the Language of
the Country, under penalty of a for ^iture, which is to be indispensably paid
(...) Sy^s made us a curious feast lately, where in a Cup of the richest Greek
we had your health, and I could not tell whither the Wine or the remembrance of
you was sweeter; for it was naturally a kind of Aromatic Wine, which left a
fragrant perfuming kind of farewell behind it. I have sent you a Runlet of it
in the Ship Lion, and if it com safe and unprick'd, I pray bestow some Bottles
upon the Lady (you know) with my humble Service. When you write next to Master
Simns, I pray acknowledge the good Hospitality, and extraordinary civilities I
received from him: Before I conclude, I will acquaint you with a common saying
that is used of this dainty City of Venice.

Venetia, Venetia, chi non te vede non te Pregia,
Ma chi t'ha troppo veduto te Despreggia.
Englished and Rim'd thus (though I know you need no Translation, you
understand so much of Italian,)

Venice, Venice, none Thee unseen can prize,
Who has seen thee too much will Thee despise.
I will conclude with that famous Hexastic which Sanz^^^^^^ made of this rare
Cite, which pleases me much better.

Viderat Hadriatis Venetam Neptunus in undis
Stare urbem, and toti ponere jura Mari;
Nunc mihi Tarpeias quantum vis Jupiter Arces
O^^^ice, and illa tui moenia Martis, ait,
Sic Pelago Tibrim praefers, urbem aspice utramque
Illam homines dices, hanc posuisse Deos.
When Neptun saw in Adrian Surges stand
Venice, and give the Sea Laws of command:
Now Jove said he, Object thy Capitol,
And Mars proud Walls: This were for to extol
Tyber beyond the Main* both Towns behold,
R(...) men thou wilt say, Venice the Gods did mould.
Sanz^^^^^^ had given him by Saint Mark a hundred (...), (...) evry one of
these Verses, which amounts to about 300 pounds. It would be long before the
(...) of London would do the like: Witne^ that ^old reward, or rather those
cold drops of W^ which were cast upon my Countreyman Sir Hugh Middleto^, for
beinging Ware River through her Streets, the most serviceable and (...) sor^est
benefit that ever she received.

The parcel of Italian Books that you writ for, you shall receive (...) Master
Leat, if it please God to send the Ship to safe Port; and I take it as a
favor, that you employ me in any thing that may ^nduce to your contentment;
because

I am your serious Servitor, J. H.
Ven: 12. Aug. 1621.
XXXVII. To Cap. Thomas Porter, from Venice.
My dear Captain,
AS I was going a Shipboard in Alicant, a Letter of yours in Spanish came to
hand: I discovered two things in it, first, what a master you are of that
Language, then how mindful you are of your friend; for the first, I dare not
correspond with you yet; for the second, I shall never com short of you, for I
am as mindful of you, as possibly you can be of me, and some hours, my Pulls
does not beat more often, then my memory runs on you, which is often enough in
conscience; for the Physicians hold, that in evry well disposed body, there be
above 4000 Pulsations evry hour, and some Pulses have bin known to beat above
30000 times an hour in acute Feavours.

I understand you are bound with a gallant Fleet for the Mediterranean, if you
com to Alicant, I pray commend me to Francisco Marco my Landlord, he is a
merry drole, and good company: One night when I was there he sent his Boy with a
Borracho of Leather under his Cloak for Wine, the Boy coming back about ten a
clock, and passing by the Guard, one asked him whither he carried any Weapons
about him (for none must wear any Weapons there after ten at night,) No quoth
the Boy being pleasant, I have but a little Dagger; the Watch came and searched
him, and finding the Barracho full of good Wine, drunk it all up, saying,
Sirrah, You know no man must carry any Weapons so late: but because we know
whose Servant you are, there is the Scabbard of your Dagger again, and so threw
him the empty Borracho; but another passage pleased me better of Don Beltran de
Rosa, who being to marry a rich Labradors (a Yeomans) daughter hard by, which
was much importuned by her parents to the match, because their Family should be
thereby ennobled, he being a Cavalier of Saint Iago; the young Maid having
understood that Don Beltran had bin in Naples, and had that disease about him,
answered wittily, En verdad pro adobar mi la sangre, no quiero danar mi la
carne; Truly Sir, To better my blood, I will not hurt my flesh. I doubt I
shall not be in England before you set out to Sea, if not, I take my leave of
you in this Paper, and wish you a prosperous voyage and an honorable return;
It is the hearty Prayers of

Ven: 21. Aug. 1621. Your J. H.

XXXVIII. To Sir William Saint John Knight, from Venice.
SIR,
HAving seen Ant^nors Tomb in Padoiia, and the Amphitheater of Flaminius in
Verona, with other brave Towns in Lombardy, I am now co^ to Rome, and Rome they
say is evry man's Country, she is called Communis Patria, for evry one that is
within the compass of the Latin Church, finds himself here as it were at hom,
and in his Mothers house, in regard of interest in Religion, which is the
cause, that for one Native, there be five strangers that sojourn in this City,
and without any distinction, or mark of strangenes, they com to preferments and
offices, both in Church and State, according to merit, which is more valued
and sought after here, then any where.

But whereas I expected to have found Rome elevated upon seven Hills, I met her
rather spreading upon a Flat, having humbled her self since she was made a
Christian, and descended from those Hills to Campus Martius, with Trasteren,
and the Suburbs of Saint Peter she has yet in compass about fourteen miles,
which is far short of that vast circuit she had in Claudius his time; for
Vopiscu^ writes she was then of fifty miles circumference, and she had five
hundred thousand free Citizens in a famous cense that was made, which allowing,
but six to evry Family in Women, Children, and Servants, came to three Millions
of souls, but she is now a Wilderness in comparison of that number: The Pope is
grown to be a great Temporal Prince of late years, for the state of the Church
extends above 300. miles in length, and 200 miles in breadth, it contains
Ferrara, Bologna, Romagnia, the Marquisat of Ancona, umbria, Sabina, Perugia,
with a part of Toscany, the Patrimony, Rome her self, and Latium: In these there
are above fifty Bishoprics, the Pope has also the Duchy of Spoleto, and the
exarchat of Ravenna; he has the Town of Beneventa in the Kingdom of Naples,
and the County of Venisse called Avignon in France; he has title also good
enough to Naples it self, but rather then offend his Champion the King of
Spain, he is contented with a white Mule, and Purse of Pistols about the neck,
which he receives evry year for a heriot or homage, or what you will call it;
he pretends also to be Lord Paramount of Sicily, ^rbin, Par^a, and Masser^, of
Norway, Ireland, and England, since King John did prostrat our Crown at
Pandelfo his Legat's Feet.

The State of the Apostolie See here in Italy lies twixt two Seas, the
Adriati^, and the Tyrrh^, and it runs through the midst of Italy, which makes
the Pope powerful to do good or harm, and more capable then any other to be an
Umpire or an Enemy: His authority being mixed twixt Temporal and Spiritual
disperseth it self into so many members, that a young man may grow old here,
before he can well understand the form of Government.

The Consistory of Cardinals meet but once a week, and once a week they
solemnly wait all upon the Pope. I am told there are now in all Christendom but
sixty eight Cardinals, whereof there are six Cardinal Bishops, fifty one
Cardinal Priests, and eleven Cardinal Deacons: The Cardinal Bishops attend
and sit near the Pope, when he celebrats any Festival: The Cardinal Priests
assist him at Mass, and the Cardinal Deacons attire him. A Cardinal is made
by a short Breve or Writ from the Pope in these words, Creamus te Socium
Regibus, superiorem ducibus and fratrem ^ostrum: We creat thee a Companion to
Kings, Superior to Dukes, and our Brother: If a Cardinal Bishop should be
questioned for any offense, there must be twenty four Witnesses produced against
him.

The Bishop of O^ia has most privilege of any other, for he consecrats and
instals the Pope, and goes always next to him: All these Cardinals have the
repute of Princes, and besides other incomes, they have the Annats of Benefices
to support their greatness.

For point of power, the Pope is able to put 50000 men in the field, in case of
necessity, besides his navall strength in Galleys. We read how Paul the third
sent Charles the fifth twelve thousand Foot, and 500. Horse. Pius the fifth
sent a greater aid to Charles the ninth* and for riches, besides the Temporal
Dominions he has in all the Countries before named, the Datary or Dispatching
of Bulls, the Trienniall Subsidies, Annats, and other Ecclesiastic Rights,
mount to an unknown sum; and it is a common saying here. That as long as the
Pope can finger a pen, he can want no pence. Pius the fifth, notwithstanding
his expenses in Buildings left four Millions in the Castle of Saint Angelo, in
less then five years, more I believe then this Gregory the fifteenth will, for
he has many Nephews; and better it is to be the Popes Nephew, then to be
favorit to any Prince in Christendom.

Touching the Temporal Government of Rome, and Oppidan Affairs; there is a
Praetor, and some choice Citizens which ^it in the Capitol: Amongst other pieces
of policy, there is a Synagog of Jews permitted here (as in other places of
Italy) under the Popes nose, but they go with a mark of distinction in their
hats, they are tolerated for advantage of commerce, wherein the Jews are
wonderful dextrous, though most of them be only Brokers and Lom^rdeers; and
they are held to be here, as the Cinic held Women to be ^alum necessarium. There
be few of the Romans that use to pray heartily for the Popes long life, in
regard the oftener the change is, the more advantageous it is for the City,
because commonly it brings strangers, and a recruit of new people. This Air of
Rome is not so wholesome as of old, and amongst other reasons one is because of
the burning of Stubble to fatten their fields; For her Antiquities, it would
take up a whole Volumn to write them, those which I hold the chiefest are
Vespasia^s Amphitheater, where fourscore thousand people might sit; The Stoves
of Anthony, diverse rare Statues at Belveder and Saint Peter's, specially that of
Laocoon, the Obelisk; for the genius of the Roman has always bin much taken
with Imagery, Limming, and Sculptures, insomuch, that as in former times, so
now, I believe the Statues and Pictures in Rome, exceed the number of living
people: One antiquity among other, is very remarkable, because of the change of
Language; which is an ancient Column erected as a Trophey for Duillius the
Consul, after a famous Navall Victory obtained against the Carthaginians in
the second Punic War, where these words are engraven and remain legible to this
day. Exemet leciones Maci^rates Castreis exfocient pugnandod cepet enque
^avebos marid Consul, etc. And half a dozen lines more it is called Columna
restrata, having the Beaks and Prores of ships engraven up and down, whereby it
appears, that the Latin then spoken was much differing from that which was used
in Ciceros time 150. years after. Since the dismembring of the Empire Rome has
run through many Vieissitudes, and turns of Fortune; and had it not bin for the
residence of the Pope, I believe she had become a heap of ^tones, a mount of
Rubbish by this time; and howsoever that she bears up indifferent well, yet one
may say,

Qui miseranda videt veteris vestigia Romae,
Ille potest merito dicere Roma suit.
They who the ruins of first Rome behold,
May say, Rome is not now, but was of old.
Present Rome may be said to be but the Monument of Rome passed, when she was
in that flourish that Saint Austin desired to see her in: She who tamed the
world, tamed her self at last, and falling under her own weight, fell to be a
prey to Time; yet there is a providence seems to have a care of her still; for
though her Air ^e not so good, nor her circumjacent Soil so kindly as it was,
yet she has wherewith to keep life and soul together still, by her Ecclesiastic
Courts, which is the sole cause of her peepling now: So that it may be said,
When the Pope came to be her head, she was reduced to her first principles; for
as a shepherd was founder, so a shepherd is still her Governor and preserver.
But whereas the French have an odd saying, that

Iamais cheval ny homme,
S'amenda pour aller a Rome.
Never Horse, or Man did mend,
That unto Rome did wend.
Truly I must confess, that I find my self much bettered by it; for the sight
of some of these ruins did fill me with symptoms of Mortification, and made me
more sensible of the frailty of all sublunary things, how all bodies, as well
inanimat as animat, are subject to dissolution and change, and evry thing else
under the Moon, except the love of

Your faithful Servitor, J. H.
Rome, September. 13, 1621.
XXXIX. To Sir T. H. Knight. from Naples.
SIR
I Am now in the Gentle City of Naples, a City swelling with all delight,
Gallantry and Wealth; and truly, in my opinion, the King of Spains greatness
appears here more emminently, then in Spain it self: This is a delicat
luxurious City, fuller of true-bred Cavaliers, then any place I saw yet. The
Clime is hot, and the constitutions of the Inhabitants more hot.

The Napolitan is accounted the best Courtier of Ladies, and the greatest
embracer of pleasure of any other peeple: They say there is no less here then
twenty thousand Courtizans registered in the office of Savelli. This Kingdom
with Calabria, may be said to be the one Moytie of Italy, it extends it self
450. miles, and spreds in breadth 112; it contains 2700 Towns, it has 20
Archbishops 127 Bishops, 13 Princes, 24 Dukes, 25 Marquisses, and 800 Barons.
There are three Presidiall Castles in this City; and though the Kingdom abound
in rich Staple commodities, as Silks, Cottons, and Wine, and that there is a
mighty Revenue comes to the Crown; yet the King of Spain when he casts up his
account at the years end, makes but little benefit thereof, for it is eaten up
twixt Governors, Garrisons, and Officers. He is forced to maintain 4000
Spanish Foot, called the Tercia of Naples, in the Castles he has 1600 in
perpetual Garrison; he has 1000 men of Arms, 450 Light Horse; besides there
are five Footmen enrolled for evry hundred Fire; And he had need to do all
this, to keep this voluptuous people in aw; for the Story musters up seven and
twenty famous Rebellions of the Neapolitans in less then 300 years: But now
they pay soundly for it, for one shall hear them groan up and down under the
Spanish yoke; And commonly the King of Spain sends some of his Grandes hither,
to repair their decayed fortunes, whence the saying sprung, That the Viceroy of
Sicily gnaws, the Governor of Milan Eats, but the Viceroy of Naples devoures.
Our English Merchants here, beat a considerable Trade, and their Factors live
in better Equippage, and in a more splendid manner, as in all Italy besides,
then their Masters and Principalls in London, they ruffle in Silks and Sattins,
and wear good Spanish Leather-Shooes, while their Masters-Shooes upon our
Exchange in London shine with Blacking. At Puzzoli not far off amongst the
Grotts, there are so many strange stupendous things, that nature her self seemed
to have studied of purpose how to make her self there admired: I reserve the
discoursing of them with the nature of the Tarantola, and Manna which is
gatherd'd here and no where else, with other things, till I shall see you, for
they are fitter for discourse then a Letter. I will conclude with a Proverb they
have in Italy of this people.

Napolitano,
Largo di bocca, stretto di mano.
The Neapolitans
Have wide mouths, but narrow hands.
They make strong Masculin promises, but Femal performances (for deeds are men,
and words are women) and if in a whole flood of complements one find a drop of
reality, it is well. The first acceptance of a Courtesy is accounted the
greatest incivility that can be amongst them, and a ground for a quarrel, as I
heard of a German Gentleman that was baffled for accepting one only invitation
to a dinner. So desiring to be preserved still in your good opinion, and in the
rank of your seravants, I rest always most ready

At Your disposing, J. -H.
Naples, October. the 1. 1621.
XL. To Christopher Jones Esquire at Grayes-Inne, from Naples.
Honored Father,
I Must still style you so, since I was adopted your Son, by so good a Mother
as Oxford: My mind lately prompted me, that I ^ould commit a great Soloecisme,
if amongst the rest of my friends (...) England, I should leave you unsaluted,
whom I love so dearly ^ell, specially having such a fair and pregnant
opportunity, as ^e hand of this worthy Gentleman, your Cousin Morgan, who (...)
now posting hence for England: He will tell you how it fares ^ith me; how any
time these thirty and odd months I have bin ^ss'd from shore to shore, and
passed under various Meridians* ^d am now in this voluptuous, and luxuriant
City of Naples: and though these frequent removes and tumblings under climes
(...) differing temper, were not without some danger, yet the de^ght which
accompanied them was far greater; and it is impossi^e for any man to conceive
the true pleasure of Peregrination, ^t he who actually enjoyes, and puts it in
practice: Believe it (...), that one year well employed abroad by one of mature
judgment (which you know I want very much) advantageth more in ^int of useful
and solid knowledge, then three in any of our ^iversities: You know Running
Waters are the purest; so they ^t traverse the World up and down, have the
cleer^st under^ndings; being faithful ey-witnesses of those things which ^her
receive but in trust, whereunto they must yield an intuitive ^nsent, and a kind
of implicit faith. When I passed through (...) parts of Lombardy, amongst
other things, I observed the Phy^gnomies, and Complexions of the peeple, men
and women, ^d I thought I was in Wales, for diverse of them have a cast of
^untenance, and a nearer resemblance with our Nation, then ^y I ever saw yet:
And the reason is obvious, for the Romans ^ing bin near upon three hundred
years amongst us, where ^ey had four Legions (before the English Nation, or
Language ^d any being) by so long a coalition and tract of time, (...) two
Nations must needs copulat and mix: Insomuch, that I believe there is yet
remaining in Wales many of (...) Roman race, and diverse in Italy of the
British. Amongst (...) resemblances, one was in their prosody, and vein of
(...) or riming, which is like our Bards, who hold agnominations, a^ enforcing
of consonant words or syllables, one upon the other^ be the greatest elegance:
As for example in Welsh, Tewgris, (...) dyrris ty'r derrin gwillt, etc. So have
I seen diverse old rimes Italian running so; as Done, O danno, ^he Febo
affranto (...) In selva salvo a me Piu caro cuore, etc.

Being lately in Rome, amongst other Pasquills I met with (...) that was
against the Scot, though it had some gawl in it, yet it (...) a great deal of
wit, specially toward the conclusion; so that think if King James saw it, he
would but laugh at it.

As I remember some years since, there was a very abusive (...) in Verse brought
to our King; and as the passages were a (...) before him, he often said, That
if there were no more men England, the rogue should hang for it; at last being
com to (...) conclusion, which was (after all his railing)

Now God preserve the King, the Queen, the Peers,
And grant the Author long may wear his Ears.
This pleased His Majesty so well, that he broke into a (...) and said, By my
Sol so thou shall for me: Thou art a bitter, (...) thou art a witty Knave.

When you write to Monmouthshire, I pray send my respects my Tutor, Master Moor
Fortune, and my service to Sir (...) Williams; and according to that relation
which was 'twixt us Oxford, I rest

Naples, 8. October. 1621. Your Constant Son to serve you, J. H.

XLI. To Sir J. C. from Florence.
SIR,
THis Letter comes to kiss your hands from fair Florence, a City so
beutifull, that the great Emperor ( Charles the fifth) said, That she was
fitting to be shown, and seen only upon Holidayes: She marvailously
flourishes with Buildings, with Wealth and Artisans; for it is thought that in
Serges, which is but one commodity, there are made two millions evry year: All
degrees of people live here not only well, but splendidly well,
notwithstanding the manifold exactions of the Duke, upon all things: For none
can buy here Lands or Houses, but he must pay eight in the hundred to the Duke;
none can hire or build a House, but he must pay the tenth penny; none can
marry, or commerce suite in Law, but there is a Fee to the Duke; none can bring
as much as an Egg or Sallet to the Market, but the Duke has share therinna:
Moreover, Ligorn which is the Key of Toscany, being a Maritim, and a great
Mercantil Town, has mightily enriched this Country by being a Frank Port to
all comers, and a safe rendevouz to Pirates, as well as to Merchants. Add
hereunto, that the Duke himself in some respect is a Merchant, for he sometimes
ingrosseth all the Corn of the Country, and retails it at what rate he
pleases. This inables the Duke to have perpetually 20000 men enrolled, trained
up, and paid, and none but they can carry Arms; he has 400 Light Horse in
constant pay, and 100 men at Arms besides; and all these quartered in so narrow
a compass, that he can command them all to Florence in twenty four hours. He
has twelve Galleys, two Galeons, and six Galeasses besides, and his Galleys,
are called, The black Fleet, because they annoy the Turk more in the bottom of
the Straits, then any other.

This State is bound to keep good quarter with the Pope, more then others; for
all Toscany is fenced by Nature her self, I mean with Mountains, except toward
the Territories of the Apostolic See, and the Sea it self, therefore it is
called a Country of Iron.

The Dukes Palace is so spacious, that it occupies the Room of fifty Houses at
least; yet though his Court surpasses the bounds of a Duke's, it reaches not
to the Magnificence of a King's: The Pope was solicited to make the gran Duke
a King, and he answered, That he was content he should be King in Toscany, not
of Toscany; whereupon one of his Counselors replied, That it was a more
glorious thing to be a gran Duke, then a petty King.

Among other Cities which I desi^'d to see in Italy, Genoa was one where I
lately was, and found her to be the proudest for buildings of any I met
withal, yet the people go the plainest of any other, and are also most
parsimonious in their diet: They are the subtillest, I will not say the most
subdolous dealers; they are wonderful wealthy specially in Money: In the year
1600 the King of Spain owed them eighteen millions, and they say it is double
as much now.

From the time they began to finger the Indian Geld, and that this Town has
bin the Scale by which he has conveyed his Tresure to Flanders, since the
Wars in the Netherlands for the support of his Armies, and that she has got
some privileges for the exportation of VVools, and other commodities
(prohibited to others) out of Spain, she has improved extremely in riches, and
made Saint George's Mount swell higher then Saint Marks in Venice.

She has bin often ill favouredly shaken by the Venetian, and has had other
enemies, which have put her to hard shifts for her own defense, specially in
the time of Lewis the eleventh of France; at which time, when she would have
given her self up to him for Protection, King Lewis being told that Genoa was
content to be his, he answered, She should not be his long, for he would give
her up to the devil, and rid his hands of her.

Indeed the Genowaies have not the Fortune to be so well beloved, as other
people in Italy, which proceeds I believe from their cunningnes, and
over-reachings in bargaining, wherein they have something of the Jew. The Duke is
there but Biennial, being changed evry two years: He has fifty Germans for his
Guard; there be four Centurion^ that have 100 men a piece, which upon occasions,
attend the Signory abroad in Velvet Coats; there be eight chief Governors, and
400 Counselors, amongst whom there be five Soverain Syndics, who have
authority to censure the Duke himself, his time being expired, and punish any
Governor else, though after death, upon the Heir.

Amongst other customs they have in that Town, one is, That none must carry a
pointed Knif about him, which makes the Hollander, who is used to Snik and
Snee, to leave his Horn-sheath and Knif a Shipboard when he comes a shore: I
met not with an Englishman in all the Town; nor could I learn of any Factour of
ours that ever resided there.

There is a notable little active Republic toward the midst of Toscany, called
Luca, which in regard she is under the Emperors protection, he dares not
meddle withal, though she lie as a Partridg under a Faulcons Wings, in
relation to the gran Duke; besides there is another reason of the State, why he
meddles not with her, because she is more beneficial unto him now that she is
free, and more industrious to support this freedom, then if she were become his
vassal; for then it is probable, she would grow more careless and idle, and
so could not vent his commodities so soon, which she buys for ready money,
wherein most of her wealth consists: There is no State that winds the penny more
nimbly, and makes quicker returns.

She has a Counsel called the Discoli, which pryes into the profession and
life of evry one, and once a year they rid the State of all Vagabonds: So that
this petty, pretty Republic, may not be improperly parellell'd to a Hive of
Bees, which have bin always the emblems of industry and order.

In this splendid City of Florence, there be many rarities, which if I should
insert in this Letter, it would make her swell too big, and indeed they are
fitter for Parol Communication. Here is the prime dialect of the Italian
spoken, though the pronunciation be a little more guttural, then that of Siena,
and that of the Court of Rome, which occasions the Proverb,

Lingua Toscana in boca Romana. The Toscan tongue sounds best in a Roman mouth.
The peeple here generally seem to be more generous, and of a higher comportment
then elsewhere, very cautious and circumspect in their negotiation; whence
arises the Proverb,

Chi ha da far con Tosco,
Non bisogna chi sia Losco.
Who deals with a Florentine,
Must have the use of both his Ey'n.
I shall bid Italy farewell now very shortly, and make my way are the Alps to
France, and so home by Gods grace, to take a review of my friends in England,
amongst whom, the sight of your self will be as gladsom to me, as of any other;
for I profess my self, and purpose to be ever

Your thrice affectionat Servitor, J. H.
Florence, 1 November. 1621.
XLII. To Cap. Francis Bacon, from Turin.
SIR
I Am now upon point of shaking hands with Italy; for I am com to Turin, having
already seen Uenice the rich, Padoua the learned, Bologna the fat, Rome the
holy, Naples the gentle, Genoa the proud, Florence the fair, and Milan the
great; from this last, I came hither, and in that City also appears the
Grandeur of Spains Monarchy very much: The Governor of Milan is always
Captain General of the Cavalry to the King of Spain thorowout Italy: The Dnke
of Feria is now Governor, and being brought to kiss his hands, he used me
with extraordinary respect, as he does all of our Nation, being by the
maternall side a Dormer. The Spaniard entertains there also 3000 Foot, 1000
Light Horse, and 600 men at Arms in perpetual pay; so that I believe the
benefit of that Duchy also, though seated in the richest Soil of Italy, hardly
countervails the charge. Three things are admired in Milan, the Dome or great
Church (built all of white Marble, within and without) the Hospital, and the
Castle, by which the Cittadell of Antwerp was traced, and is the best
conditioned Fortress of Christendom: Though Nova Palma a late Fortress of the
Venetian would go beyond it, which is built according to the exact Rules of the
most modern Enginry, being of a round form with nine Bastions, and a street
level to evry Bastion.

The Duke of Savoy, though he pass for one of the Princes of Italy, yet the
least part of his Territories lie there, being squandered up and down amongst
the Alps; but as much as he has in Italy, which is Piemont, is a well peepled,
and passing good Country.

This Duke of Savoy Emanuel, is accounted to be of the ancient'st and purest
extraction of any Prince in Europ, and his Knights also of the Anunciade, to be
one of the ancient'st Orders; though this present Duke be little in Stature,
yet is he of a lofty spirit, and one of the best Soldiers now living; and
though he be valiant enough, yet he knows how to patch the Lions-skin with a
Fox-Tail; and whosoever is Duke of Savoy, had need be cunning, and more then
any other Prince, in regard, that lying between two potent Neighbors, the
French and the Spaniard, he must comply with both.

Before I wean my self from Ital^, a word or two touching the genius of the
Nation. I find the Italian a degree higher in complement then the French, he is
longer and more grave in the delivery of it, and more prodigal of words,
insomuch, that if one were to be worded to death, Italian is the fittest
Language, in regard of the fluency and softnes of it; for throughout the whole
body of it, you have not a word ends with a consonant, except some few
Monosyllable Conjunctions and Propositions, and this renders the Speech more
smooth; which made one say, That when the confusion of toungs happened at the
building of the Tower of Babel* if the Italian had bin there, Nimrod had made
him a Playsterer. They are generally indulgent of themselves, and great
embracers of pleasure, which may proceed from the luscious rich Wines, and
luxurious Food, Fruits, and Roots, wherewith the Country abounds, Insomuch,
that in some places, Nature may be said to be Lena sui, A Baud to her self. The
Cardinal de Medici's Rule, is of much authority amongst them, That there is no
Religion under the Navill. And some of them are of the opinion of the Asians,
who hold, that touching those natural passions, desires, and motions, which
run up and down in the blood, God Almighty and his Handmaid Nature, did not
intend they should be a torment to us, but to be used with comfort and delight.
To conclude, in Italy, there be Virtutes magnae, nec minora Vitia, Great
virtues, and no less vices.

So with a tender of my most affectionat respects unto you, I rest

Your humble Servitor, J. H.
Turin, 30. November. 1621.
XLIII. To Sir I. H. from Lions.
SIR,
I Am now got ore the Alps, and returned to France; I had crossed and clammer'd
up the Pyreneans to Spain before, they are not so high and hideous as the Alps;
but for our Mountains in Wales as Eppint and Penwinm^ur, which are so much
cried up amongst us, they are Molehills in comparison of these, they are but
Pigmeys compared to Giants, but blisters compared to Impostumes, or Pimples to
Werts: Besides, our Mountains in Wales bear always something useful to man or
beast, some grass at least; but these uncouth huge monstrous excrescences of
Nature, bear nothing (most of them) but craggy Stones: The tops of some of them
are blanched over all the year long with Snows, and the people who dwell in the
Valleys drinking, for want of other, this Snow-water, are subject to a strange
swelling in the Throat, called Goytre, which is common amongst them. As I
scaled the Alps, my thoughts reflected upon Hannibal, who with Vinegar and
Strong Water, did eat out a passage through those Hills, but of late years
they have found a speedier way to do it by Gunpowder.

Being at Turin, I was by some disaster brought to an extreme low ebb in money,
so that I was forced to foot it along with some Pilgrims, and with gentle pace
and easy journeys, to clime up those Hills till I came to this Town of Lions,
where a Country man of ours, one Mr. Lewis, whom I knew in Alieant lives
Factour, so that now I want not any thing for my accommodation.

This is a stately rich Town, and a renowned Mart for the Silks of Italy, and
other Levantin commodities, and a great bank for money, and indeed the greatest
of France. Before this Bank was founded, which was by Henry the first, France
had but little Gold and Silver, insomuch, that we read how King John their
Captive King, could not in four years, raise sixty thousand Crowns to pay his
Ransom to our King Edward; And Saint Lewis was in the same case when he was
prisoner in Egypt, where he had left the Sacrament for a gage; But after this
Bank was erected, it filled France full of money; They of Luca, Florence, and
Genoa, with the Venetian, got quickly over the Hills, and brought their moneys
hither to get twelve in the hundred profit, which was the interest at first,
though it be now much lower.

In this great Mercantil Town, there be two deep navigable Rivers, the Rhone and
the Sone, the one has a swift rapid course, the other slow and smooth: And one
day as I walked upon their Banks, and observed so much difference in their
course, I fell into a contemplation of the humors of the French and Spaniard,
how they might be not improperly compared to these Rivers; the French to the
swift, the Spaniard to the slow River.

I shall write you no more Letters until I present my self unto you for a
speaking Letter, which I shall do as soon as I may tread London stones:

Your affectionate Servitor, J. H.
Lions, 6. November. 1621.
XLIIII. To Mr. Tho. Bowyer, from Lions.
BEing so near the Lake of Geneva, curiosity would carry anyone to see it: The
Inhabitants of that Town, me thinks, are made of another past differing from
the affable nature of those peeple I had conversed withal formerly; they have
one policy, lest that their pretty Republic should be pestered with fugitives,
their Law is, That what stranger soever flies thither for sanctuary, he is
punishable there, in the same degree, as in the Country where he committed the
offense.

Geneva is governed by four Syndncs, and four hundred Senators: She lies like a
Bonetwixt three Mastiffs, the Emperor, the French King, and the Duke of Savoy,
they all three look upon the Bone, but neither of them dare touch it singly,
for fear the other two would fly upon him: But they say the Savoyard has the
justest Title, for there are Imperial Records extant, That although the Bishops
of Geneva were Lords Spiritual and Temporal, yet they should acknowledge the
Duke of Savoy for their Superior: This man's Ancestors went frequently to the
Town, and the Keys were presently tendered to him. But since Calvin's time, who
had bin once banished, and then called in again, which made him to apply that
speech unto himself, The stone which the builders refused, is become the head
stone of the corner; I say, since they were refined by Calvin, they seem to
shun and scorn all the World besides, being cast as it were into another mould,
which has quite altered their very natural disposition in point of Moral
Society.

Before I part with this famous City of Lions, I will relate unto you a
wonderful strange accident that happened here not many years ago: There is an
Officer called Le Chevalier du Guet (which is a kind of Night-guard) here as
well as in Paris, and his Lieutenant called Iaquette, having supped one night
in a rich Merchants house, as he was passing the round afterward, he said, I
wonder what I have eaten and drunk at the Merchants house, for I find my self
so hot, that if I met with the Devils Dam to night, I should not forbear using
of her; hereupon, a little after he overtook a young Gentlewoman masked, whom
he would needs usher to her lodging, but discharged all his Watch, except two:
she brought him, to his thinking, to a little low lodging hard by the City
Wall, where there were only two Rooms: and after he had enjoyed her, he desired,
that according to the custom of French Gentlemen, his two Camerads might
partake also of the same pleasure; so she admitted them one after the other:
And when all this was don, as they sat together, she told them, if they knew
well, who she was, none of them would have ventured upon her; thereupon she
whissel'd three times, and all vanished: The next morning, the two soldiers
that had gone with Lieutenant Jaquette were found dead under the City Wall,
amongst the ordure and excrements, and Iaquette himself a little way off half
dead, who was taken up, and coming to himself, confessed all this, but died
presently after.

The next week I am to go down the Loire toward Paris, and thence as soon as I
can for England, where amongst the rest of my friends, whom I so much long to see
after this Trienniall separation, you are like to be one of my first objects;
In the mean time, I wish the same happiness may attend you at home, as I
desire to attend me hom-ward; for I am

Truly yours, I. H.
Lions, 5. December. 1621.
Familiar Letters.
SECTION II.
I. To my Father.
SIR,
IT has pleased God after almost three year^ peregrination by Land and Sea, to
bring me back safely to London, but although I am com safely, I am com sickly:
for when I landed in Venice, after so long a Sea-voyage from Spain, I was
afraid the same defluxion of salt rheum which fell from my Temples into my
throat in Oxford, and distilling upon the uvula impeached my utterance a little
to this day, had found the same chan^ell again, which caused me to have an
Issue made in my left ^rm for the diversion of the humor. I was well ever
after till I came to Rouen, and there I fell sick of a pain in the head, which,
with the Issue, I have carried with me to England. Doctor Harvy who is my
Physician, tells me that it may turn to a Consumption, therefore he has
stopped the Issue, telling me there is no danger at all in it, in regard I have
not worn it a full twelvemonth: My Brother I thank him has been very careful
of me in this my sickness, and has come often to visit me; I thank God I have
passed ^he brunt of it, and am recovering, and picking up my crumbs ^pace. There
is a flaunting French Ambassador com over lately, and I believe his errand is
naught else but Complement, for the King of France being lately at Calais, and
so in sight of England, ^e sent his Ambassador Monsieur Cadenet expressly to
visit our King; ^e had audience two days since, where he with his Train of
ruffling long-haird Monsieurs, carried himself in such a light garb, that after
the audience, the King askd my Lord Keeper Bacon what he thought of the French
Ambassador, he answered, that he was a tall proper man; I, his Majesty replied,
but what think you o^ his head-peece? is he a proper man for the Office of an
Ambassador? Sir, said Bacon; Tall men are like high Houses of four or five
Stories, wherein commonly the uppermost room is worst furnished.

So desiring my brothers and sisters, with the rest of my (...) and friends in
the Country, may be acquainted with my safe return to England, and that you
would please to let me hear from you by the next convenience, I rest,

Land. 2 Febr. 1621. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

II. To Rich. Altham Esqr. at Norberry.
SAlve pars animae dimidiata me^ae; Hail half my soul, m^ dear Dick, etc. I was
no sooner returned to the sweet bosom of England, and had breathed the smoke of
this Town, but my memory ran suddenly on you, the Idea of you has almost ever
since so filled up and ingroft my imagination, that I can think on nothing else,
the Jove of you swells both in my breast and brain with such a pregnancy, that
nothing can deliver me of this violent high passion but the sight of you: Let
me despair if I lie, there was never (...) longed more after any thing by reason
of her growing (...) than I do for your presence: Therefore I pray you make
(...) to save my longing, and Tantalize me no longer (it is but three hours
riding) for the sight of you will be more precious to me than any one Object I
have seen, (and I have seen many rare ones) in all my three year^ T ^vell; and
if you take this for a Complemen^ (because I am newly com from France) you are
much mist^ken in

London, 1 (...). 1621. Your J. H.

III. To D. Caldwall Esqr. at Battersay.
MY dear Dan. I am com at last to London, but not without some danger, and
through diverse difficulties, for I fell sick in France, and came so over to
Kent; And my journey from the Sea side hither, was more tedious to me than from
Rome to Rouen, where I grew first indisposed; and in good faith, I cannot
remember any thing to this hour how I came from Gravesend hither, I was so
stupefied, and had lost the knowledge of all things; But I am com to myself
indifferently well since, I thank God for it, and you cannot imagine how much
the sight of you, much more your society, would revive me: your presence would
be a Cordial unto me more restorative than exalted Gold, more precious than
the powder of Pearl, whereas your absence if it continue long, will prove unto
me like the dust of Diamonds, which is incurable poison: I pray be not
accessory to my death, but hasten to comfort your so long weather beaten friend,

Land. Febr. 1. 1621. J. H.

IV. To Sir James Crofts at the L. Darcy's in St. Osith.
SIR, I am got again safely this side of the Sea, and though I was in a very
sickly case when I first arrived, yet thanks be to God I am upon point of
perfect recovery, whereunto the sucking in of English air, and the sight of some
friends conduced not a little.

There is fearful news com from Germany; you (...) how the Bohemians shook off
the Emperors yoke; and how the great Counsel of Prague fell to such a hurly
b^rly, that some of the Imperial Counselors were hurld out at the windows; you
heard also I doubt not, how they offered the Crown to the Duke of Saxony, and
he waving it, they sent Ambassadors to the (...), whom they thought might prove
par negotio, and to be able to go throughstitch with the work, in regard of his
powerful alliance, the King of great Britain being his Father in Law, the King
of Denmark, the Prince of O^nge, the Marq. of Brandenburg, the Duke of Bo^illon
his Uncles, the States of Holland his Confederates, the French King his friend,
and the Duke of Bavaria his near allye: The Prince Palsgrave made some
difficulty at first, and most of his Counselors opposed it, others incited him
to it, and amongst other hortatives, they told him, That if he had the courage
to venture upon a King of Englands sole Daughter, he might very well venture
upon a Sovereign Crown when it was tendered him. Add hereunto that the States
of Holland did mainly advance the work, and there was good reason in policy for
it; for their twelve years Truce, being then upon point of expiring with Spain,
and finding our King so wedded to Peace, that nothing could divorce him from
it, they lighted upon this design, to make him draw his Sword* and engage hi^
against the House of Austria for the defense of his sole Daughter, and his
Gran-Children. What his Majesty will do hereafter I will not presume to
foretell, but hitherto he has given little countenance to the business, nay, he
utterly misliked it at first* for whereas Doctor Hall gave the Prince Palsgrave
the Title of King of Bohemia in his Pulpit Prayer, he had a check for his
pains; for I heard his Majesty should say, that there is an implicit tie amongst
Kings, which obliges them, though there be no other interest or particular
engagement* to stick unto, and right one another upon insurrection of Subjects;
Therefore he had more reason to be against the Bohemians than to adhere to them
in the deposition of their Sovereign Prince: The King of Denmark sings the same
note, nor will he also allow him the appellation of King. But the fearful news
I told you of at the beginning of this Letter, is, that there are fresh tidings
brought how the Prince Palsgrave had a well appointed Army of about 25000 horse
and foot near Prague, but the Duke of Bavaria came with scarce half the number,
and notwithstanding his long march, gave them a sudden Battle, and utterly
routed them; Insomnch that the new King of Bohemia, hahaving not worn the Crown
a whole twelvemonth, was forced to fly with his Qu^n and children; and after
many difficulties they write, that they are come to the Castle of Castrein, the
Duke of Brandenburghs Country his Uncle: T^is news affects both Court and City
here with much heavines.

I send you my humble thanks for the noble correspondence you pleased to hold
with me abroad, and I desire to know by the nex^, when you come to London, that
I may have the comfort of the sight of you, after so long an absence.

Ma^ch the 1. 1619. Your^ true Servitor, J. H.

V. To Dr. Fra: Man^ell, at All* Souls in Oxford.
I Am returned safe from my forain employment, from my three years travel, I
did my best to make what advantage I could of the time though not so much as I
should; for I find that Peregrination (well used) is a very profitable school*
it is a running Academy, and nothing conduces more to the building up and
perfecting of a man. Your honorable Uncle Sir R^rt Mansell who is now in the
Med^erranean has been very noble to me, and I shall ever acknowledge a good
part of my education from him. He has melted vast sums of money in the glass
business, a business indeed more proper for a Merchant, than a Courtier. I heard
the King should say, that he wondered Robin Mansell being a Seaman, whereby he
has got so much honor, should fall from Water to tamper with Fire, which are
two contrary Elements: My Father fears that this glass-employment will be too
brittle a foundation for me to build a Fortune upon, and Sir Robert being now
at my coming back so far at Sea, and his return uncertain; my Father has
advised me to hearken after some other condition. I attempted to go Secretary
to Sir John Airs to Constantinople, but I came too late: You have got your
self a great deal of good repute by the voluntary resignation you made of the
Principality of Jesus College, to Sir Eubule Theloall, in hope that he will be
a considerable Benefactor to it: I pray God he perform what he promises, and
that he be not over-partiall to North Wales men. Now that I give you the first
summon, I pray you make me happy with your correspondence by Letters, there is
no excuse or impediment at all left now, for you are sure where to find me,
whereas I was a Landloper as the Dutchman says, a wanderer, and subject to
uncertain removes, and short sojourns in diverse places before. So with
apprecation of all happiness to you here and hereafter; I rest,

March 5. 1618. At your friendly dispose, J. H.

VI. To Sir Eubule Theloall, Knight, and Principal of Jesus Coll. in Oxford.
SIR, I send you most due and humble thanks, that notwithstanding I have played
the Truant, and been absent so long from Oxford, you have been pleased lately
to make choice of me to be Fellow of your new Foundation in Jesus College,
whereof I was once a Member: As the quality of my Fortunes, and course of life
run now, I cannot make present use of this your great favor, or promotion
rather, yet I do highly value it, and humbly accept of it, and intend, by your
permission, to reserve and lay it by, as a good warm garment against rough
weather if any fall on me. With this my expression of thankfulness, I do
congratulate the great honor you have purchased both by your own beneficence,
and by your painful endeavor besides, to perfect that National College, which
hereafter is like to be a Monument of your Fame, as well as a Seminary of
Learning, and will perpetuat your memory to all Posterity.

God Almighty prosper and perfect your undertakings, and provide for you in
Heaven those rewards which such public works of Piety use to be crowned
withal; it is the apprecation of

Your truly devoted Servitor, J. H.
London, idibus Mar. 1621.
VII. To my Father.
SIR, according to the advice you sent me in your last, while I sought after a
new course of employment, a new employment has lately sought after me; My Lord
Savage has two young Gentlemen to his son^es, and I am to go travel with
them: Sit James Croftes (who so much respects you) was the main Agent in this
business, and I am to go shortly to Longm^ford in Suffolk, and ^hence to Saint
Osith in Essex to the Lord Darcy. Queen Anne is lately dead of a Dropsy in
Denmark house* which is held to be one of the fatal events that followed the
last fearful Comet that rose in the tail of the Constellation of Virgo, which
some ignorant Astronomers, that write of it, would fix in the Heavens, and that
as far above the Orb of the Moon, as the Moon is from the Earth: but this is
nothing in comparison of those hideous fires that are kindled in Germany, blown
first by the Bohemians, which is like to be a war without end; for the w^ole
House of Austria is interessed in the quarrel, and it is not the custom of
that House to sit by any as^ront, or forget it quickly. Queen Anne left a world
of brave Jewels behind, but one P^ero an outlandish man who had the keeping of
them embeazled many, and is run away; she left all she had to Prince Charles,
whom she eve^ loved best of all her Children* nor do I hear of any Legacy she
left at all to her daughter in Germany; for that match some say lessened
something of her affection toward her ever since, so that she would often call
her goody Palsgrave, nor could she abide Secretary Winwood ever after, who was
one of the chiefest instruments to bring that match about, as also for the
rendition of the cautionary Towns in the Low Countries Flushing and B^ill, with
the Rammakins. I was lately with Sir John Walter and others of your Counsel
about your Law-busines, and some of them told me that Master I. Lloyd your
adversary, it one of the shrewdest Sollicito^s in all the thirteen Shires of
Wales, being so habituated to Law-sutes and wrangling, that he knows any the
least starting hole in every Court: I could wish you had made a fair end with
him, for besides the cumber and trouble* specially to those that dwell at such
a huge distance from Westminster Hall as you do, Law is a shrewd pickpu^s, and
the Lawyer as I heard one say wittily not long since, is like a Christmasse box
which is sure to get whosoever loses.

So with the continuance of my due and daily prayers for your health, with my
love to my brothers and sisters, I rest,

Your dutiful Son, J. H.
March 20. 1621.
VIII. To Dan. Caldwall Esqr. from the Lord Savages House in Long-Melford.
My dear D.
THough considering my former condition of life I may now be called a
Countreyman, yet you cannot call me a Rusti^, (as you would imply in your
Letter) as long as I live in so civil and noble a Family, as long as I lodge in
so virtuous and regular a House as any* I believe in the Land both for
oeconomicall government, and the choice company* for I never saw yet such a
dainty Race of Children in all my life together, I never saw yet such an
orderly and punctual attendance of servants* nor a great House so neatly kept;
here one shall see nor dog, nor cat, nor cage to cause any nastines within the
body of the House: The kitchen and gutters and other offices of noise and
drudgery are at the ^ag end, there is a back gate for beggars and the meaner sort
of swains to come in at; The stables butt upon the Park, which for a cheerful
rising ground, for groves and browsings for the Deer, for rivulets of water may
compare with any for its bigness in the whole land; it is opposite to the front
of the great House, whence from the Gallery one may see much of the game when
they are a hunting. Now for the gardning and costly choice flowers, for ponds,
for stately large walks green and gravelly, for orchards and choice fruits of
all sorts, there a^e few the like in England: here you have your ^on Cr^en pear
and (...) ^n perfection, your Muscadell grapes in such plenty that there are some
bottles of wine sent every year to the King; And one Mr. Daniel a worthy
Gentleman hard by, who has ^in long abroad, makes good store in his vintage.
Truly this House of Long-Melford though it be not so great, yet it is so well
compacted and contrived with such dainty conveniences every way, that if you
saw the Landscape of it, you would be mightily taken with it, and it would serve
for a choice pattern to bu^ld and contrive a house by: If you come this Summer
to your Manor of Sheriff in Essex, you will not be ^ar off hence; if your
occasions will permit, it will be worth your coming hither, though it be only
to see him, who would think it a short journey to go from Saint David's head to
Dover cliff^ to see and serve you, were there occasion* if you would know who
the same is, '(...)

20 Mar. 1621. Your J. H.

IX. To Robert Brown Esqr.
Sir*
THanks for one ^rtesie, is a good Usher to bring on another, Therefore it is my
policy at this time to thank you most heartily for your late ^opious Letter to
draw on a second: I say, I thank you a thousand times over for yours of the
third of this present, which abounded with such vari^tie of news, and ample
well-couch^ relations, that I made many friends by it; yet I am sorry for the
quality of some of your news, that Sir Robert Mansell being now in the
Mediterranean with a considerable ^avall strength of ours against the Moors, to
do the Spaniard a pleasure, Marquis Spinola should in a h^gling way, change his
Master for the time, and taking Commission from the Emperor, become his servant
for invading the Palatinat with the Forces of the King of Spain, in the
Netherlands* I am sorry also the Princes of the Union should ^e so stupid as to
suffer him to take Oppenheim by a Parthian kind of back stratagem, in appearing
before the Town, and making semblance afterward to go for Worms, and then
perceiving the Forces of the United Princes to go for succouring of that, to
turn back and take the Town he intended first, whereby I fear he will be quickly
master of the rest. Surely I believe there may be some treachery in it, and that
the Marquis of An^back the General was orecom by pistol^ made of Indian
ingots, rather than of steel, else an Army of 40000. which he had under his
command might have made its par^y good against Spinola's less than 10000.
though never such choice Veterans. But what will not gold do? it will make a
Pigmey too hard for a Giant, there is no fence or ^ortres against an Ass laden
with gold: It was the saying you know of His Father, whom partial and ignorant
Antiquity cries up to have conquered the World, and that ^e sighed there were no
more worlds to conquer, though he had never one of the three old parts of the
then known World entirely to himself. I desire to know what is become of that
handful of men his Majesty sent to Germany under Sir Horace Vere, which he was
bound to do as he is one of the Protestant Princes of the Union, and what is
become of Sir Arthur Chichester, who is gone Ambassador to those parts.

Dear Sir, I pray make me happy still with your Letters, it is a mighty
pleasure for us Country folks to hear how matters pass in London and abroad;
you know I have not the opportunity to correspond with you in like kind, but
may happily hereafter when the tables are turned, when I am in London, and you
in the West. Whereas you are desirous to hear how it fares with me, I pray know,
that I live in one of the noblest Houses, and best Air of England: There is a
dainty Park adjoining where I often wander up and down, and I have my several
walks, I make one to represent the Royal Exchange, ^he other the middle Isle
of Paul's, another, Westminster Hall; and when I pass through the herd of Deer
methinks I am in ^apside. So with a full return of the same measure of love, as
you pleased to send me, I rest

24 Mar^ij. 1621. Yours J. H.

X. To R. Altham Esqr. from Saint Osith.
SIR,
LIfe it self is not so dear unto me as your friendship, nor Virtue in her best
colors a^ precious as your Love, which was lately so lively pourtraied unto me
in yours of the fifth of this present: Me thinks your letter was like a piece
of Tissue richly embroderd with rare flowers up and down, with curious
representation^, and Landskips: Albeit I have as much stuff as you of this kind
(I mean matter of Love) yet I want such a Loom to work it upon, I cannot draw
it to such a curious web, therefore you must be content with homely Polldavie
ware from me, for you must not expect from us Country folks such urbanities,
and quaint invention, that you, who are daily conversant with the wits of the
Court, and of the Inns of Court, abound withal.

Touching your intention to travel beyond the Seas the next Spring, and the
intimation you make how happy you would be in my company; I let you know, that
I am glad of the one, and much thank you for the other, and will think upon it,
but I cannot re^olve yet upon any thing. I am now here at the Earl Rivers, a
^oble and great knowing Lord* who has seen much of the World ^broad; My Lady
Savage his Daughter is also here with diverse of (...) children: I hope this
Hilary Term to be merry in London, and amongst others to re-enjoy your
conversation principally, for I esteem the society of no soul upon Earth more
than yours: till then I bid you Farewell, and as the season invites me, I wish
you a merry Christmas, resting

December 20. 1622. Yours while J^m. Howell.

XI. To Captain Tho: Porter upon his return from Algier voyage.
Noble Captain,
I Congratulat your safe return from the Streights, but am sorry you were so
streigh^ned in your Commission, that you could not attempt what such a brave
navall power of ^o* men of War, such a gallant General and other choice
knowing Commanders might have performed, if they h^d had line enough; I know
the lightness and nimblenesse of Algier ships, when I lived lately in Alicant
and other places upon the Mediterranean, we should every week hear some of them
chased, but very seldom taken; for a great ship following one of them, may be
said to be as a Mastiff dog running after a hare; I wonder the Spaniard came
short of the promised supply for furtherance of that notable adventurous design
you had to fire the Ships and Galleys in Algier road; And according to the
relation you pleased to send me* it was one of the bravest enterprises, and had
proved such a glorious exploit, that no story could have paralleld; But it
seems their Hoggies, Magitians and Maribotts, were tampring with the ill Spirit
of the Air all the while, which brought down su^ a still cataract of rain
water^ suddenly upon you to hinder the working of your fireworks; such a
disaster the story tells us b^fell Charles the Emperor, but far worse than
yours, for he lost ships and multitudes of men, wh^ were made slaves, but you
came off with loss of eight men only, and Algier is another gets thing now,
than she was then, being I believe a hundred degrees stronger by Land and Sea,
and for the latter strength we may thank our Countreyman Ward, and (...) the
butterbag Hollander, which may be said to have bin two of the fatallest and
most infamoust men that ever Christendom b^ed; for the one taking all
Englishmen, and the other all Dutchmen, and bringing the Spips and Ordnance to
Algier, they may be said ^o have bin the chief Raysers of those Picaroons to be
Pirates, which are now come to that height of strength, that they daily
endammage and affront all Christendom. When I consider all the circumstances
and success of this your voyage, when I consider the narrownes of your
Commission, which was as lame as the Cl^ that kept it; when I find that you
secured the Seas, and ^rafick all the while, for I did not hear of one Ship
taken while you were abroad; when I hear how you brought back all the Fleet
without the least disgrace or damm^ge by foe or ^oul weather ^o any ship* I
conclude, and so do far b^ter judgments than mine, that you did what possibly
could be done: let those that repine at the one in the hundred (which was
imposed upon all the Levant (...) for the support of this Fleet) mutter what
they will, that you went first to Gravesend, then to the Lands end, and after
to no end.

I have sent you for your welcome home (in part) two barrells of Colchester
oysters, which were provided for my Lord of Colchester himself, therefore I
pre^ume they are good, and all green finnd; I shall shortly follow, but not to
stay long in England, for I thin^ I must over again speedily to push on my
fortunes: so my dear Tom* I am de todas m^s entran^s, from the center of my
heart I am

St. Osith, December Yours, J. H.

XII. To my Father upon my secona going to Travel.
SIR,
IAm lately returned to London, having been all this while in a very noble
Family in the Country, where I found far greater repects than I deserved; I
was to go with two of my Lord Savag^ Sons to travel, but finding my self too
young for such a charge, and our Religion differing, I have now made choice to
go over Camerade to a very worthy Gentleman Baron Althams Son, whom I kn^w in
S^anes, when my brother was there. Truly I hold him to be one of the
hopefullest young men of this Kingdom for parts and person, he is full of
excellent solid knowledge, as the Mathematics, the Law and other material
studies; besides I should have beed tied to have staid three years abroad in
the other employment at least, but I hope to go back from this by Gods grace
before a twelvemonth be at an end, at which time I hope the hand of Providence
will settle me in some stable home-fortun^.

The news is that the Prince Palsgrave with his Lady and Children are come to
the Hague in Holland, having made a long progres or rather a pilgrimage about
Germany from Prague. The old Duke of Bavaria his Uncle is chosen Elector and
Arch*s^wer of the Roman Empire in his place (but as they say in an imperfect
Diet) and with this proviso, that the transferring of this Election upon the
Bavarian, shall not prejudice the next heir. Th^r is one Count Mansfelt that
begins to get a great name in Germany, and he with the Duke of Brunswick who is
a temporal Bpp. of Halverstade, have a considerable Army on foot for the Lady
Elizabeth, which in the low Countries and some parts of Germany is called the
Queen of Boheme, and for her winning Princely comportment, the Queen of Hearts:
Sir Arthur Chichester is come back from the Palatinate, much complaining of the
small Army that was sent thither under Sir Horace Vere, which should have been
greater, or none at all.

My Lord of Buckingham having been long since Master of the Horse at Court, is
now made Master also of all the wood^n Horses in the Kingdom, which indeed are
our best Horses, for he is to be High Admiral of England, so he is become
Dominus Equorum and Aquarum. The late Lord Thre^* Cranfield grows al^o very
powerful, but the City hates him for having betrayed their greatest secrets
which he was capable to know more than another, having been formerly a Merchant.

I think I shall have no opportunity to write to you again till I bet other
side of the Sea; therefore I humbly take my leave, and ask your blessing, that I
may the better prosper in my proceedings: So I am,

Your dutiful Son, J. H.
March 19. 1621.
XIII. To Sir John Smith Knight.
SIR,
THe first ground I set foot upon after this my second transma^ voyage was
Trevere (the Scots Staple) in Zeland, thence (...) sailed to Holland, in which
passage we might see diverse Steeples and Tur^ets under water, of Towns that as
we were told were swallowed up by a D^luge within the memory of man: we went
afterward to the Hague, where there are hard by, though in several places, two
wonderful things to be seen, one of Art, the other of Nature; That of Art is a
Wagon or Ship, or a Monster mix^ of both, like the Hippocentaure who was half
man, and half horse; this Engine has wheels and sayls that will hold above
twenty people, and goes with the wind, being drawn or moved by nothing else, and
will run, the wind being good, and the sayls hois'd up, above fifteen miles an
hour upon the even hard sands: they say this invention was found out to
entertain Spinola when he came hither to treat of the last Truce. That wonder
of Nature is a Church-Monument, where an Earl and a Lady are engraven with 365
Children about them, which were all delivered at one birth; they were half
male, half femal; the Basin hangs in the Church which carried them to be
Christened, and the Bishops Name who did it; and the Story of this Miracle, with
the year and the day of the month mentioned, which is not yet 200 years ago;
and the S^ory is this: That Countess walking about her door after dinner, there
came a Begger-woman with two children upon her back (...) beg alms, the
Countess asking whether those children were her own, she answered, she had
them both at one birth and by one father, who was her husband; The Countess
would not only give her a^y alms, but reviled her bitterly, saying, it was
impossible for one man to get two children at once: The begger-woman being thus
provoked with ill words and without alms fell to imprecations, that it should
please God to show his judgment upon her, and that she might bear at one birth
a^ many children as there be days in the year, which she did before the same
years end, having never born child before. We are now in North Holland, where I
never saw so many, amongst so few, sick of L^prosies; and the reason is,
because they commonly eat abundance of fresh Fish. A Gentleman told me, that
the women of this Country when they are delivered, there comes out of the womb
a living creature besides the child called Zu^chie, likest to a Bat of any
other creature, which the Midwi^s throw into the (...), holding sheets before
the chimney lest i^ should fly away. Master Altham desires his service be
presented to You and your Lady, to Sir John Franklin and all at the Hill; the
like do I humbly crave at your hands: the Italian and French Manuscripts you
pleased to favor me withal I le^ at Mr. Seiles the Stationer, whence if you
have them not already, you may please to send for them. So in all affection I
kiss your hands and am

Your humble Servitor, J. H.
Trevere 10th of Apr. 1622.
XIV. To' the Right Honble, the Lord Vicount Colchester, after Earl Rivers.
Right Honble,
THe commands your Lopp. pleased to impose upon me when I left England, and
those high favors wherein I stand bound to your Lopp. call upon me at this time
to send your Lopp. ^om small fruits of my foreign Travel: Marquis Spinola is
returned from the Palatinat, where he was so fortunat, that like Caesar (...)
came, saw and overcame, notwithstanding that huge Army of the Princes of the
Union, consisting of forty thousand men, whereas his was under twenty, but made
up of old ^ough blades, and veteran Commanders. He has now changed his coa^,
and taken up his old Commission again from Don Philippo, whereas during that
expedition, he called himself Caesar's servant. I hear the Emperor has
transmitted the upper Palatinat to the Duke of Bavaria, as caution for those
moneys he has expended in these wars: And the King of Spain is the Emperors
Commissary for the lower Palatinat: They both pretend that they were bound to
obey the Imperial summons to assist Caesar in these wars; the one as he was
Duke of Burgundy, the other of Bavaria, both which Countries are ^eudetarie to
the Empire, else they had incurred the Imperial bun* It is'fear'd this German
war will be as the Frenchman says, de longue halaine, long breathed, ^or there
are great powers on both sides, and they say the King of Denmark is arming.

Having made a leasurely so journ in this Town, I had spare hou^ to couch in
writing a survay of these Countries which I have now traversd the second time;
but in regard it would be a great bulk for a Letter, I send it your Lopp.
apart, and when I return to England, I shall be bold to attend your Lopp. for
correction of my faults; In the interim I rest

Antwerp, May 1. 1622. My Lord, Your thrice humble Serviv. J. H.

XV, A survey of the seventeen Provinces.
My Lord,
TO attempt a precise description of each of the seventeen Provinces, and of
its Progression, Privileges and Primitive government, were a task of no less
confusion than labor: Let it suffice to know, that since Flanders and Holland
were erected to Earldoms, and so left to be an apendix of the Crown of France*
some of them have had absolut and supreme Governors, some subaltern and subject
to a superior Power. Amongst the rest the Earls of Flanders and Holland were
most considerable, but of them two he of Holland being homegeable to none, and
having Friestand and Zeland added, was the more potent: In process of time all
the seventeen met in one; some by conquest, others by donation and legacy, but
most by alliance: In the House of Burgundy this union receivd most growth, but
in the House of Austria it came to its full perfection; for in Charles the
fifth they all met as so many lines drawn from the circumference to the center,
who Lording as supreme head not only over the fifteen Temporal, but the two
Spiritual, Liege and V^recht, had a def^in to reduce them to a Kingdom, which
his Son Philip the second attempted after him, but they could not bring their
intents home to their aim, the cause is imputed to that multiplicitie and
difference of privileges which they are so eager to maintain, and whereof some
cannot stand with a Monarchy without incongruity. Philip the second at his
inauguration was sworn to observe them, and at his departure he obliged himself
by oath, to send still one of his own blood to govern them: Moreover, at the
request of the Knights of the golden Fleece, he promised that all Foreign
soldiers should retire, and that he himself would come to visit them once
every seventh year, but being once gone, and leaving in lieu of a Sword a
Distaff an unweldy woman to govern, he came not only short of his promise, but
procured a Dispensation from the Pope to be absolved of his Oath, and all this
by the counsel of the Cardinal Granvill, who, as the States Chronicler
writes, was the first firebrand that kindled that lamentable and longsome war
wherein the Netherlands have traded above fifty years in blood: For intending
to increase the number of Bishops, to establish the decrees of the Counsel of
Trent, and to clip the power of the Counsel of State composed of the natives
of the Land, by making it appealable to the Counsel of Spain, and by adding to
the former Oath of Allegiance, (all which conduced to settle the inquisition,
and to curb the conscience) the broyls began; to appease which, Ambassadors
were dispatched to Spain, whereof the two first came to violent deaths, the one
being beheaded, the other poysond: But the two last Egmont and Horn were
nourished still with hopes, until ' Philip the second had prepared an Army
under the conduct of the Duke of Alva, to compose the difference by arms* For
as soon as he came to the government, he established the Blo^t-rad, as the
complainants termed it, a Counsel of Blood, made up most of Spaniards, Egmont
and Horn were apprehended, and afterward beheaded; Cittadells were erected,
and the Oath of Allegiance, with the Political government of the Countsey in
diverse things altered: This powered oil on the fire formerly kindled, and put
all in combustion; The Prince of Orange retires, thereupon his eldest son was
surpised and sent as Hostage to Spain, and above 5000. Families quit the
Country, many Towns revolted, but were afterward reduced to obedience, which
made the Duke of Alva say, that the Netherlands appertained to the King of
Spain not only by descent but conquest, and for cumble of his victories when he
attempted to impose the tenth penny for maintenance of the Garrisons in the
Cittadels he had erected at Grave, V^echt, and Antwerp, (where he caused his
Statue made of Canon brass ^o be erected, trampling the Belgians under his
feet) all the Towns withstood this imposition, so that at last matters
succeeding ill with him, and having had his cosen Pacecio hanged at Flushing
gates after he had traced out the platform of a Cit^dell in that Town also, he
received Letters of revocation from Spain; Him succeeded Don Luys de Requiseus,
who came short of his predecessor in exploits, and dying suddenly in the field,
the government was invested for the time in the Counsel of State; The Spanish
soldiers being without a head, gathered together to the number of 16^0. and
committed such outrages up and down, that they were proclaimed enemies to the
State: Hereupon the pacification of Cant was transacted, whereof amongst other
Articles one was, that all foreign soldiers should quit the Country: This was
ratified by the King, and observed by Don John of Austria who succeeded in the
government; yet Don John retaind the Landskneghts at his devotion still, for
some secret deffein, and as some conjectured for the invasion of England, he
kept the Spaniards also still hovering about the Frontiers ready upon all
occasion: Certain Letters were intercepted that made a discovery of some
projects which made the war to bleed afresh; Don John was proclaimed enemy to
the State; so the Archduke Matthias was sent for, who being a man of small
performance and improper for the times was dismissed, but upon honorable
terms. Don John a little after dies, and as some gave out of the pox; Then comes
in the Duke of Parma, a man as of a different Nation being an Italian, so of a
differing temper, and more moderat spirit and of greater performance than all
the rest, for whereas all the Provinces except Luxenburg and Henault had
revolted, he reduced Gant, Tourney, Bruges, Malins, Brussells, Antwerp, (which
three last he beleagerd at one time) and diverse other great Towns to the
Spanish obedience again: He had sixty thousand men in pay, and the choicest
which Spain and Italy could afford. The French and English Ambassadors
interc^ding for a peace, had a short answer of Philip the second, who said,
that he needed not the help of any to reconcile himself to his own subjects,
and reduce them to conformity, but the difference that was he would refer to
his co^en the Emperor: Hereupon the business was agitated at Colen, where the
Spaniard stood as high a tipto as ever, and notwithstanding the vast expense of
treasure and blood he had bin at for so many years, and that matters began to
exasperat more and more, which were like to prolong the wars in infinitum, he
would abate nothing in point of Ecclesiastic government: Hereupon the States
perceiving that King Philip could not be wrought either by the solicitation of
other Princes, or their own supplications so often rei^erated, that they might
enjoy the freedom of Religion, with other infranchisements, and finding him
inex^rable, being incited also by that ban which was published against the
Prince of Orange, that whosoever killd him should have 5000. crowns, they at
last absolutely renounced and abjured the King of Spain for their Soverain;
They bro^k his Seals, changed the Oath of Allegiance, and fled to France for
shelter; they inaugurated the Duke of Aniou (recommended unto them by the Queen
of England to whom he was a sut^r) for their Prince, who attempted to render
himself absolute, and so thought to surprise Antwerp, where he receivd an
illfavord repuls; yet nevertheless, the united Provinces, for so they termd
themselfs ever after, fearing to distaste their next great neighbor France, made
a second proffer of their protection and Soverainty to that King, who having
too many irons in the fire at his own home, the Ligue growing stronger and
stronger, he answered them that his shirt was nearer to him than his dublet;
Then had they recours to Queen Elizabeth, who partly for her own security,
partly for interest in Religion reached them a supporting hand, and so sent them
men, money and a Governor the Earl of Leicester, who not symbolizing with their
humor, was quickly revokd, yet without any outward dislike on the Queens side,
for she left her Forces still with them but upon their expense: She lent them
afterward some considerable sums of moneys, and she receivd Flushing and the
Brill for caution: Ever since the English have bin the best sinews of their
war, and Achievers of the greatest exploits amongst them. Having thus made sure
work with the English, they made young Count Maurice their Governor, who for
five and twenty years together held rack with the Spaniard, and during those
traverses of war was very fortunat: an overture of Peace was then propounded,
which the States would not hearken unto singly with the King of Spain, unless
the Provinces that yet remaind under him would engage themselfs for performance
of what was Articled, besides they would not treat either of Peace or Truce,
unless they were declared free States, all which was granted, so by the
intervention of the English and French Ambassadors, a Truce was concluded for
12 years.

These wars did so drain and discommodat the King of Spain, by reason of his
distance (every Soldier that he sent either from Spain or Italy, costing him
nere upon a hundred crowns before he could be rendered in Flanders,) that
notwithstanding his mines of Mexico and Peru* it plunged him so deeply in debt,
that having taken up moneys in all the chief banks of Christendom he was forcd
to publish a Diplo^a wherein he dispensed with himself (as the Holland Story
has it) from payment, alleging that he had employed those moneys for the
public Peace of Christendom: this broak many great Banquers, and they say his
credit was not current in Sevill or Lisbon his own Towns: and which was worse,
while he stood wrestling thus with his own Subjects, the Turk took his
opportunity to get from him Tunis and the Goletta the Tropheys of Charles the
fifth his Father. So eager he was in this quarrel that he imployd the utmost of
his strength and industry to reduce this people to his will, in regard he had
an intent to make these Provinces his main Randevous and Magazin of men of war,
which his neighbors perceiving, and that he had a kind of aim to be Western
Monarch, being led not so much for love as reasons of State, they stuck close
to the revolted Provinces, and this was the bone that Secretary Walsingham told
Queen Elizabeth, he would cast the King of Spain that should last him 20 years,
and perhaps make his teeth shake in his head.

But to return to my first discourse whence this digression has snatchd me, The
Netherlands who had bin formerly knit and concentred under one Soverain Prince,
were thus dismembered; And as they subsist now, They are a State and a Province:
The Province having ten of the 17. at least, is far greater, more populous,
better soyld, and more stored with Gentry. The State is the richer and
stronger, the one proceeding from their vast Navigation and Commerce, the other
from the quality of their Country, being defensible by Rivers and Sluices, by
means whereof they can suddenly overwhelm all the whole Country, witness that
stupendous siege of Leyden and Haerlam, for most of their Towns the marks
being taken away are inaccessible by reason of shelfs of sands. Touching the
transaction of these Provinces which the King of Spain made as a dowry to the
Archduke Albertus, upon marriage with the Infanta (who thereupon left his red
Hat, and Toledo Miter the chiefest spiritual Dignity in Christendom for
revenue after the Papacy) it was fringd with such cautelous restraints, that he
was sure to keep the better end of the staff still to himself: for he was to
have the tutele and ward of his children, that they were to marry with one of
the Austrian Family recommended by Spain, and in default of issue, and in case
Albertus should survive the Infanta, he should be but Governor only: Add
hereunto that King Philip reserved still to himself all the Cittadells and
Castles, with the order of the golden Fleece, whereof he is Master, as he is
Duke of Burgundy.

The Archduke for the time has a very princely command, all Coyns bear his
st^mp, all Placarts or Edicts are publishd in his name, he has the election of
all civil Officers, and Magistrates; he nominats also Bishops and Abbars, for
the Pope has only' the Confirmation of them here, nor can he adjourn any out
of the Country to answer any thing, neither are his Bulls of any strength
without the Princes placet, which makes him have always some Commissioners to
execute his Authority. The people here grow hotter and hotter in the Roman
Cause, by reason of the mixture with Spaniards and Italians; as also by the
example of the Archduke, and the Infanta, who are devout in an intense degree.
There are two supreme Counsels, the Privy Counsel, and that of the State; this
treats of confederations and intelligence with foreign Princes, of Peace and
War, of entertaining or of dismissing Colonells and Captains, of
Fortifications, and they have the surintendency of the highest affairs that
concern the Prince and the policy of the Provinces. The private has the
granting of all Patents and Requests, the publishing of all Edicts and
Proclamations, the prising of Coin, the looking to the confines and extent of
the Provinces, and the enacting of all new Ordinances. Of these two Counsels
there is never a Spaniard, but in the actual Counsel of War their voices are
predominant: There is also a Court of Finances or Exchequer, whence all they
that have the fingring of the Kings money, must draw a discharge. Touching
matters of Justice, their Law is mixed between Civil and common with some
clauses of Canonical: The high Court of Parliament is at Maline, whither all
Civil Causes may be brought by appeal from other Towns, except some that have
municipall Privileges, and are soverain in their own jurisdictions, as Mons in
Henalt, and a few more.

The prime Province for dignity is Brabant, which amongst many other privileges
it enjoys, has this for one, not to appear upon any summons out of its own
precinct, which is one of the reasons why the Prince makes his residence there:
but the prime for extent and fame is Flanders the chiefest Earldom in
Christendom, which is three days journey in length; Ghent, its Metropolis, is
reputed the greatest town of Europe, whence arose the Proverb, Les flamen tient
un began, qui tiendra Paris dedans. But the beautifullest, richest, strongest,
and most privileged City is Antwerp in Brabant, being the Marquisat of the holy
Empire, and drawing nere to the nature of a Hans Town, for she pays the Prince
no other Tax but the Impost. Before the dissociation of the seventeen
Provinces, this Town was one of the greatest Marts of Europe, and greatest bank
this side the Alps, most Princes having their Factors here, to take up, or let
out moneys, and here our Gresham got all his wealth, and built our Royal
Exchange by model of that here. The Merchandise was brought hither from
Germany, France and Italy by Land, and from England, Spain, and the Hans towns
by Sea, was estimated at above twenty Millions of Crowns every year; but as no
violent thing is long lasting, and as it is fatal to all Kingdoms, States,
Towns and Languages to have their period, so this renowned Mart has suffered a
shrewd eclipse, yet no utter downfall, the Exchange of the King of Spains money
and some small land trafic, keeping still life in her, though nothing so full
of vigor as it was. Therefore there is no town under the Archduke where the
States have more concealed friends than in Antwerp, who would willingly make
them her Masters in hope to recover her former commerce which after the last
twelve years truce began to revive a little, the States permitting to pass by
Lillo's sconce which commands the river of Skeld and lies in the teeth of the
Town some small cross-saild ships to pass hither: There is no place has been
more passive than this, and more often pillaged; amongst other times she was
once plundered most miserably by the Spaniards under the conduct of a Priest,
immediately upon Don John of Austria's death, she had then her Stat-house
burned, which had cost a few years before above twenty thousand Crowns the
building, and the spoils that were carried away thence amounted to forty Tuns
of gold: Thus she was reduced not only to poverty, but a kind of captivity,
being commanded by a Citadell, which she preferred before a Garrison; this made
the Merchant retire and seek a more free Randevous, some in Zeland, some in
Holland, specially in Amsterdam which rose upon the fall of this Town, as
Lisbon did from Venice upon the discovery of the Cape of good Hope, though
Venice be not nere so much crestfall'n.

I will now steer my discourse to the united Provinces as they term themselves,
which are six in number, viz. Holland, Zeland, Frisland, Overyssell,
Gronninghen and Utrecht, three parts of Gilderland, and some Frontire Towns and
places of contribution in Brabant and Flanders: In all these there is no
innovation at all introduced, notwithstanding this great change in point of
Government, except that the College of States represents the Duke or Earl in
times passed, which College consists of the chiefest Gentry of the Country,
surintendants of Towns, and the principal Magistrates: Every Province and
great Town choose yearly certain Deputies, to whom they give plenary power to
deliberat with the other States of all affairs touching the public welfare of
the whole Province, and what they vote stands for Law. These being assembled
consult of all matters of State, Justice and War, the Advocat who is prime in
the Assembly propounds the business, and after collects the suffrages, first of
the Provinces, then of the Towns, which being put in form he delivers in
pregnant and moving speeches, and in case there be a dissonance and reluctance
of opinions, he labors to accord and reconcile them, concluding always with
the major voices.

Touching the administration of Justice, the President, who is monthly changed,
with the great Counsel have the supreme judicature, from whose Decrees there is
no appeal, but a revision, and then some of the choycest Lawyers amongst them
are appointed.

For their Opidan Government they have variety of Officers, a Scout,
Bourgmasters, a Balue, and (...): The Scout is chosen by the States, who with
the Balues have the judging of all criminal matters in last resort without
appeal, they have also the determining of Civil Causes, but those are
appealable to the Hague. Touching their chiefest Governor (or General rather
now) having made proof of the Spaniard, German, French and English, and
agreeing with none of them, they lighted at last upon a man of their own mould
Prince Maurice now their General, in whom concurred diverse parts suitable to
such a charge, having been trained up in the wars by his Father, who with three
of his Uncles and diverse of his kindred, sacrificed their lives in the States
quarrel: he has thriven well since he came to the Government; he cleared
Friesland, Overyssell and Groninghen, in less than 18 months: He has now
continued their Governor and General by sea and land above 33 years; he has
the election of Magistrates, the pardning of Malefactors, and diverse other
Prerogatives, yet they are short of the reach of Soverainty, and of the
authority of the ancient Counts of Holland: Though I cannot say it is a
mercenary employment, yet he has a limited allowance, nor has he any implicit
command when he goes to the field, for either the Counsel of War marches with
him, or else he receives daily directions from them: moreover the States
themselves reserve the power of nominating all Commanders in the Army, which
being of sundry Nations deprive him of those advantages he might have to make
himself absolut. Martiall-Discipline is no where so regular as amongst the
States, no where are there lesser insolences committed upon the Burger, no^
robberies upon the Country Boors, nor are the Officers permitted to insult ore
the common soldier: When the Army marches, not one dares take so much as an
apple off a tree, or a root out of the earth in their passage; and the reason
is, they are punctually paid their pay, else I believe they would be insolent
enough, and were not the pay so certain I think few or none would serve them.
They speak of sixty thousand they have in perpetual pay by Land and Sea, at
home and in the Indies: The King of France was used to maintain a Regiment, but
since Henry the Greats death the payment has been neglected. The means they
have to maintain these Forces, to pay their Governor* to discharge all other
expense, as the preservation of their Di^es which comes to a vast expense
yearly, is the ancient revenue of the Counts of Holland, the impropria^ Church
living, Imposts upon all Merchandise which is greater upon exported than
imported goods* Excise upon all commodities, as well for necessity as pleasure,
taxes upon every Acre of ground, which is such, that the whole Country returns
into their hands every three years: Add hereunto the Art they use in their bank
by the rise and fall of money, the fishing upon our Coasts, whither they send
every Autum^ above 700 Hulks or Busses, which in the voiages they make, return
above a Million in Herings; moreover their fishing for Greenfish and Salmon
amounts to so much more, and for their Cheese and Butter, it is thought they
vent as much every year as Lisbon does spices. This keeps the common Treasury
always full, that upon any extraordinary service or dessein there is seldom any
new tax upon the people. Trafic is their general profession, being all either
Merchants o^ Mariners, and having no land to manure, they furrow the Sea for
their living; and this universality of trade and their banks of adventures
distributes the wealth so equally, that few amongst them are exceeding rich or
exceeding poor: Gentry amongst them is very thin, and as in all Democraties
little respected, and coming to dwell in Towns they soon mingle with the
Merchant, and so degenerat: Their soil being all 'twixt marsh and meadow is so
fat in pasturage, that one Cow will give eight quarts of milk a day, ^o that as
a Boor told me, in four little dorps near Herlam, it is thought there is as much
milk milk'd in the year, as there is Rhenish wine brought to Dort, which is the
sole Staple of it. Their towns are beautiful and neatly built, and with
uniformity, that who sees one, sees all: In some places, as in Amsterdam, the
foundation costs more than the superstructure, for the ground being soft, they
are constrained to ram in huge stakes of timber (with wool about it to
preserve it from pu^rifaction) till they com to a firm basis; so that as one
said, whosoever could see Amsterdam under ground, should see a huge winter
Forest.

Amongst all the confederat Provinces, Holland is most predominant, which being
but six hours journey in breadth, contains nine and forty walled Towns, and all
these within a days journey one of another. Amsterdam for the present is one of
the greatest mercantill Towns in Europ: To her is appropriated the East and
West Indie trade, whether she sends yearly 40. great ships, with another fleet
to the Baltic Sea, but they send not nere so many to the Mediterranean as
England: Other towns are passably rich, and stored with shipping, but not one
very poor, which proceeds from the wholesome policy they use, to assign every
Town some firm Staple commodity, as to (their maiden Town) D^rt the German wines
and corn, to Midlebourgh the French and Spanish wines, to Trevere (the Prince
of Orange his Town) the Scots trade, Leyden in recompense of her long siege was
erected to an University, which with Franiker in Fris^land is all they have;
Haerlam for knitting and weaving has some privilege, Rotterdam has the English
cloth, and this renders their Towns so equally rich and populous. They allow
free harbor to all Nations with liberty of Religion, (the Roman only excepted)
as far as the Jew who has two Synagogs allowd him but only in Amsterdam, which
piece of policy they borrow of the Venetian with whom they have very intimat
intelligence, only the Jew in Venice, in Rome and other places go with some
outward mark of distinction, but hear they wear none: and these two republics,
that in the East and this in the West, are the two remora's that stick to the
great vessel of Spain, that it cannot sail to the Western Monarchy.

I have been long in the survay of these Provinces, yet not long enough, for
much more might be said which is fitter for a Story than a Survay; I will
conclude with a mot or two of the people, whereof some have been renownd in times
past for feats of war: amongst the States, the Hollander or Batavian has been
most known, for some of the Roman Emperors have had a selected guard of them
about their persons for their fidelity and valeur, as now the King of France
has of the Swisse: The Frisons also have bin famous for those large privileges
wherewith Charlemain endowd them; The Flemins also have bin illustrious for the
martial exploits they achiev'd in the East where two of the Earls of Flanders
were crowned Emperors. They have all a genius inclined to commerce, very
inventive and witty in manufactures, witness the Art of Printing, painting and
coloring in glass; those curious quadrants, chim's and dialls, those kind of
wagons which are used up and down Christendom were first used by them; and for
the Mariners Compass, though the matter be disputable twixt the Neapolitan, the
Portugal and them, yet there is a strong argument on their side, in regard they
were the first that subdivided the four cardinal winds to two and thirty,
others naming them in their Language.

There is no part of Europ so hanted with all sorts of Forrener^ as the
Netherlands, which makes the Inhabitants as well women as men so well versed in
all sorts of languages, so that in Exchange time one may hear 7. or 8. sorts of
toungs spoken upon their Bourses: nor are the men only expert herein, but the
women and maids also in their common hostries, and in Holland the wif's are so
well versed in bargaining, cifring and writing, that in the absence of their
Husbands in long Sea voyages they beat the trade at home, and their words will
pass in equal credit: These women are wonderfully sober, though their
Husbands make commonly their bargains in drink, and then are they most
cau^elous. This confluence of Strangers makes them very populous, which was the
cause that Charles the Emperor said, that all the Netherlands seemd to him but
as one continued Town. He and his Grandfather Maximilian, notwithstanding the
choice of Kingdoms they had, kept their Courts most frequently in them, which
showed how highly they esteemd them, and I believe if Philip the second had
visited them sometimes matters had not gone so ill.

There is no part of the Earth considering the small circuit of Country which
is estimated to be but as big as the fist part of Italy, where one may find
more differing customs, tempers and humors of people, than in the Netherlands:
The Walloon is quick and spritfull, acostable and full of Complement, and gaudy
in apparel like his next neighbor the French: The Flemin and Braban^r, somewhat
more slow and more sparing of speech: The Hollander slower than he, more surly
and respectles of Gentry and strangers, homely in his clothing, of very few
words, and heavy in action, which may be well imputed to the quality of the
soil, which works so strongly upon the humors, that when people of a more
vivacious and nimble temper com to mingle with them, their children are
observed to partake rather of the soil than the sire: And so it is in all
Animalls besides.

Thus have I hudled up some observations of the Low Countries, beseeching your
Lopp* would be pleased to pardon the imperfections, and correct the errors of
them, for I know none so capable to do it as your Lopp. to whom I am

Antwerp, 1 Maii. 1622. A most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XIV To my Br^sher, Master Hugh Penry upon his marriage.
SIR,
YOu have had a good while the interest of a Friend in me, but you have me now
in a streighter tie, for I am your brother, by your sat marriage which has
turned friendship into an alliance; you have in your arms one of my dearest
sisters, who I hope, nay I know will make a good wife: I heartily congratulate
this marriage, and pray that a blessing may descend upon it from that place
where all marriages are made which is from Heaven, the Fountain of all
felicity: to this prayer I think it no profaneness to add the saying of the
Lyric Poet Horace, in whom I know you delight much, and I send it you as a kind
of Epithalamium, and wish it may be verified in you both.

Foelices ter and amplius
Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis
Divulsus querimoniis
Suprema citius solvet amor die.
Thus Englished.

That Couple's more than trebly blessed
Which nuptial bonds do so combine,
That no distaste can them untwine
Till the last day send both to rest.
So dear brother, I much rejoice for this alliance, and wish you may increase
and multiply to your hearts content.

May the 20 1622. Your affectionat brother, J. H.

XVII. To my brother Doctor Howell from Brussels.
SIR,
I Had yours in Latin at Roterdam, whence I corresponded with you in the same
Language; I heard, though not from you, since I came from Brussells, that our
sister Anne is lately married to Mr Hugh Penry, I am heartily glad of it, and
wish the rest of our fisters were so well bestowd; for I know Mr Penry to be a
Gentleman of a great deal of solid worth and integrity, and one that will prove
a great Husband, and a good O^conomist.

Here is news that Mansfel^ has received a foyl lately in Germany, and that
the Duke of Brunswick, alias Bishop of Halverstadt has lost one of his arms:
This maks them vapor here extremely, and the last week I heard of a play the
Jesuits of Antwerp made, in derogation or rather derision of the proceedings of
the Prince Palsgrave, where amongst diverse other passages, they feignd a Post
to com puffing upon the stage, and being askd what news, he answered how the
Palsgrave was like to have shortly a huge formidable Army, for the King of
Denmark was to send him a hundred thousand, the Hollanders a hundred thousand,
and the King of great Britain a hundred thousand; but being asked thousands of
what? he replied the first would send 100000. red Herings, the second 100000.
Cheeses, and the last 100000. Ambassadors; alluding to Sir Richard Weston, and
Sir Edward Conway, my Lord Carlisle, Sir Arthur Chichester, and lastly, the Lord
Digby, who have bin all employed in quality of Ambassadors in less than two
years, since the beginning of these German broils: touching the last, having
bin with the Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria, and carried himself with such
high wisdom in his negotiations with the one, and stoutnes with the other, and
having preserved Count Mansfiel^s troops from disbanding, by pawning his own
argentry and Jewels, he passed this way, where they say the Archduke did
esteem him more than any Ambassador that ever was in this Court, and the report
is yet very fresh of his high abilities.

We are to remove hence in coach toward Paris the next week where we intend
to winter, or hard by; when you have opportunity to write to Wales, I pray
present my duty to my Father, and my love to the rest; I pray remember me also
to all at the Hill and the Dale, specially to that most virtuous Gentleman, Sir
John Franklin. So my dear brother, I pray God continue and improve his
blessings to us both, and bring us again together with comfort.

June 10. 1622. Your brother, J. H.

XVIII. To Dr. The: Prichard at Worcester House.
SIR,
FRiendship is that great chain of human society, and intercours of letters is
one of the chiefest links of that chain: you know this as well as I, therefore I
pray let our friendship, let our love, that national ty of British love, that
virtuous ty of Academi^ love be still strengthened (as heretofore) and receive
daily more and more vigor. I am now in Paris, and there is weekly opportunity to
receive and send; and if you please to send, you shall be sure to receive, for
I make it a kind of Religion to be punctual in this kind of payment. I am
heartily glad to hear that you are become a domestic member to that most noble
Family of the Worcesters, and I hold it to be a very good foundation for future
preferment; I wish you may be as happy in them, as I know they will be happy in
you. F^ance is now barren of news, only there was a shrewd brush lately twixt
the young King and his Mother, who having the Duke of Espernon and others for
her Champions met him in open field about pont de Ce, but she went away with
the worst; such was the rare dutifulnes of the King, that he forgave her upon
his knees, and pardoned all her accomplices; And now there is an universal Peace
in this Country, which it is thought will not last long, for there is a war
intended against them of the reformd Religion; for this King though he be slow
in speech, yet is he active in spirit, and loves motion: I am here camrade to a
gallant young Gentleman my old acquaintance who is full of excellent parts,
which he has acquired by a choice breeding, the Baron his Father gave him both
in the University, and the Inns of Court, so that for the time, I envy no man's
happiness. So with my hearty commends, and (...) ^ndear'd love unto you, I rest

(...), 3. Aug. ^622. Yours whiles Jam. Howell.

XIX. To the Honble. Sir Tho. Savage, (after Lord Savage,) at his House upon
Tower Hill.
Honble. SIR,
THose many undeserved favors for which I stand obliged to your self and my
noble Lady, since the time I had the happiness to com first under your roof, and
the command you pleased to lay upon me at my departure thence, call upon me at
this time to give you account how matters pass in France.

That which for the present affords most plenty of news, is Rochell, which the
King threatens to block up this Spring with an army by sea, under the command
of the D. of Nevers, and by a land army under his own conduct: both sides
prepare, he to assault, the Rochellers to defend. The King declares that he
proceeds not against them for their Religion which he is still contented to
tolerat, but for holding an Assembly against his Declarations. They answer that
their Assembly is grounded upon his Majesty's royal Warrant, given at the
dissolution of the last Assembly at Lodun, where he solemnly gave his word to
permit them to re-assemble when they would six months as^er, if the breaches of
their liberty, and grievances which they then propounded were not redressed; and
they say this being unperform'd, it stands not with the sacred Person of a King
to violat his promise, being the first that ever he made them. The King is so
incensed against them, that their Deputies can have neither access to his
Person, nor audience of his Counsel, as they style themselves the Deputies of
the Assembly at Rochell; but if they say they com from the whole body of Them
of the pretended reformed Religion, he will hear them. The breach between them
is grown so wide, that the King resolves upon a fiege. This resolution of the
Kings is much somented by the Roman Clergy, specially by the Celestines, who
have 200000 Crowns of gold in the Arsenal of Paris, which they would sacrifice
all to this service, besides the Pope sent him a Bull to levy what sums he
would of the Gallican Church, for the advancement of this design: This
resolution also is much pushed on by the Gentry, who besides the particular
emploiments and pay they shall receive hereby, are glad to have their young
King trained up in Arms to make him a Martial man; But for the Merchant and
poor Peasan, they tremble at the name of this War, fearing their teeth should
be set on edge with those sour grapes their fathers tasted in the time of the
League, for if the King begin with Rochell, it is feared all the four corners of
the Kingdom will be set on ^re.

Of all the Towns of surety which They of the Religion hold, Rochell is the
chiefest; a place strong by nature, but stronger by Art; It is a Maritim town,
and landward they can by sluices drown a leagues distance: it is fortified with
mighty thick walls, bastions, and counters^arps, and those according to the
modern rules of Enginry. This amongst other cautionary Towns, was granted by
Henry the fourth, to them of the Religion for a certain term of years, which
being expired, the King says they are devolved again to the Crown, and so
demands them. They of the Religion pretend to have diverse grievances; first
they have not been paid these two years the 160000 Crowns which the last King
gave them annually to maintain their Ministers and Garrisons: They complain of
the Kings carriage lately at Bearn (Henry the greats Country) which was merely
Protestant, where he has introduced two years since the public exercise of the
Mass, which had not bin sung there fifty years before; he altered also there
the Government of the Country, and in lieu of a Viceroy, left a Governor only:
and whereas Navarrin was formerly a Court of Parliament for the whole Kingdom of
Navar, (that is under France) he has put it down and published an Edict, that
the Navarrois should com to Tolo^se, the chief town of Languedoc; and lastly,
he left behind him a Garrison in the said Town of Navarrin. These and other
grievances they of the Religion proposed to the King lately, desiring his
Majesty would let them enjoy still those privileges his Predecessor Henry the
third, and his Father Henry the fourth afforded them by Act of Pacification:
But he made them a short answer, that what the one did in this point, he did it
out of fear; what the other did, he did it out of love; but he would have them
know that he neither loved them, nor feared them: so the business is like to
bleed sore on both sides; nor is there yet any apearance of prevention.

There was a scuffle lately here 'twixt the Duke of Navers and the Cardinal of
Guise, who have had a long suit in law about an Abbey, and meeting the last
week about the Palace, from words they fell to blows, the Cardinal struck the
Duke first, and so were parted, but in the afternoon there appeared on both
sides no less than 3000 horse in a field hard by, which shows the populousnes
and sudden strength of this huge City, but the matter was taken up by the King
himself, and the Cardinal clapped up in the Bastile, where the King says he
shall abide to ripen; for he is but young, and they spoke of a Bull that is to
come from Rome to decardinalize him. I fear to have trespas'd too much upon
your patience, therefore I will conclude for the present, but will never cease
to profess my self

Your thrice humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
Paris, Aug. 18. 1622.
XX. To D. Caldwall Esqr. from Poyssy.
My dear D.
TO be free from English, and to have the more convenience to fall close to our
business, Mr. Altham and I are lately re^'d from Paris to this Town of Poyssy, a
pretty gentile place at the ^oot of the great Forest of Saint German upon the
River Sequana, and within a mile of one of the Kings chiefest standing Houses,
and about 15 miles from Paris. Here is one of the prime Nunneries of all
France. Lewis the ninth, who in the Catalog of the French Kings is called St.
Lewis, which Title was confirmed by the Pope, was baptized in this little Town,
and after his return from Egypt and other places against the Saracens, being
asked by what Title he would be distinguished from the rest of his Predecessors
after his death, he answered, that he desired to be called Lewis of Poyssy:
reply being made that there were diverse other places and cities of renown, where
he had performed brave exploits, and obtained famous victories, therefore it was
more fitting that some of those places should denominat him: no, said he, I
desire to be called Lewis of Poyssy, because there I got the most glorious
victory that ever I had, for there I overcame the Devil: meaning that he was
Christened there.

I sent you from Antwerp a silver Dutch Table Book, I desire to hear of the
receipt of it in your next: I must desire you (as I did once at Rouen) to send
me a dozen pair of the whitest kidskin glov's for women, and half a dozen pair
of knit's, by the Merchants post, and if you want any thing that France can
afford, I hope you know what power you have to dispose of

Poyssy, Septem. 7. 1622. Your J. H.

XXII. To my Father, from Paris.
SIR,
I Was afraid I should never have had ability to write to you again, I had
lately such a dangerous fit of sickness, but I have now passed the brunt of it,
God has been pleased to reprieve me, and reserve me for more days which I hope
to have grace to number better; Mr. Altham and I having retired to a small Town
from Paris for more privacy, and sole conversation with the nation; I tied my
self to a task for the reading of so many books in such a compass of time, and
thereupon to make good my-word to my self, I used to watch many nights together,
though it was in the depth of Winter, but returning to this Town, I took cold
in the head, and so that mals of rheum which had gathered by my former watching
turned to an impostume in my head, whereof I was sick above forty days, at the
end they caute^is'd and made an issue in my check to make vent for the
impostume, and that saved my life: At first they let me blood, and I parted
with above fi^y ounces in less than a ^ortnight, for phlebotomy is so much
practiced here, that if ones little finger ache, they presently open ^ vein, and
to balance the blood on both sides, they usually ^et blood in both arms. And
the commonness of the thing* ^eems to take away all fear, insomuch that the
very women when ^hey find themselves indisposed, will open a vein themselves,
for ^hey hold that the blood which has a circulation and fetches a ^ound
every 24 hours about the body is quickly repaired again; I was eighteen days
and nights that I had no sleep but short imperfect slumbers, and those too
protur'd by potions; the tumor at last came so about my throat that I had
scarce vent left for respiration, and my body was brought so low with all sorts
of Physic, that I appeard like a mere Skeleton. When I was indifferently well
recovered, some of the Doctors and Chirurgions that tended me, gave me a visit,
and amongst other things they fell in discourse of wines which was the best; and
so by degrees they fell upon other beverages, and one Doctor in the company who
had bin in England, told me that we have a drink in England called Ale, which he
thought was the wholsomst liquor that could go into ones guts, for whereas the
body of man is supported by two columns, viz. the natural heat, and radical
moisture, he said, there is no drink conduces more to the preservation of the
one, and the increase of the* other than Ale, for while the Englishmen drank
only Ale, they were strong brawny able men, and could draw an arrow an ell
long, but when they fell to wine and beer, they are found to be much impaird in
their strength and age; so the Ale bore away the bell among the Doctors.

The next week we advance our course further into France toward the river of
Loire to Orleans, whence I shall continue to convey my duty to you. In the mean
time I humbly crave your blessing, and your acknowledgment to God Almighty for
my recoverie; be pleased further to impart my love amongst my brothers and
sisters withal my kinsmen and friends in the Country, so I rest

Paris, Decembris 10. 1622. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

XXII. To Sir Tho. Savage Knight and Baronet.
Honble SIR.
THat of the fifth of this present which you pleased to send me, was received.
and I begin to think my self something more then I was, that you value so much
the slender endevors of my pen to do you service. I shall continue to improve
your good opinion of me as opportunity shall serve.

Touching the great threats against Rochell, whereof I gave you an ample
relation in my last, matters are become now more calm and rather inclining to an
accommodation, for it is thought a sum of money will make up the breach; and to
this end some think all these bravado's were made. The Duke of Luynes is at last
made Lord high Constable of France the prime Officer of the Crown, he has a
peculiar Court to himself, a guard of a 100. men in rich liveries, and a
hundred thousand livers every year Pension: The old Duke of Lesdiguieres, one
of the ancientst soldiers of France, and a Protestant, is made his Lieutenant.

But in regard all Christendom rings of this Favorit, being the greatest that
ever was in France since the Maires of the Palace, who came to be Kings
afterward, I will send you herein his Legend. He was boru in Province, and is
a Gentleman by descent, though of a petty extraction, in the last Kings time
he was preferred to be one of his pages, who finding him industrious, and a
good waiter, allowed him 300. Crowns pension per annum, which he husbanded so
well, that he maintaind himself and his two brothers in passable good fashion
therewith. The King observing that, doubled his Pension, and taking notice that
he was a serviceable instrument and apt to please, he thought him fit to be
about his son, in whose service he has continued above fifteen years, and he
has flown so high into his favor by a singular dexteri^ie and Art he has in
^aulconrie, and by shooting at birds flying, wherein the King took great
pleasure, that he has soard to this pitch of honor. He is a man of a passable
good understanding and forecast, of a mild comportment, humble and debonnair to
all, and of a winning conversation, he has about him choice and solid heads
who prescribe unto him rules of policy, by whose Compass he steers his course,
which is likely will make him subsist long: He is now com to that transcendent
altitude, that he seems to have mounted above the reach of envy, and made all
hopes of supplanting him frustrate, both by the politic guidance of his own
actions, and the powerful alliances he has got for himself and his two
brothers: he is married to the Duke of Montbazons daughter, one of the prime
Peers of France. His second brother Cadanet (who is reputed the wisest of the
three) married the heiress of Picardy, with whom he had 9000 l. lands a year.
His third brother Brand to the great heiress of Luxemburg, of which house there
have bin five Emperor; so that these three brothers and their allies would be
able to counter balance any one faction in France, the eldest and youngest
being made Dukes, and Peers of France, the other Marshall. There are lately two
Ambassadors extraordinary com hither from Venice about the Valtolin, but their
negotiation is at a stand, until the return of an Ambassador extraordinary
which is gone to Spain: Ambassadors also are com from the Hague for payment of
the French Regiment there, which has bin neglected these ten years, and to
know whether his Majesty will be pleased to continue their pay any longer; but
their answer is yet suspended: They have brought news that the seven ships
which were built for his Majesty in the Tess^ll are ready, to this he answered,
that he desires to have ten more built; for he intends to finish that design
which his Father had a foot a little before his death to establish a royal
company of Merchants.

This is all the news that France affords for the present, the relation whereof
if it prove as acceptable as my endeavors to serve you herein are pleasing unto
me, I shall esteem my self happy: So wishing you and my noble Lady continuance
of health, and increase of honor, I rest

Paris, 15 Decembris. 1622. Your most humble Servitor, J. H.

XXIII. To Sir John North, Knight,
SIR,
I confess you have made a perfect conquest of me by your late favors, and I
yield my self your cap^if, a day may com that will enable me to pay my ransom,
in the interim let a most thankful acknowledgment be my bail and mainprise.

I am now removed from off the Sein to the Loire to the fair Town of Orleans:
there was here lately a mixed Procession twixt military and ecclesiasti^ for the
maid of Orleans, which is performd every year very solemnly, her Statue stands
upon the bridge, and her cloths are proserv'd to this day, which a young man
wore in the Procession; which makes me think that her story though it sound
like a romance is very true: And I read it thus in two or three Chronicles;
when the English had made such firm invasions in France, that their Armies had
marchd into the heart of the Country, besiegd Orleans, and driven Charles the
seventh to Bourges in Berry, which made him to be called, for the time, King of
Berry; there came to his Army a Shepherdess one Anne de Arque, who with a
confident look and language told the King that she was designed by heaven to
beat the English, and drive them out of France. Therefore she desired a command
in the* Army, which by her extraordinary confidence and importunity she
obtained, and putting on man's apparel she proved so prosperous, that the
siege* was raisd from before Orleans, and the English were pursued to Paris,
and forced to quit that, and driven to Normandy: she usd to go on with
mavelous courage and resolution, and her word was hara ha: But in Normandy
she was taken prisoner, and the English had a fair revenge upon her, for by an
arrest of the Parliament of Rouen she was burnt for a Witch. There is a great
business now a foot in Paris called the Polette, which if it take effect will
tend to correct, at least wise to cover a great error in the French Government:
The custom is that all the chief places of Justice throughout all the eight
Courts of Parliament in France, besides a great number of other offices, are
set to sale by the King, and they return to him unless the buyer lives forty
days after his resignation to another: It is now propounded that these casual
offices shall be absolutely hereditary, provided that every officer pay a yearly
revenue unto the King, according to the valuation and perquisits of the o^ice:
this business is now in hot ^gitation, bu^ the issue is yet doubtful.

The last you sent, I receivd by Vacandary in Paris: so highly honoring your
excellent parts and me^it, I rest, now that I understand French indifferently
well, no more your ( she) Servant, but

Orleans, 3 Martii. 1622. Your most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XXIV. To Sir James Crofts, Knight.
SIR,
Were I to freight a Letter with Complements, this Country would furnish me
with variety, but of news a small store at this present, and for Complement it
is dangerous to use a^y to you, who have such a piercing judgment to discern
semblan^es from realities,

The Queen Mother is com at last to Paris, where she has not been since An^e's
death: The King is also returned post from Bo^deaux, having traversed most part
of his Kingdom, he settled peace every where he pas'd, and quashed diverse
insurrections, and by his obedience to his mother, and his lenity toward all
her partisans a^ pont de C^ where above 400 were slain, and notwithstanding
that he was victorious, yet he gave a general pardon, he has gained much upon
the affections of his people: His Counsel of State wen^ ambulatory always with
him, and as they say here, never did men manage things with more wisdom. There
is a war questionless a fermenting against the Protestants, the Duke of
Espernon in a kind of Rodomontado way, desired leave of the King to block up
Rochell, and in six weeks he would undertake to deliver her to his hands, but I
believe he reckons without his Host. I was told a merry passage of this little
Gascon Duke, who is now the oldest soldier of France; Having come lately to
Paris he treated with a Pander to procure him a ^urtesan, and if she was a
Damoisell (a Gentlewoman) he would give so much, and if a Citizen he would give
so much: The Pande^ did his Office, but brought him a Citizen clad in
Damoisells apparel, so she and her Maquerell were paid accordingly; the ne^
day after, some of his familiars having understood hereof began to be pleasant
with the Duke, and to jeer him, that he being a vis^il Routier an old tried
soldier, should suffer himself to be so co^end, as to pay for a Citizen after
the rate of a Gentlewoman; the little Duke grew half wild hereupon, and
commenced an action of fraud against the Pander, but what became of it I cannot
tell you, but all Paris rung of it. I hope to return now very shortly to
England, where amongst the ^est of my noble friends I shall much rejoice to see
and serve you whom I honor with no vulgar affection, so I am

Your true Servitor, J. H.
Orleans, 5 Martii. 1622.
XXV. To my Cosen Mr. Will. Martin at Brussells from Paris.
Dear Cosen,
I Find you are very punctual in your performances, and a precise observer of
the promise you made here to correspond with Mr. Altham and me by Letters. I
thank you for the variety of German news you imparted unto me, which was so
neatly couched and curiously knit together, that your Letter ^ight serve for a
pattern to the best Intelligencer. I am sorry the affairs of the Prince
Palsgrave go so untowardly, the wheel of War may turn, and that Spoke which is
now up may down again. For French Occurrences, there is a War certainly intended
against them of the Religion here; and there are visible preparations a loot
already; Amongst others that shrink in the shoulders at it the Kings servants
are not very well pleased with it, in regard besides Scots and Swissers, there
are diverse of the Kings Servants that are Protestants. If a man go to (...)' di
s^ato to reason of State, the French King has something to justify this
dessein, for the Protestants being so numerous, and having near upon fifty
presidiary walled Towns in their hands for caution, they have power to disturb
France when they please, and being abetted by a foreign Prince to give the King
Law; and you know as well as I how they have been made use of to kindle a fire
in France: Therefore rather than they should be utterly suppressed, I believe the
Spaniard himself would reach them his ragged staff to defend them.

I send you here enclosed another from Master Altham who respects you dearly,
and we remembered you lately at la pomme du pin in the best liquor of the French
Grape. I shall be shortly for London, where I shall not rejoice a little to
meet you; that English air may confirm what foreign begun, I mean our friendship
and affections, and in Me (that I may return you in English the Latin Verses
you sent me)

As soon a little little Ant
Shall bib the Ocean dry,
A Snail shall creep about the world,
Ere these affections dye.
So my dear Cosen* may Virtue be your guide, and Fortune your Companion.

Paris, 18 Martii. 1622. Yours while Jam. Howell.

Familiar Letters.
SECTION III.
I. To my Father.
SIR,
I Am safely returned now the second time from beyond the Seas, but I have yet
no employment; God and good friends I hope will shortly provide one for me.

The Spanish Ambassador Count Gondamar does strongly negotiat a Match 'twixt
our Prince, and the Infanta of Spain, but at his first audience there happened
an ill favored accident (I pray God it prove no ill augury) for my Lord of
Arundell being sent to accompany him to White Hall, upon a Sunday in the
afternoon, as they were going over the Tarrasse, it broke under them, but only
one was hurt in the arm; Gondamar said that he had not cared to have dyed in so
good company: he says there is no other way to regain the Palatinate, but by
this match, and to settle an eternal Peace in Christendom.

The Marquis of Buckingham continues still in fulness of grace and favor; the
Countess his Mothes sways also much at Court, she brought Sir Henry Montague
from delivering law on the K. Bench, to look to his bags in the Exchequer, for
she made him Lord high Treasurer of England* but he parted with his white staff
before the years end, though his pu^ had bled deeply for it (above 20000 l.)
which made a Lord of this Land to ask him at his return from Court, whether he
did not find that wood was extreme dear at New Market, for there he received
the white staff. There is now a notable stirring man in the place, my Lord
Cranfield, who from walking about the Exchange, is com to sit chief Judge in
the Chequer Chamber, and to have one of the highest places at the Counsel
Table: He is married to one of the Tribe of Fortune, a kinswoman of the Marquis
of Buckingham. Thus there is rising and falling at Court, and a^ in our natural
pace one foot cannot be up, till the other be down, so is it in the affairs of
the world commonly, one man rises at the fall of the other.

I have no more to write at this time, but that with tender of my duy to you, I
desire a continuance of your blessing and prayers.

Land. March 22. 1622. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

II. To the Honble, M. John Savage (now Earl Rivers) at Florence.
SIR,
MY love is not so short but it can reach as far as Florence to find you out,
and further too if occasion required, nor are those affections I have to serve
you so dull but they can clammer ore the Alps and Apennin to wait upon you, as
they have adventured to do now in this paper. I am sorry I was not in London
(...) kiss your hands before you set to Sea, and much more sorry that I had not
the happiness to meet you in Holland or Brabant, for we went the very same road,
and lay in Dort and Antwerp in the same lodgings you had lain in a fortnight
before. I presume you have by this time tasted of the sweetness of Travel, and
that you have weaned your affections from England for a good while, you must
now think upon home (as one said) good men think upon heaven, aiming still to
go thither, but not till they finish their course; and yours I understand will
be three years, in the mean time you must not suffer any melting tenderness of
thoughts, or longing desires, to distract or interrupt you in that fair road
you are in to virtue, and to beautify within that comely Edifice which nature
has built without you. I know your reputation is precious to you, as it should
be to every noble mind, you have exposed it now to the hazard, therefore you
must be careful it receive no taint at your return by not answering that
expectation which your Prince and noble Parents have of you: You are now under
the chiefest clime of wisdom, fair Italy, the Darling of Nature, the Nurse of
Policy, the Theater of Virtue; But though Italy give milk to Virtue with one
dug, she often suffers Vice to suck at the other, therefore you must take heed
you mistake not the dug; for there is an ill favored saying, that Inglese
Italionato, e Diavolo incarnato; An Englishman Italianat, is a Devil incarnat.
I fear no such thing of you, I have had such pregnant proofs of your ingenuity,
and noble inclination^ to virtue and honor: I know you have a mind to both, but
I must tell you that you will hardly get the good will of the latter, unless
the first speak a good word for you: when you go to Rome, you may happily see the
ruins of two Temples, one dedicated to Virtue, the other to Honor, and there
was no way to enter into the last, but through the first. Noble Sir, I wish
your good very seriously, and if you please to call to memory, and examine the
circumstance of things, and my carriage toward you since I had the happiness to
be known first to your Honorable Family, I know you will conclude that I love
and honor you in no vulgar way.

My Lord, your Grandfather was complaining lately that he had not heard from
you a good while: By the next shipping to Ligorn, amongst other things he
intends to send you a whole Brawn in collers. I pray be pleased to remember my
affectionat service to Mr. Tho. Savage, and my kind respects to Mr. Bold: for
English news I know this packet coms fraighted to you, therefore I forbear at
this time to send any. Farewell noble Heir of Honor, and command always

Land. March 24. 1622. Your true Servitor, J. H.

III. To Sir James Crofts Knight, at Saint Osith in Essex.
SIR,
I had yours upon tuesday last, and whereas you are desirous to know the
proceedings of the Parliament, I am sorry I must write to you that matters
begin to grow boisterous. The King retired not long since to New market not
very well pleased, and this week there went thither twelve from the House of
Commons, to whom Sir Richard* Weston was the mouth; the King not liking the
Message they brought, called them his Ambassadors, and in the large answer which
he has sent to the Speaker, he says that he must apply unto them a speech of
Queen Elizabeth's to an Ambassador of Poland, Legatum expectavimus, Heralaum
accepimus? We expected an Ambassador, we have receivd a Herald; he takes it not
well that they should meddle with the match twixt his Son and the Infanta,
alleging an example of one of the Kings of France, which would not marry his
Son without the advice of his Parliament, but afterward that King grew so
despicable abroad, that no Foreign State would treat with him about any thing
without his Parliament. Sundry other high passages there were as a caveat he
gave them not to touch the honor of the King of Spain, with whom he was so far
engaged in a matrimonial treaty that he could not go back: he gave them also a
check for taking Cognizance of those things which had their motion in the
ordinary Courts of Justice, and that Sir Edward Coke, (though these words were
not inserted in the answer) whom he thought to be the fittest instrument for a
Tyrant that ever was England) should be so bold as to call the Prerogative of
the Crown a great monster. The Parliament after this was not long lived but
broak up in discontent, and upon the point of dissolution, they made a Protest
against diverse particulars in the aforesaid answer of his Majesty's. My Lord
Digby is preparing for Spain in quality of Ambassador Extraordinary, to
perfect the match twixt our Prince and the Lady Infanta, in which business
Gondamar has waded already very deep, and bin very active, and ingratiated
himself with diverse persons of quality, Ladies especially, yet he could do no
good upon the Lady Hatton, whom he desird lately that in regard he was her next
neighbor (at Ely House) he might have the benefit of her back gate to go abroad
into the fields, but she put him off with a Complement, whereupon in a private
audience lately with the King amongst other passages of merriment, he told him
that my Lady Hatton was a strange Lady, for she would not suffer her Husband
Sir Edward Coke to com in at her foredore, nor him to go out at her back door;
and so related the whole business: He was also dispatching a l'ost lately for
Spain, and the Post having receivd his packet, and kisd his hands, he called him
back and told him he had forgot one thing, which was, that when he came to
Spain he should commend him to the Sun, (...) he had not seen him a great
while, and in Spain he should be sure to find him: So with my most humble
service to my Lord of Colchester, I rest

London, Mar. 24. 1622. Your most humble Servitor, J. H.

IV, To my brother Mr Hugh Penry.
Sir,
THe Welsh nag you sent me, was deliverd me in a very good plight, and I give
you a thousand thanks for him; I had occasion lately to try his mettle and his
lungs, and every one tells me he is right, and of no mong^ell race, but a true
Mountaneer, for besides his toughness, and strength of lungs up a hill, he is
quickly curried, and content with short Commons: I believe he has not been
long a highway traveller, for whereas other horses, when they pass by an Inn or
Alehouse use to make toward them to give them a friendly visit, this n^g
roundly goes on, and scorns to cast as much as a glance upon any of them,
which I know not whether I shall impute it to his ignorance, or height of
spirit, but conversing with the soft horses of England, I believe he will
quickly be brought to be more courteous.

The greatest news we have now is the return of the Lord BPP* of Landass,
Davenant, Ward, and Belcanquell, from the Synod of Dort, where the Bishop had
precedence given him according to his Ep^scopall dignity, Arminius and Vorstius
were sore baited there concerning Predestination, Election, and Reprobation; as
also touching Christ's death, and man's Redemption by it; then concerning man's
Corruption, and Conversion; lastly, concerning the perseverance of the Saints:
I shall have shortly the transaction of the Synod. The Jesuits have put out a
gee^ing libell against it, and these two verses I remember in it.

Dordrecti Synodus? nodus; chorus integer? aeger;
Conventus? ventus; S^ffio stramen, Amen.
But I will confront this Distich with another I read in France of the Jesuits
in the Town of Dole, toward Lorain; they had a great house given them called
L'ar^ (arcum) and upon the river of L^, Henry the fourth gave them la fleche,
sagittam in ^atin, where they have two stately Convents, that is, Bow and
Arrow; whereupon one made these verses:

Arcum Dola dedit, dedit ill is alma sagittam
Francia; quis chordam, quam meruere, dabit?
Fair France the Arrow, Dole gave them the Bow,
Who shall the String which they deserve bestow?
No more now but that with my dear love to my Sister I rest.

London, April 16. 1622. Your most affectionate brother J. H.

V. To the Lord Vicount Colchester.
My good Lord,
I receivd your Lopps* of the last week, and according to your command, I send
here enclosed the Venetian gazet: for foreign aviso's, they write that Mansfelt
has bin beaten out of Germany, and is come to Sedan, and it is thought the Duke
of Bouillon will set him up again with a new Army: Marquis Spinola has newly
sat down* before Berghen op zoom; your Lopp* knows well what consequence that
Town is of, therefore it is likely this will be a hot Summer in the Netherlands.
The French King is in open war against them of the Religion, he has already
cleard the Loire by taking Ier seau and Saumur, where Mon^r. du Plessis sent
him the keys, which are promisd to be deliverd him again, but I think ad
Graecas Calenda^. He has bin also before Saint John d' angeli, where the young
Cardinal of Guyse died, being struck down by the puff of a Canon bullet,
which put him in a burning ^eaver, and made an end of him: the last Town that is
taken was Clerac, which was put to 50000. Crowns ransom; many were put to the
sword, and diverse Gentlemen drowned as they thought to escape; this is the
fifteenth cautionary Town the King has taken, and now they say he marches
toward Montauban, and so to Montpelli^r and Nism^, and then have at Rochell.
My Lord Hayes is by this time it is thought with the Army; for Sir Edward
Harbert is returned, having had some clashings and counterbuffs with the
Favorite Luynes, wherein he comported himself gallantly: there is a fresh report
blown over, that Luynes is lately dead in the Army of the Plague, some say of
the Purples, the next cosen german to it; which the Protestants give out to be
the just judgment of Heaven ^aln upon him, because he incited his Master to
these wars against them. If he be not dead, let him die when he will, he will
leave a fame behind him, to have bin the greatest Favorit for the time that
ever was in France, having from a simple Faulkner com to be high Constable, and
made himself and his younger brother Brand Dukes and Peers; and his second
brother Cadenet Marshall, and all three married to Princely Families.

No more now, but that I most humbly kiss your Lopps* hands, and shall be
always most ready and cheerful to receive your commandments, because I am

London, 12 Aug. 1623. Your Lordships obliged Servitor, I. H.

VI. To my Father, from London.
SIR,
I was at a dead stand in the course of my Fortunes, when it pleased God to
provide me lately an employment to Spain, whence I hope there may arise both
repute and profit. Some of the Cap^ Merchants of the Turkey Company, amongst
whom, the chiefest were Sir Robert Napper, and Captain Leat, proposed unto me,
that they had a great business in the Court of Spain in agitation many years,
nor was it now their business but the Kings, in whose name it is followed: they
could have Gentlemen of good quality that would undertake it; yet if I would
take it upon me, they would employ no other, and assured me that the employment
should tend both to my benefit and credit. Now the business is this: There was a
great Turkey ship called the Vineyard, sailing through the Streights toward
Constantinople, but by distress of weather she was forced to put into a little
Port called Milo in Sardinia: The searchers came aboard of her, and finding her
richly laden, for her cargazon of broad cloth was worth the first penny near
upon 30000 l. they cavell'd at some small proportion of lead and tin, which
they had only for the use of the ship, which the Searchers alleged to be ropa
de contrabando prohibited goods; for by Article of Peace nothing is to be
carried to Turkey that may arm or vittle. The Viceroy of Sardinia hereupon
seizd upon the whole ship and all her goods, landed the Master and men in
Spain, who coming to Sir Charles Corawalles then Ambassador at the Cour^; Sir
Charles could do them little good at present, therefore they came to England,
and complaind to the King and Counsel: his Majesty was so sensible hereof that
he sent a particular Commission in his own royal Name, to demand a restitution
of the ship and goods, and justice upon the Viceroy of Sardinia, who had so
apparently broke the Peace, and wronged his Subjects: Sir Charles (with Sir Paul
Pi^dar a while) labourd in the business, and commenced a suit in Law, but he
was called home before he could do any thing to purpose. After him Sir John
Digby, (now Lord Digby) went Ambassador to Spain, and amongst other things, he
had that particular Commission from his Majesty invested in him, to prosecut
the suit in his own royal Name: Thereupon he sent a well qualified Gentleman,
Mr Walsingham G^sley to Sardinia, who unfortunately meeting with some men of War
in the passage, was carried prisoner to Algier: My Lord Digby being remanded
home* left the business in Mr Cotingtons hands then Agent, but reassumed it at
his return: yet it proved such a tedious intricate suit, that he returned again
without finishing the work; in regard of the remoteness of the Island of
Sardinia, whence the witnesses and other dispatches were to be fetchd. The Lord
Digby is going now Ambassador extraordinary to the Court of Spain, upon the
business of the match, the restitution o^ the Palatinate, and other high
affairs of State; therefore he is desirous to transmit the Kings Commission to
ching this particular business to any gentleman that is capable to follow it,
and promises to assist him with the utmost of his power, and he says he has
good reason to do so, in regard he has now a good round share himself in it.
About this business* I am now preparing to go to Spain, in company of the
Ambassador, and I shall kiss the Kings hands as his Agent touching this
particular Commission. I humbly entreat that your blessing and prayers may
accompany me in this my new employment, which I have undertaken upon very good
terms touching expenses and reward: So with my dear love to my brothers and
sisters, with other kindred and friends in the country, I rest

London, 8 Sept. 1623. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

VII. To Sir Tho: Savage Knight and Baronet, at his house in Long-Melford.
Honble SIR,
I Receivd your commands in a Letter which you sent me by Sir John North, and I
shall not fail to serve you in those particulars. It has pleased God to
dispose of me once more for Spain, upon a business which I hope will make me
good returns: there have two Ambassadors and a royal Agent followed it
hitherto, and I am the fourth that is employed in it: I defer to trouble you
with the particulars of it, in regard I hope to have the happiness to kiss your
hand at Tower hill before my departure; which will not be, till my Lord Digby
sets forward. He goes in a gallant splendid Equipage, and one of the Kings
ships is to take him in at Plymouth, and transport him to the Corunnia, or
Saint Ande^as.

Since that sad disaster which befell Archbishop Abbot, to kill the man by the
glancing of an arrow as he was shooting at a Deer, (which kind of death befell
one of our Kings once in new Forest:) there has bin a Commission awarded to
debate whether upon this fact, whereby he has shed human blood, he be not to be
deprived of his Archbishopric, and pronounced irregular; some were against him,
but Bishop Andrews, and Sir Henry Martin stood stiffly for him, that in regard
it was no spontaneous act, but a mere contingencie, and that there is no degree
of men but is subject to misfortunes and casualties, they declared positively
that he was not to fall from his dignity or function, but should still remain a
regular and in statu quo prius; during this debate, he petitioned the King that
he might be permitted to retire to his Almeshouse at Guilford where he was
born, to pass the remainder of his life; but he is now come to be again rectus
in curia, absolutely quitted and restored to all things: But for the wife of
him which was killd, it was no misfortune to her, for he has endowed herself,
and her children with such an Estate, that they say her Husband could never
have got: So I humbly kiss your hands and rest

London, 9 Nov. 1622. Your most obliged Servi^. J. H.

VIII. To Captain Nich: Leat from Madrid, at his house in London.
SIR,
I Am safely com to the Court of Spain, and although by reason of that
misfortune which befell Mr Altham and me, of wounding the Sergeants in
Lombardstreet, we stayed three weeks behind my Lord Ambassador, yet we came
hither time enough to attend him to Court at his first audience.

The English Nation is better lookd on now in Spain than ordinary, because of
the hopes there are of a match, which the Merchant and comunalty much desire,
though the Nobility and Gentry be not so forward for it; so that in this point
the pulls of Sp^ beats quite contrary to that of England, where the people are
^vers to this match, and the Nobility with most part of the Gentry inclinable.

I have perusd all the papers I could get into my hands, touching the business
of the ship- Vineyard, and I find that they are higher than I in bulk, though
closely pressed together; I have cast up what i^ awarded by all the sentences of
view and review, by the Counsel of State and War, and I find the whole sum as
well principal, as interest upon interest, all sorts of damages, and processall
charges, com to above two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns. The Conde del Real
quondam Viceroy of Sardinia, who is adjudged to pay most part of this money, is
here* and he is Mayordomo Lord steward to the Infant Cardinal; if he has
wherewith, I donbt not but to recover the money, for I hope to have com in a
favorable conjuncture of time, and my Lord Ambassador who is so highly esteemd
here, does assure me of his best furtherance. So praying I may prove as
succesfull, as I shall be faithful in this great business, I rest

Madrid, 28 December. 1622. Yours to dispose of, J. H.

IX. To Mr Arthur Hopton from Madrid.
SIR,
SInce I was made happy with your acquaintance, I have receivd sundry strong
evidences of your love and good wishes unto me, which have tied me unto you in
no common obligation of thanks: I am in despair ever to cancel this bond, nor
would I do it, but rather endear the engagement more and more.

The treaty of the match twixt our Prince and the Lady Infant is now strongly
a foot, she is a very comely Lady, rather of a Flemish complexion than Spanish;
fair haird, and carries a most pure mixture of red and white in her face: she
is full and big lipd, which is held a beauty rather than a blemish or any
excefle in the Austrian Family, it being a thing incident to most of that race:
she goes now upon 16, and is of a talness agreeable to those years. The King is
also of such a complexion, and is under twenty; he has two brothers, Don
Carlos, and Don Herna^do, who though a youth of twelve, yet is he Cardinal and
Archbishop of Toledo, which in regard it has the Chancelorship of Castile
annexed to it, is the greatest spiritual dignity in Christendom after the
Papacy, for it is valued at 300000. Crowns per annum: Don Carlos is of a
differing complexion from all the rest, for he is black haird, and of a Spanish
hue, he has neither Office, Command, Dignity or Title, but is an individual
companion to the King, and what clothes soever are provided for the King, he
has the very same, and as often, from top to toe; he is the better beloved of
the people for his complexion, for one shall hear the Spaniard sigh and lament,
saying, O when shall we have a King again of our own color!

I pray commend me kindly to all at your house, and send me word when the young
gentlemen return from Italy. So with my most affectionat respects to your self,
I rest

Madrid, 5. ^an. 1622. Your true friend to serve you, J. H.

X. To Captain Nic. Leat, from Madrid.
SIR,
YOurs of the tenth of this present I received by Mr. Simon Digby, with the
enclosed to your son in Alicant, which is safely sent. Since my last unto you I
had access to Olivares the Favorit that rules all; I had also audience of the
King, to whom I delivered two memorialls since, in his Majesty's name of great
Britain, that a particular Iunta of some of the Counsel of State and War,
might be appointed to determine the business: the last memorial had so good
success that the Referees are nominated, whereof the chiefest is the Duke of
Infantado. Here it is not the style to claw and complement with the King, or
Idolize him by Sacred, Soverain, and most Excellent Majesty; but the Spaniard
when he petitions to his King, gives him no other Character but Sir, and so
relating his business, at the end he does ask and demand Justice of him. When I
have done with the Viceroy here, I shall hasten my dispatches for Sardinia:
since my last I went to liquidat the account more particularly, and I find that
of the 250000 Crowns, there are above forty thousand due unto you; which might
serve for a good Aldermans estate.

Your son in Alicant writes to me of another mischance that is befaln the ship
Amity about Mallorca, whereof you were one of the proprietaries; I am very
sorry to hear of it, and touching any dispatches that are to be had hence, I
shall endeavor to procure you them according to instructions.

Your cosen Richard Altham remembers his kind respects unto you, and sends you
many thanks for the pains you took in freeing us from that trouble which the
scuffle with the Sergeants brought upon us. So I rest

Madrid, 5 Ian. 1622. Yours ready to serve you, J. H.

XI. To the Lord Vicount Colchester from Madrid.
Right Honble.
THe grand business of the match goes so fairly on, that a special Iunta is
appointed to treat of it, the names whereof I send you here enclosed: they have
proceeded so, far that most of the Articles are agreed upon: Mr. George Gage is
lately come hither from Rome, a polite and prudent gentleman, who has
negotiated somthings in that Court for the advance of the business with the
Cardinals Bandino, Lodovisie, and la Susanna, who are the main men there to
whom the drawing of the dispensation is referred.

The late taking of Ormus by the Persian from the Crown of Portugal keeps a
great noise here, and the rather because the exploit was done by the assistance
of the English ships that were then therabouts; my Lord Digby went to Court and
gave a round satisfaction in this point; for it was no voluntary, but a
constrained act in the English, who being in the Persians Port were suddenly
embarked for the service: And the Persian herein did no more than what is
usual amongst Christian Princes themselves, and which is oftener put in
practice by the King of Spain, and his Viceroys, than by any other, viz. to
make an embargue of any strangers ship that rides within his Ports upon all
occasion. It was feared this surprisall of Ormus which was the greatest Mart in
all the Orient for all sorts of jewels, would have bred ill blood, and
prejudiced the preceedings of the match, but the Spaniard is a rational man,
and will be satisfied with reason Count Olivares is the main man who sways all,
and it is thought he is not so much affected to an alliance with England as his
Predecessor the Duke of Lerma was, who set it first a foot 'twixt Prince Henry,
and this Queen of France: The Duke of Lerma was the greatest Privado, the
greatest Favorit that ever was in Spain since Don Alvaro de Luna, he brought
himself, the Duke of Uzeda his son, and the Duke of C^a his grandchild to be
all Grandes of Spain, which is the greatest Title that a Spanish Subject is
capable of, they have a privilege to stand covered before the King, and at
their election there is no other Ceremony but only these three words by the King,
Cobrese por Grande, cover your self for a Grande, and that is all: The Cardinal
Duke of Lerma lives at Valladolid, he officiats and sings Mass, and passes his
old age in Devotion and exercises of Piety: It is a common and indeed a
commendable custom amongst the Spaniard, when he has passed his gran
climacteric, and is grown decrepit, to make a voluntary resignation of Offices,
be they never so great and profitable, (though I cannot say Ler^ did so) and
sequestring and weaning themselves as it were from all mundan negotiations and
encombrances, to retire to some place of devotion, and spend the residue of
their days in meditation, and in preparing themselves for another world:
Charles the Emperor showed them the way, who left the Empire to his brother,
and all the rest of his Dominions to his son Philip the second, and so taking
with him his two sisters, he retired into a Monastery, they into a Nunnery:
this does not suit well with the genius of an Englishman, who loves not to pull
off his clothes till he goes to bed. I will conclude with some Verses I saw
under a huge Rodomontado picture of the Duke of Lerma, wherein he is painted
like a Giant bearing up the Monarchy of Spain, that of France, and the Popedom
upon his shoulders, with this Stanza,

Sobre les ombros d'este Atlante
Yazen en aquestos dias,
Estas tres Monarquias.
Upon the shoulders of this Atlas lies,
The Popedom and two mighty Monarchies.
So I most humbly kiss your Lordships hands, and rest ever most ready

Madrid, 3 Febr. 1622. At your Lordships command, J. H.

XII. To my Father.
SIR,
ALL affairs went on fairly here, specially that of the match; when Master
Endymion Porter brought lately my Lord of B^istoll a dispatch from England of a
high nature, wherein the Earl is commanded to represent unto this King how much
his Majesty of great Britain since the beginning of these German wars has
labourd to merit well of this Crown, and of the whole House of Austria, by a
long and lingering patience, grounded still upon assurances hence, that care
should be had of his honor, his Daughters jointure, and grand-childrens
patrimony; yet how crosly all things had proceeded in the Treaty at Bruxells,
managed by Sir Richard Weston, as also that in the Palatinat by the Lord
Chichester: how in treating time the Town and Castle of Heidelberg were taken,
Manbeim besieged, and all acts of Hostility used, notwithstanding the fair
professions made by this King, the Infanta at Bruxells, and other his
Ministers: How merely out of respect to this King, he had neglected all
Martial means which probably might have preserved the Palatinat: those thin
Garrisons which he had sent thither being rather for honors sake to keep a
footing until a general accommodation, than that he relied any way upon their
strength: And since that there are no other fruits of all this but reproach and
scorn* and that those good Offices which he used toward the Emperor on the
behalf of his Son in law, which he was so much encouraged by Letters from hence
should take effect, have not sorted to any other issue, than to a plain affront
and a high injuring of both their Majesty's, though in a different degree; The
Earl is to tell him that his Majesty of great Britain hopes and desires that
out of a true apprehension of these wrongs offered unto them both, he will as
his dear and loving brother faithfully promise and undertake upon his honor,
confirming the same under his hand and seal, either that Heidelberg shall be
within seventy days rendered into his hands; as also that there shall be within
the said term of seventy days a suspension of arms in the Palatinat, and that a
Treaty shall recommence upon such terms as he propounded in November last,
which this King held then to be reasonable: And in case that this be not
yielded unto by the Emperor, that then this King join forces with his Majesty
of England, for the recovery of the Palatinat, which upon this trust has been
lost; or in case his forces at this time be otherwise employed, that they
cannot give his Majesty that assistance he desires and deserves, that at least
he will permit a free and friendly passage through his Territories, for such
Forces as his Mejesty of great Britain shall employ into Germany: Of all which,
if the Earl of Bristoll has not from the King of Spain a direct assurance
under his hand and Seal ten days after his audience, that then he take his
leave, and return to England to his Majesty's presence, else to proceed in the
negotiation of the match according to former instructions.

This was the main substance of his Majesty's late letter, yet there was a
postill added, that in case a rupture happen 'twixt the two Crowns, the Earl
should not com instantly and abruptly ^way, but that he should send advice
first to England, and carry the business so, that the world should not presently
know of it.

Notwithstanding all these traverses, we are confident here, that the match
will take, otherwise my Cake is Dow. There was a great difference in one of the
capitulations 'twixt the two Kings, how long the children which should issue of
this marriage were to continue sub regimine Matris, under the tutele of the
Mother. This King demanded 14 years at first, then twelve, but now he is come
to nine, which is newly condescended unto. I received yours of the first of
September in another from Sir James Crofts, wherein it was no small comfort to
me to hear of your health. I am to go hence shortly for Sardinia, a dangerous
voyage, by reason of Algier Pirates. I humbly desire your prayers may accompany

Madrid, 23 Febr. 1622. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

XIII. To Sir James Crofts Knight.
SIR,
YOurs of the second of October came to safe hand with the enclosed; you write
that there came dispatches lately from Rome, wherein the Pope seems to endeavor
to insinuat himself into a direct treaty with England, and to negotiat
immediately with our King touching the dispensation, which he not only labors
to evade, but utterly disclaims, it being by Article the task of this King to
procure all dispatches thence: I thank you for sending me this news. You shall
understand there came lately an express from Rome also to this Court, touching
the business of the match which gave very good content; but the dispatch and
new instructions, which Mr. Endymion Porter brought my Lord of Bristoll lately
from England touching the Prince Palatinat, fills us with apprehensions of
fear: Our Ambassadors here have had audience of this King already about those
Propositions, and we hope that Master Porter will carry back such things as
will satisfy. Touching the two points in the Treaty wherein the two Kings
differed most, viz. about the education of the children, and the exemption of
the Infanta's Ecclesiastic servants from secular jurisdiction: both these
points are cleared, for the Spaniard is com from fourteen years to ten, and for
so long time the Infant Princes shall remain under the mothers government. And
for the other point, the Ecclesiastical Superior shall first take notice of
the offense that shall be committed by any spiritual person belonging to the
Infanta's family, and according to the merit thereof either deliver him by
degradation to the secular justice, or banish him the Kingdom according to the
quality of the delict, and it is the same that is practiced in this Kingdom,
and other parts that adhere to Rome.

The Conde de Monterrey goes Viceroy to Naples, the Marquis de Montesclaros
being put by, the gallanter man of the two. I was told of a witty saying of
his, when the Duke of Lerma had the vogue in this Court: for going one morning
to speak with the Duke, and having danced attendance a long time, he peeped
through a slit in the hanging, and spied Don Rodrigo Calderon, a great man (who
was lately beheaded here for poisning the late Queen Dowager) delivering the
Duke a Paper upon his knees, whereat the Marquis smiled and said, Voto a tal,
aqu^l hombre sube mas a las rodillas, que yo no hago a los pics, I swear that
man climbs higher upon his knees, than I can upon my feet: Indeed I have read
it to be a true Court rule, that descendendo ascendendum est in Aula,
descending is the way to ascend at Court. There is a kind of humility and
compliance, that is far from any servile baseness or fordid flattery, and may
be termed discretion rather than adulation. I intend God willing to go for
Sardinia this Spring, I hope to have better luck than Master Walsingham Gresley
had, who some few years since in his passage thither upon the same business
that I have in agitation, met with some Turksmen of war, and so was carried
slave to Algier. So with my true respects to you* I rest

Madrid, 12 Mar. 1622. Your faithful Servant, J. H.

XIV. To Sir Francis Cottington, Secretary to his Highness the Prince of
Wales, at Saint James.
SIR,
I Believe it will not be unpleasing unto you to hear of the procedure and
success of that business wherein your self has been so long versed in: I mean
the great suit against the quondam Viceroy of Sardinia the Conde del Real:
Count Gondamars coming was a great advantage unto me, who has don me many
favors; besides a confirmation of the two sentences of view and review, and of
the execution against the Viceroy, I have procured a Royal cedule which I
caused to be printed, and whereof I send you here enclosed a Copy, by which
Cedule I have power to arrest his very person, and my Lawyers tell me there was
never such a cedule granted before: I have also by virtue of it priority of all
other his Creditors: He has made an imperfect overture of a composition, and
showed me some trivial old fashioned jewels, but nothing equivalent to the
debt. And now that I speak of jewels, the late surprisall of Ormus by the
assistance of our ships sinks deep in their stomachs here, and we were afraid
it would have spoild all proceedings; but my Lord Digby, now Earl of Bristoll
(for Count Gondamar brought him ore his Patent) has calmd all things at his
last audience.

There were luminaries of joy lately here for the victory that Don Gonzalez de
Cordova got over Count Mansfelt in the Netherlands with that Army which the
Duke of Bouillon had levied for him, but some say they have not much reason to
rejoice, for though the Infantery suffered, yet Mansfelt got clear with all his
horse by a notable retreat, and they say here it was the greatest piece of
service and Art he ever did, it being a Maxim, that there is nothing so
difficult in the Art of War, as an honorable retreat. Besides, the report of
his coming to Breda, caused Marquis Spinola to raise the siege before Berghen,
to burn his tents, and to pack away suddenly; for which he is much censured
here:

Captain Leat and others have written to me of the favorable report you
pleased to make of my endeavors here, for which I return you humble thanks: and
though you have left behind you multitude of servants in this Court, yet if
occasion were offered, none should be more forward to go on your errand, then

Madrid, 15 Mar. 1622. Your humble and faithful Servitor, J. H.

XV. To the Honble. Sir Tho: Savage, Knight and Baronet.
Honble SIR,
THe great business of the match was tending to a period, the Articles
reflecting both upon Church and State, being capitulated, and interchangeably
accorded on both sides, and there wanted nothing to consummate all things, when
to the wonderment of the world the Prince and the Marquis of Buckingham arrived
at this Court a friday last, upon the close of the evening* they lighted at my
Lord of Bristols house, and the Marquis (Mr Thomas Smith) came in first with a
Portmantle under his arm, then (Mr John Smith) the Prince was sent for, who
staid a while the to'ther side of the street in the dark, my Lord of Bristoll
in a kind of astonishment brought him up to his bed chamber, where he presently
called for pen and ink, and dispacht a Post that night to England to acquaint
his Majesty how in less then sixteen days he was come safely to the Court of
Spain; that Post went lightly laden, for he carried but three letters: the next
day came Sir Francis Cotington and Mr Porter, and dark rumors ran in every
corner how some great man was com from England, and some would not stick to say
amongst the vulgar, it was the King, but toward the evening on saturday the
marquis went in a close coach to Court, where he had private audience of this
King, who sent Olivares to accompany him back to the Prince, where he kneeld
and kisd his hands, and hugd his thighs, and deliverd how unmeasurably glad his
Catholic Majesty was of his coming, with other high complements, which Mr
Porter did interpret. About ten a clock that night, the King himself came in a
close coach with intent to visit the Prince, who hearing of it, met him
halfway, and after salutations and diverse embraces which past in the first
interview they parred late: I forgot to tell you, that Count Gondamar being
sworn Counselor of State that morning, having bin before but one of the
Counsel of War, he came in great have to visit the Prince saying, he had
strange news to tell him, which was that an Englishman was sworn privy
Counselor of Spain, meaning himself, who he said was an Englishman in his
heart. On Sunday following, the King in the afternoon came abroad to take the
air with the Queen, his two brothers and the Infanta, who were all in one
coach, but the Infanta sat in the boot with a blew riband about her arm, of
purpose that the Prince might distinguish her: there were above twenty coaches
besides of Grandes, Noble men and Ladies that attended them. And now i^ was
publicly known amongst the vulgar, that it was the Prince of Wales who was com,
and the confluence of people before my Lord of Bristolls house was so great and
greedy to see the Prince, that to clear the way, Sir Lewis Div^s went out and
took coach, and all the crowd of people went after him: so the Prince himself a
little after took coach, wherein there were the Earl of Bristoll, Sir Walter
Ashton, and Count Gondamar, and so went to the Prado, a place hard by, of
purpose to take the air, where they stayed till the King past by: as soon as
the Infanta saw the Prince her color rose very high, which we hold to be an
impression of love and affection, for the face is often times a true Index of
the heart. Upon Monday morning after the King sent some of his prime Nobles, and
other Gentlemen to attend the Prince in quality of Officers, as o^e to be his
Mayordom (his Steward) another to be Master of the Horse, and so to inferior
Officers, so that there is a complete Court now at my Lord of Bristolls house:
but upon Sunday next the Prince is to remove to the Kings Palace, where there is
one of the chief quarters of the house providing for him. By the next
opportunity you shall hear more, In the interim I take my leave and rest

March, 27. 1623. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XVI. To Sir Eubule Theloall Knight, at Grayes-Inne.
SIR,
I Know the eyes of all England are earnestly fixd now upon Spain, her best
jewel being here; but his journey was like to be spoild in France, for if he
had stayed but a little longer at Bayon the last Town of that Kingdom
hitherwards, he had bin discoverd, for Monsieur Gramond the Governor had notice
of him not long after he had taken Post. The people here do mightily magnify
the gallantry of the journey, and cry out that he deserved to have the Infanta
thrown into his arms the first night he came: He has bin entertaind with all
the magnificence that possibly could be devised. On Sunday last in the morning
betimes he went to Saint Hieroms Monastery, whence the Kings of Spain use to be
fetchd the day they are crowned; and thither the King came in person with his
two Brothers, his eight Counsels, and the flower of the Nobility: He rid upon
the Kings right hand through the heart of the Town under a great Canopy, and
was brought so into his lodgings to the Kings Palace, and the King himself
accompanied him to his very bedchamber. It was a very glorious sight to behold,
for the custom of the Spaniard is, though he go plain in his ordinary habit,
yet upon some Festival or cause of triumph, there is none goes beyond him in
gaudiness.

We daily hope for the Popes Breve or Dispensation to perfect the business,
though there be dark whispers abroad that it is com already, but that upon this
inexpected coming of the Prince, it was sent back to Rome, and some new clauses
thrust in for their further advantage. Till this dispatch comes, matters are at
a kind of stand; yet his Highness makes account to be back in England about the
latter end of May. God Almighty turn all to the best, and to what shall be most
conducible to his glory. So with my due respects unto you, I rest

April, 1* 1623. Your much obliged Servitor, J. H.

XVII. To Captain Leat.
SIR,
HAving brought up the Law to the highest point against the Viceroy of
Sardinia, and that in an extraordinary manner, as may appear unto you by that
Printed cedule I sent you in my last, and finding an apparent disability in him
to satisfy the debt* I thought upon a new design, and framed a memorial to
the King* and wrought good strong means to have it seconded, that in rega^ that
predatory act of seizing upon the ship Vinyard in Sardi^* with all her goods,
was done by his Majesty's Viceroy, his soverain Minister of State, one that
immediately represented his own Royal Person, and that the said Viceroy was
insolvent; I desired his Majesty would be pleased to grant a Warrant for the
releef of both parties to lade so many thousand Sterills o^ measures of corn
out of Sardinia and Sicily custom-free. I had gonf^ in the business when Sir
Francis Cottington sent for me, and required me in the Prince his name to
proceed no further herei^, till he was departed: so his Highness presence here
has tur^ rather to my disadvantage, than otherwise. Amongst other Grandezas
which the King of Spain conferred upon our Prince, one was the releasment of
Prisoners, and that all Petitions of grace should com to him for the first
month, but he has been wonderful sparing in receiving any, specially from any
English, Irish, or Scot. Your son Nicolas is com hither from Alicant, about the
ship Amity, and I shall be ready to second him in getting satisfaction, so I
rest,

Madrid, June 3. 1623. Yours ready to serve you, J. H.

XVIII. To Captain Tho. Porter.
Noble Captain,
MY last unto you was in Spanish, in answer to one of yours in the same
language, and amongst that confluence of English gallants, which upon the
occasion of his Highness being here, are com to this Court; I fed my self with
hopes a long while to have seen you, but I find now that those hopes were impd
with false feathers. I know your heart is here, and your best affections,
therefore I wonder what keeps back your person: but I conceive the reason to be
that you intend to com like your self, to com Commander in chief of one of the
Castles of the Crown, one of the ships Royal: If you com so to this shore
side, I hope you will havetime to come to the Court, I have at any time a good
lodging for you, and my Landlady is none of the meanest, and her husband has
many good parts; I heard her setting him forth one day, and giving this
Character of him, Mi marido ei buen musico, buen esgrimidor, buen eserivano,
excellent Arithmetico, salvo que no multiplica: My husband is a good Musician,
a good Fencer, a good Horseman, a good Penman, and an excellent
Arithmetician, only he cannot multiply. For outward usage, there is all
industry used to give the Prince and his servants all possible contentment, and
some of the Kings own servants wait upon them at Table in the Palace, where I am
sorry to hear some of them jeer at the Spanish fare, and use other slighting
speeches and demeanor. There are many excellent Poems made here since the
Princes arrival, which are too long to couch in a Letter, yet I will venture
to send you this one stanza of Lope de Vegas.

Carlos Estuardo Soy
Que siendo Amor mi guia,
Al cielo d'Espana voy,
Por ver mi Estrella Maria.
There are Comedians once a week com to the Palace, where under a great Canopy,
the Queen and the Infanta sit in the middle, our Prince and Don Carles on the
Queens right hand, the King and the little Cardinal on the Infanta's left
hand. I have seen the Prince have his eyes immovably fixed upon the Infanta
half an hour together in a thoughtfull speculative posture, which sure would
needs be tedious, unless affection did sweeten it: it was no handsome comparison
of Olivares, that he watched her as a cat does ^ mouse. Not long since the
Prince understanding that the Infanta was used to go some mornings to the Casa
de campo, a summer house the King has the other side the river, to gather May
dew, he did rise betimes and went thither, taking your brother with him, they
were let into the house, and into the garden, but the Infanta was in the
orchard, and there being a high partition wall between, and the door doubly
bolted, the Prince got on the top of the wall, and sprung down a great hight,
and so made toward her, but she spying him first of all the rest, gave a
sh^eck and ran back; the old Marquis that was then her gardien, came toward
the Prince, and fell on his knees, conjuring his Highness to retire, in regard
he hazarded his head, if he admitted any to her company; so the door was opened
and he came out under that wall over which he had got in: I have seen him watch
a long hour together in a close Coach in the open street to see her as she went
abroad: I cannot say that the Prince did ever talk with her privately, yet
publicly often my Lord of Bristoll being Interpreter, but the King always sat
hard by, to over-hear all. Our cosen Archy has more privilege than any, for he
often goes with his fools coat where the Infanta is with her Meninas and Ladies
of honor, and keeps a blowing and blustering amongst them, and flu^ts out what
he list.

One day they were discoursing what a mavelous thing it was, that the Duke of
Bavaria with less then 15000 men, after a long toylsom March, should dare to
encounter the Palsgraves army, consisting of above 2500^, and to give them an
utter discomfiture, and take Prague presently after. Whereunto Archy answered,
that he would tell them a stranger thing than that: was it not a strange thing,
quoth he, that in the year 88, there should com a Fleet of one hundred and forty
sails from Spain, to invade England, and that ten of these could not go back to
tell what became of the rest? By the next opportunity I will send you the
Cordovan pockets and gloves you writ for of Francisco Morenos persuming. So may
my dear Captain live long and love his

Madrid, July 10. 1623. J. H.

XIX. To my Cosen Tho. Guin Esqr. at his house Trecastle.
Cosen,
I Received lately one of yours, which I cannot compare more properly than to a
posie of curious flowers, there was therein such variety of sweet strains and
dainty expressions of love: And though it bore an old date, for it was forty
days before it came to safe hand, yet the flowers were still fresh, and not a
whit faded, but did cast as strong and as fragrant a sent, as when your hands
bound them up first together, only there was one flower that did not savor so
well, which was the undeserved Character you please to give of my small
abilities, which in regard you look upon me through the prospective of
affection, appear greater unto you than they are of themselves; yet as small as
they are I would be glad to employ them all to serve you upon any occasion.

Whereas you desire to know how matters pass here, you shall understand that we
are rather in assurance, than hopes that the match will take effect, when one
dispatch more is brought from Rome which we greedily expect. The Spaniards
generally desire it, they are much taken with our Prince, with the bravery of
his journey, and his discreet comportment since, and they confess there was
never Princess courted with more gallantry. The wits of the Court here, have
made diverse Encomiums of him, and of his affection to the L Infanta. Amongst
others, I send you a Latin Poem of one Marnieri^s a Valenciano, to which I add
this ensuing Hexastic, which in regard of the difficulty of the Verse
consisting of all Ternaries (which is the hardest way of versifying) and of the
exactness of the translation, I believe will give you content.

Fax grata est, gratum est vulnus, mihi grata catena est,
Me quibus astringit, laedit and urit Amor,
Sed flammam extingui, sanari vulnera, solvi
Vincla, etiam ut possem non ego posse velim:
Mirum equidem genus hoc morbi est, incendia and ictus
Vinclaque, vinctus adbuc laesus and ustus, amo.
Gratefull's to me the fire, the wound, the chain
By which love burns, love binds and gives pain,
But for to quench this fire, these bonds to loose,
These wounds to heal, I would not could I choose:
Strange sickness, where the wounds, the bonds, the fire
That burns, that bind, that hurt, I must desire.
In your next, I pray send me your opinion of these verses, for I know you are
a Critic in Poetry. Mr Vaugham of the Golden-grove and I were Camerades and
bedfellows here many months together, his father Sir John Vaughan the Prince
his Controuler, is lately com to attend his Master. My Lord of Carlisle, my Lord
of Holland, my Lord of Rochfort, my Lord of Denbigh, and diverse others are
here, so that we have a very flourishing Court, and I could wish you were here
to make one of the number. So my dear cosen, I wish you all happiness, and our
noble Prince a safe and successful return to England.

Madrid, 13 Aug. 1623. Your most affectionate Cosen, J. H.

XX. To my noble friend, Sir John North.
SIR,
THe long look'd-for Dispensation is come from Rome, but I hear it is clogged
with new clauses; and one is, that the Pope who allegeth that the only aim of
the Apostolical See in granting this Dispensation, was the advantage and case
of the Catholics in the King of great Britains Dominions, therefore he desired
a valuable caution for the performance of those Articles which were stipulated
in their favor; this has much puzzled the business, and Sir Francis Cotington
comes now over about it: Besides there is some distaste taken at the Duke of
Buckingham here, and I heard this King should say he will treat no more with
him, but with the Ambassadors, who he says, have a more plenary Commission,
and understand the business better. As there is some darkness happened twixt the two
Favorits, so matters stand not ^ight twixt he Duke and the Earl of Bristoll;
but God forbid that a business of so high a consequence as this which is likely
to tend so much to the universal good of Christendom, to the restitution of
the Palatinat, and the composing those broils in Germany, should be ranversd by
differences twixt a few private subjects, though now public Ministers.

Mr Washington the Prince his Page is lately dead of a Calenture, and I was at
his burial under a Figtree behind my Lord of Bristols house. A little before
his death one Ballard and English Priest went to tamper with him, and Sir
Edmund Varney meeting him coming down the stairs out of Washingtons chamber,
they fell from words to blows; but they were parted. The business was like to
gather very ill blood, and com to a great height, had not Count Gondamar quasht
it, which I believe he could not have done, unles the times had bin favorable;
for such is the reverence they bear to the Church here, and so holy a conceit
they have of all Ecclesiastics, that the greatest Don in Spain will tremble to
offer the mean of them any outrage or affront: Count Gondamar has also
helped to free some English that were in the Inquisition in Toledo and Sevill,
and I could allege many instances how ready and cheerful he is to assist any
Englishman whatsoever; notwithstanding the base affronts he has often receivd
of the London buys as he calls them. At his last return hither, I heard of a
merry saying of his, to the Queen, who discoursing with him about the
greatness of London, and whether it was as populous as Madrid, yes Madame, and
more populous when I came away, though I believe there is scarce a man left there
now but all women and children; for all the mem both in Court and City were
ready booted and spurd to go away. And I am sorry to hear how other Nations do
much tax the English of their incivility to public Ministers of State, and what
ballads and pasquils, and fopperies and plays, were made against Gondamar for
doing his Masters business. My Lord of Bristoll coming from Germany to
Brussells, notwithstanding that at his arrival thither, the news was fresh
that he had relieved Frankindale as he past, yet was he not a whit the less
welcome, but valued the more both by the Archdutchess her self and Spino^ with
all the rest; as also that they knew well that the said Earl had bin the sole
adviser of keeping Sir Robert Mansell abroad with that Fleet upon the coast of
Spain till the Palsgrave should be restord. I pray Sir when you go to London
wall, and Tower hill, be pleased to remember my humble service, where you know
it is due. So I am.

Madrid, Aug. 15. 1623. Your most faithful Servitor, J. H.

V. To the right Honble, the Lord Vicount Colchester.
My very good Lord,
I Received the letter and commands your Lopp. pleased to send me by Mr
Walsingham Gresley; and touching the Constitutions and Orders of the
Contratation House of the West Indies in Sevill, I cannot procure it for love
or money, upon any terms, though I have done all possible diligence* therein:
And some tell me it is dangerous, and no less then Treason in him, that gives
the copy of them to any, in regard it is counted the greatest Mystery of all the
Spanish government.

That difficulty which happened in the business of the match of giving caution to
the Pope, is now overcome; for whereas our King answered that he could give no
other caution than his Royal word and his sons, exemplified under the great
Seal of England, and confirmed by his Counsel of State, it being impossible to
have it done by Parliament, in regard of the aversnes the common people have to
the alliance; And whereas this gave no satisfaction to Rome, the King of Spain
now offers himself for caution, for putting in execution what is stipulated in
behalf of the Roman Catholics throughout his Majesty of great Britain's
Dominions; but he desires to consult his ghostly fathers to know whether he may
do i^ without wronging his conscience; hereupon there has bin a I^ta formed of
Bishops and Jesuits, who have bin already a good while about it, and the Bishop
of Segovia, who is as it were Lord Threasurer, having written a Treatise lately
against the match, was outed of his Office, banished the Court, and confined to
his Diocese. The Duke of Buckingham has bin ill disposed a good while, and
lies sick at Court, where the Prince has no public exercise of devotion, but
only bedchamber prayers, and some thin^ that his lodging in the Kings house is
like to prove a disadvantag^ to the main business, for whereas most sorts of
people here hardly hold us to be Christians, if the Prince had had a Palace of
his own, and bin permitted to have used a room for an open Chapel to exercise
the Liturgy of the Church of England, it would have brought them to have a
better opinion of us; And to this end there were some of our best Church plate,
and vestments brought hither, but never used. The slow place of this Iunta
troubles us a little, and to the Divines there are some Civilians admitted
lately, and the quaere is this, whether the King of Spain may bind himself by
oath in the behalf of the King of England, to perform such and such Articles
that are agreed on in favor of the Roman Catholics by virtue of this match,
whether the King may do this salva conscientia.

There was a great show lately here of baiting of bulls with men for the
entertainment of the Prince; it is the chiefest of all Spanish sports, commonly
there are men killd at it, therefore there are Priests appointed to be there ready
to confess them: It has happened oftentimes that a Bull has taken up two men
upon his horns with their guts dangling about them; the horsemen run with
lances and swords, the foot with goads. As I am told the Pope has sent diverse
Bulls against this sport of bulling, yet it will not be left, the Nation has
taken such an habitual delight in it. There was an ill favord accident like to
have happened lately at the Kings house, in that part where my Lord of Carlisle,
and my Lord Denbigh were lodged; for my Lord Denbigh late at night taking a
pipe of Tobacco in a Balcone which hung over the Kings garden, he blew down the
ashes, which falling upon some parchd combustible matter, began to flame and
spread, but Master Davis my Lord of Carliles Barber leapt down a great height,
and quenched it. So with continuance of my most humble service, I rest ever ready

Madrid, Aug. 16. 1623. At your Lopps. commands, J. H.

XXI. To Sir James Crofts, from Madrid.
SIR,
THe Court of Spain affords now little news, for there is a Remora sticks to the
business of the match, till the Iunta of Divines give up their opinion: But from
Turkey there came a Letter this week wherein there is the strangest and most
tragical news, that in my small reading no Sorry can parallel, or show with
more pregnancie the instability and tottering estate of human greatness, and the
sandy foundation whereon the vast Ottoman Empire is reard upon: For Sultan Osman
the grand Turk. a man according to the humor of that Nation, warlike and fleshd
in blood, and a violent hater of Christians, was in the flower of his years, in
the heat and height of his courage, knocked in the head by one of his own
slaves, and one of the meanest of them, with a battle axe, and the murderer
never after proceeded against or questioned.

The ground of this Tragedy was the late ill success he had against the Pole,
wherein he lost about 100000. horse for want of forage, and 80000. men for want
of fighting, which he imputed to the cowardice of his Ianizaries, who rather
than bear the brunt of the battle, were more willing to return home to their
wives and merchandising, which they are now permitted to do contrary to their
first institution, which makes them more worldly, and less venturous. This
disgraceful return from Poland stuck in Osmans stomach, and so studied a way
how to be revengd of the Ianizaries; therefore by the advice of his grand Vizier
(a stout gallant man who had bin one of the chief Beglerbegs in the East) he
intended to erect a new Soldiery in Asia about Damasco, of the Coords a
frontier people, and consequently hardy and inured to Arms. Of these he
purposed to entertain 40000. as a lifegard for his person, though the main
design was to suppress his lazy and lustful Ianizaries, with men of fresh new
spirits.

To disguise this plot, he pretended a pilgrimage to Mecha, to visit Mahomets
Tomb, and reconcile himself to the Prophet, who he throught was angry with him,
because of his late ill success in Poland: but this color was not specious
enough, in regard he might have performd this Pilgrimage with a smaller train
and charge; therefore it was propounded that the Emir of S^dm should be made to
rise up in arms, that so he might go with a greater power and treasure, but
this plot was held disadvantagious to him, in regard his Ianizaries must then
have attended him: so he pretends and prepares only for the Pilgrimage, yet he
makes ready as much treasure as he could make, and to that end he melts his
plate, and furniture of horses, with diverse Church lamps; this fomented some
jealousy in the Ianizaries, with certain words which should drop from him,
that he would find soldiers shortly should whip them. Hereupon he has sent
over to Asias side his pavilions, many of his servants, with his jewels and
treasure, resolving upon the voyage, notwithstanding that diverse petitions were
delivered him from the Clergy, the civil Magistrate and the Soldiery that he
should desist from the voyage, but all would not do: thereupon upon the point of
his departure, the Ianizaries and Sp^ies came in a tumultuary manner to the
Seraglio, and in a high insolent language dissuaded him from the Pilgrimage,
and demanded of him his ill counselors. The first he granted, but for the
second, he said that it stood not with his honor, to have his nearest servants
torn from him so, without any legal proceeding, but he assured them that they
should appear in the Divan the next day, to answer for themselves; but this not
satisfying, they went away in a fury and plunderd the Grand Visiers Palace,
with diverse others; Osman hereupon was advised to go from his private gardens
that night to the Asian shore, but his destiny kept him from it: so the next
morning they came armd to the Court, (but having made a covenant not to violate
the Imperial Throne) and cut in pieces the Grand Vizier with diverse other
great Officers, and not finding Osman, who had hid himself in a small lodge in
one of his gardens, they cried out they must have a Musulman Emperor; therefore
they broke into a Dungeon, and brought out Mustapha Osmans Uncle, whom he had
clapped there at the beginning of the tumult, and who had bin King before, but
was deposed for his simplicity, being a kind of santon or holy man, that is,
twixt an Innocent and an Idiot: This Mustapha they did reinthronize and place
in the O^toman Empire.

The next day they found out Osman, and brought him before Mustapha, who
excused himself with tears in his eyes for his rash attempts, which wrought
tenderness in some, but more scorn and fury in others, who fell upon the Capi
Aga, with other Officers, and cut them in pieces before his eyes: Osman thence
was carried to Prison, and as he was getting a horsback, a common soldier took
off his Turban, and clapped his upon Osmans head, who in his passage begd a
draught of water at a Fountain: The next day the new Vizier went with an
Executioner to strangle him, in regard there were two younger brothers more of
his to preserve the O^tomans race, where after they had rushd in, he being
newly awakd, and staring upon them, and thinking to defend himself, a robust
boisterous rogue knocked him down, and so the rest fell upon him and strangled
him with much ado.

Thus fell one of the greatest Potentats upon earth by the hands of a
contemptible slave, for there is not a free born subject in all that vast
Empire: Thus fell he that Entitles himself most puissant and highest Monarch of
the Turks, King above all Kings, a King that dwells upon the earthly
Paridise, son of Mahomet, keeper of the grave of the Christian God, Lord of the
Tree of Life, and of the River Flisky, Prior of the earthly Paridise, Conqueror
of the Macedonians, the seed of great Alexander, Prince of the Kingdoms of
Tartary, Mesopotamia, Media, and of the martial Mammaluck^, Anatolia,
Bithynia, Asia, Armenia, Servia, Thracia, Morta, Valachi^, Moldavia, and of all
warlike Hungary, Soverain Lord and Commander of all Greece, Persia, both the
Arabia's, the most noble kingdom of Egypt, Tremisen and African, Empire of
Trab^sond and the most glorious Constantinople, Lord of all the white and black
Seas, of the holy City Mecha and Medina, shining with divine glory, commander
of all things that are to be commanded, and the strongest and mightiest
Champion of the wide world, a Warrior appointed by Heaven in the edge of the
sword, a Persecutor of his Enemies, a most perfect jewel of the blessed Tree,
the chiefest keeper of the crucified God, etc. with other such bombardicall
Titles.

This Osman was a man of goodly Constitution, an amiable aspect, and of excess
of courage, but sordidly covetous, which drove him to violat the Church, and to
melt the Lamps thereof, which made the Mufti say that this was a due judgment
fallen upon him from Heaven for his Sacrilege. He used also to make his person
too cheap, for he would go ordinarily in the night time with two men after him
like a petty Constable, and peep into the Cauphhouses and Cabarets, and
apprehend Soldiers there. And these two things it seems was the cause, that
when he was so assaulted in the Seraglio, not one of his Domestic servants,
whereof he had 3000, would li^t an Arm to help him.

Some few days before his death, he had a strange dream, for he dreamt that he
was mounted upon a great Camel, who would not go neither by fair nor foul
means, and lighting off him, and thinking to strike him with his Cimitier, the
body of the beast vanished, leaving the Head and the bridle only in his hands;
when the Mufti and the Hoggies could not interpret this dream, Mustapha his
Uncle did it, for he said, the Camel signified his Empire, his mounting of him
his excess in Government, his lighting down his deposing. Another kind of
Prophetic speech dropped from the Grand Vizier to Sir Thomas Roe our Ambassador
there, who having gone a little before this Tragedy to visit the said Vizier,
told him what whisperings and mutterings there were in every corner for this
Asiatic voyage, and what ill consquences might ensue from it; therefore it might
well stand with his great wisdom to stay it; but if it held, he desired him to
leave a charge with the Chimacham his Deputy, that the English Nation in the
Port, should be free from outrages: whereunto the Grand Vizier answered, Trouble
not your self about that, for I will not remove so far from Constantinople, but
I will leave one of my legs behind to serve you, which proved too true, for he
was murdered afterward, and one of his legs was hung up in the Hippodrome.

This fresh Tragedy makes me to give over wondering at any thing that ever I
heard or read, to show the lubricity of mundan greatness, as also the fury of
the vulgar, which like an impetuous Torrent gathers strength by degrees as it
meets with diverse Dams, and being come to the hight, cannot stop it self: for
when this rage of the soldiers began first, there was no design at all to
violat or hurt the Emperor, but to take from him his ill Counselors, but being
once a foot, it grew by insensible degrees to the utmost of outrages.

The bringing out of Mustapha from the Dungeon, where he was prisoner, to be
Emperor of the Musulmans, puts me in mind of what I read in Mr. Camden of our
late Queen Elizabeth, how she was brought from the Scaffold, to the English
Throne.

They who profess to be Critics in policy here, hope that this murdering of
Osman may in time breed good blood, and prove advantageous to Christendom; for
though this be the first Emperor of the Turks that was dispatched so, he is not
like to be the last, now that the soldiers have this precedent: others think
that if that design in Asia had taken, it had been very probable the
Constantinopolitans had hoisd up another King, and so the Empire had been
dismembered, and by this division had lost strength, as the Roman Empire did,
when it was broken into East and West.

Excuse me that this my Letter is become such a Monster, I mean that it has
past the sise and ordinary proportion of a Letter, for the matter it treats of
is monstrous, besides it is a rule that Historical Letters have more liberty
to be long than others: In my next you shall hear how matters pass here, in the
mean time, and always I rest

Madrid, Aug. 17. 1623. Your Lordships most devoted Servitor, J. H.

XXII. To the Right Honble. Sir Tho. Savage, Knight and Baronet.
Honble. SIR,
THe procedure of things in relation to the grand business the match, was at
kind of a stand when the long winded Iunta delivered their opinions, and fell
at last upon this result, that his Catholic Majesty for the satisfaction of St.
Peter, might oblige himself in the behalf of England, for the performance of
those capitulations which reflected upon the Roman Catholics in that Kingdom;
and in case of nonperformance, then to right himself by war; since that, the
matrimonial Articles were solemnly sworn unto by the King of Spain and his
Highness, the two Favorits, our two Ambassadors, the Duke of Infantado and
other Counselors of State being present; hereupon the eighth of the next
September, is appointed to be the day of Desposorios, the day of affiance, or
the betrothing day; there was much gladness expressed here, and luminaries of joy
were in every great street throughout the City: but there is an unlucky
accident has intervened, for the King gave the Prince a solemn visit since,
and told him Pope Gregory was dead, who was so great a friend to the match, but
in regard the business was not yet com to perfection, he could not proceed
further in it till the former Dispensation were ratified by the new Pope Urban,
which to procure he would make it his own task, and that all possible
expedition should be used in it, and therefore desired his patience in the
interim. The Prince answered, and pressed the necessity of his speedy return with
diverse reasons, he said there was a general kind of murmuring in England for
his so long abseuce, that the King his Father was old and sickly, that the
Fleet of shipe were already, he thought, at Sea to fetch him, the winter drew
on, and withal that the Articles of the match were signed in England, with
this proviso, that if he be not com back by such a month they should be of no
validity. The King replied, that since his Highness was resolved upon so
sudden a departure, he would please to leave a Proxy behind to ^ish the
marriage, and he would take it for a favor if he would depute Him to personat
him, and ten days after the ratification shall come from Rome the business should
be don, and afterward he might send for his wife when he pleased. The Prince
rejoined, that amongst those multitudes of royal favors which he had received
from his Majesty, this transcended all the rest, therefore he would most
willingly leave a Proxy for his Majesty and another for Don Carlos to this
effect; so they parted for that time without the least ombrage of discontent,
nor do I hear of any engendered since. The last month it is true the Iunta of
Divines dwelt so long upon the business, that there were whisperings that the
Prince intended to go away disguised as he came, and the question being asked
by a person of quality, there was a brave answer made, that i^ love brought him
thither, it is not fear shall drive him away.

There are preparations already a foot for his return, and the two Prexies are
drawn and left in my Lord of Bristolls hands. Notwithstanding this ill favord
stop, yet we are here all confident the business will take effect: In which
hopes I rest

Madrid, 18 Aug. 1623. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXIII. To Captain Nich: Leat at his house in London.
SIR,
THis Letter comes to you by Mr. Richard Altham, of whose sudden departure
hence I am very sorry, it being the late death of his brother Sir James Altham.
I have been at a stand in the business a gond while, for his Highness coming
hither was no advantage to me in the earth: He has done the Spaniards diverse
courtesies, but he has been very sparing in doing the English any: It may be
perhaps because it may be a diminution of honor to be beholden to any foreign
Prince to do his own Subjects favors: but my business requires no favor, all I
desire is justice, which I have not obtained yet in reality.

The Prince is preparing for his jorney, I shall to (...) again closely when he
is gone, and make a shaft or a bolt of it. The Popes death has retarded the
proceedings of the match, but we are so far from despairing of it, that one may
have wagers thirty to one it will take effect still. He that deals with this
Nation must have a great deal of phlegm, and if this grand business of State,
the match, suffer such protractions and puttings off, you need not wonder that
private negotiations, as mine is, should be subject to the same inconveniences.
There shall be no means left unattempted that my best industry can find out to
put a period to it, and when his Highness is gone, I hope to find my Lord of
Bristoll more at leisure to continue his favor and furtherance, which has
been much already: So I rest

Madrid, Aug. 19. 1623. Yours ready to serv^ you, J. H.

XXIV. To Sir James Crofts.
SIR,
THe Prince is now upon his jorney to the Sea side, where my Lord of Rutland
attends for him with a royal fleet: There are many here shrink in their
shoulders, and are very sensible of his departure, and the Lady Infanta resents
it more than any; she has caused a Mass to be sung every day ever since for
his good Voyage: The Spaniards themselves confess there was never Princes so
bravely wooed. The King and his two Brothers accompanied his Highness to the
Escurial some twenty miles off, and would have brought him to the Sea side, but
that the Queen is big and has not many days to go; when the King and he
parted, there past wonderful great endearments and embraces in diverse postures
between them a long time; and in that place there is a Pillar to be erected as
a Monument to Posterity. There are some Grandes; and Count Gondamar with a great
train besides gone with him to the Marine, to the Sea side, which will be many
days journey, and must needs put the King of Spain to a mighty expense, besides
his seven months entertainment here: we hear that when he past through
Valladolid, the Duke of Lerma was retired thence for the time by special
command from the King, left he might have discourse with the Prince, whom he
extremely desired to see: This sunk deep into the old Duke, insomuch that he
said that of all the acts of malice which Olivares had ever done him, he
resented this more than any: He bears up yet very well under his Cardinals
habit, which hat^ kept him from many a foul storm that might have fallen upon him
else from the temporal power. The Duke of Uzeda his son finding himself to
decline in favor at Court, had retired to the Country, and dyed soon after of
coffeehouse: During his sickness the Cardinal writ this short weighty
Letter unto him: Dizen me, que Mareys de necio, por mi, mas temo mis anos que
mis E^igos. Lerma. I shall not need to English it to you who is so great a
Master of the Language. Since I began this Letter, we understand the Prince is
safely embarked, but not without some danger of being cast away, had not Sir
Sackvill Trever taken him up: I pray God send him a good voyage, and us no ill
news from England. My most humble service at Tower Hill, so I am

Madrid, Aug. 21. 1623. Your humble Servitor, J. H.

XXV. To my Brother, Doctor Howell.
My Brother,
SInce our Prince his departure hence, the Lady Infanta studieth English apace,
and one Mr. Wadsworth and Father Boniface two Englishmen, are appointed her
teachers, and have access to her every day. We account her as it were our
Princess now, and as we give, so she takes that Title: Our Ambassadors my Lord
of Bristoll, and Sir Walter Ast^n, will not stand now covered before her when
they have audience, because they hold her to be their Princess: she is
preparing diverse suits of rich Clothes for his Highness of persum'd Amber
leather, some embroder'd with Pearl, some with Gold, some with Silver; her
Family is a settling apace, and most of her Ladies and Officers are known
already; we want nothing now but one dispatch more from Rome, and then the
marriage will be solemnizd, and all things consummated; yet there is one Mr.
Clerk (with the lame arm) that came hither from the Sea side, as soon as the
Prince was gone, he is one of the Duke of Buckinghams creatures, yet he lies at
the Earl of Bristols house which we wonder at, considering the darkness that
happened twixt the Duke and the Earl: we fear that this Clerk has brought
something that may puzzle the business. Besides having occasion to make my
address lately to the Venetian Ambassador, who is interressed in some part of
that great business for which I am here, he told me confidently it would be no
match, nor did he think it was ever intended. But I want faith to believe him
yet, for I know Saint Mark is no friend to it, nor France or any other Prince
or State besides the King of Denmarck, whose Grandmother was of the house of
Austria being sister to Charles the Emperor. Touching the business of the
Palatinate, our Ambassadors were lately assured by Olivares, and all the
Counselors here, and that in this Kings name, that he would procure his
Majesty of great Britain entire satisfaction herein, and Olivares, giving them
the joy, entreated them to assure their King upon their honor, and upon their
lives of the reality hereof; for the Infanta her self (said he) has stird in
it, and makes it now her own business; for it was a firm peace and amity (which
he confessed could never be without the accommodation of things in Germany) as
much as an alliance, which his Catholic Majesty aimd at. But we shall know
shortly now what to trust to, we shall walk no more in mists, though some give
out yet that our prince shall embrace a cloud for Juno at last. I pray present
my service to Sir John Franklin, and Sir John Smith, with all at the Hill and
Dale, and when you send to Wales, I pray convey the enclosed to my Father. So
my dear brother I pray God bless us both, and bring us again joyfully together.

Madrid, Aug. 12. 1623. Your very loving Brother, J. H.

XXVI. To my noble friend, Sir John North Knight.
SIR,
I Received lately one of yours, but it was of a very old date: we have our
eyes here now all fixd upon Rome, greedily expecting the Ratification, and
lately a strong rumor ran it was com, in so much Mr Clerk who was sent hither
from the Prince being a shipboard, (and now lies sick at my Lord of Bristolls
house of a Calenture) hearing of it, he desired to speak with him, for he had
something to deliver him from the Prince, my Lord Ambassador being com to him,
Mr Clerk delivered a letter from the Prince; the contents whereof were, that
whereas he had left certain Proxies in his hand to be deliverd to the King of
Spain after the Ratification was com, he desired and required him not to do it
till he should receive further order from England; my Lord of Bristoll hereupon
went to Sir Walter Aston, who was in joint Commission with him for concluding
the match, and showing him the Letter, what my Lord Aston said I know not, but
my Lord of Bristoll told him that they had a Commission Royal under the broad
Seal of England to conclude the match; he knew as well as he how earnest the
King their Master has bin any time these ten years to have it don; how there
could not be a better pawn for the surrendry of the Palatinat, than the Infanta
in the Prince his arms, who would never rest till she did the work to merit
love of our Nation: He told him also how their own particular fortunes
depended upon it, besides if he should delay one moment to deliver the Proxy
after the Ratification was com according to agreement, the Infanta would hold
her self so blemished in her honor, that it might overthrow all things. Lastly,
he told him that they incurred the hazard of their heads if they should suspend
the executing his Majesty's Commission upon any order but from that power which
gave it, who was the King himself; hereupon both the Ambassadors proceeded
still in preparing matters for the solemnizing of the marriage: the Earl of
Bristoll had caused above thirty rich Liveries to be made of watchet Velvet,
with silver lace up to the very capes of the Cloaks, the best sorts whereof were
valued at 80 l. a Livery: My Lord Aston had also provided new Liveries, and a
fortnight after the said politic report was blown up, the Ratification came
indeed complete and full; so the marriage day was appointed, a Terrass covered
all over with Tapestry was raised from the Kings Palace to the next Church,
which might be about the same extent, as from White Hall to Westminster Abbey,
and the King intended to make his sister a Wife, and his daughter (whereof the
Queen was delivered a little before) a Christian upon the same day; the Grandes
and great Ladies had been invited to the marriage, and order was sent to all the
Port Towns to discharge their great Ordnance, and sundry other things were
prepared to honor the solemnity: but when we were thus at the hight of our
hopes, a day or two before; there came Mr. Killegree, Gresley, Wood and Davies,
one upon the neck of another with a new Commission to my Lord of Bristoll
immediately from his Majesty, countermanding him to deliver the Proxy aforesaid,
until a full and absolut satisfaction were had for the surrendry of the
Palatinat under this Kings hand and Seal, in regard he desired his Son should
be married to Spain, and his Son in law remarried to the Palatinat at one time;
hereupon all was dashed to pieces; and that frame which was rearing so many
years, was ruined in a moment. This news struck a damp in the hearts of all
people here, and they wished that the Postillons that brought it, had all broke
their necks in the way.

My Lord of Bristoll hereupon went to Court to acquaint the King with his new
Commission, and so proposed the restitution of the Palatinat, the King answered
'twas none of his to give, it is true he had a few Towns there, but he held them
as Commissioner only for the Emperor, and he could not command an Emperor; yet
if his Majesty of great Britain would put a Treaty a foot, he would send his
own Ambassadors to join; In the interim, the Earl was commanded not to deliver
the foresaid Proxy of the Prince, for the desposorios or espousall until
Christmas: (And herein it seems his Majesty with you was not well informed, for
those powers of Proxies expired before) the King here said further that if his
Uncle the Emperor, or the Duke of Bavaria would not be conformable to reason,
he would raise as great an Army for the Prince Palsgrave* as he did under
Spinola when he first invaded the Palatinat; and to secure this, he would
engage his Contratation House of the West Indies, with his Plate Fleet, and
give the most binding instrument that could be under his hand and Seal. But
this gave no satisfaction, therefore my Lord of Bristoll I believe has not long
to stay here, for he is commanded to deliver no more Letters to the Infanta,
nor demand any more audience, and that she should be no more styled Princess of
England, or Wales. The foresaid Caution which this King offered to my Lord of
Bristoll, made me think of what I read of his Grandfather Philip the second,
who having been married to our Queen Mary, and it being thought she was with
child of him, and was accordingly prayed for at Paul's Cross, though it proved
afterward but a tympany, King Philip prepos'd to our Parliament that they would
pass an Act that he might be Regent during his or her minority that should be
born, and he would give good caution to surrender the Crown, when he or she
should com to age: the motion was hotly canvas'd in the house of Peers, and
like to pass, when the Lord Paget rose up and said, I, but who shall sue the
Kings bond? so the business was dashed. I have no more news to send you now, and
I am sorry I have so much, unless it were better; for we that have business to
negotiat here are like to suffer much by this rupture: welcome be the will of
God, to whose benediction I commend you, and rest

Madrid, Aug. 25. 1623. Your most humble Servitor, J. H.

XXVII. To the Right Honble the Lord Clifford.
My good Lord,
THough this Court cannot afford now such comfortable news in relation to
England as I could wish, yet such as it is, you shall receive. My Lord of
Bristoll is preparing for England, I waited upon him lately when he went to
take his leave at Court, and the King washing his hands took a Ring from off
his own finger, and put it upon his, which was the greatest honor that ever he
did any Ambassador as they say here; he gave him also a Cupbord of Plate,
^alued at 20000 Crowns: There were also large and high promises made him, that
in case he^ feared to fall upon any rock in England, by reason of the power of
those who malignd him, if he would stay in any of his Dominions, he would give
him means and honor equal to the highest of his enemies. The Earl did not only
wave, but disdaind these Propositions made unto him by Olivares; and said he
was so confident of the King his Masters justice and high judgment, and of his
own innocence, that he conceived no power could be able to do him hurt. There
has occurd nothing lately in this Court worth the advertisement: They speak
much of the strange carriage of that boisterous Bishop of Halverstad, (for so
they term him here) that having taken a place where there were two Monasteries
of Nuns and Friars, he caused diverse featherbeds to be ripped and all the
feathers to be thrown in a great Hall whither the Nuns and Friars were thrust
naked with their bodies ^ld and pitchd, and to tumble among these feathers,
which makes them here presage him an ill death. So I most affectionately kiss
your hands and rest

Madrid, Aug. 26. 1623. Your very humble Servitor, J. H.

XXVIII. To Sir John North.
SIR,
I Have many thanks to render you for the favor you lately did to a kinsman of
mine, Mr. Vaughan, and for diverse other which I defer till I return to that
Court, and that I hope will not be long. Touching the procedure of matters
here, you shall understand that my Lord Aston had special audience lately of
the King of Spain, and afterward presented a Memorial wherein there was a high
complaint against the miscarriage of the two Spanish Ambassadors now in England
the Marquis of Inopifa and Don Carlos Coloma, the substance of it was that the
said Ambassadors in a private audience his Majesty of great Britain had given
them, informd him of a pernicions plot against his Person and royal authority,
which was that at the beginning of your now Parliament, the Duke of Buckingham
with others his accomplices often met and consulted in a clandestin way, how to
break the treaty both of Match and Palatinat: and in case his Majesty was
unwilling thereunto, he should have a Country house or two to retire unto for
his recreation and health, in regard the Prince is now of years and judgment
fit to govern. His Majesty so resented this, that the next day he sent them
many thanks for the care they had of him, and desird them to perfect the work,
and now that they had detected the treason to discover also the traitors, but
they were shy in that point, the King sent again desiring them to send him the
names of the Conspirators in a paper, sealed up by one of their own confidents,
which he would receive with his own hands, and no soul should see it else;
advising them withal, that they should not prefer this discovery before their
own honors, to be accounted false Accusers: they replied that they had don
enough already by instancing in the Duke of Buckingham, and it might easily be
guest who were his Confidents, and Creatures. Hereupon his Majesty put those
whom he had any grounds to suspect to their oaths: And afterward sent my Lord
Conway, and Sir Francis Cotington, to tell the Ambassadors that he had left no
means unassaid to discover the Conspiration, that he had sound upon oath such a
clearness of ingenuity in the Duke of Buckingham, the satisfied him of his
innocence: Therefore he had just cause to conceive that this information of
theirs, proceeded rather from malice and some political ends then from truth,
and in regard they would not produce the Authors of so dangerous a Treason,
they made themselves to be justly thought the Authors of it: And therefore
though he might by his own royal justice, and the law of nations punish this
excess and insolence of theirs, and high wrong they had done to his best
servants, yea to the Prince his Son, for through the sides of the Duke they
wounded him, in regard it was impossible that such a design should be attempted
without his privity, yet he would not be his own Judge herein, but would refer
them to the King their Master whom he conceived to be so just, that he doubted
not but he would see him satisfied, and therefore he would send an express unto
him hereabouts to demand Justice, and reparation: this business is now in
agitation, but we know not what will become of it. We are all here in a sad
disconsolat condition, and the Merchants shake their heads up and down out of
an apprehension of some fearful war to follow: so I most affectionatly kiss
your hands and rest

Madrid, Aug. 26 1623. Your very humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXIX. To Sir Kenelme Digby Knight.
SIR,
YOu have had knowledge (none better) of the progression and growings of the
Spanish match from time to time; I must acquaint you now with the rupture and
utter dissolution of it, which was not long a doing; for it was done in one
audience that my Lord of Bristoll had lately at Court, whence it may be
inferred, that it is far more easy to pull down, than rear up, for that
structure which was so many years a rearing, was dashed as it were in a trice:
Dissolution goes a faster pace than Composition. And it may be said, that the
civil actions of men, specially great affairs of Monarchs (as this was) have
much Analogy in degrees of progression with the natural production of man. To
make man there are many acts must proceed, first a meeting and copulation of
the Sexes, then Conception, which requires a well-disposed womb to retain the
prolificall seed, by the constriction and occlusion of the orifice of the
Matrix, which seed being first blood, and afterward cream, is by a gentle
ebullition coagulated, and turned to a crudded lump, which the womb by virtue of
its natural heat prepares to be capable to receive form, and to be organized;
whereupon Nature falls a working to delineat all the members, beginning with
those that are most noble: as the Heart, the Brain, the Liver; whereof Galen
would have the Liver, which is the shop and source of the blood, and Aristotle
the Heart to be the first framed, in regard it is primum vivens, and ultimum
moriens: Nature continues in this labor until a perfect shape be introduced,
and this is called Formation which is the third act, and is a production of an
organicall body out of the spermatic substance, caused by the plastic virtue of
the vital spirits: and sometimes this act is finished thirty days after the
Conception, sometimes fifty, but most commonly in forty two, or forty five, and
is sooner don in the male. This being done, the Embryon is animated with three
souls; the first with that of Plants called the vegetable soul, then with a
sensitive, which all brute Animals have, and lastly, the Rational soul is
infused, and these three in man are like Trigonus in Tetragono; the two first
are generated ex Traduce, from the seed of the Parents, but the last is by
immediate infusion from God, and it is controverted 'twixt Philosophers and
Divines, when this infusion is made.

This is the fourth act that goes to make man, and is called Animation: and as
the Naturalists allow Animation double the time that Formation had from the
Conception, so they allow to the ripening of the Embryo in the womb, and to the
birth thereof treble the time that Animation had, which happens sometimes in
nine, sometimes in ten months. This Grand business of the Spanish match, may be
said to have had such degrees of progression; first there was a meeting and
coupling on both sides, for a Iunta in in Spain, and some select Counselors of
State were appointed in England; After this Conjunction the business was
conceived, then it received form, then life, (though the quickening was slow)
but having had nere upon ten years in lieu of ten months to be perfected, it
was infortunately strangled when it was ripe and ready for birth; and I would
they had never been born that did it, for it is like to be out of my way 30:
ol, And as the Embryo in the womb is wrapped in three membranes or tunicles, so
this great business, you know better than I, was involved in many difficulties,
and died so entangled before it could break through them.

There is a buzz here of a match 'twixt England and France; I pray God send it
a speedier Formation and Animation than this had, and that it may not prove an
abortive.

I send you herewith a letter from the Paragon of the Spanish Court Dona Anna
Maria Man^ique, the Duke of Maquedas sister, who respects you in a high Degree;
she told me this was the first Letter she ever writ to man in her life, except
the Duke her brother: she was much solicited to write to Mr. Thomas Carry, but
she would not. I did also your Message to the Marquesa d' Inososa who put me to
sit a good while with her upon her Estrado which was no simple favor: you are
much in both these Ladies Books, and much spoken of by diverse others in this
Court. I could not recover your Diamond hasband which the Picaroon snatched
from you in the coach* though I used all means possible, as far as book, bell
and candle in point of Excommunication against the party in all the Churches of
Madrid, by which means you know diverse things are recovered: So I most
affectionatly kiss your hands and rest

Post.
Yours of the 2. of March came to safe hand.

Madrid. Your most faithful Servitor, J. H.



XXX. To my Cosen, Mr J. Price, (now Knight) at the middle Temple, from Madrid.
COsen suffer my Letter to salute you first in this Distich,

A Thamisi Tagus quot leucis flumine distat,
Oscula tot manibus porto, Pricaee, tuis.
As many miles Thames lies from Tagus Strands,
I bring so many kisses to thy hands.
My dear Jack,

IN the large Register or Almanac of my friends in England, you are one of the
chiefest red Letters, you are one of my Festi^all Rubriques; for whenever you
fall upon my mind, or my mind falls upon you, I keep Holy day all the while,
and this happens so often that you leave me but few working days throughout the
whole year, fewer far than this Country affords, for in their Calender above
five Months of the twelve are dedicated to some Saint or other, and kept
Festival; a Religion that the London Apprentices would like well.

I thank you for yours of the third Current, and the ample Relations you give
me of London Occurrences, but principally for the powerful and sweet
assurances you give me of your love, both in Verse and Prose. All businesses
here are off the hinges, for one late audience of my Lord of Bristoll pulld
down what was so many years a raising. And as Thomas Aquinas told an Artist of
a costly curious Statue in Rome, that by some accident while he was a trimming
it, fell down and so broke to pieces, Opus triginta annoram destruxisti, thou
have destroyed the work of thirty years; so it may be said that a work nere
upon ten years is now suddenly sha^terd to pieces. I hope by Gods grace to be
now speedily in England, and to re-enjoy your most dear society: In the mean
time may all happiness attend you.

Ad Litteram,
Ocius ut grandire gradus oration, possis
Prosa, tibi binos jungimus ecce pedes.
That in thy jorney thou may be more fleet,
To my dull Prose I add these Metric feet.
Resp.
Ad mare cum venio quid agam? Repl. tum praepete penna
Te ferat, est lator nam levis ignis, Amor,
But when I com to Sea how shall I shift?
Let Love transport thee then, for Fire is swift.
Your most affectionat Cos. J. H.
March 30. 1624.
XXXI. To the Lord Vicount Col. from Madrid.
Right Honble.
YOur Lopps. of the third Current, came to safe hand, and being now upon point
of parting with this Court I thought it worth the labor to send your Lopps a
short survey of the Monarchy of Spain; a bold undertaking your Lopp. will say,
to comprehend within the narrow bounds of a Letter such a huge bulk, but as in
the bosse of a small Diamond ring one may discern the image of a mighty
mountain, so I will endeavor that your Lopp. may behold the power of this
great King in this paper.

Spain has bin always esteemd a Country of ancient renown, and as it is
incident to all other, she has had her vicissi^udes, and turns of Fortune: She
has bin thrice overcome; by the Romans, by the Goths, and by the Moors* the
middle conquest continues to this day; for this King and most of the Nobility
proses themselves to have descended of the Goths; the Moors kept here about
700. years, and it is a remarkable Story how they got in first; which was thus
upon good record. There raignd in Spain Don Rodrigo, who kept his Court then at
Malaga; He emploid the Conde Don Julian Ambassador to Barbary, who had a
Daughter, (a young beautiful Lady) that was maid of Honor to the Queen: The
King spying her one day refreshing her self under an Arbor, sell enamored
with her, and never left till he had deslowrd her: She resenting much the
dishonor, writ a letter to her Father in Barbary under this Allegory, That
there was a fair green Apple upon the table, and the Kings poignard fell upon it
and clest it in two. Don Julian apprehending the meaning, got letters of
revocation, and came back to Spain, where he so complied with the King, that he
became his Favorite: Amongst other things he advised the King that in regard he
was now in Peace with all the world, he would dismiss his Galleys and
Garrisons that were up and down the Sea coasts, because it was a superfluous
charge. This being don and the Country left open to any Invader, he prevaild
with the King to have leave to go with his Lady to see their friends in
Tarragona, which was 300. miles off: Having bin there a while, his Lady made
semblance to be sick, and so sent to petition the King, that her daughter Donna
Cava (whom they had left at Court to satiat the Kings lust) might com to
comfort her a while; Cava came, and the gate through which she went sorth is
called af^ her name to this day in Malaga: Don Julian having all his chief
kindred there, he saild over to Barbary, and afterward brought over the King
of Morocco, and others with an Army, who suddenly invaded Spain, lying armles
and open, and so conquered it. Don Rodrigo died gallantly in the field, but
what became of Don Julian, who for a particular revenge betrayed his own
Country, no Story makes men^. A few years before this happend, Rodrigo came to
Toledo, where under the great Church there was a vault with huge Iron doors, and
none of his Predecessors durst open it, because there was an old Prophecy, That
when that vault was opened Spain should be conquered; Rodrigo slighting the
Prophecy, caused the doors to be broke open, hoping to find there some
Treasure, but when he entered, there was nothing sound but the pictures of
Moors, of such men that a little after fulfilled the Prophecy.

Yet this last conquest of Spain was not perfect, for diverse parts Northwest
kept still under Christian Kings, specially Biscay, which was never conquered,
as Wales in Britanny, and the Biscayners have much Analogy with the Welsh in
diverse things: They retain to this day the original Language of Spain, they
are the most mountainous people, and they are reputed the ancientst Gentry; so
that when any is to take the order of Knighthood, there are no Inquistors
appointed to find whether he be clear of the blood of the Moors as in other
places. The King when he comes upon the confines, pulls off one shoo before he
can tread upon any Biscay ground: And he has good reason to esteem that
Province, in regard of diverse advantages he has by it, for he has his best
timber to build ships, his best Mariners, and all his iron thence.

There were diverse bloody battles 'twixt the remnant of Christians, and the
Moors for seven hundredth years together, and the Spaniards getting ground more
and more, drive them at last to Granada, and thence also in the time of
Ferdinand and Isabella quite over to Barbary: their last King was Chico, who
when he fled from Granada crying and weeping, the people upbra^ded him, That he
might well weep like a woman, who could not defend himself and them like a man.
(This was that Ferdinand who obtaind from Rome the Title of Catholic, though
some Stories say that many ages before Ricaredus the first Orthodox King of the
Goths, was styled Catholicus in a Provincial Synod held at Toledo, which was
continued by Alphonsus the first, and then made hereditary by this Ferdinand.)
This absolute conquest of the Moors happened about Henry the sevenths time, 'when
the soresaid Ferdinand and Isabella had by alliance joynd Castile and Aragon,
which with the discovery of the West Indies, which happend a little after, was
the first foundation of that greatness whereunto Spain is now mounted. Afterward
there was an alliance with Burgundy and Austria, by the first House the
seventeen Provinces fell to Spain, by the second Charles the fifth came to be
Emperor: and remarkable it is how the House of Austria came to that height from
a mean Earl, the Earl of Hasburgh in Germany. who having bin one day a hunting,
he overtook ^ Priest who had bin with the Sacrament to visit a poor sick body,
the Priest being tired, the Earl lighted off his horse, helped up the Priest,
and so waited upon him afoot all the while till he brought him to the Church:
The Priest giving him his benediction at his going away, told him that for this
great act of humility and piety, His Race should be one of the greatest that
ever the world had, and ever since, which is some 240. years ago, the Empire
has continued in that House, which afterward was called the House of Austria.

In Philip the seconds time the Spanish Monarchy came to its highest cumble, by
the conquest of Portugal, whereby the East Indies, sundry Islands in the
Atlantic Sea, and diverse places in Barbary were added to the Crown of Spain. By
these steps this Crown came to this Grandeur; and truly give the Spaniard his
due, he is a mighty Monarch, he has Dominions in all parts of the world (which
none of the four Monarchies had) both in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America,
(which he has solely to himself) though our Henry the seventh had the first
proffer made him: So the Sun shines all the four and twenty hours of the
natural day upon some part or other of his countries, for part of the Antipodes
are subject to him. He has eight Viceroys in Europe, two in the East Indies,
two in the West, two in Afric, and about thirty provincial soverain Commanders
more; yet as I was told lately, in a discourse twixt him and our Prince at his
being here, when the Prince sell to magnify his spacious Dominions, the King
answered, Sir, it is true, it has pleased God to trust me with diverse Nations
and Countries, but of all these there are but two which yield me any clear
revenues, viz. Spain, and my West Indies, nor all Spain neither, but Castile
only, the rest do scarce quit cost, for all is drunk up twixt Governors and
Garrisons; yet my advantage is to have the opportunity to propagate Christian
Religion, and to employ my Subjects. For the last, it must be granted that no
Prince has better means to breed brave men, and more variety of commands to
heighten their spirits with no petty but Princely employments. This King
besides has other means to oblige the Gentry unto him, by such a huge number
of Commendams which he has in his gift to bestow o^ whom he please of any of
the three Orders of Knighthood; which England and France want. Some Noble men in
Spain can despend 50000 l. some forty, some thirty, and diverse twenty thousand
pounds per annum. The Church here is exceeding rich both in revenues, plate,
and buildings; one cannot go to the meanest Country Chapel, but he will find
Chalices, lamps and candlesticks of silver. There are some Bishoprics of
30000l. per annum, and diverse of 10000 l. and Toledo is 100000 l. yearly
revenue. As the Church is rich, so it is mightily reverenced here, and very
powerful, which made Philip the second rather depend upon the Clergy, than the
secular Power: Therefore I do not see how Spain can be called a poor Country,
considering the revenues aforesaid of Princes and Prelates; nor is it so thin of
People as the world makes it, and one reason may be that there are sixteen
Universities in Spain, and in one of these there were fifteen thousand Students
at one time when I was there, I mean Salamanca, and in this Village of Madrid
(for the King of Spain cannot keep his constant Court in any City) there are
ordinarily 600000 souls. It Is true that the colonizing of the Indies, and the
wars of Flanders have much drained this Country of people: Since the expulsion
of the Moors, it is also grown thinner, and not so full of corn; for those
Moors would grub up wheat out of the very tops of the craggy hills, yet they
used another grain for their bread, so that the Spaniard had naught else to do
but go with his Ass to the Market, and buy corn of the Moon. There lived here
also in times past a great number of Jews, till they were expelled by
Ferdinand, and as I have read in an old Spanish Legend, the cause was this; The
King had a young Prince to his son, who was used to play with a Jewish Doctor
that was about the Court, who had a Ball of gold in a string hanging down his
breast, the little Prince one day snatched away the said gold Ball, and carried
it to the next room, the Ball being hollow, opend, and within there was painted
our Savior kissing a Jews tail: Hereupon they were all suddenly disterr'd and
exterminated, yet I believe in Portugal there lurks. yet good store of them.

For the soil of Spain, the fruitfulnes of their valleys recompenses the
sterillity of their hills, corn is their greatest want, and want of rain is the
cause of that, which makes them have need of their neighbors; yet as much as
Spain bears is passing good, and so is every thing else for the quality, nor
has any one a better horse under him, a better cloak on his back, a better
sword by his side, better shoes on his feet, than the Spaniard, nor does any
drink better Wine, or eat better fruit than he, nor flesh for the quantity.

Touching the People, the Spaniard looks as high, though not so big a^ a
German, his excess is in too much gravity, which some who know him not well,
hold to be a pride, he cares not how little he labors, for poor Gascons and
Morisco slaves do most of his work in field and vineyard; he can endure much in
the war, yet he loves not to fight in the dark, but in open day, or upon a
stage, that all the world might be witnesses of his valor; so that you shall
seldom hear of Spaniards employed in night service; nor shall one hear of a
Duel here in an age: He has one good quality, that he is wonderfully obedient
to Government: for the proudest Don of Spain when he is prancing upon his Ginet
in the streets, if an Alguazil (a Sargeant) show him his Vare, that is a little
white staff he carries as badge of his Office; my Don will down presently off
his horse, and yield himself his prisoner. He has another commendable quality,
that when he gives Alms, he pulls off his Hat, and puts it in the beggars hand
with a great deal of humility. His gravity is much lessned since the late
Proclamation came out against ruffs, and the King himself showed the first
example, they were come to that hight of excess herein, that twenty shillings
were used to be paid for starching of a ruff: and some, though perhaps he had
never a shirt to his back, yet would be have a toting huge swelling ruff about
his neck. He is sparing in his Ordinary diet, but when he makes a Feast he is
free and bountiful. As to Temporal Authority, specially Martial, so is be
very obedient to the Church, and believes all with an implicit faith: he is a
great servant of Ladies, nor can he be blamed, for as I said before he coms of
a Gotish race; yet he never brags of, nor blazes abroad his doings that way,
but is exceedingly careful of the repute of any woman, (A civility that we
much want in England) He will speak high words of Don Philippo his King, but
will not endure a stranger should do so: I have heard a Biscayner make a
Rodomontado, that he was as good a Gentleman as Don Philippo himself, for Don
Philippo was half a Spaniard, half a German, half an Italian, half a Frenchman,
half I know not what, but he was a pure Biscayner, without mixture. The
Spaniard is not so smooth and oily in his Complement as the Italian, and though
he will make strong protestations, yet he will not swear out Complements like
the French and English, as I heard when my Lord of Carlisle was Ambassador in
France, there came a great Monsieur to see him, and having a long time banded,
and sworn Complements one to another who should go first out at a door, at last
my Lord of Carlisle said, o Monseigneur ayez pity de mon ame, O my'. Lord have
pity upon my soul.

The Spaniard is generally given to gaming, and that in excess; he will say
his prayers before, and if he win he will thank God for his good fortune after;
their common game at cards (for they very seldom play at dice) is Primera, at
which the King never shows his game, but throws his cards with their faces down
on the Table: He is Merchant of all the cards and dice through all the Kingdom,
he has them made for a penny a pair, and he retails them for twelve pence; so
that it is thought he has 30000 l. a year by this trick at cards. The Spaniard
is very devout in his way, for I have seen him kneel in the very dirt when the
Ave Mary bell rings: and some if they spy two straws or sticks lie cross-wise in
the street, they will take them up and kiss them, and lay them down again. He
walks as if he marched, and seldom looks on the ground, as if he contemnd it. I
was told of a Spaniard who having got a fall by a stumble, and broke his nose,
rose up, and in a disdainful manner said, Voto a tal esto es caminar por la
tierra, This is to walk upon earth. The Labradors and Country Swains here are
sturdy and rational men, nothing so simple or servile as the French Peasan who
is born in chains. It Is true, the Spaniard is not so conversable as other
Nations; (unless he has traveled) else he is like Mars among the Planets,
impatient of Conjunction: nor is he so free in his gifts and rewards: as the
last Summer it happened that Count Gondamar with Sir Francis Cotington went to
see a curious house of the Constable of Castiles, which had been newly built
here; the keeper of the house was very officious to show him every room with
the garden, grotha's, and aqueducts, and presented him with some fruit;
Gondamar having been a long time in the house, coming out, put many
Complements of thanks upon the man, and so was going away, Sir Francis
whispered him in the ear and askd him whether he would give the man any thing
that took such pains, Oh quoth Gondamar, well remembered Don Francisco, have you
ever a double Pistol about you? If you have, you may give it him, and then you
pay him after the English manner, I have paid him already after the Spanish.
The Spaniard is much improved in policy since he took footing in Italy, and
there is no Nation agrees with him better. I will conclude this Character with
a saying that he has*

No ay bombre debaxo d'el sol,
Como el Italiano y el Espanol.
Whereunto a Frenchman answered,

Dizes la verdad, y tienes razon,
El uno es puto, el otro ladron.
Englished thus,

Beneath the Sun there is no such man,
As is is the Spaniard and Italian.
The Frenchman answers,

Thou tell the truth, and reason have,
The first's a Thief, a Buggerer the last.
Touching their women, nature has made a more visible distinction twixt the
two sexes here, than else where; for the men for the most part are swarthy and
rough, but the women are made of a far finer mould, they are commonly little;
and whereas there is a saying that to make a complete woman, let her be English
to the neck, French to the wast, and Dutch below; I may add for hands and feet
let her be Spanish, for they have the least of any. They have another saying, a
French-woman in a dance, a Dutch-woman in the kitchen, an Italian in a window,
an English-woman at board, and the Spanish a bed. When they are married they
have a privilege to wear high shoes, and to paint, which is generally
practiced here, and the Queen uses it her self. They are coy enough, but not
so froward as our English, for if a Lady go along the street, (and all women
going here vaild and their habit so generally like, one can hardly distinguish
a Countess from a Cobblers wife) if one should cast out an odd ill sounding
word, and ask her a favor, she will not take it ill, but put it off and answer
you with some witty retort. After 30 they are commonly past child-^earing, and
I have seen women in England look as youthful at 50, as some here at 25. Money
will do miracles here in purchasing the favor of Ladies, or any thing else,
though this be the Country of money, for it furnishes well-near all the world
besides, yea their very enemies, as the Turk and Hollander; insomuch that one
may say the Coin of Spain is as Catholic, as her King. Yet though he be the
greatest King of gold and silver Mines in the world, (I think) yet the common
current Coin here is Copper, and herein I believe the Hollander has done him
more mischief by counterfeiting his Copper Coins, than by their arms, bringing
it in by strange surreptitious ways, as in hollow Sows of Tin and Lead, hollow
Masts, in pitched Buckets under water and other ways. But I fear to be
injurious to this great King to speak of him in so narrow a compass, a great
King indeed, though the French in a slighting way compare his Monarchy to a
Beggars Cloak made up of patches, they are patches indeed, but such as he has
not the like: The East Indies is a patch embroidered with Pearl, Rubies, and
Diamonds: Peru is a patch embroidered with massy gold, Mexico with silver,
Naples and Milain are patches of cloth of Tissue, and if these patches were in
one piece, what would become of his cloak embroyderd with flower deluces?

So desiring your Lopp. to pardon this poor imperfect paper* considering the
high quality of the subject, I rest

Madrid, 1 Feb. 1623. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.

XXXI. To Mr Walsingham Gresly, from Madrid.
Don Balchasar,
I Thank you for your Letter in my Lords last packet, wherein among other
passages, you write unto me the circumstances of Marquis Spinola's raising his
Leaguer, by flatting and firing his works before Berghen. He is much taxed
here, to have attempted it, and to have buried so much of the Kings tresure
before that town in such costly Trenches: A Gentleman came hither lately, who
was at the siege all the while, and he told me one strange passage, how Sir
Ferdinando Carry a huge corpulent Knight, was shot through his body, the bullet
entering at the Navell, and coming out at his back killed his man behind him,
yet he lives still, and is like to recover: With this miraculous accident, he
told me also a merry one, how a Captain that had a Wooden Leg Booted over, had
it shatterd to pieces by a Cannon Bullet, his Soldiers crying out a Surgeon, a
Surgeon, for the Captain; no, no, said he, a Carpenter, a Carpenter, will serve
the tu^n: To this pleasant tale I Will add another that happened lately in Alcala
hard by, of a Dominican Friar, who in a solemn Procession which was held there
upon Ascension day last, had his stones dangling under his habit cut off
instead of his pocket by a cutpurse.

Before you return hither, which I understand will be speedily, I pray bestow a
visit on our friends in Bishopsgate-street: So I am

^ Feb. 1623. Your faithful Servitor, J. H.

XXXIII. To Sir Robert Napier Knight, at his house in Bishops-gate-street, from
Madrid.
SIR,
THe late breach of the Match, hatch broke the neck of all businesses here, and
mine suffers as much as any: I had access lately to Olivares, once or twice; I
had audience also of the King, to whom I presented a memorial that intimated
Letters of Mart, unless satisfaction were had from his Viceroy the Conde del
Real; the King gave me a gracious answer, but Olivares a churlish one, viz.
That when the Spaniards had justice in England, we should have justice here: So
that notwithstanding I have brought it to the highest point and pitch of
perfection in Law that could be, and procured some dispatches, the like whereof
were never granted in this Court before, yet I am in despair now to do any
good: I hope to be shortly in England, by God grace, to give you and the rest
of the proprietaries, a punctual account of all things: And you may easily
conceive how sorry I am, that matters succeeded not according to your
expectation, and my endeavors: but I hope you are none of those that measure
things by the event. The Earl of Bristoll, Count Gondamar, and my Lord
Ambassador Aston, did not only do courtesies, but they did cooperate with me in
it, and contributed their utmost endeavors* So I rest

Madrid, 19. Feb. 1623. Yours to serve you, J. H.

XXXIV. To Mr. A. S. in Alicant.
MUch endeared Sir: Fire, you know, is the common emblem of love, But without
any disparagement to so noble a passion, me thinks it might be also compared to
tinder, and Letters are the proper'st matter whereof to make this tinder*
Letters again are fittest to kindle and re-accend this tinder, they may serve
both for flint, steel, and match. This Letter of mine comes therefore of set
purpose to strike some sparkles into yours, that it may glow and burn, and
receive ignition, and not lie dead, as it has don a great while: I make my pen
to serve for an instrument to stir the cinders wherewith your old love to me
has bincover'd a long time; therefore I pray let no covurez-f^u Bell have power
hereafter to rake up, and choke with the ashes of oblivion, that clear slame
wherewith our affections did use to sparkle so long by correspondence of
Letters, and other offices of love.

I think I shall sojourn yet in this Court these three months, for I will not
give over this great business while there is the least breath of hope remaining.

I know you have choice matter of intelligence sometimes from thence, therefore I
pray impait some unto us, and you shall not fail to know how matters pass here
weekly. So with my b^sa manos to Francisco Imperial, I rest

Madrid, 3 Mar. 1623. Yours most affectionately to serve you, J. H.

XXXV. To the Honble. Sir T. S. at Tower Hill.
SIR,
I Was yesterday at the Escuriall to see the Monastery of Saint Laurence, the
eight wonder of the World; and truly considering the site of the place, the
state of the thing, and the symmetry of the structure, with diverse other
raritles, it may be called so; for what I have seen in Italy, and other places,
are but bables to it. It is built amongst a company of Craggy-barren-hills,
which makes the air the hungrier, and wholsommer; it is all built of Freestone
and Marble, and that with such solidity and moderat height, that surely Philip
the seconds chief design was to make a sacrifice of it to eternity, and to
contest with the Meteors, and Time it self. It cost eight Millions, it was
twenty four years a building, and the Founder himself saw it finished, and
enjoyed it twelve years after, and carried his Bones himself thither to be
buried.

The reason that moved King Philip to wast so much tresure, was a vow he had
made at the battle of Saint Quentin, where he was forced to batter a Monastery
of Saint Laurence Friars, and if he had the victory, he would erect such a
Monastery to Saint Laurence, that the world had not the like; therefore the form
of it is like a Gridiron, the handle is a huge Royal Palace, and the body a
vast Monastery or Assembly of quadrangular Cloisters, for there are as many as
there be months in the year. There be a hundred Monks, and every one has his
man and his mule, and a multitude of Officers; besides, there are three
Libraries there, full of the choicest Books for all Sciences. It is beyond
expression, what Gro^s, Gardens, Walks, and Aqueducts there are there, and what
curious Fountains in the upper Cloisters, for there be two Stages of Cloisters:
In fine, there is nothing that is vulgar there. To take a view of every Room in
the House, one must make account to go ten miles; there is a Vault called the
Pantheon, under the highest Altar, which is all paved, walled, and arched, with
Marble; there be a number of huge Silver Candlesticks, taller than I am; Lamps
three yards compass, and diverse Chalices and Grosses of massy Gold: There is one
Quire made all of burnished Brass: Pictures and Statues like Giants, and a
world of glorious things that purely ravished me* By this mighty Monument, it
may be inferred, that Philip the second, though he was a little man, yet had he
vast Gigantic thoughts in him, to leave such a huge pile for posterity to gaze
upon, and admire his memory. No more now, but that I rest

Madrid, Mar. 9. 1623. Your most humble Servitor, J. H.

XXXVI, To the Lo: Vicount Col. from Madrid.
My Lord,
YOu writ to me long since, to send you an account of the Duke of Ossuna's
death, a little man, but of great fame and fortunes, and much cried up, and
known up and down the World. He was revoked from being Viceroy of Naples (the
best employment the King of Spain has for a Subject) upon some disgust; And
being com to this Court, when he was brought to give an account of his
government, being troubled with the Gout, he carried his Sword in his hand in
steed of a staff; the King misliking the manner of his posture, turned his back
to him, and so went away; thereupon he was overheard to mutter, Esto es para
serv^ muchach^s; This it is to serve boys: This coming to the Kings ^are, he
was apprehended, and committed prisoner to a Monastery, not far off, where he
continued some years, until his Beard came to his girdle, then growing very
ill, he was permitted to com to his House in this Town, being carried in a bed
upon men's shoulders, and so died some year ago. There were diverse accusations
against him, amongst the rest, I remember these, That he had kept the Marquis
de Campolataros wife, sending her husband out of the way upon employment; That
he had got a bastard of a Turkish woman, and suffered the child to be brought
up in the Mahumetan religion; That being one day at High Mass, when the host
was elevated, he drew out of his pocket a p^ece of Gold, and held it up,
intimating that that was his god: That he had invited some of the prime
Courtisans of Naples to a Feast, and after dinner made a banquet for them in
his Garden, where he commanded them to strip themselves stark naked, and go up
and down, while he shot Sugar-Plums at them out of a Trunk, which they were to
take up from off their high Chapins; and such like extravagancies. One (amongst
diverse other) witty passage was told me of him, which was, That when he was
Viceroy of Sicily, there died a great rich Duke, who left but one Son, whom
with his whole estate, he bequeathed to the Tutele of the Jesuits, and the
words of the Will were, When he is passed his minority (Dar^te al mio figlivolo
quelque voi volete) you shall give my son what you will. It seems the Jesuits
took to themselves two parts of three of the estate, and gave the rest to the
heir, the young Duke complaining hereof to the Duke of Ossuna, (then Viceroy)
he commanded the Jesuits to appear before him; he asked them how much of the
estate they would have, they answered, two parts of three, which they had
almost employed already to build Monasteries, and an Hospital, to erect
particular Altars, and Masses, to sing Dirges and Refrigeriums, for the soul of
the deceased Duke: Hereupon, the Duke of Ossuna caused the Will to be produced,
and found therein the words before recited, When he is passed his minority, you
shall give my son (of my estate) what you will; Then he told the Jesuits, you
must by virtue and tenor of these words, give what you will to the son, which
by your own confession is two parts of three; and so he determined the business.

Thus have I in part satisfied your Lordships desire, which I shall do more
amply, when I shall be made happy to attend you in person, which I hope will be
ere it be long: In the Interim, I take my leave of you from Spain, and rest

Madrid, 13 Mar. 1623. Your Lordships most ready and humble Servitor, J. H.

XXXVII. To Simon Digby Esquire.
SIR,
I Thank you for the several sorts of Ciphers you sent me to write by, which
were very choice ones and curious. Cryptology, or Epistolizing in a Clandestin
way, is very ancient: I read in Agellius, that C. Caesar in his Letters to
Cajus Oppius, and Balbus Cor^lius, who were two of his greatest confident'st in
managing his private affairs, did write in Ciphers by a various transportation
of the Alphabet; whereof Probus Grammaticus de occulta litterarum significatione
Epistolarum C. Caesaris, writes a curious Commentary: But me thinks, that
certain kind of Hieroglyphics, the Caelestiall Signs, the seven Planets, and
other Constellations might make a curious kind of Cipher, as I will more
particularly demonstrate unto you in a Scheme, when I shall be made happy with
your conversation. So I rest

Madrid, Mar. 15. 1623. Your assured Servitor, J. H.

XXXVIII. To Sir James Crofts, from Bilbao.
SIR,
BEing safely come to the Marine, in convoy of his Majesty's Jewels, and being
to sojourn here some days, the convenience of this Gentleman (who knows, and
much honors you) he being to ride Post through France, invited me to send
you this. We were but five horsemen in all our seven days journey, from Madrid
hither, and the charge Mr. Wiches had is valued at four hundred thousand
Crowns; but it is such safe traveling in Spain, that one may carry Gold in the
Palm of his hand, the government is so good. When we had gained Biscay ground,
we passed one day through a Forest, and lighting off our Mules to take a
little repast under a tree, we took down our Alforjas, and some bottles of
wine (and you know it is ordinary here to ride with ones victuals about him)
but as we were eating, we spied two huge Woolfs, who star'd upon us a while,
but had the good manners to go a way: It put me in mind of a pleasant tale I
heard Sir Thomas Fair^ax relate of a Soldier in Ireland, who having got his
Passeport to go for England, as he passed through a Wood with his Knapsac upon
his back, being weary, he sat down under a Tree, where he opened his Knapsack,
and fell to some Victuals he had; but upon a sudden he was surpised with two
or three Woolfs, who coming toward him, he threw them scraps of Bread and
Cheese, till all was don, then the Woolfs making a nearer approach unto him, he
knew not what shift to make, but by taking a pair of Bag-Pipes which he had,
and as soon as he began to play upon them, the Wolves ran all away as if they
had bin scared out of their wi^s; whereupon the Soldier said, A pox take you
all, if I had known you had loved music so well, you should have had it before
dinner.

If there be a lodging void at the three Halbards-Heads, I pray be pleased to
cause it to be reserved for me. So I rest

Bilbo, Sept. 6. 1624. Your humble Servitor, J. H.

Familiar Letters.
SECTION IV.
I. To my Father from London.
SIR,
I Am newly returned from Spain, I came over in Convoy of the Prince his
jewels, for which, one of the Ships Royal with the Catch were sent under the
Command of Captain Love; We landed at Plymouth, whence I came by Post to
Theobalds in less then two nights and a day, to bring his Majesty news of their
safe arrival: The Prince had newly got a fall off a Horse, and kept his
Chamber; the jewels were valued at above a hundred thousand pounds; some of
them a little before the Prince his departure had bin presented to the Infanta,
but she waving to receive them, yet with a civil complement, they were left in
the hands of one of the Secretaries of State for her use upon the wedding day,
and it was no unworthy thing in the Spaniard to deliver them back,
notwithstanding, that the Treaties both of Match, and Palatinat, had bin
dissolved a pretty while before by Act of Parliament, that a war was threatened,
and Ambassadors revoked. There were jewels also amongst them to be presented to
the King and Queen of Spain, to most of the Ladies of Honor, and the Grandees.
There was a great Table Diamond for Olivares of eighteen Carrats Weight, but the
richest of all was to the Infanta her self, which was a Chain of great Orient
Perl, to the number of 276. weighing nine Ounces. The Spaniards notwithstanding
they are the Masters of the Staple of jewels, stood astonished at the beuty of
these, and confessed themselves to be put down.

Touching the employment, upon which I went to Spain, I had my charges born all
the while, and that was all; had it taken effect, I had made a good business of
it; but it is no wonder (nor can it be I hope any disrepute unto me) that I
could not bring to pass, what three Ambassadors could not do before me.

I am now casting about for another Fortun, and some hopes I have of employment
about the Duke of Buckingham, he sways more than ever; for whereas he was before
a Favorit to the King, he is now a Favorit to Parliament, People, and City,
for breaking the match with Spain: Touching his own interest, he had reason to
do it, for the Spaniards love him not: but whether the public interest of the
State will suffer in it, or no, I dare not determine, for my part, I hold the
Spanish Match to be better than their Powder, and their Wares better than their
Wars; and I shall be ever of that mind, That no Country is able to do England
less hurt, and more good than Spain, considering the large Trafic and Treasure
that is to be got thereby.

I shall continue to give you account of my courses when opportunity serves,
and to dispose of matters so, that I may attend you this Summer in the
Country: So desiring still your Blessing and Prayers, I rest,

London, December* 10* 1624. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

II. To R. Brown Esquire.
Dear Sir,
There is no seed so fruitful as that of Love, I do not mean that gross carnal
Love which propagats the World, but that which preserves it, to wit, Seeds of
Friendship, which has little commerce with the Body, but is a thing Divine an^
Spiritual; There cannot be a more pregnant proof hereof, then those Seeds of
Love, which I have long since cast into your Breast, which have thriven so well,
and in that exuberance, that they have been more fruitful unto me, then that
field in Sicily, called Le trecente cariche^, The field of three hundred Loads,
so called, because it returns the Sower three hundred for one yearly* So
plentiful has your love been unto me, but amongst other sweet fruits it has
born, those precious Letters which you have sent me from time to time, both at
home and abroad, are not of the least value; I did always hugg and highly
esteem them, and you in them, for they yielded me both profit and pleasure.

That Seed which you have also sown in me, has ^ructified something, but it
has not been able to make you such rich returns, nor afford so plentiful a
Crop, yet I dare say^, this Crop how thin soever, was pure and free from Tares,
from Cockle or Darnell, from flattery or fashood, and what it shall produce
hereafter, shall be so; nor shall any injury of the Heavens, as Tempests, or
Thunder and Lightning (I mean no cross or affliction whatsoever) be able, to
blast and smutt it, or, hinder it to grow up, and fructify still.

This is the third time God Almighty has been pleased to bring me back to the
sweet bosom of my dear Country from beyond the Seas; I have been already
comforted with the sight of many of my choice friends, but I miss you
extremely, therefore I pray make haste, for London streets which you and I have
trod together so often, will prove tedious to me else. Amongst other things,
Blackfriars will entertain you with a Play Spick and span new, and the
Cockpit with another; nor I believe after so long absence, will it be an
unpleasing object for you to see,

London, Ian. 20 1624. Your J. H.

III. To the Lord Vicount Colchester.
Right Honble,
MY last to your Lordship was in Italian, with the Venetian Gazetta enclosed.
Count Mansfelt is upon point of parting, having obtained it seems the sum of
his desires, he was lodged all the while in the same Quarter of Saint James,
which was appointed for the Infanta; he supped yestrnight with the Counsel of
War, and he has a grant of 12000 men, English and Scots, whom he will have
ready in the Body of an Army against the next Spring; and they say, that
England, France, Venice, and Savoy, do contribut for the maintenance thereof
60000 pound a month; there can be no conjecture, much less any judgment made yet
of his design; Most Sthink it will be for relieving Breda, which is straightly
begirt by pinola, who gives out, that he has her already as a Bird in a Cage,
and will have her maugre all the opposition of Christendom; yet there is fresh
news com over, that Prince Maurice has got on the back of him, and has
beleaguered him, as he has done the Town, which I want faith to believe yet,
in regard of the huge circuit of Spinola's Works, for his circumvallations are
cried up to be near upon twenty miles. But while the Spaniard is spending
Millions here ^or getting small Towns, the Hollander gets Kingdoms of him else
where, for he has invaded and taken lately from the Portugal part of Brasil,
a rich Country for Sugars, Cottons, Balsams, Dying-wood, and diverse
commodities besides.

The Treaty of marriage 'twixt our Prince, and the youngest daughter of France,
goes on a pace, and my Lord of Carlisle and Holland are in Paris about it, we
shall see now what difference there is 'twixt the French and Spanish pace: The
two Spanish Ambassadors have been gone hence long since, they say, that they are
both in prison, one in Burges in Spain, the other in Flanders, for the
scandalous information they made here against the Duke of Buckingham, about
which, the day before their departure hence, they desired to have one private
audience more, but his Majesty denied them; I believe they will not continue
long in disgrace, for matters grow daily worse and worse 'twixt us, and Spain:
for diverse Letters of Mart are granted our Merchants, and Letters of Mart are
commonly the forerunners of a War: Yet they say Gondamar will be on his way
hither again, about the Palatinat, for the King of Denmark appears now in his
Necces quarrel, and Arm's apace.

No more now, but that I kiss your Lordships hands, and rest

Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
London, 5 Febr. 1624.
IV. To my Cos: Mr. Rowland Gwin.
Cousin,
I Was lately sorry, and I was lately glad, that I heard you were ill, that I
heard you are well.

Your affectionat Cousin, I. H.

V. To Thomas Jones Esquire.
Tom,
IF you are in healt^, it is well, we are here all so, and we should be better
had we your company; therefore I pray leave the smutty Air of London, and com
hither to breath sweeter, where you may pluck a Rose, and drink a Cillibub.

Your faithful friend, J. H.
Kentis, June, 1. 1625.
VI. To D. C.
THe Bearer hereof has no other errand, but to know how you do in the
Country, and this paper is his credentiall Letter; Therefore I pray hasten his
dispatch, and if you please send him back like the man in the Moon, with a
basket of your fruit on his back.

Your true friend, J. H.
London this Aug. 10. 1624.
VII. To my Father, from London.
SIR,
I Received yours of the third of February, by the hands of my Cousin Thomas
Gwin of Trecastle.

It was my fortune to be on Sunday was fortnight at Theobalds, where his late
Majesty King James departed this life, and went to his last rest upon the day
of rest, presently after Sermon was don: A little before the break of day, he
sent for the Prince, who rose out of his bed, and came in his Nightgown; the
King seemed to have some earnest thing to say unto him, and so endeavored to
rowse himself upon his Pillow, but his spirits were so spent, that he had not
strength to make his words audible. He died of a Fever which began with an
Ague, and some Scotch Doctors mutter at a Plaster the Countess of Buckingham
applied to the outside of his stomach: It Is thought the last breach of the march
with Spain, which for many years he had so vehemently defir'd, took too deep an
impression in him, and that he was forced to rush into a war, now in his
declining Age, having lived in a continual uninterrupted peace his whole life,
except some collateral aids he had sent his Son in Law: as soon as he expired,
the Privy Counsel sat, and in less then a quarter of an hour, King Charles was
proclaimed at Theobalds Court Gate, by Sir Edward Zouch Knight Marshall, Master
Secretary Conway dictating unto him, That whereas it has pleased God to take to
his mercy, our most gracious Sovereign King James of famous memory, We proclaim
Prince Charles, His rightful and indubitable Heir, to be King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. The Knight Marshall mistook, saying, His
rightful and dubitable Heir, but he was rectified by the Secretary. This being
don, I took my Horse instantly, and came to London first, except one, who was
com a little before me, insomuch, that I found the Gates shut. His now Majesty
took Coach, and the Duke of Buckingham with him, and came to Saint James; In
the evening he was proclaimed at White Hall Gate, in Cheapside, and other
places, in a sad shower of Rain; and the Weather was suitable to the condition
wherein he finds the Kingdom which is Cloudy; for he is left engaged in a War
with a potent Prince, the peeple by long desuetude unapt for Arms, the ^leet
Royal in quarter repair, himself without a Queen, his Siser without a
Country, the Crown pitifully laden with debts, and the Purse of the State
lightly ballasted, though it never had better opportunity to be rich then it
had these last twenty years: But God Almighty, I hope will make him emerge, and
pull this Island out of all these plunges, and preserve us from worser times.

The Plague is begun in White-Chappell, and as they say in the same house, at
the same day of the month, with the same number that died twenty two years
since, when Queen Elizabeth departed.

There are great preparations for the Funeral, and there is a design to buy all
the Cloth for Mourning White, and then to put it to the Dy^rs in gross, which
is like to save the Crown a good deal of money; the Drapers murmur extremely at
the Lord Cranfield for it.

I am not settled yet in any stable condition, but I lie Windbound at the Cape
of good Hope, expecting some gentle gale to launch out into an employment.

So with my love to all my Brothers and Sisters at the Bryn, and near
Brecknock, I humbly crave a continuance of your Prayers, and Blessing to

Your dutiful Son, J. H.
London, December. 11. 1625.
VIII. To Dr. Prichard.
SIR,
SInce I was beholden to you for your many favors in Oxford, I have not heard
from you, ( ne gry quidem) I pray let the wonted correspondence be now revived,
and receive new vigor between us.

My Lord Chancellor Bacon is lately dead of a long languishing weakness; he died
so poor, so that he scarce left money to bury him, which though he had a great
Wit, did argue no great Wisdom, it being one of the essential properties of a
Wiseman to provide for the main chance. I have read, that it has bin the
fortunes of all Poets commonly to die Beggars; but for an Orator, a Lawyer, and
Philosopher, as he was, to die so, 'cis rare. It seems the same fate befell
him, that attended Demosthenes, Seneca, and Cicero, (all great men) of whom,
the two first fell by corruption; the falrest Diamond may have a flaw in it,
but I believe he died poor out of a contempt of the pelf of Fortune, as also
out of an exeess of generosity, which appeared, as in diverse other passages, so
once when the King had sent him a Stag, he sent up for the Underkeeper, and
having drunk the Kings health unto him in a great Silver. Guilt-Bowl, he gave
it him for his fee.

He writ a pitiful Letter to King James, not long before his death, and
concludes, Help me dear Soverain Lord and Master, and pity me so far, that I
who have bin born to a Bag, be not now in my age forced in effect to bear a
Wallet; nor I that desire to live to study, may be driven to study to live:
Which words, in my opinion, argued a little abjection of spirit, as his former
Letter to the Prince did of prophanes, wherein be hoped, that as the Father was
his Creater, the Son will be his Redeemer. I write not this to derogat from the
noble worth of the Lord Viscount Verulam, who was a rare man, a man Reconditae
scientiae, and ad salutem literarum natus, and I think the eloquentst that was
born in this Isle. They say he shall be the last Lord Chancellor, as Sir Edward
Coke was the last Lord Chief Justice of England; for ever since they have bin
termed Lord Chief Justices of the Kings Bench; so hereafter there shall be only
Ketpers of the Great Seal, which for Title and Office, are deposable; but they
say the Lord Chancelors Title is indelible.

I was lately at Grayes-Inne with Sir Eubule, and he desired me to remember him
unto you, as I do also salute Meum Prichardum ex imis praecordiis, Vale (...).

London, Ian. 6. 1625 Yours most affectionately while, I. H.

IX. To my welbeloved Consin Mr. T. V.
Cousin,
YOu have a great work in hand, for you write unto me, that you are upon a
treaty of marriage; a great work indeed, and a work of such consequence, that it
may make you or mar you; it may make the whole remainder of your life uncouth,
or comfortable to you; for of all civil actions that are incident to man,
there is not any that tends more to his infelicity or happiness; therefore it
concerns you not to be overhasty herein, not to take the Ball before the
Bound; you must be cautious how you thrust your neck into such a yoke, whence
you will never have power to withdraw it again; for the tongue uses to tie so
hard a knot, that the teeth can never untie, no not Alexanders Sword can cut
asunder among us Christians. If you are resolved to marry, Choose where you
love, and resolve to love your choice; let love, rather than lucre, be your
guide in this election, though a concurrence of both be good, yet for my part,
I had rather the latter should be wanting than the first; the one is the Pilot,
the other but the Ballast of the Ship which should carry us to the Harbor of a
happy life: If you are bent to wed, I wish you another gets wife then Socrates
had; who when she had scoulded him out of doors, as he was going through the
Portall, threw a Chamber pot of stale Urine upon his head, whereat the
Philosopher having bin silent all the while, smilingly said, I thought ofter so
much Thunder we should have Rain: And as I wish you may not light upon such a
Xantippe, (as the wisest men have had ill luck in this kind, as I could
instance in two of our most eminent Lawyers, C. B.) so I pray that God may
deliver you from a Wife of such a generation, that Strowd our Cook here at
Westminster said his Wife was of, who, when (out of a mislike of the Preacher)
he had on a Sunday in the Afternoon, gone out of the Church to a Tavern, and
returning toward the Evening pretty well heated with Canary, to look to his
Roast, and his Wife falling to read him a loud lesson in so furious a manner,
as if she would have basted him instead of the Mutton, and amongst other
revilings, telling him often, Thut the devil, the devil would fetch him, at
last he broke out of a long silence, and told her, I prithee good Wife hold thy
self content, for I know the devil will do me no hurt, for I have married his
Kinswoman: If you light upon such a Wife (a Wife that has more been then
flesh) I wish you may have the same measure of patience that Socrates and
Strowd had, to suffer the Gray-Mare sometimes to be the better Horse. I remember
a French Proverb:

La Maison est miserable and Meschante,
Ou la Poule plus haut que le Coc chante,
That House does every day more wretched grow,
Where the Hen louder than the Cock does crow.
Yet we have another English Proverb almost counter to this* That it is better
to marry a Shrew then a Sheep; for though silence be the dumb Orator of beuty,
and the best ornament of a Woman, yet a Phlegmatic dull wife is fulsom and
fastidious.

Excuse me Cousin, that I Jest with you in so serious a business: I know you
need no counsel of mine herein, you are discreet enough of your self; nor, I
presume, do you want advice of Parents, which by all means must go along with
you: So wishing you all conjugall joy, and a happy confarreation, I rest

London, Feb. 5. 1625. Your affectionat Cousin, J. H.

X. To my Noble Lord, the Lord Clifford from London.
My Lord,
THe Duke of Buckingham is lately returned from Holland, having renewed the
peace with the States, and Articled with them for a continuation of some Navall
forces, for an expedition against Spain; as also having taken up some moneys
upon private jewels (not any of the Crowns) and lastly, having comforted the
Lady Elizabeth for the decease of his late Majesty her Father, and of Prince
Frederic her eldest Son, whole disasterous manner of death, amongst the rest of
her sad afflictions, is not the least: For passing over Haerlam Mere, a huge
Inland Lough, in company of his Father, who had bin in Amsterdam, to look how
his bank of money did thrive, and coming (for more frugality) in the common
Boat, which was oreset with Merchandise, and other passengers, in a thick Fog,
the Vessel turned ore, and so many perished; the Prince Palsgrave saved
himself by swimming, but the young Prince clinging to the Mast, and being
entangled among the Tacklings, was half drowned, and half frozen to death: A
sad destiny.

There is an open rupture twixt us and the Spaniard, though he gives out, that
he never broke with us to this day: Count Gondamar was on his way to Flanders,
and thence to England (as they say) with a large Commission to treat, for a
surrender of the Palainat, and so to piece matters together again; but he died
in the journey, at a place called Bunnol, of pure apprehensions of grief, as it
is given out.

The match twixt his Majesty and the Lady Henrietta Maria, youngest Daughter to
Henry the great (the eldest being married to the King of Spain, and the second
to the Duke of Savoy) goes roundly on, and is in a manner concluded; whereat the
Count of Soissons is much discontented, who gave himself hopes to have her; but
the hand of Heaven has predestined her for a far higher condition.

The French Ambassadors who were sent hither to conclude the business, having
private audience of his late Majesty a little before his death, he told them
pleasantly, That he would make war against the Lady Henrietta, because she
would not receive the two Letters which were sent her, one from himself, and
the other from his son, but sent them to her Mother; yet he thought he should
easily make peace with her, because he understood she had afterward put the
latter Letter in her bosom, and the first in her Coshionet, wherly he
gathered, that she intended to reserve his son for her Affection, and him for
Counsel.

The Bishop of Lucon, now Cardinal de Richelieu, is grown to be the sole
Favorit of the King of France, being brought in by the Queen Mother, he has
hin very active in advancing the match, but it is thought the wars will break
out afresh against them of the Religion, notwithstanding the ill fortune the
King had before Mountauban few years since, where he lost above 500 of his
Nobles, whereof the great Duke of Main was one; and having lain in person before
the Town many months, and received some affronts, as that inscription upon their
Gates show, Roy sans foy, ville sans peur, a King without faith, a town without
fear; yet he was forced to raze his works, and raise his siege.

The Letter which Mr. Ellis Hicks brought them of Mountauban from Rechell,
through so much danger, and with so much gallantry, was an infinite advantage
unto them; for whereas there was a politic report raised in the Kings Army, and
blown into Mountauban, that Rochell was yielded to the Count of Soissons, who
lay ^hen before her, this Letter did inform the contrary, and that Rochell was
in as good a plight as ever; whereupon, they made a sally the next day upon the
Kings Forces, and did him a great deal of spoil.

There be summous out for a Parliament, I pray God it may prove more prosperous
than the former.

I have been lately recommended to the Duke of Buckingham, by some noble friends
of mine that have intimacy with him, about whom, though he has three
Secretaries already, I hope to have some employment; for I am weary of walking
up and down so idly upon London streets.

The Plague begins to rage mightily, God avert his judgments, that meance so
great a Mortality, and turn not away his face from this poor Island: So I kiss
your Lordships hands in quality of

Land. 25. Feb. 1625. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.

XI. To Rich. Altham Esqr.
SIR,
THe Echo wants but a face, and the Looking-Glass a voice, to make them both
living creatures, and to become the same body they represent; the one by
repercussion of sound, the other by reflection of sight: Your most ingenious
Letters to me from time to time, do far more lively represent you, than either
Echo or Crystal can do; I mean, they represent the better and nobler part of
you, to wit, the inward man; they clearly set forth the notions of your mind,
and the motions of your soul, with the strength of your imagination; for as I
know your exterior person by your lineaments, so I know you as well inwardly by
your lines, and by those lively expressions you give of your self, insomuch,
that I believe, if the interior man within you were so visible as the outward
(as once Plate wished, that virtue might be seen with the corporeal eyes) you
would draw all the world after you; or if your well-born thoughts, and the
words of your Letters were echoed in any place, where they might rebound and be
made audible,, they are composed of such sweet and charming strains of
ingenuity and eloquence, that all the Nymphs of the Woods and the Valleys, the
Dryades, yea, the Graces and Muses', would pitch their Pavillions there; nay,
Apollo himself would dwell longer in that place with his Rays, and make them
reverberat more strongly, than either, upon Pindus, or Parnassus, or Rhodes it
self* whence he never removes his Eye, as long as he is above this Hemispher. I
confess my Letters to you, which I send by way of correspondence, com far short
of such virtue, yet are they the true Idaeas of my mind, and of that real and
inbred affection I bear you; one should never teach his Letter or his Laquay to
lie, I observe that rule: but besides my Letters, I could wish there were a
Crystal Casement in my Breast, through which you might behold the motions of my
heart,

-- Utinamque oculos in pectore pesses Inserere, then should you clearly see
without any deception of sight, how truly I am, and how entirely

27 of Febr. 1625. Yours J. H.
And to answer you in the same strain of Verse you sent me.

First, Shall the Heavens bright Lamp forget to shine,
The Stars shall from the Azurd sky decline;
First, Shall the Orient with the West shake hand,
The Center of the world shall cease to stand:
First, Wolves shall ligue with Lambs, the Dolphins fly,
The Lawyer and Physician Fees deny,
The Thames with Tagus shall exchange her Bed,
My Mistress locks with mine, shall first turn red;
First, Heaven shall lie below, and Hell above,
Ere I inconstant to my Altham prove.


XII. To the R. Honble my Lord of Calingford, after Earl of Carberry, at Colden
Grove, 28 May. 1625.
My Lord,
WE have gallant news now abroad, for we are sure to have a new Queen ere it
be long; both the Contract and marriage was lately solemnized in France; the one
the second of this month in the Louvre, the other the eleventh day following in
the great Church of Paris, by the Cardinal of Rochefoucand; there was some
clashing 'twixt him, and the Archbishop of Paris, who alleged 'twas his duty to
officiat in that Church, but the dignity of Cardinal, and the quality of his
Office, being the Kings great Almner, which makes him chief Curat of the Court,
gave him the prerogative. I doubt not but your Lordship has heard of the
Capitulations, but for better assurance, I will run them over briefly.

The King of France obliged himself to procure the Dispensation; the marriage
should be celebrated in the same form as that of Queen Margaret, and of the
Duchess of Bar; her Dowry should be 800000 Crowns six shillings a piece, the
one moitie to be paid the day of the Contract, the other a twelvemonth after.
The Queen shall have a Chapel in all the Kings Royal houses, and any where
else, where she shall recide within the Dominions of his Majesty of great
Britain, with free exercise of the Roman Religion, for her self, her Officers,
and all her Household, for the celebration of the Mass, the Predication of the
Word, Administration if the Sacraments, and power to procure Indulgences from
the Holy Father. That to this end, she shall be allowed 28 Priests or
Ecclesiastics in her House, and a Bishop in quality of Almoner, who shall have
jurisdiction over all the rest, and that none of the Kings Officers shall have
power over them, unless in case of Treason; therefore all her Ecclesiastics
shall take the Oath of fidelity to His Majesty of great Britain; there shall
be a Cymitier or Churchyard closed about, to bury those of her Family. That
in consideration of this marriage, all English Catholics, as well Ecclesiastics
as Lay, which shall be in any prison merely for Religion, since the last Edict,
shall be set at liberty.

This is the eighth Alliance we have had with France, since the Conquest; and
as it is the best that could be made in Christendom, so I hope it will prove
the happiest. So I kiss your hands, being

Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.
Land. Mar. 1* 1625.
XIII. To the Honble Sir Tho. Sa^
SIR,
I Conversed lately with a Gentleman that came from France, who amongst other
things, discoursed much of the Favourit Richelieu, who is like to be an active
man, and has great designs. The two first things he did, was to make sure of
England, and the Hollander; he thinks to have us safe enough by this marriage;
and Holland by a late League, which was bought with a great sum of money; for
he has furnished the States with a Million of Livers, at two shillings a piece
in present, and six hundred thousand Livers every year of these two that are to
com; provided, That the States repay these sums two years after they are in
peace or truce: The King pressed much for Liberty of Conscience to Roman
Catholics amongst them, and the Deputies promised to do all they could with the
States General about it; they Articled likewise for French to be associated
with them in the trade to the Indies.

Monsieur is lately married to Mary of Bourbon, the Duke of Monpensiers
Daughter, he told her, That he would be a better Husband, than he had been a
Suter to her, for he hung off a good while: This marriage was made by the King,
and Monsieur has for his apennage 100000 Livers, annual Rent from Chartres
and Blois, 100000 Livers Pension, and 500000 to be charged yearly upon the
general receipts of Orleans, in all about 70000 pounds. There was much ado
before this match could be brought about, for there were many opposers, and there
be dark whispers, that there was a deep plot to confine the King to a Monastery,
and that Monsieur should govern; and diverse great ones have suffered for it,
and more are like to be discovered. So I take my leave for present, and rest

Land. Mar. 10, 1626. Your very humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XIV. To the Lady Jane Savage, Marchioness of Winchester.
Excellent Lady,
I May say of your Grace, as it was said once of a rare Italian Princess, that
you are the greatest Tyrant in the World, because you make all those that see
you your slaves, much more them that know you, I mean those that are acquainted
with your inward disposition, and with the faculties of your soul, as well as
the Phisnomy of your face; for Virtue took as much pains to adorn the one, as
Nature did to perfect the other; I have had the happiness to know both, when
your Grace took pleasure to learn Spanish, at which time, when my betters far
had offered their service in this kind, I had the honor to be commanded by you
often. He that has as much experience of you, as I have had, will confess,
that the handmaid of God Almighty was never so prodigal of her gifts to any,
or labored more to frame an exact model of Femal perfection; nor was dame
Nature only busied in this Work, but all the Graces did consult and co-operat
with her, and they wasted so much of their Tresure to in rich this one piece,
that it may be a good reason why so many lame and defective fragments of
Women-kind are daily thrust into the world.

I return you here enclosed the Sonnet, your Grace pleased to send me lately,
rendered into Spanish, and fitted for the same Air it had in English, both for
cadence, and number of feet: With it I send my most humble thanks, that your
Grace would descend to command me in any thing that might conduce to your
contentment and service; for there is nothing I desire with a greater Ambition
(and herein I have all the World my Rival) than to be accounted

Madame Your Grace's most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
Land. Mar. 15. 1626.
X. To the Right Honble the Lord Clifford.
My Lord,
I Pray be pleased to dispense with this slownes of mine in answering yours of
the first of this present:

Touching the domestic occurrences, the Gentleman who is Bearer hereof, is more
capable to give you account by discourse, than I can in paper.

For foreign tidings, your Lordship may understand, that the Town of Breda has
bin a good while making her last will and testament, but now there is certain
news com, that she has yielded up the Ghost to Spinalo's hands after a tough
siege of thirteen months, and a circumvallation of nee^r upon twenty miles
compass.

My Lord of Southampton and his eldest son sickned at the siege, and died at
Berghen; the adventrous Earl Henry of Oxford, seeming to tax the Prince of
Orange of slacknes to fight, was set upon a desperate Work, where he melted his
grease, and so being carried to the Hague, he died also: I doubt not but you
have heard of Graye Maurice's death, which happened when the Town was passed
cure, which was his more than the States, for he was Marquis of Breda, and had
near upon thirty thousand dollars annual rent from her: Therefore he seemed in a
kind of sympathy to sicken with his Town, and died before her. He had provided
plentifully for all his Natural children, but could not, though much
importuned by Doctor Roseus, and other Divines upon his death bed, be induced
to make them legitimat by marying the mother of them, for the Law there is,
That if one has got children of any Woman, though unmaried to her, yet if he
mary her never so little before his death, he makes her honest, and them all
legitimat; but it seems, the Prince postpos'd the love he bore to his woman and
children, to that which he bore to his brother Henry; for had he made the
children legitimat, it had prejudiced the brother in point of command and
fortunes; yet he has provided very plentifully for them and the mother.

Grave Henry has succeeded him in all things, and is a gallant Gentleman, of a
French education and temper; he charged him at his death to marry a young Lady,
the Count of Solms Daughter, attending the Queen of Bohemia, whom he had long
courted, which is thought will take speedy effect.

When the siege before Breda had grown hot, Sir Edward Vere being one day
attending Prince Maurice, he pointed at a rising place called Terbay, where the
enemy had built a Fort, (which might have bin prevented) Sir Edward told him,
he feared that Fort would be the cause of the loss of the Town; the Grave
spatter'd and shook his head, saying, 'twas the greatest error he had committed
since he knew what belonged to a Soldier; as also in managing the plot for
surprising of the Cittadell of Antwerp, for he repented that he had not
employed English and French, in lieu of the slow Dutch who aimed to have the
sole honor of it, and were not so fit instruments for such a nimble piece of
service. As soon as Sir Charles Morgan gave up the Town, Spinola caused a new
Gate to be erected with this inscription in great Golden Characters.

Philippo quarto regnante,
Clara Eugenia Isabella Gubernante,
Ambrosio Spinola obsidente,
Quatuor Regibus contra conantibus
Breda capta fuit Idibus, etc.
It Is thought Spinola now, that he has recovered the honor he had lost before
Berghen op Zoon three years since, will not long stay in Flanders, but retire.

No more now but that I am resolved to continue ever,

London, Mar. 19. 1626. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.

XVI. To Mr R. Sc. at York.
SIR,
I Sent you one of the third Current, but it was not answered; I sent another of
the thirteenth like a second Arrow to find out the first, but I know not what is
become of either; I send this to find out the other two, and if this fail, there
shall go no more out of my Quiver: If you forget me, I have cause to complain,
and more* if you remenber me; to forget, may proceed from the frailty of
memory, not to answer me when you mind me, is pure neglect, and no less than a
piacle. So I rest

Yours easily to be recovered, J. H.
Ira furor brevis est, brevis est mea littera, cogor, Ira correptus,
corripuisse stylum. London 19 of July, the first of the Dogdaies, 1626.
XVII. To Dr. Field, Lord Bishop of Landaff.
My Lord,
I Send you my humble thanks for those worthy Hospitable favors you were
pleased to give me at your lodgings in Westminster. I had yours of the fifth of
this present, by the hands of Mr. Jonathan Field. The news which fills every
corner of the Town at this time, is the sorry and unsuccessfull return that
Wimbledons Fleet has made from Spain: It was a Fleet that deserved to have had
a better destiny, considering the strength of it, and the huge charge the Crown
was at; for besides a squadron of sixteen Hollanders, whereof Count William one
of Prince Maurice's natural Sons was Admiral, there were above fourscore of
ours; the greatest joint navall power (of Ships without Galleys) that ever
spread sail upon Salt Water, which makes the World abroad to stand astonished
how so huge a Fleet could be so suddenly made ready. The sinking of the long
Robin with 170 souls in her, in the Bay of Biscay, erc she had gone half the
voyage was no good augury; And the Critics of the time say, there were many
other things that promised no good fortune to this Fleet; besides they would
point at diverse errors committed in the conduct of the main design; first, the
odd choice that was made of the Admiral, who was a mere Land-man, which made
the Sea men much slight him, it belonging properly to Sir Robert Mansell,
Vice Admiral of England, to have gone in case the High-Admirall went not; then
they speak of the incertainty of the enterprise, and that no place was pitched
upon to be invaded, till they came to the height of the South Cape, and to
sight of shore, where the Lord Wimbledon first called a Counsel of War, wherein
some would be for Malaga, others for Saint Mary-Port, others for Gibraltar, but
most for Cales, and while they were thus consulting, the Country had an alarm
given them; Add hereunto the blazing abroad of this expedition ere the Fleet
went out of the Downs, for Mercurius Gallobelgicus had it in print, that it was
for the Streights mouth; Now it is a rule, that great designs of State should be
mysteries till they com to the very act of performance, and then they should
turn to exploits: Moreover, when the local attempt was resolved on, there were
seven ships (by the advice of one Captain Love) suffered to go up the River,
which might have bin easily taken, and being rich, it is thought they would have
defrayed well near the charge of our Fleet, which ships did much infest us
afterward with their Ordnance, when we had taken the Forr of Puntall:
Moreover, the disorderly carriage and excess of our Land-men (whereof there were
10000) when they were put a shore, who broke into the Friars Caves, and other
Cellers of Sweet-Wines, where many hundreds of them being surprizd, and found
dead-drunk, the Spaniards came and toar off their Ears, and Noses, and plucked
out their Eyes: And I was told of one merry fellow escaping, that killed an
Ass for a Buck: Lastly, it is laid to the Admiralls charge, that my Lord de la
Wares Ship being infected, he should give order, that the sick men should be
scattered in o diverse ships, which dispersed the contagion exceedingly, so that
some thousands died before the Fleet returned, which was don in a confused
manner without any observance of Sea Orders: Yet I do not hear of any that will
be punished for these miscarriages, which will make the dishonor fall more
foully upon the State: but the most unfortunate passage of all was, that though
we did nothing by Land that was considerable, yet if we had stayed but a day or
two longer, and spent time at sea, the whole Fleet of Galeons, and Nova
Hispania, had fallen into our mouths, which came presently in, close along the
Coasts of Barbary, and in all likelihood, we might have had the opportunity to
have taken the richest prize that ever was taken on salt water. Add hereunto,
that while we were thus Masters of those Seas, a Fleet of fifty sail of Brasil
men got safe into Lisbon, with four of the richest Cara^ks that ever came from
the East Indies.

I hear my Lord of Saint David's is to be removed to Bath and Wells, and it were
worth your Lordships coming up, to endeavor the succeeding of him. So, I
humbly rest

Land. 20 Novem. 1626. Your Lordships most ready Servitor, J. H.

XVIII. To my Lord Duke of Buckinghams Grace at New Market.
MAy it please your Grace to peruse and pardon these few Advertisements, which
I would not dare to present, had I not hopes that the goodness which is
concomitant with your greatness, would make them venial.

My Lord, a Parliament is at hand, the last was boisterous, God grant that this
may prove more calm: A rumor runs that there are Clouds already engendered, which
will break out into a storm in the lower Region^, and most of the drops are
like to fall upon your Grace: This, though it be but vulgar Astrology, is not
altogether to be contemned, though I believe that His Majesty's countenance
reflecting so strongly upon your Grace, with the brightness of your own
innocence, may be able to dispell and scatter them to nothing.

My Lord, you are a great Prince, and all eyes are upon your actions, this
makes you more subject to envy, which like the Sun beams, beats always upon
rising grounds. I know your Grace has many sage and solid heads about you; yet
I trust it ^ will prove no offense, if out of the late relation I have to your
Grace, by the recommendation of such Noble personages, I put in also my Mite.

My Lord, under favor, it were not amiss if your Grace would be pleased to part
with some of those places you hold, which have least relation to the Court, and
it would take away the mutterings that run of multiplicity of Offices, and in
my shallow apprehension, your Grace might stand more firm without an Anchor:
The Office of High Admiral in these times of action requires one whole man to
execute it, your Grace has another Sea of businesses to wade through, and the
voluntary resigning of this Office would fill all men, yea even your enemies,
with admiration and affection, and make you more a Prince, than detract from
your greatness: If any ill successes happen at Sea (as that of the Lord
Wimbledons lately) or if there be any murmur for pay, your Grace will be free
from all imputations, besides it will afford your Grace more leisure to look
into your own affairs, which lie confused, and unsettled: Lastly, (which is not
the least thing) this act will be so plausible, that it may much advantage His
Majesty in point of Subsidy.

Secondly, it were expedient (under correction) that your Grace would be
pleased to allot some set hours for audience and access of Suitors, and it would
be less cumber to your Self, and your Servants, and give more content to the
World, which often mutters for difficulty of access.

Lastly, it were not amiss, that your Grace would settle a standing
Mansion House and Family, that Suitors may know whither to repair constantly,
and that your Servants evry one in his place, might know what belongs to his
place, and attend accordingly; for though confusion in a great Family carry a
kind of state with it, yet order and regularity gains a greater opinion of
virtue and wisdom. I know your Grace does not (nor needs not) affect
popularity: It is true, that the peoples love is the strongest Cittadell of a
Sovereign Prince, but to a great subject, it has often proved fatal; for he
who pulls off his Hat to the People, gives his Head to the Prince; and it is
remarkable what was said of a late infortunat Earl, who a little before Queen
Elizabeth's death, had drawn the Ax upon his own Neck, That he was grown so
popular, that he was too dangerous for the times, and the times for him.

My Lord, now that your Grace is threatened to be heaved at, it should behove
evry one that owes you duty and good will, to reach out his hand some way or
other to serve you; Amonst these, I am one that presumes to do it, in this
poor impertinent Paper; for which I implore pardon, because I am

Land. 13 Febr. 1626. My Lord, Your Grace's most humble and faithful Servant,
J. H.

XIX. To Sir J. S. Knight.
SIR,
There is a saying which carries no little weight with it, that Parvus amor
loquitur, ingens stapet; Small love speaks, while great love stands astonished
with silence: The one keeps a tatling, while the other is struck dumb with
amazement, like deep Rivers, which to the eye of the beholder seem to stand
still, while small shallow Rivulets keep a noise; or like empty Casks that make
an obstreperous hollow sound, which they would not do were they replenished,
and full of Substance: It Is the condition of my love to you, which is so great,
and of that profoundnes, that it has been silent all this while, being
stupefied with the contemplation of those high Favors, and sundry sorts of
Civilities, wherewith I may say, you have overwhelmed me. This deep Foard of my
affection and gratitude to you, I intend to cut out hereafter into small
currents (I mean into Letters) that the course of it may be heard, though it
make but a small bubling noise, as also, that the clearnes of it may appear
more visible.

I desire my Service be presented to my noble Lady, whose fair hands, I humbly
kiss; and if she want any thing that London can afford, she need but command
her and

Land. 11. of Febr* 1626. Your most faithful and ready Servitor, J. H.

XX. To the Right Honble the Earl R.
My Lord,
ACcording to promise, and that portion of obedience I ow to your commands, I
send your Lordship these few Avisos, some whereof I doubt not but you have
received before, and that by ^bler pens than mine, yet your Lordship may
happily find herein, something which was omitted by others, or the former news
made clearer by circumstance.

I hear Count Mansfelt is in Paris, having now received three routings in
Germany; it is thought the French King will piece him up again with new
recruits. I was told that as he was seeing the two Queens one day at Dinner,
the Queen Mother said, they say, Count Mansfelt is here amongst this Crowd, I
do not believe it quoth the young Queen; For whenever he sees a Spaniard he
runs away.

Matters go untowardly on our side in Germany, but the King of Denmark will be
shortly in the field in person; and Bethlem Gabor has been long expected to do
something, but some think he will prove but a Bugbear. Sir Charles Morgan is to go
to Germany with 6^00 Anxiliaries to join with the Danish Army.

The Parliament is adjourned to Oxford, by reason of the sickness which
increases exceedingly; and before the King went out of Town there dyed 1500
that very week, and two out of White Hall it self.

There is high clashing again 'twixt my Lord Duke, and the Earl of Bristoll,
they recriminat one another of diverse things; the Earl accuses him amongst
other matters, of certain Letters from Rome; of putting His Majesty upon that
hazardous jorney of Spain, and of some miscarriages at his being in that Court:
There be Articles also against the Lord Conway, which I send your Lordship here
enclosed.

I am for Oxford the next week, and thence for Wales, to fetch my good old
Fathers blessing, at my return, if it shall please God to reprieve me in these
dangerous times of Contagion, I shall continue my wonted service to your
Lordship, if it may be done with safety. So I rest

Land. 15 of Mar. 1626. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.

XXI. To the Honble the Lord Viscount C.
My Lord,
SIr John North delivered me one lately from your Lordship, and I send my
humble thanks for the Venison you intend me.

I acquainted your Lordship as opportunity served with the nimble pace the
French Match went on by the successful negotiation of the Earls of Carlisle and
Holland (who outwent the Monsieurs themselves in Courtship) and how in less
than nine Moons this great business was proposed, pursued, and perfected, whereas
the Sun had leisure enough to finish his annual progres, from one end of the
Zodiac to the other so many years, before that of Spain could com to any shape
of perfection: This may serve to show the difference 'twixt the two Nations,
the Leaden-heeld pace of the one, and the Quick-silver'd motions of the other;
It shows also how the French is more generous in his proceedings, and not so
full of scruples, reservations, and jealousies, as the Spaniard, but deals
more frankly, and with a greater confidence and gallantry,

The Lord Duke of Buckingham is now in Paris accompanied with the Earl of
Montgomerie, and he went in a very splendid equipage. The Venetian and
Hollander with other States that are no friends to Spain, did some good offices
to advance this Alliance; and the new Pope propounded much toward it; But
Richelieu the new Favorit of France was the Cardinal instrument in it.

This Pope Urban grows very active, not only in things present, but ripping up
of old matters, for which there is a select Committee appointed to examine
accounts and errors passed, not only in the time of his immediate Predecessor,
but others. And one told me of a merry Pasquill lately in Rome; that whereas
there are two great Statues, one of Peter, the other of Paul, opposite one to the
other upon a Bridge, one had clapped a pair of Spurs upon Saint Peter's Heels, and
Saint Paul asking him whither he was bound, he answered, I apprehend some
danger to stay now in Rome, because of this new Commission, for I fear they
will question me for denying my Master. Truly brother Peter, I shall not stay
long after you* for I have as much cause to doubt, that they will question me
for persecuting the Christians, before I was converted. So I take my leave and
rest

London, 3 May. 1626. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.

XXII. To my Brother, Master Hugh Penry.
SIR,
I Thank you for your late Letter, and the several good tidings you sent me
from Wales; In requital I can send you gallant news, for we have now a most
Noble new Queen of England, who in true beuty is beyond the Long-Woo'd Infanta;
for she was of a fading Flaxen-Hair, Big Lipp'd, and somewhat heavy Eyed; but
this Daughter of France, this youngest Branch of Bourbon (being but in her
cradle when the great Henry her Father was put out of the World) is of a more
lovely and lasting complexion, a dark brown, she has eyes that sparkle like
Stars; and for her Physiognomy she may be said to be a mirror of perfection:
She had a rough passage in her transfretation to Dover Castle, and in
Canterbury the King Bedded first with her; there were a goodly train of choice
Ladies attended her coming, upon the Bowling-green on Barram-Down upon the way,
who divided themselves into two rows, and they appeared like so many
Constellations; but me thought that the Country Ladies out-shin'd the
Courtiers: She brought over with her, two hundred thousand Crowns in Gold and
Silver, as halt her portion, and the other Moitie is to be paid at the years
end. Her first suit of servants (by Article) are to be French, and as they die
English are to succeed; she is also allowed twenty eight Ecclesiastics of any
Order, except Jesuits; a Bishop for her Almoner, and to have private exercise of
her Religion, for her and her servants.

I pray convey the enclosed to my Father by the next convenience, and present
my dear love to my Sister; I hope to see you at Dyvinnock about Micha^mas, for
I intend to wait upon my Father, and will take my Mother in the way, I mean
Oxford, in the interim, I rest

London, 16 May, 1626. Your most affectionat Brother, J H.

XXIII. To my Uncle Sir Sackvill Trever, from Oxford.
SIR,
^ Am sorry I must write unto you the sad tidings of the dissolution of the
Parliament here, which was don suddenly: Sir John E^liot was in the heat of a
high speech against the Duke of Buching^m, when the Usher of the Black-Rod,
knocked at the door, and signified the Kings pleasure, which struck a kind of
consternation in all the House: My Lord Keeper Williams has parted with the
Broad-Seal, because as some say, he went about to cut down the Scale, by which
he rose; for some it seems did ill offices 'twixt the Duke and him: Sir Thomas
Coventry has it now, I pray God he be tender of the Kings conscience, whereof
he is Keeper, rather than of the Seal.

I am bound to morrow upon a journey toward the Mountains to see some Friends
in Wales, and to bring back my Fathers blessing; for better assurance of
Lodging where I pass, in regard of the Plague, I have a Post Warrant as far as
Saint David's, which is far enough you will say, for the King has no ground
further on this Island. If the sickness rage in such extremity at London, the
Term will be held at Reding.

All your friends here are well, but many look blank because of this sudden
rupture of the Parliament; God Almighty turn all to the best, and stay the fury
of this contagion, and preserve us from ^urther judgments, so I rest

Oxford, 6 Aug. 1626. Your most affectionate Nephew, J. H.

XXIV. To my Father, from London.
SIR,
I Was now the fourth time at a dead stand in the course of my fortunes, for
though I was recommended to the Duke, and received many Noble respects from
him, yet I was told by some who are nearest him, that some body has don me ill
offices, by whispering in his ear, that I was two much Digbified, and so they
told me positively, that I must never expect any employment about him of any
trust: while I was in this suspense, Mr. Secretary C^way sent for me, and
proposed unto me, that the King had occasion to send a Gentleman to Italy, in
nature of a moving Agent, and though he might have choice of persons of good
quality that would willingly undertake this employment, yet understanding of my
breeding, he made the first proffer to me, and that I should go as the Kings
Servant, and have allowance accordingly; I humbly thanked him for the good
opinion he pleased to conceive of me, being a stranger to him, and desired some
time to consider of the proposition, and of the nature of the employment; so he
granted me four days to think upon it, and two of them are passed already. If I
may have a support accordingly, I intend by Gods grace (desiring your consent
and blessing to go along) to apply my self to this course; but before I part
with England, I intend to send you further notice.

The sickness is miraculously decreased in this City and Suburbs; for from two
and fifty hundred which was the greatest number that died in one week, and
that was some forty days since, they are now fallen to three hundred. It was
the violent'st ^t of contagion that ever was for the time in this Island, and
such as no story can parallel, but the Ebb of it was more swift than the Tide.
My brother is well, and so are all your friends here, for I do not know any of
your acquaintance that is dead of this furious infection: Sir John Walter asked
me lately how you did, and wished me to remember him to you. So with my love to
all my Brothers and Sisters, and the rest of my friends which made so much of
me lately in the Country, I rest

London, 7 Aug. 1626. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

XXV. To the right Honble the Lord Conway, Principal Secretary of State to his
Majesty, at Hampton Court.
Right Honble,
SInce I last attended your Lopp. here, I summond my thoughts to Counsel, and
canvas'd to and fro within my self, the business you pleased to impart unto me,
for going upon the Kings Service to Italy; I considered therein many
particulars, First the weight of the employment, and what maturity of
judgment, discretion, and parts are required in him that will personat such a
man; next, the difficulties of it, for one must send sometimes light out of
darkness, and like the Be suck Honey out of bad, as out of good Flowers;
thirdly, the danger which the undertaker must convers withal, and which may
fall upon him by interception of Letters or other cross casualties; lastly, the
great expense it will require, being not to remain Sedentary in one place, as
other Agents, but to be often in itinerary motion.

Touching the first, I refer my self to your Honors favorable opinion, and
the Character which my Lord S. and others shall give of me* for the second, I
hope to overcom it; for the third, I weigh it not, so that I may merit of my
King and Country; for the last, I crave leave to deal plainly with your Lopp.
that I am a Cadet, and have no other patrimony or support, but my breeding,
therefore I must breath by the employment; And my Lord, I shall not be able to
perform what shall be expected at my hands, under one hundred pounds a quarter,
and to have bills of credit accordingly. Upon these terms, my Lord, I shall
apply my self to this Service, and by Gods blessing hope to answer all
expectations. So referring the premises to your Noble consideration, I rest

London, Sept. 8. 1626. My Lord, Your very humble and ready Servitor, J. H*

XXVI. To my Brother (after) Dr. Howell, now Bishop of Bristoll.
My brother,
NExt to my Father, it is fitting you should have cognizance of my affairs and
fortunes. You heard how I was in agitation for an employment in Italy, but my
Lord Conway demurred upon the salary I propounded; I have now waved this course,
yet I came off fairly with my Lord; for I have a stable home emploiment
proffered me by my Lord Scroop, Lord President of the North, who sent for me
lately to Worcester House, though I never saw him before, and there the bargain
was quickly made, that I should go down* with him to York for Secretary, and
his Lordship has promised me fairly; I will see you at your House in Horsley
before I go, and leave the particular circumstances of this business till then.

The French that came over with Her Majesty, for their petulancy, and some
misdemeanors, and imposing some odd penancy's upon the Queen, are all casheer'd
this week, about a matter of sixscore, whereof the Bishop of Mende was one, who
had stood to be Steward of Her Majesty's Courts, which Office my Lord of
Holland has; It was a thing suddenly don, for about one of the clock as they
were at dinner, my Lord Conway, and Sir Thomas Edmonds, came with an Order from
the King, that they must instantly away to Somerset House, for there were
Barges, and Coaches staying for them; and there they should have all their
Wages paid them to a penny, and so they must be content to quit the Kingdom:
This sudden, undream'd of Order, struck an astonishment into them all, both men
and women; and running to complain to the Queen, His Majesty had taken her
before into his Bedchamber, and locked the doors upon them, until he had told
her how matters stood; the Queen fell into a violent passion, broke the
Glass-Windows, and tore her Hair, but she was calmed afterward: Just such a
destiny happened in France some years since to the Queens Spanish Servants
there, who were all dismissed in like manner for some miscarriages; the like was
don in Spain to the French, therefore it is no new thing.

They are all now on their way to Dover, but I fear this will breed ill blood
'twixt us and France, and may break out into an ill-favored quarrel.

Master Mountague is preparing to go to Paris as a Messenger of Honor, to
prepossess the King and Counsel there, with the truth of things.

So with my very kind respects to my Sister, I rest

Land. 15 Mar. 1626. Your loving brother, J. H.

XXVII. To the Right Honble the Lord S.
My Lord,
I Am bound shortly for York, where I am hopeful of a profitable employment.
There is fearful news com from Germany, that since Sir Charles Morgan went
thither with 6^00 men for the assistance of the King of Denmark, the King has
received an utter overthrow by Tilly, he had received a fall off a Horse from a
Wall five yards high, a little before, yet it did him little hurt.

Tilly pursues his Victory strongly, and is got ore the Elve to Holsteinland,
insomuch that they write from Hamburgh, that Denmark is in danger to be utterly
lost: The Danes and Germans seem to lay some fault upon our King, the King upon
the Parliament, that would not supply him with Subsidies to assist his Uncle,
and the Prince Palsgrave, both which was promised upon the rupture of the
Treaties with Spain, which was done by the advice of both Houses*

This is the ground that His Majesty has lately sent out privy Seals for Loan
Moneys, until a Parliament may be called, in regard that the King of Denmark is
distressed, the Sound like to be lost, the Eastland Trade, and the Staple at
Hamborough in danger to be destroyed, and the English Garrison under Sir Charles
Morgan at Sto^d ready to be starved.

These Loan moneys keep a great noise, and they are imprisoned that deny to
conform themselves.

I fear I shall have no more opportunity to send to your Lordship, till I go to
York, therefore I humbly take my leave, and kiss your hands, being ever,

My Lord, Your obedient and ready Servitor, J. H*

XXVIII. To Mr. R. L. Merchant.
I Met lately with I. Harris in London, and I had not seen him two years
before, and then I took him, and knew him to be a man of thirty, but now one
would take him by his Hair to be near threescore, for he is all turned gray. I
wonderd at such a Metamorphosis in so short a time, he told me 'twas for the
death of his Wife, that nature had thus antidated his years, it is true that a
weighty settled sorrow is of that force, that besides the contraction of the
Spirits, it will work upon the radical moisture, and dry it up, so that the
Hair can have no moisture at the Root. This made me remember a Story that a
Spanish Advocat told me, which is a thing very remarkable. When the Duke of
Alva was in Brussels, about the beginning of the tumults in the Netherlands, he
had sat down before Hulst in Flanders, and there was a Provost Marshall in his
Army, who was a Favorit of his; and this Provost had put some to death by secret
Commission from the Duke: There was one Captain Bolea in the Army, who was an
intimat friend of the Provosts, and one evening late, he went to the said
Captains Tent, and brought with him a Confessor, and an Executioner, as it was
his custom; He told the Captain, that he was com to execut his Excellencies
Commission, and Marshall Law upon him; the Captain started up suddenly, his
hair standing at an end, and being struck with amazement, asked him wherein he
had offended the Duke; the Provest answered, Sir I com not to expostulat the
business with you, but to execut my Commission, therefore I pray prepare your
self, for there is your Ghostly Father and Executioner: so he fell on his knees
before the Priest, and having don, the Hangman going to put the Halter about
his neck, the Provost threw it away, and breaking into a laughter, told him,
there was no such thing, and that he had don this to try his courage, how be
could bear the terror of death, the Captain look^ ghastly up^ him, and said,
then Sir get you out of my Tent, for you have don me ^ very ill office: The
next morning the said Captain Bolea, though ^ young man of about thirty, had
his hair all turned grav, to the admiration of all the world, and of the Duke of
Alva himself, who question him about it, but he would confess nothing. The next
year the Du^ was revoked, and in his journey to the Court of Spain, he was to
pas^ by Saragossa, and this Captain Bolea, and the Provost went alon^ with him
as his Domestics: The Duke being to repose some days in S.. ragossa, the young*
old Captain Bolea told him, that there was a thing in that Town worthy to be
seen by His Excellency, which was a Casa de Locos, a Bedlam-house, for there was
not the like in Christendom: Well said the Duke, go and tell the Warden I will
be there to morrow in the afternoon, and wish him to be in the way. The Captain
having obtaind this, went to the Warden and told him, that the Duke would com
to visit the House the next day, and the chiefest occasion that moved him to
it, was, that he had an unruly Provost about him, who was subject oftentimes to
fits of frenzy, and because he wishes him well, he had tried diverse means to
cure him, but all would not do, therefore he would try whether keeping him
close in Bedlam for some days, would do him any good: The next day the Duke came
with ar^ffling train of Captains after him, amongst whom was the said Provost,
very shining brave; being entered into the house, about the Dukes person,
Captain Bolea told the Warden, pointing at the Provost, that is the man; so he
took him aside into a dark Lobby, where he had placed some of his men, who
muffled him in his Cloak, seized upon his gilt Sword, with his Hat and Feather,
and so hurried him down into a Dungeon: My Provost had lain there two nights
and a day, and afterward it happened that a Gentleman coming out of curiosity
to see the house, peeped in at a small grate where the Provost was; The Provost
conjured him as he was a Christian, to go and tell the Duke of Alva, his
Provost was there clapped up, nor could be imagine why. The Gentleman did the
Arrand, whereat the Duke being astonished, sent for the Warden with his
prisoner; so he brought my Provost en cuerpo Madman like, full of straws and
Feathers before the Duke, who at the sight of him, breaking out into a
laughter, asked the Warden, why he had made him his Prisener; Sir, said the
Warden, 'twas by virtue of your Excellenci^s Commission brought me by Captain
Bolea: Bolea stepped forth and told the Duke; Sir, you have asked me often, how
these hairs of mine grew so suddenly gray, I have not revealed it yet to any
soul breathing, but now I Will tell your Excellency, and so sell a relating the
passage in Flanders. And Sir I have been ever since beating my Brains how to
get an equal revenge of him, and I thought no revenge to be more equal or
corresponding, now that you see he has made me old before my time, than to
make him mad if I could, and had he stayed some days longer close Prisoner in
the Bedlam House, it might happily have wrought some impressions upon his
pericranium: The Duke was so well pleased with the Story, and the wittines of
the revenge, that he made them both friends; and the Gentleman who told me this
passage, said, that the said Captain Bolea was yet living, so that he could not
be less than ninety years of age.

I thank you a thousand times for the C^phalonia Muscadell, and Botargo you
sent me; I hope to be shortly quit with you for all courtesies, in the interim,
I am

York this 1 of May. 1626. Your obliged friend to serve you, J H.
Postscript.
I Am sorry to hear of the trick that Sir John Aires put upon the Company by
the Box of Hailshot, signed with the Ambassadors Seal, that he had sent so
solemnly from Constantinople, which he made the world believe to be full of
Chequins and Turkey gold.



Familiar Letters.
SECTION V.
I. To Dan. Caldwall Esqr, from York.
My dear D.
THough I may be termed a right Northern man, being a good way this side
Trent, yet my love to you is as Southern as ever it was, I mean it continues
still in the same degree of heat, not can this bleaker air, or Boreas chilling
blasts cool it a whit; I am the same to you this side Trent, as I was the last
time we crossed the Thames together to see Smugg the Smith, and so back to the
Still-yard: But I fear that your love to me does not continue in so constant
and intense a degree, and I have good grounds for this fear, because I never
received one syllable from you, since I left London; if you ridd me not of this
scruple, and send to me speedily, I shall think, though you live under a hotter
clyme in the South, that your former love is not only coold but frozen.

For this present condition of life, I thank God, I live well contended, I have
a fee from the King, diet for my self and two servants, livry for a horse, and
a part of the Kings house for my lodging, and other privileges which I am told
no Secretary before me had* but I must tell you the perquisits are nothing
answerable to my expectation yet. I have built me a new study since I came,
wherein I shall amongst others meditat sometimes on you, and whence this present
Letter coms. So with a thousand thanks for the plentiful Hospitality and
Joviall farewell you gave me at your House in Essex, I rest

York 30 Iulii. 1627. Yors, yors, yors, J. H.

II. To Mr. Richard Leat.
SIgnor io, it is now a great while me thinks since any act of friendship, or
other interchangeable offices of love has passed between us, either by
Letters, or other accustomed ways of correspondence; And as I will not accuse,
so I go not about to clear my self in this point, let this long silence be
termed therefore a cessation rather than neglect on both sides: A bow that lies
awhile unbent, and a field that remains fallow for a time, grow never the
worse, but afterward the one sends forth and arrow more strongly, the other
yields a better crop being recultivated: Let this be also verified in us, let
our friendship grow more fruitful after this pawse, let it be more active for
the future: you see I begin and shoot the first shaft. I send you herewith a
couple of red Dear pies, the one Sir Arthur Ingram gave me, the other my Lord
Presidents Cook, I could not tell where to bestow them better; In your next let
me know which is the best seasoned; I pray let the Sydonian Merchant Io.
Bruckburst be at the eating of them, and then I know they will be well soaked.
If you please to send me a barrel or two of Oysters which we want here, I
promise you they shall be well eaten, with a cup of the best Clarret, and the
best Sherry, to which Wine this Town is altogether adicted, shall not be
wanting.

I understand the Lord Weston is Lo. Treasurer, we may say now, that we have
Treasurers of all tences, for there are four living, to wit, the Lord
Manchester, Middlesex, Malborough, and the newly chosen; I hear also that the
good old man (the last) has retired to his lodgings in Lincolns Inn, and so
reduced himself to his first principles, which makes me think that he cannot
bear up long, now that the staff is taken from him. I pray in your next send me
the Venetian Gazetta. So with my kind respects to your Father, I rest

York, 9. July. 1627. Yours, J. H.

III. To Sir Ed. Sa. Knight.
SIR, 'Twas no great matter to be a Prophet, and to have foretold his rupture
'twixt us and France upon the sudden renvoy of her Majesty's servants, for many
of them had sold their estates in France, given money for their places, and so
thought to live and die in England in the Queens service, and so have
pitifully complained to that King, thereupon he has arrested above 100 of our
Merchant men that went to this Vintage at Bourdeaux. We also take some straglers
of theirs, for there are Letters of Mart given on both sides.

There are Writs issued out for a Parliament, and the Town of Richmond in
Richmond shire has made choice of me for their Burgess, though Master
Christopher Wansford and other powerful men, and more deserving than I, stood
for it. I pray God send fair weather in the House of Commons, for there is much
murmuring about the restraint of those that would not conform to loan-moneys.
There is a great Fleet a preparing, and an Army of Land-men, but the design is
uncertain whether it be against Spain or France, for we are now in enmity with
both those Crowns. The French Cardinal has been lately the other side the Alps,
and settled the Duke of Nevers in the Duchy of Mantoua, notwithstanding the
opposition of the King of Spain and the Emperor, who alleged that he was to
receive his investiture from him, and tha^ was the chief ground of the War; but
the French Arms have d^ the work, and com triumphantly back over the Hills
again. No more now, but that I am as always

Your true friend, J. H.
March 2. 1627.
IV. To the Worpll Mr Alderman of the Town of Richmond, and the rest of the
worthy Members of that ancient Corporation.
SIR,
I Received a public Instrument from you lately, subscribed by your self, and
diverse others, wherein I find that you have made choice of me to be one of your
Burgesses for this now neer-approaching Parliament; I could have wished that
you had not put by Master Wandesford, and other worthy Gentlemen that stood so
earnestly for it, who being your neighbors, had better means, and more
abilities to serve you. Yet since you have cast these high respects upon me, I
will endeavor to acquit my self of the trust, and to answer your expectation
accordingly: And as I account this Election an honor unto me, so I esteem it a
great advantage, that so worthy, and well experienced a Knight as Sir Talbot
Bows is to be my Colleague and fellow Burgess; I shall steer by his compass, and
follow his directions in any thing that may concern the welfare of your Town,
and of the Precincts thereof, either for redress of any grievance, or by
proposing some new thing that may conduce to the further benefit and advantage
thereof, and this I take to be the true duty of a Parliamentary Burgess, without
roving at randum to generals. I hope to learn of Sir Talbot what is fitting to
be don, and I shall apply my self accordingly to join with him to serve you
with my best abilities: So I rest

Your most assured and ready friend to do you service, J. H.
Land. March 24: 1627.
V. To the Right Honble the Lo: Clifford at Knasbrugh.
My Lord,
THe news that fill all mouths at present, is the return of the Duke of
Buckingham from the Isle of Ree, or as so^ call it the I Will of Rue, for the
bitter success we had there; for we had but a ^t entertainment in that sal^
Island. Our first invasion was magnanimous and brave, whereat near upon 200
French Gentlemen perished, and diverse Barons of quality. My Lord Newport had
ill luck to disorder our Cavalry with an unruly Horse he had: His brother Sir
Charles Rich was slain, and diverse more upon the retreat, amongst others, great
Golonell Gray fell into Salt-pit, and being ready to be drowned he cried out
Cens mill escus pour ma rancon, a hundred thousand Crowns for my ransom, the
Frenchmen hearing that, preserved him, though he was not worth a hundred
thousand pence. Another merry passage a Captain told me, that when they were
rifling the dead bodies of the French Gentlemen after the first invasion, they
found that many of them had their Mistresses favors tied about their
genitories. The French do much glory to have repelled us thus, and they have
reason, for the truth is, they comported themselves gallantly; yet they confess
our landing was a notable piece of courage, and if our Retreat had been
answerable to the Invasion, we had lost no honor at all. A great number of
gallant Gentlemen fell on our side, as Sir John Heyden, Sir Io. Burrowes, Sir
George Blundell, Sir Alex. Brett, with diverse Veteran Commanders, who came from
the Netherlands to this service.

God send us better success the next time, for there is another Fleet preparing
to be sent under the Command of the Lord Denbigh; so I kiss your hands, and am

Land. 24 of Sept, 1627. Your humble Servitor, J. H.

VI. To the Right Honble the Lord Scroop, Earl of Sunderland, Lord President of
the North.
My Lord,
MY Lord D^nbigh is returned from attempting to relieve Rochell, which is
reduced to extreme exigent; And now the Duke is preparing to go again, with as
great power as was yet raised: notwithstanding that the Parliament has flown
higher at him than ever; which makes the people here hardly wish any good
success to the Expedition, because he is General. The Spaniard stands at a
gaze all this while, hoping that we may do the work, otherwise I think he would
find some way to relieve that Town, for there is nothing conduces more to the
uniting and strengthening of the French Monarchy than the reduction of Rochell.
The King has been there long in person with his Cardinal, and the stupendous
works they have raised by Sea and Land, are beyond belief, as they say. The
Sea-works and booms were traced out by Marquis Spinola, as he was passing that
way for Spain from Flanders.

The Parliament is prorogued till Michaelmas term; there we^ five Subsidies
granted, the greatest gift that ever Subjects gave their King at once; and it
was in requital that his Majesty passed the Petition of Right, whereby the
liberty of the freeborn subject is so strongly and clearly vindicated. So that
there is a fair correspondence like to be 'twixt his Majesty and the two Houses.
The Duke made a notable Speech at the Counsel Table in joy hereof, amongst
other passages, one was, that hereafter his Majesty would please to make the
Parliament his Favorit, and he to have the honor to remain still his servant.
No more now but that I continue

Land. 25. Sept. 1628. Your Lordships most dutiful Servant, J. H.

VII. To the Right Honble the La: Scroope Countess of Sunderland, from Stamford.
Madam,
I Lay yesternight at the Post House at Stilton, and this morning betimes the
Postmaster came to my beds head and told me the Duke of Buckingham was slain;
my faith was not then strong enough to believe it, till an hour ago I met in
the way with my Lord of Rutland (your Brother) riding Post toward London, it
pleased him to alight, and show me a Letter, wherein there was an exact relation
of all the circumstances of this sad Tragaedy.

Upon Saturday last, which was but next before yesterday being Bartholmew
yeeve, the Duke did rise up in a well disposed humor out of his bed, and cut a
Caper or two, and being ready, and having been under the Barbers hands (where
the Murderer had thought to have don the deed, for he was leaning upon the
Window all the while) he went to breakfast attended by a great Company of
Commanders, where Monsieur Soubize came unto him, and whispered him in the ear
that Rochell was relieved, the Duke seemed to slight the news, which made some
think that Soubize went away discontented; After Breakfast the Duke going out,
Colonel Friar stepped before him, and stopping him upon some business, one
Lieutenant Felton being behind, made a thrust with a common tenpeny knife over
Friars arm at the Duke, which lighted so fatally, that he slit his heart in
two, leaving the knife sticking in the body; The Duke took out the knife, and
threw it away, and laying his hand on his Sword, and drawn it half out said,
the Villain has killd me (meaning as some think Colonel Friar) for there had
been some difference 'twixt them, so reeling against a Chimney he fell down
dead; The Duchess being with child hearing the noise below, came in her night
geers from her Bed Chamber, which was in an upper room, to a kind of Rayl, and
thence beheld him weltering in his own blood. Felton had lost his Hat in the
crowd, wherein there was a Paper sowed, wherein he declared that the reason which
moved him to this act was no grudg of his own, though he had been far behind
for his pay, and had bin put by his Captains place twice, but in regard he
thought the Duke an enemy to the State, because he was branded in Parliament,
therefore what he did was for the public good of his Country. Yet he got
clearly down, and so might have gone to his horse which was tied to a hedge hard
by, but he was so amazed that he missd his way, and so struck into the pastry,
where though the cry went that some Frenchman had don't, he thinking the word
was Felton, he boldly confessed it was he that had don the deed, and so he was in
their hands, Jack Stamford would have run at him, but he was kept off by Mr.
Nicholas, so being carried up to a Tower Captain Min^e toare off his spurrs,
and asking how he durst attempt such an act, making him believe the Duke was
not dead, he answered boldly that he knew he was dispatchd, for ^was not he, but
the hand of heaven that gave the stroke, and though his whole body had bin
coverd over with armor of proof he could not have avoided it. Captain Charles
Price went Post presently to the King four miles off, who being at prayers on
his knees when it was told him, yet he never stirrd, nor was he disturbd a whit
till all divine service was don. This was the relation as far as my memory
could bear, in my Lord of Rutlands Letter, who willd me to remember him unto
your Ladyship, and tell you that he was going to comfort your niece (the
Duchess) as fast as he could: and so I have sent the truth of this sad story to
your Ladyship, as fast as I could by this post, because I cannot make that
speed myself, in regard of some business I have to dispatch for my Lord in the
way; So I humbly take my leave, and rest

Stamford, Aug. 5. 1628. Your Lapps most dutiful Servant, J. H.

IX. To the right Honble Sir Peter Wichts his Majesty's Ambassador at
Constantinople.
My Lord,
YOurs of the 2. of July came to safe hand, and I did all those particular
recaudos, you enjoined me to do to some of your ^ends here.

The Town of Rochell has bin fatal and infortunat to England, for this is the
third time that we have attempted to releeve her, but our fleets and forces
returned without doing any thing. My Lord of Linsey went thither with the same
Fleet the Duke intended to go on, but he is returned without doing any good, he
made some shots at the great Boom and other baricadoes at sea, but at such a
distance, that they conld do no hurt. Insomuch that the Town is now given for
lost, and to be passd cure, and they cry out, we have betrayed them: At the
return of this Fleet two of the Whelps were cast away, and three ships more,
and some five ships who had some of those great stones, that were brought to
build Paul's, for ballast and for other uses within them, which could promise no
good success, for I never heard of any thing that prospered which being once
designed for the honor of God was alienated from that use. The Queen
interposeth for the releasement of my Lord of Newport and others who are
prisoners of War, I hear that all the colors they took from us are hung up in
the great Church Nostredame as tropkeys in Paris. Since I began this letter
there is news brought that Rochell has yielded, and that the King has
dismantled the Town, and razd all the fortifications landward, but leaves those
standing which are toward the Sea. It is a mighty exploit the French King has
don, for Rochell was the chiefest propugnacle of the Protestants there, and now
questionles all the rest of their cautionary Towns which they kept for their
own defense will yield, so that they must depend hereafter upon the Kings mere
mercy. I hear of an overture of Peace twixt us and Spain, and that my Lord
Cottington is to go thither, and Don Carlos Coloma to com to us. God grant it,
for you know the saying in Spanish Nunca vi tan mala paz, que no fuera mejor,
que la mejor guerra. It was a bold thing in England, to fall out with the two
greatest Monarchs of Christendom, and to have them both her enemies at one
time, and as glorious a thing it was to bear up against them. God turn all to
the best, and dispose of things to his glory; So I rest

London, 1 Sept. 1628. Your Lordships ready Servitor, J. H.

X. To my Cosen Mr. Stgeon, at Christ-Church College in Oxford.
COsen, though you want no incitements to go on in that fair road of virtue*
where you are now running your course, yet being lately in your noble Fathers
company, he did intimat unto me, that any thing which came from me would take
with you very much. I hear so well of your proceedings, that I should rather
commend than encourage you. I know you were removed to Oxford in full maturity,
you were a good Orator, a good Poet, and a good Linguist for your time; I would
not have that fate light upon you, which uses to befall some, who from golden
Students, become silver Bachelors, and Leaden Masters, I am far from
entertaining any such thought of you, that Logic with her quiddities, and Quae
la vel Hipps, can any way unpolish your human studies: As Logic is clubfisted
and crabbed, so she is terrible at first sight, she is like a Gorgons head to a
young student, but after a twelve months constancy and patience, this Gorgons
head will prove a mere buggbear; When you have devoured the Organon, you will
find Philosophy far more delightful and pleasing to your palate: In feeding
the soul with knowledge, the understanding requires the same consecutif acts
which nature uses in nourishing the body. To the nutrition of the body, there
are two Essential conditions required assumption and retention, then there
follows two more, (...) and (...), concoction and agglutination or adhaesion;
So in feeding your soul with Science, you must first assume, and suc^ in the
matter into your apprehension, then must the memory retain and keep it in,
afterward by disputation, discourse, and meditation, it must be well concocted;
then must it be agglutinate^ and converted to nutriment; All this may be
reduced to these (...) heads, tencre fideliter, and uti faeliciter, which are
two of the happiest properties in a student; there is an other act required to
goo^ concoction called the act of Expulsion, which puts off all that is unfound
and noxious, so in study there must be an expulsive vert^ to shun all that is
erroneous, and there is no science but is full (...) such stuff, which by
direction of Tutor, and choice of good Book must be excernd: Do not confound
your self with multiplicity of Authors, two is enough upon any Science,
provided they be plenary and orthodox; Philosphy should be your substantial
food, Poetry your banqueting stuff; Philosophy has more of reality in it than
any knowledge, the Philosopher can fadom the deep, measure Mountains, reach
the Stars with a staff, and bless Heaven with a girdle.

But amongst these studies you must not forget the unicum necessarium, on
Sundaies and Holy Days, let Divinity be the sole object of your speculation,
in comparison whereof all other knowledge is but cobweb learning; prae qua
quisquiliae coetera.

When you can make truce with study, I should be glad you would employ some
superfluous hour or other to write unto me, for I much covet your good, because
I am

London 25 October. 1627. Your affectionat Cosen, J. H.

XI. To Sir Sackvill Trevor Knight.
Noble Onkle,
I Send you my humble thanks for the curious Sea-chest of glasses you pleased
to bestow on me, which I shall be very chary to keep as a Monument of your love.
I congratulat also the great honor you have got lately by taking away the
Spirit of France, I mean by taking the third great Vessel of her Sea-Trinity,
Her Holy Spirit, which had bin built in the mouth of the Texell for the service
of her King; without complementing with you, it was one of the best exploits
that was performed since these wars began, and besides the renown you have
purchased, I hope your reward will be accordingly from his Majesty, whom I
remember you so happily preserved from drowning in all probability at St.
Anderas road in Spain. Though Princes guerdons com slow, yet they com sure; And
it is oftentimes the method of God Almighty himself to be long both in his
rewards and punishments.

As you have berest the French of their Sain-Esprit, their Holy Spirit, so there
is news that the Hollander have taken from Spain, all her Saints; I mean todos
los santos, which is one of the chiefest staples of Sugar in Brasill. No more
but that I wish you all health, honor, and hearts desire.

London, 26 of October. 1627. Your much obliged Nephew and Servitor, J. H.

XII. To Captain Tho. B. from York.
NOble Captain, Yours of the first of March was deliverd me by Sir Richard
Scott, and I held it no profanation of this Sunday evening considering the
quality of my subject, and having (I thank God for it) performed all Church
duties, to employ some hours to meditat on you, and send you this friendly
salute, though I confess in an unusual monitory way. My dear Captain, I love
you perfectly well, I love both your person and parts which are not vulgar, I
am in love with your disposition which is generous, and I verily think you were*
never guilty of any Pusillanimous act in your life: Nor is this love of mine
conferred upon you gratis, but you may challenge it as your due, and by way of
correspondence, in regard of those thousand convincing Evidences you have given
me of yours to me, which ascertain me, that you take me for a true friend: Now I
am of the number of those, that had rather commend the virtue of an enemy, than
soeth the vices of a friend; for your own particular, if your parts of virtue,
and your infirmities were cast into a balance, I know the first would much
out-poise the other; yet give me leave to tell you (...) there is one frailty,
or rather ill favored custom that reigns in you, which weighs much, it is a
humor of swearing in all your discours^s, and they are not slight, but deep,
far fetched Oaths that you are wont to rap out, which you use as flowers of
Rhetoric to enforce a ^aith upon the hearers, who believe you never the more,
and you use this in cold blood when you are not provoked, which makes the humor
far more dangerous; I know many, (and I cannot say I my self am free from it
God forgive me) that being transported with choler, and as it were made drunk
with passion, by some sudden provoking accident, or extreme ill fortune at play
will let fall Oaths and deep Protestations* but to belch out, (...) send forth,
as it were, whole volleys of Oaths and Curses in a calm humor, to verify every
trivial discourse is a thing of horror. I knew a King that being crossed in his
game would amongst his Oaths fall on the ground, and bite the very earth in the
rough of his passion; I heard of another King ( Henry the fourth of France)
that in his highest distemper would swear but Ventre de Saint Gris, by the
belly of Saint Gris; I heard of an Italian, that having been much accustomed to
blaspheme, was weaned from it by a pretty wile, for having been one night at
play, and lost all his money, after many execrable Oaths, and having offered
money to another to go out to face heaven and defy God, he threw himself upon
a Bed hard by, and there fell asleep; The other Gamsters played on still* and
finding that he was fast asleep, they put out the candels, and made semblance
to play on still, they fell a wrangling, and spoke so loud, that he awaked, he
hearing them play on still fell a rubbing his eyes, and his conscience presently
prompted him that he was struck blind, and that Gods judgment had deservedly
fallen down upon him for his blasphemies, and so he fell to sigh and weep
pitifully, a ghostly Father was sent for, who undertook to do some acts of
penance for him, if he would make a vow never to play again or blaspheme, which
he did, and so the candles were lighted again, which he thought were burning
all the while; so he becam a perfect Convert. I could wish this Letter might
produce the same effect in you; There is a strong Text, that the curse of heaven
hangs always over the dwelling of the swearer, and you have more fearful
examples of miraculous judgments in this particular, than of any other sin.

There is a little town in Languedoc in France that has a multitude of the
Pictures of the Virgin Mary up and down, but she is made to carry Christ in her
right arm contrary to the ordinary custom, and the reason they told me was
this, that two gamsters being at play, and one having lost all his money, and
bolted out many blasphemies, ^e gave a deep Oath that that whore upon the wall,
meaning the picture of the blessed Virgin* was the cause of his ill luck,
hereupon the child removed imperceptibly from the left arm to the right, and
the man fell stark dumb ever after'^, thus went the tradition there; This makes
me think upon the Lady Southwells news from Utopia that he who swears when he
plays at dice, may challenge his damnation by way of purchase. This in^andous
custom of Swearing I observe reigns in England lately more than any where else,
though the German in his highest puff of pas^ion swear by a hundred thousand
Sacraments, the Italian by the whore of God, the French by his death, the
Spaniard by his flesh, the Westiman by his sweat, the Irish man by his five
wounds, though the Scot commonly bids the devil hale his soul, yet for
variety of Oaths the English Roarers put down all: Consider well what a
dangerous thing it is to tear in pieces that dreadful name which makes the
vast fabric of the world to tremble, that holy name wherein the whole Hierarchy
of Heaven does triumph, that blisful name wherein consists the fulness of all
felicity. I know this custom in you yet, is but a light disposition, it is no
habit I hope, let me therefore conjure you by that power of friendship, by that
holy ligue of love which is between us, that you would suppress it before it
com to that, for I must tell you that those who could find in their hearts to
love you for many other things, do disrespect you for this, they hate your
company, and give no credit to whatsoever you say, it being one of the
punishments of a swearer as well as of a liar not to be believed when he tells
truth.

Excuse me that I am so free with you, what I write proceeds from the clear
current of a pure affection, and I shall heartily thank you, and take it as an
argument of love, if you tell me of my weaknesses, which are (God wot) too too
many, for my body is but a Cargazon of corrupt humors, and being not able to
overcome them all at once I do endeavor to do it by degrees, like Sertorius
his soldier who when he could not cut off the Horse tail with his sword at one
blow, fell to pull out the hair one by one: And touching this particular humor
from which I dissuade you, it has raged in me too often by contingent fits,
but I thank God for it I find it much abated, and purged. Now the only Physic I
used was a precedent fast and recours to the holy Sacrament the next day, of
purpose to implore pardon for what was passed, and power for the future to
quell those exorbitant motions, those ravings and feavourish fits of the soul,
in regard there are no infirmities more dangerous, for at the same instant they
have being they become impieties. And the greatest symptom of amendment I find
in me is, because whenever I hear the holy name of God blasphemed by any
other, it makes my heart to tremble within my breast: Now it is a penitential
Rule that if sins present do not please thee, sins passed will never hurt thee.
All other sins have for their object, either pleasure or profit, or some aim
and satisfaction to body or mind, but this has none at all, therefore fie
upon it, my dear Captain the whether you can make a conquest of your self in
subduing this execrable custom. Alexander subdued the World, Caesar his
Enemies, Hercules* Monsters, but he that o^ecomes himself is the true valiant
Captain. I have herewith sent you a Hymn consonant to this subject; because I
know you are Musical and a good Poet.

A gradual Hymn of a double cadence, tending to the Honor of the Holy Name of
GOD.
1.
LEt the vast universe,
And therein every thing,
The mighty acts rehearse
Of their immortal King,
His Name extol
what to Nadir
from Zenith stir
Twixt Pole and Pole.
2.
Ye Elements that move,
And alter every hour,
Yet herein constant prove,
And symbolize all sower,
His praise to tell,
mix all in one
for air and tone
To sound this peale.
3.
Earth which the center art
And only stand still,
Yet move, and bear thy part,
Resound with ecchos shrill,
Thy Mines of gold,
with precious stones,
and unions,
His fame uphold.
4.
Let all thy fragrant flowers
Grow sweeter by this (...),
Thy tallest trees and bowers
Bud forth and blossom sair,
Beasts wild and tame,
whom lodgings yield*
House dens or field,
Collaud his Name.
5.
Yet Seas with Earth that make
One globe flow high and swell,
Exalt your Makers name,
In deep his wonders tell,
Leviathan,
and what does swim
near bank or brim,
His glory fcan.
6.
Yet airy Regions all
Ioyn in a sweet concent,
Blow such a Madrigall
May reach the Firmament:
Winds, hail, Ice, snow,
and perly drops,
that hang on crops,
His wonders show.
7.
Pure element of fire
With holy sparks inflame
This sublunary quire,
That all one Consort frame.
Their spirits raise,
to trumpet forth
their Makers worth,
And sound his praise.
8.
Ye glorious Lamps that roul^
In your celestial Spears
All under his control,
Who you on poles up bears
Him magnify,
yet Planets bright,
and fixed lights
That deck the sky.
9.
O Heaven Chrystalline,
which by thy watery but
Do temper and refine
the rest in azurd blue,
His glory sound
thou first Mobile,
which makst all w^^^el
In circle round.
10.
Ye glorious souls who reign
In sempiternall joy,
Free from those cares and pain
which here did you annoy,
And him behold
in whom all bliss
concentred is
His laud unfold.
11.
Blessed maid which do surmount
all Saints and Seraphins,
And raignst as Paramount,
And chief of Cherubins,
Chant out his praise
who in thy womb,
nine months took room,
Though crowned with rays.
12.
Oh let my soul and heart,
my mind and memory
Bear in this Hymn a part,
and join with earth and sky.
Let every wight
the whole world ore
laud and adore
The Lord of light.
All your friends here are well, Tom Young excepted, who I fear has not long
to live amongst us, so I rest,

York, the 1 of Aug. 1628. Your true friend, J. H.

XIII. To Will: Austin, Esqr.
SIR,
I Have many thanks to give you for that excellent Poem you sent me upon the
Passion of Christ, surely you were possessed with a very strong spirit when you
penned it, you were become a true Enthusiasist; for, Iet me despair if I lie unto
you, all the while I was perusing it, it committed holy rapes upon my soul, me
^ought I felt my heart melting within my breast, and my thoughts transported to
a true Elysium all the while, there were such flexanimous strong ravishing
strains throughout it. To deal plainly with you, it were an injury to the public
good, not to expose to open light such divine raptures, for they have an
edifying power in them, and may be termed the very quintessence of devotion;
you discover in them what a rich talent you have, which should not be buried
within the walls of a private study, or pass through a few particular hands, but
appear in public view, and to the sight of the world, to the enriching of
others, as they did me in reading them. Therefore I shall long to see them pass
from the Bankside to Paul's Churchyard, with other precious pieces of yours,
which you have pleased to impart unto me

Oxford, 20 Aug^ 1628. Your most affectionate Servito^, J. H.

XIV. To Sir I. S. Knight.
SIR,
YOu writ to me lately for a Footman, and I think this bearer will fit you; I
know he can run well, for he has run away twice from me, but he knew the way
back again, yet though he has a running head as well as running heels, (and
who will expect a footman to be a stayed man?) I would not part with him, were
I not to go ^ost to the North. There be some things in him that answer for his
waggeries, he will com when you call him, go when you bid him, and shut the
door after him; he is faithful and stout, and a lover of his Master; He is a
great enemy to all dogs, if they bark at him in his running, for I have seen
him confront a huge mastif, and knock him down: When you go a Country journey,
or have him run with you a hunting, you must spirit him with liquor, you must
allow him also something extraordinary for socks, else you must not have him to
wait at your table; for when his grease melts in running hard it is subject to
fall into his toes. I send him you but for trial, if he be not for your turn,
turn him over to me again when I com back,

The best news I can send you at this time, is, that we are like to have peace,
both with France and Spain, so that Harwich men your Neighbors, shall not
hereafter need to fear the name of Spinola, who struck such an apprehension
into them lately, that I understand they begin to fortify.

I pray present my most humble service to my good Lady, and at my return from
the North, I will be hold to kiss her hands, and yours, so I am

London, 25 of May. 1628. Your much obliged Servito^, J. H.

XV. To my Father.
SIR,
OUr two younger brothers, which you sent hither, are disposed of; my brother
Doctor has placed the elder of the two with Mr. Hawes, a Mercer in Cheapside,
and he took much pains in it, and I had placed my brother Ned, with Mr.
Barrington, a Silk*man in the same street, but afterward for some
inconveniences, I removed him to one Mr. Smith at the Flower-de-Luce in
Lumbard-street, a Mercer also; Their Masters are both of them very well to pass,
and of good repute; I think it will prove some advantage to them hereafter, to
be both of one trade; because when they are out of their time, they may join
s^ocks together; So that I hope, sir, they are well placed as any two youths in
London, but you must not use to send them such large tokens in money, for that
may corrupt them. When I went to bind my brother Ned apprentice in Drapers
Hall, casting my eyes upon the Chimney piece of the great room I might spy a
picture of an ancient Gentleman, and underneath Thomas Howell, I asked the
Clerk about him, and he told me that he had bin a Spanish Merchant in Henry the
eighths time, and coming home rich, and dying a Bachelor, he gave that Hall to
the Company of Drapers, with other things, so that he is accounted one of their
chiefest Benefactors. I told the Clerk, that one of the sons of Thomas Howell
came now thither to be bound, he answered that if he be a right Howell, he may
have when he is free three hundred pounds to help to set up, and pay no
interest for five years. It may be hereafter we may make use of this. He told
me also, that any Maid that can prove her Father to be a true Howell may com
and demand fifty pounds toward her portion of the said Hall. I am to go post
toward York to morrow, to my charge, but hope, God willing, to be here again
the next Term; So with my love to my brother Howell, and my sister his wife, I
rest

London 30 Sept. 1629. Your dutiful Son, I. H.

XVI. To my brother Dr. Howell at Jesus College in Oxon.
BRother, I have sent you here enclosed; Warrants for four brace of Bucks, and
a Stag, the last Sir Arthur Manwaring procured of the King for you, toward the
keeping of your Act, I have sent you also a Warrant for a brace of Bucks out of
Waddon Chase; besides, you shall receive by this Carrier a great Wicker Hamper,
with two Geoules of Sturgeon, six barrells of pickled Oysters, three barrells
of Bologna Olives, with some other Spanish commodities.

My Lord President of the North has lately made me Patron of a living hard by
Henley, called Hambledon, it is worth five hundred pounds a year communibus
onnis, and the now Incumbent Dr. Pilkington is very aged, valetudinary, and
corpulent; My Lord by legal instrument has transmitted the next Advouson to
me for satisfaction of some arrerages; Dr. Dommlaw and two or three more have
bin with me about it, but I always intended to make the first proffer to you,
therefore I pray think of it, a sum of money must be had, but you shall be at no
trouble for that, if you only will secure it (and desire one more who I know
will do it for you) and it shall appear unto you that you have it upon far
better t^rms than any other. It is as finely situated as any Rectory can be,
for it is about the midway twixt Oxford and London, it lies upon the Thames,
and the Glebe-land house is very large and fair, and not dilapidated, so that
considering all things it is as good as some Bishoprics; I know his Majesty is
gracious unto you, and you may well expect some preferment that way, but such
livings as these are not to be had every where. I thank you for inviting me to
your Act, I will ^e with you the next week, God willing; and hope to find my
Father there; So with my kind love to Dr. Mansell, Mr. Watkins, Mr. Madocks and
Mr. Napier at Allsoules, I rest

London, 20 June. 1628. Your loving Brother, J. H.

XVII. To my Father Mr. Ben: Johnson.
FAther Ben. Nullum fit magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementi^, there is no great
wit without some mixture of madness, so says the Philosopher, nor was he a fool
who answered, nec parvum, sine mixtura stultiti^, nor small wit without some
allay of foolishn^. Touching the first it is verified in you, for I find that
you have bin oftentimes mad, you were mad when you writ your Fox, and madder
when you writ your Alchymist, you were mad when you writ Catilin, and stark mad
when you writ Sej^us; but when you writ your Epigrammes, and the Magnetic Lady
you were not so mad; Insomuch that I perceive there be degrees of madness in you;
Excuse me that I am so free with you. The madness I mean is that divine fury,
that heating and heighning Spirit which Ovid speaks of,

Est Deus in nobis agitante calescimus illo, that true enthusiasm which
transports, and elevates the souls of Poets, above the middle Region of vulgar
conceptions, and makes them soar up to Heaven to touch the stars with their
laurelld heads, to walk in the Zodiac with Apollo himself, and command Mercury
upon their errand.

I cannot yet light upon Doctor Davies his Welsh Grammar, before Christmas I am
promiss'd one; So desiring you to look better hereafter to your charcole fire
and chimney, which I am glad to be one that preserved from burning, this being
the second time that Vulca^ has threatened you, it may be because you have
spoken ill of his wise and bin too busy with his horns; I rest

Westminster, 27 June, 1629. Your Son, and contiguous Neighbor, J. H.

XVIII. To Sir Arthur Ingram at his House in York.
SIR,
I Have sent you herewith a hamper of Melons, the best I could find in any of
Tothillfield gardens, and with them my very humble service and thanks for all
favors, and lately for inviting me to your new noble House at Temple Newsam
when I return to Yorkshire; To this I may answer you as my Lord Coke was
answered by a N^folk Countryman who had a suit depending in the King's Bench
against some neighbors touching a River that used to annoy him, and Sir Edward
Coke asking how he called the River, he answered, my Lord I need not call her,
for she is forward enough to com of her self. So I may say that you need not
call me to any house of yours, for I am forward enough to com without calling.

My Lord President is still indisposed at Dr. Nappiers, yet he writ to me
lately that he hopes to be at the next sitting in York: So with a tender of my
most humble service to my noble good Lady, I rest

London, 25 Iul. 1629. Your much obliged servant, J. H.

XIX. To R. S. Esquire.
SIR,
I Am one of them, who value not a courtesy that hangs long betwixt the
fingers, I love not those viscosa beneficia, those birdl^m'd kindnesses which
Pliny speaks of; Nor would I receive money in a durty clowt, if possibly I
could be without it; Therefore I return you the courtesy by the same hand that
brought it, it might have pleasur'd me at first, but the expectation of it hat^
prejudiced me, and now perhaps you may have more need of it than

Westminster 3 Aug. 1629. Your humble Servitor, J. H.

XX. To the Countess of Sunderland at York.
Madame,
MY Lord continues still in course of Physic at Dr. Nappiers, I writ to him
lately, that his Lordship would please to com to his own house here in St.
Martins lane, where there is a greater accommodation for the recovery of his
health, Dr. Ma^ern being on the one side, and the Kings Apothecary on the
other, but I fear there be some Mountebanks that carry him away, and I hear he
intends to remove to Wickham to one Atkinson, a mere Quacksalver that was once
Dr. Lopez his man.

The little Knight that uses to draw up his breeches with a shooinghorn, I
mean Sir Posthumus Hobby, slew high at him this Parliament, and would have
incerted his name in the scrowl of Recusants, that is shortly to be presented to
the King, but I produced a Certificat from Linford under the Ministers hand
that he received the Communion at Easter last, and so got his name out;
Besides, the Deputy Lieutenants of Buckinghamshire would have charged Biggin
Farm with a light horse, but Sir Will. Allford, and others joined with me to
get it off.

Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Mr. Wansford, are grown great Courtiers lately, and
com from We^stminster-Hall to White Hall: (Sir John Savill their Countryman
having shown them the way with his white staff) The Lord Weston tamperd with
the one, and my Lord Cottington took pains with the other, to bring them about
from their violence against the Prerogative: And I am told the first of them is
promised my Lords place at York, in case his sickness continues.

We are like to have peace with Spain and France; and for Germany, they say the
Swedes are like to strike in to her, to try whether they may have better
fortune than the Danes.

My Lady Scroope (my Lords Mother) has layn sick a good while, and is very
weak. So I rest

Westminst. 5 Aug. 1629. Madame, Your humble and dutiful Servitor, J. H.

XXI. To Dr. H. W.
SIR,
IT is a rule in friendship, When distrust enters in at the foregate, love goes
out at the Postern; It is as true a rule, that (...), dubitation is the
beginning of all knowledge; I confess this is true in the first election and
co-optation of a friend, to com to the knowledge of him by quaeres and doubts;
but when there is a perfect contract made, confirmed by experience, and a long
tract of time, distrust then is mere poison to friendship; Therefore if it be as
I am told, I am unfit to be your friend, but

Westmin. 20 Oct. 1629. Your servant, J. H.

XXII. To Dr. H. W.
SIR,
THey say in Italy, that deeds are men, and words are but women; I have had
your word often to give me a visit; I pray turn your semal promises, to
masculin performances, else I shall think you have lost your being, for you know
it is a rule in law, Id^m ^st non esse, and non apparere.

Westmin. 25 Sept. 1629. Your faithful Servitor, J. H.
To Mr. B. Chaworth: On my Valentine Mrs. Francis Metcalf (now Lady Robinson)
at York.
A Sonnet.
COuld I charm the Queen of Loves,
To lend a quill of her white Doves;
Or one of Cupids pointed wings
Dipped in the fair Castalian springs,
Then would I write the all-divine
Perfections of my Valentine.
As amongst all flowrs the Rose excells,
As Amber amongst the fragrantst smells,
As amongst all mineralls the gold,
As Marble amongst the finest mold,
As Diamonds amongst jewels bright,
As Cynthia amongst the lesser lights;
So amongst the Northern beauties shine,
So far excells my Valentine.
In Rome and Naples I did view
Faces of Celestial hue,
Venetian Dames I have seen many,
(I only saw them, touched not any)
Of Spanish beauties, Dutch and French,
I have beheld the quintessence,
Yet saw I none that could outshine,
Or parallel my Valentine.
The Italians they are coy and quaint,
But they grossly daube and paint,
The Spanish kind, and apt to please,
But sav'ring of the same disease,
Of Dutch and French some few are comely,
The French are light, the Dutch are homely.
Let Tagus, Po, the Loire and Rhine
Then veil unto my Valentine.
Here may be seen pure white and red,
Not by feigned Art, but Nature wed,
No simpring smiles, no mimic face,
Affected gesture, or forced grace,
A fair smooth front, free from least wrinkle,
Her eyes (oy me) like stars do twinkle;
Thus all perfections do combine,
To beautify my Valentine.


XXIII. To Mr. Tho. M.
NOble Tom, You desired me lately to compose some lines upon your Mistresses
black eyes, her becoming frowns, and upon her Mask. Though the least request
of yours be a command unto me, the execution of it a contentment, yet I was
hardly drawn to such a task at this time, in regard that many businesses puzzle
my pericranium. -- aliena negotia centum per caput and circa saliunt latus. Yet
lest your Clorinda might expect such a thing, and that you might incur the
hazard of her smiles (for you say her frowns are favors) and that she may take
off her Mask unto you the next time you go to court her, I send you the
enclosed Verses Sonet-wise, which happly may please her better, in regard I
hear she has some skill in Music.

Upon black Eyes, and becoming Frowns, A Sonnet.
BLack eyes, in your dark Orbs dothly
My ill, or happy destiny,
If with clear looks you me behold,
You give me Mines and Mounts of Gold*
If you dart forth disdainful rays,
To your own die you turn my days.
Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dwell,
My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell.
That Lamp which all the stars does blind,
Yields to your luster in some kind,
Though you do wear to make you bright
No other dress but that of night,
He glitters only in the day,
You in the dark your beams display.
Black eyes, in your two Orbs by changes dwell,
My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell.
The cunning thief that lurks for prize,
At some dark corner watching lies,
So that heart-robbing God does stand
In your black lobbies, shaft in band,
To rifle me of what I hold
More precious far than Indian Gold.
Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dwell,
My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell.
O powerful Negromantic eyes,
Who in your circles strictly pries,
Will find that Cupid with his dart
In you does practice the black art,
And by th'enchantment I Am possessed,
Tries his conclusions in by breast.
Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dwell,
My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell.
Look on me, though in frowning wise,
Some kind of frowns become black eyes,
As pointed Diamonds being set,
Cast greater luster out of Iet,
Those pieces we esteem most rare,
Which in night shadows postur'd are:
Darkness in Churches congregats the sight,
Devotion straies in glaring light;
Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dweil,
My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell.
Touching her Mask, I will not be long about it.
Upon Clorinda's Mask.
SO have I seen the Sun in his full pride
Orecast with sullen clouds, and lose his light,
So have I seen the brightest stars denied
To show their luster in some gloomy night,
So Angels pictures have I seen vaild ore,
That more devoutly men should them adore;
So with a Mask saw I Clorinda hide
Her face more bright than was the Lemnian Bride.
Whether I have hit upon your fancy, or fitted your Mistress I know no^* I
pray let me hear what success they have; So* wishing you your hearts desire,
and if you have her, a happy conferreation, I rest in Verse and Prose,

Westmin. 29. of Mar. 1629. Yours, J. H.

XXIV. To the Right Honble my La: Scroop Countess of Sunderland at Langar.
Madam,
I Am newly returned from Hunsdon, from giving the Rites of burial to my Lords
Mother; She made my Lord sole Executor of all. I have all her Plate and
household stuff in my custody, and unles I had gone as I did much had been
embezeld. I have sent herewith the copy of a Letter the King writ to my Lord
upon the ^esignation of his place, which is fitting to be preserved for
posterity amongst the Records of Bolton Castle. His Majesty expresses ^herin
that he was never better served nor with more exactnes of fidelity and Justice
by any* therefore he int^nds to set a special mark of his (...) upon him, ^hen
his health will ^erve him to co^ to Court, my Lord Carlet^n delivered it me,
and told me he never remembered that the King writ a more gracious Letter. I
have lately bought in fee Farm Wanless Park of the Kings Commissioners for my
Lord, I got it for six hundred pound doubling the old rent, and the next day I
was offered five hundred pound for the bargain, there were diverse that put in
for'^, and my Lord of Anglesey thought himself sure of it, but I found means to
frustrat them all. I also compounded with her Majesty's Commissioners for
respit of homage for Rabbi Castle, there was 120 pound demanded, but I came off
for 40 shillings. My Lord Wentworth is made Lord Deputy of Ireland, and carries
a mighty stroke at Court, there have been some clashings 'twixt him and my Lord
of Pe^brock lately with others at Court, and diverse in the North, and some as
Sir David Fowler with others have been crushed.

He pleased to give me the disposing of the next Attorneys place in York, and
John Lister being lately dead, I went to make use of the favor, and was offered
three hundred pound for it, but some got 'twixt me and home, so that I was
forced to go away contented with one hundred pecces Mr. Ratcliff delivered me
in his Chamber at Grays Inn, and so to part with the legal instrument I had,
which I did, rather than contest.

The Duchess your Necce is well, I did what your La: commanded me at York
House. So I rest

Westminster, this first of July, 1629. Madame, Your Lapps ready and faithful
Servitor, J. H.

XXV. To D. C. Esqr. at his House in Essex.
My D. D.
I Thank you for your last Society in London, but I am sorry to have found Jack
T. in that pickle, and that he had so fa^ transgres^'d the Fannian Law, which
allows a chirping cup to satiat, not to sur^t., to ^irth, not to madness, and
upon some extraordinary occasion of some rencounters, to give Nature a (...) but
not a knock as Jack did, I am afraid he has taine such a habit of it, that
nothing but death will mend him, and I find that he is posting thither apace by
this course. I have read of a King of Navarr (Charles le mauvais) who perishd in
strong waters, and of a Duke of Clarence that was drowned in a but of Malmesey,
but Jack T. I fear will die in a butt of Ca^ary. Howsoever comend me unto him,
and desire him to have a care of the main chance. So I rest

York, 5 Iul. 1629. Yours, J. H.

XXVI. To Sir Thomas Lake Knight.
SIR,
I Have showed Sir Kenelme Digby both our translations of Martialls, Vitam quae
faci^nt beatiorem, etc. and to tell you true he adjudg'd yours the better, so I
shall pay the wager in the place appointed, and try whether I can recover my
self at giocod' amore, which the Italian says is a play to cosen the devil:
If your pulse beats accordingly I will wayt upon you on the River toward the
evening, for a floundring fit to get some fish for our supper, so I rest

3 July, 1629. Your true Servitor, I. H.

XVII. To Mr. Ben. Johnson.
FAther Ben, you desired me lately to procure you Dr. Davies Welsh Grammar to
add to those many you have, I have lighted upon one at last, and I am glad I
have it in so seasonable a time that it may serve for a New Years gift, in
which quality, I send it you; and because 'twas not you, but your Muse that
desired it of me, ^or your letter runs on feet, I thought it a good
correspondence with you to accompagne it with what follows.

Upon Dr. Davies British Grammar.
It Was a tough task believe it, thus to frame
A wild and wealthy language, and to frame
Grammatic toiles to curb her, so that she
Now speaks by rules, and sings by prosodie;
Such is the strength of Art rough things to shape',
And of rude Commons rich enclosures make.
Doubtless much oil and labor went to couch
Into methodic rules the rugged Dutch;
The Rabbis pass my reach, but judge I can,
Something of Clenard and Quintilian;
And for those modern Dames I find they three Ital. Spanish. French.

Are only lopps cut from the Latian tree,
And easy t^as to square them into parts,
The Tree it self so blossoming with Arts.
I have bin shown for Irish and Bascuence
Imperfect rules couchd in an Accidence:
But I find none of these can take the start
Of Davies, or that prove more men of art,
Wh^ in exacter method, and short way,
The Idioms of a language do display.
This is the tongue, the Bards sung in of old,
And Druids their dark knowledge did unfold,
Merlin in this his prophesies did vent
Which through the world of fame bear such extent:
This spoak that son of Mars, that Britain bold
Who first among Christian worthies is inrolld: Arthur.

This Brennus, who, to his desire and glut,
The Mistress of the world did prostitut.
This Arviragus, and brave Catarac
Sole free, when all the world was ^n Romes rack,
This Lucius who on angels wings did so^r
To Rome, and would wear diadem no more;
And thousand Heroes more which should I tell
This new-year scarce would serve me, so farewell*
Call. Apr. 1629. Your son and servitor, J. H.

XXVIII. To the right Honble the Earl of Bristol at Sherburn Castle.
My Lord,
I Attended my Lord Cottington before he went on his journey toward Spain and
put him in mind of the old business against the Viceroy of Sardinia, to see
whether any good can be don, and to learn whether the Conde or his son be
Solvent; He is to land at (...), one of the Kings ships attends him, and some
Merchant men take the advantage of this Convoy.

The news that keeps greatest noise now is, that the Emperor has made a
favorable peace with the Dane, for Tilly had crossed the Elve, and entered deep
into Holstein land, and in all probability might have carried all before him,
yet that King had honorable terms given him, and a peace is concluded (though
without the privity of England.) But I believe the King of Denmarc fared the
better, because he is Granchild to Charles the Emperors sister. Now it seems
another spirit is like to fall upon the Emperor, for they write that Gustavus
King of Sw^thland is struck into Germany, and has taken Meclenburgh; the
ground of his quarrel as I hear is, that the Emperor would not acknowledge,
much less give audience to his Ambassadors, he also gives out to com for the
assistance of his Allies, the Dukes of Pomerland and Meclenburgh, nor do I hear
that he speaks any thing yet of the Pr. Palsgraves business.

Don Carlos Coloma is expected here from Flanders about the sam^ time, that my
Lord Cottington shall be arrived at the Court of Spain, God send us an
Honorable peace, for as the Spaniard says, Nun^avi tan mala paz que no fuesse
mejor, que la mejor guerra.

London, 20 May. 1629* Your Lordships most humble and ready Servant, J. H.

XXX. To my Cosen I. P. at Mr. Conradus.
Cousin,
A Letter of yours was lately deliverd me, I made a shift to read the
superscription, but within, I wonderd what language it might be, in which 'twas
written, at first I thought 'twas Hebrew, or some of her Dialects, and so went
from the liver to the heart, from the right hand to the left to read it, but
could ma^e nothing of it; then I thought it might be the Chinese language, and
went to read the words perpendicular, and the lines were so crooked and
distorted, that no coherence could be made; Greek ^ perceived it was not, nor
Latin or English; So I gave it for mere gibbrish, and your characters to be
rather Hieroglyphics then Letters. The best is, you keep your lines at a good
distance, like those in Chancery-bills, who as a Clerk said, were made so wide
of purpose, because the Clients should have room enough to walk between them
without justling one another; yet this widenes had bin excusable if your lines
had bin straight, but they were full of odd kind of Undulations and windings;
If you can write no otherwise, one may read your thoughts as soon as your
characters. It is some excuse for you, that you are but a young beginner, I pray
let it appear in your next what a proficient you are, otherwise some blame may
light on me that placed you there; Let me receive no more Gibbrish or
Hieroglyphics from you, but legible letters, that I may acquaint your friends
accordingly of your good proceedings, So I rest

Westminst. 20 Sept. 1629. Your very loving Cosen, J. H.

XXXI. To the Lo. Viscount Wentworth Lo. President of York.
My Lord,
MY last was of the first current, since which I received one from your
Lordship, and your comands therein, which I shall ever entertain with a great
deal of cheerfulnes. The greatest news from abroad is, that the French King
with his Cardinal are com again on this side the Hills, having don his business
in Italy and Savoy, and reserved still Pignerol in his hands, which will serve
him as a key to enter Italy at pleasure; Upon the highest Mountain amongst the
Alps he left this ostentous inscription upon a great Marble pillar;

A la memoire eternelle de Lovis treiziesme,
Roy de France and de Navarre,
Tres-Auguste, tres-victorieux, tres-heureux,
Conquerant, tres-juste:
Lequel apres avoir vaincu toutes les Nations
de l'Europe,
Il a encore triumph les elements
Du ciel and de la terre,
Ayant pass deux fois ces-monts au mois
de Mars avec son Armee
Victorieuse pour remmettre les Princes
d'Italie en leurs estats,
Defendre and protegerses Alliez.
To the eternal memory of Lewis the thirteenth King of France and Navarr, most
gracious, most victorious, most happy, most just, a Conqueror; who having
orecom all Nations of Europ, he has also triumphed over the Elements of Heaven
and Earth, having twice passed ore these hills in the month of March with his
victorious Army, to restore the Princes of Italy to their estates, and to
defend and protect his Allies. So I take my leave for the present and rest,

Westmin. 5 Aug. 1629. Your Lopp* most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXXII. To Sir Keneime Digby Knight.
SIR,
GIve me leave to congratulat your happy return from the Levant, and the great
honor you have acquired by your gallant comportment in Algier in reescating so
many English slaves; by bearing up so bravely against the Venetian Fleet in the
bay of Scanderoon, and making the Pantaloni to know themselves and you better.
I do not remember to have read or heard, that those huge Galleasses of Saint
Mark were beaten before. I give you the joy also, that you have born up against
the Venetian Ambassador here, and vindicated your self of those foul
scandalls he had cast upon you in your absence; Whereas you desire me to join
with my Lord Cottington and others to make an Affidavit touching Bartholomew
Spinola, whither he be, Vezino de Madrid, viz. free Denison of Spain, I am
ready to serve you herein, or to do any other office that may right you, and
tend to the making of your prize good. Yet I am very sorry that our Aleppo
Merchants suffered so much.

I shall be shortly in London, and I will make the greater speed, because I may
serve you. So I humbly kiss my noble Ladies hand, and rest

Westmin, 25 November. 1629. Your thrice-assured Servitor, J. H.

XXXIII. To the Right Honble Sir Peter Wicths Ambr. at Constantple.
SIR,
MAster Simon Digby delivered me one from your Lordship of the first of June;
and I was extremely glad to have it, for I had received nothing from your
Lordship a twelvemonth before. Mr. Controuler Sir Tho. Edmonds is lately
returned from France, having renewed the peace which was made up to his hands
before by the Venetian Ambassadors, who had much labored in it, and had
concluded all things beyond the Alps when the King of France was at Susa to
relieve Casal. The Monsieur that was to fetch him from Saint Denis to Paris,
put a kind of jeering complement upon him, viz. that his Excellency should not
think it strange, that he had so few French Gentlemen to attend in this service
to accompany him to the Court, in regard there were so many killd at the Isle of
^hee. The Marquis of Chasteau neuf is here from France, and it was an odd
speech also from him reflecting upon Mr. Controuler, that the King of great
Britain used to send for his Ambassadors from abroad to pluck Capons at home.

Mr. Bu^lemach is to go shortly to Paris to recover the other moity of her
Majesty's portion; whereof they say my Lord of Holland is to have a good share;
The Lord Treasurer Weston is he who has the greatest vogue now at Court, but
many great ones have clash'd with him: He is so potent, that I hear his eldest
Son is to marry one of the blood Royal of Scotland, the Duke of Lenox Sister,
and that with his Majesty's consent.

Bishop La^d of London is also powerful in his way, for he sits at the helm
of the Church, and does more than any of the two Arch bishops, or all the rest
of his two and twenty brethren besides.

In your next I should be glad your Lordship would do me the favor, as to write
how the grand Signor is like to speed before Bagda^, in this his Persian
expedition.

No more now but that, I always rest

Westmin. 1 Ian. 1629. Your Lordships ready and most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XXXIV. To my Father.
SIR,
SIr Tho. Wentworth has been a good while Lord President of York, and since is
sworn Privy Counselor, and made Baron and Vicount, the Duke of Buckingham
himself flew not so high in so short a revolution of time; He was made Vicount
with a great deal of high ceremony upon a Sunday in the afternoon at
White Hall; My Lord Powis (who affects him not much) being told that the
Heralds had fetched his Pedigree from the blood Royal, viz. from John of
Gaunt, said, Dammy if ever he com to be King of England I will turn Rebel.
When I went first to give him joy, he pleased to give me the disposing of the
next Attorney's place that falls void in York, which is valued at three hundred
pounds. I have no reason to leave my Lord of Sunderland, for I hope he will
be noble unto me; the perquisits of my place, taking the Kings see away, ca^
far short of what he promised me at my first coming to him, in regard of his
non-residence at York, therefore I hope he will consider it some other way. This
languishing sickness still hangs on him, and I fear will make an end of him;
There Is none can tell what to make of it, but he voided lately a strange Worm at
Wickham; but I fear there is an impostume growing in him, for he told me a
passage, how many years ago my Lord Willoughby, and he, with so many of their
servants ( de gayete de c^ur) played a match at football against such a number
of Country men, where my Lord of Sunderland being busy about the ball, got a
bruise in the breast, which put him in a swond for the present, but did not
trouble him till three months after, when being at Bever Castle (his
brother-in-laws house) a quaume took him on a sudden, which made him retire to
his bedchamber, my Lord of Rutland following him, put a Pipe full of Tobacco
in his mouth, and he being not accustomed to Tobacco, taking the smoke
downwards, fell a casting and vomiting up diverse little impostumated bladders
of congealed blood, which saved his life then, and brought him to have a better
conceit of Tobacco ever after; and I fear there is some of that clodded blood
still in his body.

Because Mr. Hawes of Che^p-side is lately dead, I have removed my brother
Griffith to the Hen and Chickens in Pater Noster Row, ^o Mr. Tailors, as
gentile a shop as any in the City, but I gave a piece of Plate of twenty Nobles
price to his Wife. I wish the Yorkshire horse may be fit for your turn, he was
accounted the best saddle Gelding about York, when I bought him of Captain
Phillips the Mustar-master; and when he carried me first to London, there was
twenty pounds offered for him by my Lady Carlisle. No more now but desiring a
continuance of your blessing and prayers, I rest

Land. 3 December. 1630. Your dutiful Son, J. H.

XXXV. To the Lord Cottington, Ambassador Extraordinary for his Majesty of
great Britain in the Court of Spain.
My Lord,
I Received your Lordships lately by Harry Davies the Correo Santo, and I
return my humble thanks, that you were pleased to be mindful (amongst so many
high negotiations) of the old business touching the Viceroy of Sardinia, I have
acquainted my Lord of Bristoll accordingly. Our eyes here look very greedily
after your Lordship, and the success of your Embassy, and we are glad to hear
the business is brought to so good a pass, and that the capitulations are so
honorable (the high effects of your wisdom.)

For News: The Sweds do notable feat^ Germany, and we hope they cutting the
Emperor and Bavarian so much work to do, and the good offices we are to expect
from Spain upon this redintegration of Peace, will be an advantage to the
Prince Palatin, and facilitat matters for restoring him to his Country.

There is little news at our Court, but that there fell an ill-favored quarrel
'twixt Sir Kenelm Digby, and Mr. Goring, Mr. Iermin, and others at St. James
lately about Mrs Baker the Maid of honor, and Duells were like to grow of it,
but that the business was taken up by the Lord Treasurer, my Lord of Dorset, and
others appointed by the King. My Lord of Sunderland is still ill disposed; he
willed me to remember his hearty service to your Lordship, and so did Sir
Arthur Ingram, and my Lady, they all wish you a happy and honorable return, as
does

Land. 1 March, 1630. Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXXVI. To my Lo: Vicount Rocksavage.
My Lord,
Some say, the Italian loves no favor, but what is future; though I have conversed
much with that Nation, yet I am nothing infected with their humor in this
point: for I love favors passed as well, the remembrance of them joys my very
heart, and makes it melt within me; when my thoughts reflect upon your
Lordship. I have many of these fits of joy within me, by the pleasing
speculation of so many most noble favors, and respects; which I shall daily
study to improve and merit.

My Lord, Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
Westmin. 22 Mar. 1630.
XXXVII. To the Earl of Bristol.
My Lord,
I Doubt not but your ^ordship has had intelligence from time time what firm
invasions the King of Sweds has made into Germany, and by what degrees he has
mounted to this height, having but six thousand foot and five hundred horse,
when he entered first to Meclenburg, and taken that Town while Commissioners
stood treating on both sides in his tent; how thereby his Army much increased,
and so rushed further into the heart of the Country, but passing near
Magdenburg, being diffident of his own strength he suffered Tilly to take that
great Town with so much effusion of blood, because they would receive no
quarter; your Lordship has also heard of the battle of Leipsick, where Tilly
notwithstanding the Victory he had got ore the Duke of Saxony a few days
before, received an utter discomfiture, upon which victory the King sent Sir
Thomas Roe a present of two thousand pounds and in his letter calls him his
strenuum consultorem, he being one of the first who had advised him to this
German war after he had made peace 'twixt him and the Polander. I presume also
your Lordship heard how he met Tilly again near Auspurg, and made him go upon a
wooden leg where of he died, and after soundly plundered the Bavarian, and made
him flee from his own house at Munchen, and rifled his very Closets.

Now your Lordship shall understand, that the said King is at Mentz, and keeps
a Court there like an Emperor, there being above twelve Ambassadors with him.
The King of France sent a great Marquis for his Ambassador to put him in mind
of his Articles, and to tell him that his Christian Majesty wondered he would
cross the Rhine without his privity, and wondered more that he would invade the
Church Lands, meaning the Archbishop of Mentz, who had put himself under the
protection of France; The Swed answered, That he had not broke the least title
of the Articles agreed on, and touching the said Archbishop, he had not stood
Neutrall as was promised, therefore he had justly set on his skirts. The
Ambassador replied, in case of breach of Articles, his Master had eighty
thousand men to pierce Germany when he pleased; The King answered that he had
but twenty thousand, and those should be sooner at the walls of Paris, then his
fourscore thousand should be on the frontiers of Germany. If this new Conqueror
goes on with this violence, I believe it will cast the policy of all
Christendom into another mould, and be get new maxims of State, for none can
foretell where his monstrous progress will terminat; Sir Henry Vane is still in
Germany, observing his motions, and they write that they do not agree well; as
I heard the King should tell him that he spoke nothing but Spanish to him: Sir
Robert Anstruther is also at Vienna, being gone thither from the Diet at
Ratisbon.

I hear the Infant Cardinal is designed to com Governor of the Netherlands,
and passes by way of Italy, and so through Germany: his brother Don Carlos is
lately dead. So I humbly take my leave, and rest

My Lord, Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
Westmin. 23 Apr. 1630.
XXXVIII. To my noble Lady, the Lady Cor.
Madam,
YOu spoke to me for a Cook, who had seen the world abroad, and I think the
bearer hereof will fit your Ladyships ^urn. He can marinat fish, make gellies,
he is excellent for a pickant sauce, and the Haugou; besides Madame, he is
passing good for an ollia; He will tell your Ladyship that the reverend Matron
the olla podrida has intellectualls and senses; Mutton, Beef, and Bacon, are
to her, as the will, understanding, and Memory, are to the soul; Cabbage,
Turnips, Artichocks, Potatoes and Dates, are her five senses, and Pepper the
common sense; she must have Marrow to keep life in her, and some birds to make
her light, by all means she must go adorned with chains of Sausages; He is
also good at Larding of meat after the mode of France. Madame, you may make
proof of him, and if your Ladyship find him too sawey, or wastfuli, you may
return him whence you had him, So I rest

Westmin. 2 Iun. 1630. Madame, Your Lapps most humble Servitor, J. H,

XXXIX. To Mr. E. D.
SIR,
YOu write to me that T. B. intends to give money for such a place, if he does,
I fear it will be verified in him that a fool and his money is soon parted,
for I know he will be never able to execut it, I heard of a la^e secretary of
State that could not read the next morning his own hand writing, and I have
read of Caligulas horse that was made Consul, therefore I pray tell him from
me, (for I wish him well) that if he thinks he is fit for that Office, he looks
upon himself through a falls glass, a trotting horse is fit for a coach, but not
for a Ladies saddle, and an ambler is proper for a Ladies saddle, but not for a
coach. If Tom undertakes this place, he will be as an ambler in a coach, or a
trotter under a Ladies saddle, when I com to town, I will put him upon a far
fitter and more feasible business for him, and so comend me to him, for I am his
and

Westmin. 5 June, 1630. Your true friend, J. H.

XL. To my Father.
SIR,
There are two Ambassadors extraordinary to go abroad shortly, the Earl of
Leycester, and the Lord M'eston, this latter goes to France, Savoy, Venice, and
so returns by Florence a pleasant journey, for he carries presents with him
from King and Queen: The Earl of Leycester is to go to the King of Denmark, and
other Princes of Germany. The maine of the Embassy is to condole the late death
of the Lady Sophia Queen Dowager of Denmark our Kings Grandmother: She was the
Duke of Meclenburgs daughter, and her husband Christian the third dying young,
her portion which was forty thousand pound was restored fire, and living a
Widow forty four years after, she grew to be so great a huswife setting three
or four hundred people at work, that she died worth near two millions of
dollars, so that she was reputed the richest Queen of Christendom: By the
constitutions of Denmark this estate is divisible amongst her children whereof
she had five, the King of Denmark, the Duchess of Saxony, the Duchess of
Brimswick, Queen Ann, and the Duchess of Holftein, the King being Male is to
have two shares, our King and the Lady Elizabeth is to have that which should
have belonged to Queen Anne, so he is to return by the Hague: It pleased my
Lord of Leycester to send for me to Baynards Castle, and proffer me to go
Secretary in this Embassage, assuring me that the journey shall tend to my
profit and credit; So I have accepted of it, for I hea^ very nobly of my Lord,
so that I hope to make a boon voyage of it. I desire as hitherto your prayers
and blessing may accompany me, so with my love to my Brothers, and Sisters, I
rest,

London, 5 May, 1632. Your dutiful son, I. H.

XLI. To Mr. Alderman Moulson Governor of the Merchant adventurers.
SIR,
THe Earl of Leicester, is to go shortly Ambassador extraordinary to the King
of Denmark and he is to pass by Hamburgh; I understand by Mr. Skinner that the
Staple has some grievances to be redressed. If this Embassage may be an
advantage to the Company I will solicit my Lord that he may do you all the
favor that may stand with his honor, so I shall expect your instructions
accordingly, and rest,

Westmin. 1 June, 1632. Yours ready to serve you J. H.

XLII. To Mr. Alderman Clethero, Governor of the Eastland Company.
SIR,
I Am informed of some complaints that your Company has against the King of
Denmarks Officers in the Sound. The Earl of Leicester is nominated by his
Majesty to go Ambassador extraordinary to that King and other Princes of
Germany; If this Embassy may be advantageous unto you, you may send me your
directions, and I will attend my Lord accordingly, to do you any favor, that
may stand with his honor, and conduce to your benefit, and redress of
grievances, so I take my leave and rest,

Westmin. 1 of June, 1632. Yours ready to do you service, J. H.

XLIII. To the Right Honble the Earl of Leicester at Pettworth.
Mr Lord,
SIR John Pennington is appointed to carry your Lordship and your company to
Germany, and he intends to take you up at Margets. I have bin with Mr
Bourlamach, and received a bill of exchange from him for ten thousand dollars
payable in Hamburgh. I have also received two thousand pounds of Sir Paul
Pinder for your Lordships use, and he did me the favor to pay it me all in old
gold, your allowance has begun since the twenty five of July last at eight
pound per diem, and is to continue so till your Lordship return to his Majesty.
I understand by some Merchants to day upon the Exchange that the King of Denmark
is at Luckstadt, and stays there all this somer, if it be so, 'twill save half
the voyage of going to Copenhagen, for in lieu of the Sound we need go no
further then the River of Elve, so I rest,

Westmin. 13 Aug. 1632. Your Lopps most humble and faithful Servitor, J. H.

XLIIII. To the Right Honble the Lord Mohun.
My Lord,
THough any command from your Lordship be welcome to me at all times, yet that,
which you lately injoynd me in yours of the twelfth of August, that I should
inform your Lordship of what I know touching the Inquisition, is now a little
unseasonable, because I have much to do to prepare my self for this employment
to Germany, therefore I cannot satisfy you in that fulness as I could do
otherwise. The very name of the Inquisition is terrible all Christendom over,
and the King of Spaint himself, with the chiefest of his Grandes tremble at it.
It was sounded first by the Catholic King Ferdinand (our Henry the eighths
Father-in-law) for he having got Granada, and subdued all the Moors, who had
had firm sooting in that Kingdom about 700. years, yet he suffered them to live
peaceably a while in point of conscience; but afterward he sent a solemn
Mandamus to the Jacobin Friars to endeavor the conversion of them by
preaching, and all other means; They finding that their pains did little
good, (and that those whom they had converted turned Apostats) obtained power
to make a research, which afterward was called Inquisition, and it was
ratified by Pope S^xtus, that if they would not conform themselves by fai^e
m^anes, they should be forced to it. The Jacobins being sound too severe
herein, and for other abuses besides, this Inquisition was taken from them, and
put into the hands of the most sufficient Ecclesiastics. So a Counsel was
established, and Officers appointed accordingly: Whosoever was found pendulous
and branling in his Religion was brought by a Sergeant called Familiar, before
the said Counsel of Inquisition, His accuser or delator stands behind a piece
of Tapistry, to see whether he be the party, and if he be, then they put diverse
subtle and entrapping interrogatories unto him, and whether he confess any
thing or no, he is sent to prison. When the said Familiar goes to any house,
though it be in the dead of night (and that is the time commonly they use to
com, or in the dawn of the day) all doors and trunks and chests fly open to
him, and the first thing he does he seizes the parties breeches, searches his
pockets, and take his keys, and so rummageth all his closets and trunks: and a
public Notary whom he carries with him, takes an Inventory of every thing,
which is sequestered and despositated in the hands of some of his next
neighbors; The party being hurried away in a close Coach, and clap^ in prison,
he is there eight days before he makes his appearance, and then they present
unto him the Cross, and the Missall book to swear upon; if he refuses to
swear, he convinces himself, and though he swear, yet he is remanded to
prison: This Oath commonly is presented before any accusation be produced; His
Jailer is strictly commanded to pry into his actions, his deportment, words, and
countenance, and to ser spies upon him, and whosoever of his fellow prisoners,
or others can produce any thing against him, he has a reward for it: At last
after diverse apparances, examinations, and scrutinies, the Information against
him is read, but the witnesses names are concealed, then is he appointed a
Proctor and an Advocat, but he must not confer or advise with them privately,
but in the face of the Court; The Kings Attorney is a party in it, and the
accusers commonly the sole witnesses. Being to name his own Lawyers oftentimes
others are discovered and fall into trouble: while he is thus in prison, he is
so abhorred, and abandoned of all the world, that none will, atleast none dare
visit him. Though one clear himself, yet he cannot be freed, till an Act of
^aith pass; which is don seldom, but very solemnly; There are few who having
fallen into the gripes of the Inquisition do escape the rack; or the Sambenito
which is a straight yellow coat without sleeves, having the pourtrait of the
Devil painted up and down in black, and upon their heads they carry a Mi^er of
paper, with a man frying in the flames of hell upon it, they gag their mouths,
and tie a great cord about their necks: The Judges meet in some uncouth dark
dungeon, and the Executioner stands by, clad in a close dark garment, his head
and face covered with a Chaperon, out of which there are but two holes to look
through, and a huge Link burning in his hand: When the Ecclesiastic Inquisitors
have pronounced the Anathema against him, they transmit him to the secular
Judges to receave the sentence of death, for Churchmen must not have their
hands imbrued in blood, the King can mitigat any punishment under death, nor i^
a Nobleman subject to the rack.

I pray be pleased to pardon this rambling imperfect relation, and take in good
part my Conformity to your Commands, for I am

Westmin. 30 Aug. 1632. Your Lopps most ready and faithful Servitor, J. H.

Familiar Letters.
SECTION VI.
I. To P. W. Esquire at the Signet Office, from the English House in Hamburgh.
WE are safely com to Germany, Sir John Penington took us aboard in one of His
Majesty's Ships at Margets; and the Wind stood so fair, that we were at the
mouth of the Elve upon Monday following. It pleased my Lord I should Land first
with two Footmen, to make haste to Glukstad, to learn where the King of Denmark
was, and he was at Rensburgh, some two days journey off, at a Richsdagh an
Assembly that corresponds our Parliament: My Lord the next day Landed at
Glukstad, where I had provided an accommodation for him, though he intended to
have gone for Hamburgh, but I was bold to tell him, that in regard there were some
ombrages, and not only so, but open and actual differences 'twixt the King and
that Town, it might be ill taken, if he went thither first, before he had
attended the King. So I left my Lord at Glukstad, and being com hither to take
up 8000 rich Dollars upon Mr. Burlamac^ Bills, and fercht Mr. Avery our Agent
here; I return to morrow to attend (...) Lord again. I find that matters are
much off the Hinges (...) King of Denmark, and this Town.

The (...) Sweden is advancing apace to find out Wallestein, and Wallestein
(...) and in all appearance they will be shortly engaged.

No more now, for I am interpell'd by many businesses; when you write, deliver
your Letters to Mr. Railton, who will see them safely conveyed, for a little
before my departure, I brought him acquainted with my Lord* that he might
negotiat some things at Court. So with my service and love to all at
Westminster, I rest

Hamburgh, Octo. 23. 1632. Your faithful servitor, J. H.

II. To my Lord Viscount S. from Hamburgh.
My Lord,
SInce I was last in Town, my Lord of Leicester has attended the King of
Denmark at Rensburg in Holsteinland; he was brought thither from Glukstad in
indifferent good equipage, both for Coaches and Wagons; but he stayed some
days at Rensburg for Audience; we made a comely, gallant show in that kind,
when we went to Court, for we were near upon a hundred all of one piece in
mourning: It pleased my Lord, to make me the Orator, and so I made a long Latin
Speech, alta voce, to the King in Latin, of the occasion of this Ambassie, and
tending to the praise of the deceased Queen; and I had better luck then
Secretary Nanton had, some thirty years since, with Roger Earl of Rutland; for
at the beginning of his Speech, when he had pronounced Serenissime Rex, he was
dashed out of countenance, and so gravelled, that he could go no further: I
made another to Christian the fifth, his eldest Son, King elect of Denmark; for
though that Crown be purely electif, yet for these three last Kings, they
wrought so with the people, that they got their eldest Sons chosen, and
declared before their death, and to assume the Title of Kings elect* At the
same Audience, I made another Speech to Prince Frederic, Archbishop of B^eme,
the Kings third Son, and he has but one more (besides his natural Issue)
which is Prince Ulri^, now in the Wars with the Duke of Sax; and they say there
is an alliance contracted already, 'twixt Christian the fifth, and the Duke of
Sax his Daughter. This ceremony being performed, my Lord desired ^o find his
own diet, and then he fell to diverse businesses, which is ^ot fitting for me to
forestall, or impart unto your Lordship now; (...) we stayed there near upon a
month: The King feasted my Lord once, and it lasted from eleven of the clock,
till toward the Evening, during which time, the King began thirty five
healths; the first to the Emperor, the second to his Nephew of England, and so
went over all the Kings and Queens of Christendom, but he never remembered the
Prince Palsgraves health, or his Neece's all the while: The King was taken away
at last in his Chair, but my Lord of Leicester bore up stoutly all the while,
so that when there came two of the Kings Guard to take him by the Arms, as he
was going down the stairs, my Lord shook them off and went alone.

The next morning I went to Court for some dispatches, but the King was gone a
hunting at break of day; but going to some other of his Officers, their servants
told me, without any appearance of shame, That their Masters were drunk over
night, and so it would be late before they would rise.

A few days after we went to Gothorp Castle in S^eswickland, to the Duke of
Holsteins Court, where at my Lords first audience, I made another Latin Speech
to the Duke, touching his Gran-Mothers death; our entertainment there was brave
(though a little fulsom) my Lord was log'd in the Dukes Castle, and parted with
Presents, which is more then the King of Denmark did; thence we went to Husem
in Ditzmarsh, to the Duchess of Holsteins Court (our Queen Anns youngest
Sister) where we had also very full entertainment, I made a speech to her also,
about her Mothers death, and when I named the Lady Sophia* the tears came down
her cheeks. Thence we came back to Rhensburg, and so to this Town of Hamburgh,
where my Lord intends to repose some days after an abrupt, odd journey we had
through Holsteinland, but I believe it will not be long, in regard Sir John
Pennington stays for him upon the River. We expect Sir Robert Anstruther to
com from Vi^ hither, to take the advantage of the Kings Ship.

We understand that the Imperial and Swedish Army have made near approaches
one to the other, and that some skirmishes and blows have bin already twixt
them; which are the forerunners of a battle. So my good Lord I rest

Hamburgh, 9 Octo. 1632. Your most humble and faithful S^vitor, J. H.

III. To the Right Honble the Earl R. from Hamburgh.
My Lord,
THough your Lordship must needs think, that in the employment I am in (which
requires a whole man) my spirits must be distracted by multiplicity of
businesses; yet because I would not recede from my old method, and first
principles of travel, when I came to any great City, to couch in writing
what is most observable, I sequestered my self from other Affairs, to send your
Lordship what follows touching this great Hans-Town.

The Hans or Hansiatic l^gue is very ancient, some would derive the word from
hand, because they of the society plight their faith by that action: Others
derive it from Hansa, which in the Gothic tongue is Counsel: Others would have
it com from Han der see, which signifies near or upon the Sea, and this passes
for the best Etymology, because their Towns are all seated so, or upon some
navigable River near the sea. The extent of the old Hans was from the Nerve in
Livonia to the Rhin, and contained 62 great Mercantil Towns, which were divided
to four Precincts: The chiefest of the first Pr^cinct was Lub^ck, where the
Archiss of their ancient Records, and their prime Chancery is still, and this
Town is within that Verge: Cullen is chief of the second Precinct: Erurswic of
the third: and Danzic of the fourth. The Kings of Peland and Sweden have sued
to be their Protector, but they refused them, because they were not Princes of
the Empire; they put off also the King of Denmark with a Complement, nor would
they admit the King of Spain when he was most potent in the Netherlands, though
afterward when 'twas too late, they desired the help of the Ragged Staff; nor
of the Duke of Anjou, notwithstanding that, the world thought he should have
married our Queen, who interceded for him, and so 'twas probable, that thereby
they might recover their privileges in England; so that I do not find they ever
had any Protector, but the great Master of Prussia; and their want of a
Protector did do them some prejudice in that famous difference they had with our
Queen.

The old Hans had extraordinary immunities given them by our Henry the third,
because they assisted him in his wars with so many ships, and as they pretend,
the King was not only to pay them for the service of the said Ships, but for
the Vessels themselves if they miscarried: Now it happened, that at their
return to Germany, from serving Henry the third, there was a great Fleet of them
cast away; for which, according to Covenant, they demanded reparation; Our King
in lieu of money, amongst other Acts of Grace, gave them a privilege to pay but
one per cent, which continued until Queen Mories reign; and she by advice of
King Philip her husband, as 'twas conceived, enhanc'd the one to twenty per
cent. The Hans not only complained, but clamor'd loudly for breach of their
ancient Privileges confirmed unto them, time out of mind, by thirteen
successive Kings of England, which they pretended to have purchased with their
money. King Philip undertook to accommode the business, but Queen Mary dying a
little after, and he retiring, there could be nothing don* Complaint being made
to Queen Elizabeth, she answered, That as she would not innovat any thing, so
she would maintain them still in the same condition she found them: hereupon
their Navigation and Trafic ceased a while: Wherefore the English tried what
they could do themselves, and they thrive so well, that they took the whole
trade into their own hands, and so divided themselves (though they be now but
one) to Staplers, and Merchant Adventurers, the one residing constant in one
place, where they kept their Magazin of Wool, the other stirring and adventuring
to diverse places abroad with Cloth, and other Manufactures; which made the Hans
endevor to draw upon them all the malignancy they could from all Nations:
Moreover the Hans Towns being a body politic incorporated in the Empire,
complained hereof to the Emperor, who sent over persons of great quality to
mediat an accommodation, but they could effect nothing. Then the Queen caused a
Proclamation to be punished, that the Easterlings or Merchants of the Hans,
should be entreated and used as all other strangers were within her Dominions,
without any mark of difference, in point of commerce. This netled them more,
thereupon they bent their Forces more eagerly, and in a Diet at Ratisbon, they
procurd, that the English Merchants who had associated themselves into
Fraternities in Embd^n, and other places, should be declared Monopolists; and
so there was a Comitiall Edict publishd against them, that they should be
exterminated, and banished out of all parts of the Empire, and this was don by
the activity of one Suderman a great Civilian; There was there for the Queen
Gilpin, as nimble a man as Suderman, and he had the Chancellor of Embden to
second and countenance him, but they could not stop the said Edict wherein the
Society of English Merchants Adventurers was pronounced to be a Monopoly; yet
Gilpin played his game so well, that he wrought under hand, that the said
Imperial Ban should not be published till after the dissolution of the Diet,
and that in the interim, the Emperor should send Ambassadors to England, to
advertise the Queen of such a Ban against her Merchants: But this wrought so
little impression upon the Queen, that the said Ban grew rather ridiculous than
formidable, for the Town of Embden harbored our Merchants notwithstanding, and
afterward Stood, but they not being able to protect them so well from the
Imperial Ban, they settled in this Town of Hamburgh: After this, the Queen
commanded another Proclamation to be divulged, that the Easterlings or
Hansiatic Merchants should be allowed to Trade in England upon the same
conditions, and payment of duties, as her own Subjects; provided, Tha^ the
English Merchants might have interchangeable privilege, to reside and trade
peaceably in Stood or Hamburgh, or any where else, within the precincts of the
Hans: This incensed them more, thereupon they resolved to cut off Stood and
Hamburgh from being members of the Hans, or of the Empire; but they suspended
this dessein, till they saw what success the great Spanish Fleet should have,
which was then preparing in the year eighty eight, for they had not long before
had recours to the King of Spain* and made him their own, and he had don them
some material good Offices; wherefore to this day the Spanish Counsel is taxed
of improvidence, and imprudence, that there was no use made of the Hans Towns in
that expedition.

The Queen finding that they of the Hans would not be contented with that
equality she had offered 'twixt them and her own Subjects, put out a
Proclamation, that they should carry neither Corn, Victuals, Arms, Timber,
Masts, Cables, Mineralls, nor any other materials or Men to Spain or
Portugal. And after the Queen growing more redoubtable and famous, by the
overthrow of the Fleet of Eighty eight, the Osterlings fell to despair of doing
any good: Add hereunto another disaster that befell them, the taking of sixty
sails of their Ships about the mouth of Tagus in Portugal, by the Queens
Ships that were laden with Ropas de contrabando, viz. Goods prohibited by her
former Proclamation into the dominions of Spain: And as these Ships were upon
point of being discharged, she had intelligence of a great Assembly at Lub^ck,
which had met of purpose to consule of means to be revenged of her; thereupon
she staid and seized upon the said sixty Ships, only two were freed to bring
news what became of the rest. Hereupon the Pole sent an Ambassador to her, who
spoke in a high tone, but he was answered in a higher.

Ever since our Merchants have beaten a peaceful and free uninterrupted Trade
into this Town, and elsewhere within and without the Sound, with their
Manufactures of Wool, and found the way also to the White-Sea to Archangel and
Mosco: Insomuch, that the premises being well considered, it was a happy thing
for England, that that clashing fell out 'twixt her and the Hans, for it may be
said to have been the chief ground of that Shipping and Merchandising, which
she is now com to, and wherewith she has flourished ever since: But one thing
is observable, that as that Imperial or Comitial Bat, pronounced in the Diet
at Ratisbon against our Merchants and Manufactures of Wool, incited them more
to industry: So our Proclamation upon Alderman Cockeins project of transporting
no white Cloths but Died, and in their full manufacture, did cause both Dutch
and German to turn necessity to a virtue, and made them far more ingenious to
find ways, not only to Die, but to make Cloth, which has much impaired our
Markers ever since; for there has not been the third part of our Cloth sold
since, either here or in Holland.

My Lord, I pray be pleased to dispense with the prolixity of this Discourse,
for I could not wind it up closer, nor on a lesser bottom; I shall be careful
to bring with me those Furrs I had instructions for: So I rest

Hamburgh, 20 October. 1632. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.

IV. To Cap. J. Smith at the Hague.
Captain,
HAving so wishfull an opportunity as this Noble Gentleman, Mr. James Crofts
who coms with a Packet for the Lady Elizabeth from my Lord of Leicester, I
could not but send you this friendly salute. We are like to make a speedier
return than we expected from this Ambassie; for we found the King of Denmark in
He^stein, which shortened our voyage from going to the Sound: The King was in an
advantageous posture to give audience, for there was a Parliament then at
Rhensburg, where all the Younkers met. Amongst other things, I put myself to
mark the carriage of the Holstein Gentlemen, as they were going in and out at
the Parliament House; and observing well their Physiognomies, their Complexions,
and Gate, I thought verily I was in England, for they resemble the English
more, than either Welsh or Scot, (though cohabiting upon the same Island) or
any other peeple, that ever I saw yet; which makes me verily believe, that the
English Nation came first from this lower circuit of Saxony; and there is one
thing that strengthens me in this belief, that there is an ancient Town hard
by, called Lunden, and an Island called Angles; whence it may well be that our
Country came from Britannia to be Anglia.

This Town of Hamburgh from a Society of Brewers, is com to be a huge wealthy
place, and her new Town is almost as big as the old; There is a shrewd jar
'twixt her and her Protector, the King of Denmark.

My Lord of Leicester has don some good Offices to accommode matters: She
chomps extremely, that there should be such a Bit put lately in her mouth, as
the Fort at Luckstadit, which commands her River of Elve, and makes her pay
what Toll he please.

The King begins to fill his Chests apace, which were so emptied in his late
marches to Germany: He has set a new Toll upon all Ships that pass to this
Town; and in the Sound also there be some extraordinary duties imposed, whereat
all Nations begin to murmr, specially the Hollanders, who say, that the old
Primitive Toll of the Sound was but a Rose-noble for evry Ship, but by a new
Sophistry, it is now interpreted for evry Sail that should pass through,
insomuch, that the Hollander though he be a Low Country man, begins to speak
High Dutch in this point, a rough language you know; which made the Italian
tell a German Gentleman once, That when God Almighty thrust Adam out of
Paradise, he spoke Dutch; but the German retorted wittily, Then Sir, if God
spoke Dutch when Adam was ejected, Eve spoke Italian when Adam was seduced.

I could be larger, but for a sudden auvocation to business; so I most
affectionatly send my kind respects unto you, desiring, when I am rendered to
London, I may hear from you: So I am

Hamburg 22 October. 1632. Your faithful Friend to serve you, J. H.

V. To the Right Honble the Earl of Br.
My Lord,
I Am newly returned from Germany, whence there came lately two Ambassadors
extraordinary in one of the Ships Royal, the Earl of Leicester, and Sir Robert
Anstruther; the latter came from Vienna, and I know little of his negotiations;
but for my Lord of Leicester, I believe there was never so much business
dispatched in so short a compass of time, by any Ambassador, as your Lordship,
who is best able to judge, will find by this short relation: When my Lord was
com to the King of Denmarks Court, which was then at Rhensberg, a good way
within Holstein: The first thing he did, was to condole the late Queen Dowagers
death (our Kings Gran-Mother) which was don in such an equipage, that the Danes
confessed, there was never Queen of Denmark so mourned for: This ceremony being
passed, my Lord fell to business; and the first thing which he propounded, was,
That for preventing of further effusion of Christian blood in Germany, and for
the facilitating a way to restore peace to all Christendom, His Majesty of
Denmark would join with his Nephew of great Britain, to send a solemn Ambassie
to the Emperor, and the King of Sweden, (the ends of whose proceedings were
doubtful) to mediat an accommodation, and to appear for him, who will be found
most conformable to reason. To this, that King answered in writing (for that
was the way of proceeding) that the Emperor and the Swede were com to that
height, and heat of war, and to such a violence, that it is no time yet to
speak to them of peace; but when the fury is a little passed, and the times
more proper, he would take it for an Honor to join with his Nephew, and
contribut the best means he could to bring about so good a Work.

Then there was computation made, what was due to the King of great Britain, and
the Lady Elizabeth, out of their Gran-Mothers Estate,: which was valued at near
upon two Millions of Dollars, and your Lordship must think it was a hard task
to liquidat such an account: This being don, my Lord desird that part which was
due to his Majesty (our King) and the Lady his Sister, which appeared to amount
unto eightscore thousand pounds sterling: That King answered, That he confessed
there was so much money due, but his Mothers Estate was yet in the hands of
Commissioners; and neither he, nor any of his Sisters, had received their
portions yet, and that his Nephew of England, and his Near of Holland, should
receive theirs with the first; but he did intimat besides, that there were some
considerable accounts 'twixt him and the Crown of England, for ready moneys he
had lent his Brother King James, and for the thirty thousand pounds a month,
that was by Covenant promised him for the support of his late Army in Germany.
Then my Lord propounded, That His Majesty of Great Britains Subjects were not
well used by his Officers in the Sound: for though that was but a Transitory
passage into the Baltic Sea, and that they neither bought nor sold any thing
upon the place, yet they were forced to stay there many days to take up money
at high interest, to pay diverse Tolls for their Merchandise, before they had
exposed them to vent: Therefore it was desired, that for the future, what
English Merchant soever should pass through the Sound, it should be sufficient
for him to Register an invoice of his Cargazon in the Custom-House Book, and
give his Bond to pay all duties at his return, when he had made his Market. To
this my Lord had a fair answer, and so procured a public Instrument under that
Kings Hand and Seal, and signed by his Counselors, which he had brought over,
wherein the Proposition was granted; which no Ambassador could obtain before.
Then 'twas alleged, that the English Merchant Adventurers who trade into
Hamburgh* have a new Toll lately imposed upon them at Luckstad, which was
desired to be taken of^. To this also, there was the like Instrument given, that
the said Toll should be levied no more, Lastly, my Lord (in regard he was to
pa's by the Hague) desired that Hereditary part which belonged to the Lady
Elizabeth out of her Gran-Mothers Estate, because His Majesty knew well what
Crosses and Afflictions she had passed, and what a numerous Issue she had to
maintain; And my Lord of Leicester would engage his Honor, and all the Estate
he has in the World, That this should no way prejudice the accounts he is to
make with his Majesty of Great Britain. The King of Denmark highly extolled the
Noblenes of this motion; but he protested, that he had bin so drained in the
late Wars, that his Chests are yet very empty. Hereupon my Lord was feasted,
and so departed.

He went then to the Duke of Holstein to Sleswick, where he found him at his
Castle of Gothorp, and truly I did not think to have found such a magnificent
building in these bleak parts; Th^e also my Lord did condole the death of the
late Queen that Dukes Gran-Mother, and he received very Princely entertainment.

Then he went to Husem, where the like ceremony of Condolement was performed at
the Duchess of Holsteins Court, His Majesty's (our Kings) Ant.

Then he came back to Hamburgh, where that instrument which my Lord had
procured, for remitting of the new Toll at Gluckslad, was delivered the Company
of our Merchant Adventurers; and some other good offices don for that Town, as
matters stood twixt them and the King of Denmark.

Then we came to Stood, where Lesly was Governor, who carried his foot in a
scarf for a wound he had received at Bucks^obo, and he kept that place for the
King of Sweden: And some business of consequence was don there also.

So we came to Broomsbottle, where we staid for a Wind some days; and in the
midway of our voyage, we met with a Holland ship, who told us, the King of
Sweden was slain; and so we returned to London in less then three months: And
if this was not business enough for such a compass of time, I leave your
Lordship to judge.

So craving your Lordships pardon for this lame account, I rest,

Land. 1 Octo. 1632. Your Lordships most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

VI. To my Brother Dr. Howell, at his House in Horsley.
My good Brother,
I Am safely returned from Germany, thanks be to God, and the news which we
heard at Sea by a Dutch Skipper, about the midst of our voyage from Hamburgh,
it seems proves too true, which was of the fall of the King of Sweden. One
Ierbire, who says that he was in the very action, brought the first news to
this Town, and every corner rings of it; yet such is the extravagancy of some,
that they will lay wagers he is not yet dead, and the Exchange is full of such
peeple. He was slain at Lutzen field battle, having made the Imperial Army
give ground the day before; and being in pursuance of it, the next morning in a
sudden Fog that fell, the Cavelry on both sides being engaged, he was killed in
the midst of the Troops, and none knows who killed him, whether one of his own
men or the enemy; but finding himself mortally hurt, he told Saxen Waymar,
Cousin, I pray look to the Troops, for I think I have enough: His body was not
only rescued, but his forces had the better of the day; Papenheim being killed
before him, whom he esteemed the greatest Captain of all his enemies; for he
was used to say, that he had three men to deal withal, a Pultron, a Jesuit,
and a Soldier; by the two first, he meant Walstein, and the Duke of Bavaria,
by the last Papenheim.

Questionles this Gustavus (whose anagram is Augustus) was a great Captain, and
a gallant man, and had he survived that last victory, he would have put the
Emperor to such a plunge, that some think he would hardly have bin able to have
made head against him to any purpose again. Yet his own Allies confess, that
none knew the bottom of his designs.

He was not much affected to the English, witness the ill usage Marquis
Hammilton had with his 6000 men, whereof there returned not 600, the rest died of
hunger and sickness, having never seen the face of an enemy; Witness also, his
harshnes to our Ambassadors, and the rigid terms he would have tied the Prince
Palsgrave unto. So with my affectionat respects to Mr. Mouschamp, and kind
commend^ to Mr. Bridger, I rest

Westmin. 5 December. 1632. Your loving Brother, J. H.

VII. To the R. R. Dr. Field, Lord Bishop of St. David's.
My Lord,
YOur late Letter affected me with two contrary passions, with gladness, and
sorrow; the beginning of it dilated my spirits with apprehensions of joy, that
you are so well recoverd of your late sickness, which I heartily congratulat;
but the conclusion of your Lordships Letter, contracted my spirits, and plunged
them in a deep sense of just sorrow, while you please to write me news of my
dear Fathers death. Permulsit initium, percussit finis. Truly my Lord, it is
the heaviest news that ever was sent me; but when I recollect my self, and
consider the fairnes and maturity of his Age, and that it was rather a gentle
dissolution than a death: When I contemplat that infinite advantage he has got
by this change and transmigration, it much lightens the weight of my grief; for
if ever human soul entered heaven, surely his is there; such was his constant
piety to God, his rare indulgence to his children, his charity to his
neighbors, and his candor in reconciling disterences; such was the gentleness of
his disposition, his unwearied course in actions of virtue, that I wish my soul
no other felicity, when she has shaken off these Rags of Flesh, than to ascend
to his, and coinjoy the same bliss.

Excuse me my Lord, that I take my leave at this time so abruptly of you; when
this sorrow is a little disgested, you shall hear further from me, for I am

West. 1 of May. 1632. Your Lordships most true and humble Servitor, J. H.

VIII. To the Earl of Leicester at Penshurst^
My Lord,
I Have deliverd Mr. Secretary Coke an account of the whole legation, as your
Lordship inordred me, which contained near upon twenty sheets; I attended him
also with the Note of your extraordinaries, wherein I find him something
difficult and dilatory yet. The Governor of the Eastland Company, Mr. Alderman
Clethero, will attend your Lordship at your return to Court, to acknowledge
your favor unto them. I have delivered him a Copy of the transactions of things
that concerned their Company at Rhensberg.

The news we heard at Sea of the King of Swedens death is confirmed more and
more, and by the computation I have been a little curious to make, I find that
he was killed the same day your Lordship set out of Hamburgh. But there is other
news com since, of the death of the Prince Palatin, who as they write, being
returned from visiting the Duke De deux Ponts to Mentz, was struck there with
the Contagion; yet by special ways of cure, the malignity was expelld, and
great hopes of recovery, when the news came of the death of the King of Sweden,
which made such impressions in him, that he dyed few days after, having
overcom all difficulties by concluding with the Swede, and the Governor of
Frankindall, and being ready to enter into a repossession of his Country: A
sad destiny.

The Swedes bear up still, being somented and supported by the French, who will
not suffer them to leave Germany yet. A Gentleman that came lately from Italy,
told me, that there is no great joy in Rome, for the death of the King of
Sweden: The Spaniards up and down, will not stick to call this Pope Lutherano,
and that he had intelligence with the Swede. It Is true, that he has not been so
forward to assist the Emperor in this quarrel, and that in open Consistory,
when there was such a contrasto 'twixt the Cardinals for a supply from Saint
Peter, he declard, That he was well satisfied that this war in Germany was no
war of Religion; which made him dismiss the Imperial Ambassadors with this
short answer, That the Emperor had drawn these mischiefs upon himself; for at
that time when he saw the Swedes upon the Frontires of Germany, if he had
employed those men and moneys, which he consumed to trouble the peace of Italy,
in making war against the Duke of Mantova against them, he had not had now so
potent an enemy. So I take my leave for this time, being

Westminster. 3 June. 1632. Your Lordships most humble, and obedient Servitor, J. H.

IX. To Mr. E. D.
SIR,
I Thank you a thousand times for the Noble entertainment you gave me at Berry,
and the pains you took in showing me the Antiquities of that place. In
requital, I can tell you of a strange thing I saw lately here, and I believe
it is true; As I passed by St. Dunstans in Fleet street the last Saturday, I
stepped into a Lapidary or Stone-cutters shop, to treat with the Master for a
stone to be put upon my Fathers Tomb: and casting my eyes up and down, I might
spy a huge Marble with a large Inscription upon it, which was thus to my best
remembrance:

Here lies John Oxenham, a goodly young man, in whose Chamber, as he was
struggling with the pangs of death, a Bird with a white breast was seen
fluttering about his Bed, and so vanished. Here lies also Mary Oxenham, the
sister of the said John who died the next day, and the same Apparition was seen
in the Room. Then another Sister is spoke of.

Then, Here lies hard by James Oxenham, the son of the said John, who died a
child in his Cradle a little after, and such a Bird was seen fluttering about
his head, a little before he expired, which vanished afterward.* At the bottom
of the Stone there is,

Here lies Elizabeth Oxenham, the Mother of the said John, who died sixteen
years since, when such a Bird with a white breast was seen about hex Bed before
her death. To all these there be diverse Witnesses, both Squires and Ladies,
whose names are engraven upon the Stone: This Stone is to be sent to a Town
hard by Exeter where this happened.

Were you here, I could raise a choice Discourse with you hereupon. So hoping to
see you the next Term, to requite some of your favors, I rest

Westmin. 3 July. 1632. Your true friend to serve you* J. H.

X. To W. B. Esquire.
SIR,
THe upbraiding of a courtesy is as bad in the Giver, as ingratitude in the
Receiver (though which you think I am loath to believe) be faulty in the first,
I shall never offend in the second, while

VVestmin. 24. October. 1632. J. Howell.

XI. To Sir Arthur Ingram at York.
SIR,
OUr greatest news here now, is, that we have a new Attorney General, which is
news indeed, considering the humor of the man, how he has been always ready
to entertain any cause whereby he might clash with the Prerogative; but now as
Judge Richardson told him, his head is full of Proclamations, and Divices, how
to bring money into the Exchequer. He has lately found out amongst the old
Records of the Tower, some precedents for raising a tax called Ship Money, in all
the Port Towns, when the Kingdom is in danger: Whether we are in danger or no,
at present 'twere presumption in me to judge, that belongs to his Majesty, and
his Privy Counsel, who have their choice Instruments abroad for Intelligence;
yet one with half an eye may see, we cannot be secure, while such huge Fleets
of men of War, both Spanish, French, Dutch, and Dunk^rkers, some of them laden
with Ammunition* Men, Arms, and Armies, do daily ^ail on our Seas, and confront
the Kings, Chambers; while we have only three or four Ships abroad to guard our
Coasts and Kingdom, and to preserve the fairest Flower of the Crown, the
Dominion of the Narrow-Seas, which I hear the French Cardinal begins to
question, and the Hollander lately would not vail to one of his Majesty's ships
that brought over the Duke of Lenox and my Lord Weston from Bullen, and indeed,
we are jeered abroad, that we send no more ships to guard our Seas.

Touching my Lord Ambassador Weston, he had a brave journey of it, though it
c^st dear; for it is thought 'twill stand his Majesty in 25000 pounds, which
makes some Critics of the times, to censure the Lord Tresurer, That now the
King wanting money so much, he should send his son abroad to spend him such a
sum only for delivering of Presents and Complements; but I believe they are
deceived, for there were matters of State also in the Ambassie.

The Lord Weston passing by Paris, intercepted, and opened a Packet of my Lord
of Hollands, wherein there were some Letters of Her Majesty's, this my Lord of
Holland takes in that scorn, that he defied him since his coming, and demanded
the combat of him; for which he is confined to his House at Kensinton: So with
my humble service to my Noble Lady, I rest,

Westmin. 30 Ian. 1633. Your much obliged Servitor, J. H.

XII. To the Lord Vicount Wentworth, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord Precedent
of York, etc.
My Lord,
I Was glad to apprehend the opportunity of this Packet to convey my humble
service to your Lordship.

There are old doings in France, and it is no new thing for the French to be
always a doing, they have such a stirring genius. The Queen Mother has made an
escape to Brussells, and Monsieur to Lorain where they say, he courts very
earnestly the Dukes sister, a young Lady under twenty; they say a Contract is
passed already, but the French Cardinal opposes it; for they say that Lorain
Milk seldom breeds good blood in France: Not only the King, but the whole
Gallican Church has protest^ against it in a solemn Synod; for the Heir
apparent of the Crown of France, cannot marry without the Royal consent. This
aggravats a grudg the French King has to the Duke, for siding with the
Imperialists, and for things reflecting upon the Duchy of Bar; for which he is
hommogeable to the Crown of France, as he is to the Emperor for Lorain: A hard
task it is to serve two Masters; and an unhappy situation it is, to lie 'twixt
two puissant Monarchs; as the Dukes of Savoy and Lorain do: So I kiss your
Lordships hands, and rest

My Lord, Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
VVestmin. 1 of April. 1633.
XIII. To my most Noble Lady, the Lady Cornwallis.
Madam,
IN conformity to your commands, which sway with me, as much as an Act of
Parliament, I have sent your Ladyship this small Hymn for Christmas day, now
near approaching; if your Ladyship please to put an Air to it, I have my reward.

1.
Hail holy T^de,
VVherin a Bride,
A Virgin (which is more)
Brought forth a Son,
The like was don,
Never in the world before.
2.
Hail spotless Maid,
Who thee upbraid,
To have been born in sin,
Do little weigh,
What in thee lay,
Before thou did Lie-in.
3.
Three months thy Womb,
Was made the Dome
Of Him, whom Earth nor Air,
Nor the vast mould
Of Heaven can hold,
'Cause he is Ubiquitair.
4.
O, would ^e daign
To rest and reign
In The center of my heart:
And make it still
His domicill,
And residence in part.
5.
But in so foul a Cell
Can he abide to dwell?
Yes when he please to move
His Herbenger to sweep the Room,
And with rich Odors it perfume,
Of Faith, of Hope, of Love.
So I humbly kiss your hands, and thank your Ladyship, that you would command
in any thing that may conduce to your contentment.

Westmin. 3 Feb. 1633. Your Lapps most humble Servitor, J. H.

XIV. (...) the Lord Clifford at Knasburgh.
My Lord,
I Received your Lordships of the last of June, and I return m^ most humble
thanks for the choice Nagg you pleased to send me, which came in very good
plight. Your Lordship desires me to lay down what in my Travells* abroad I
observed of the present condition of the Jews, once an Elect peeple, but now
grown contemptible, and strangely squandered up and down the World. Though such
a Discourse, exactly framed, might make up a Volume, yet I will twist up what I
know in this point, upon as narrow a Bottom as may be shut up within the
compass of this Letter.

The first Christian Country that expelled the Jews, was England; France
followed our example next, then Spain, and afterward Portugal; nor were they
exterminated these Countries for their Religion, but for Villainies and
cheatings; for clipping Coins, poisning of Waters, and counterfeiting of Seals.

Those Countries they are permitted to live now most in amongst Christians, are
Germany, Holland, Bohemia, and Italy; but not in those parts where the King of
Spain has to do. In the Levant and Turkey, they swarm most, for the gran
Vizier, and all other great Boshawes, have commonly some Jew for their
Counselor or Spy, who inform them of the state of Christian Princes, possess
them of a hatred of the Religion, and so incense them to a war against them.

They are accounted the subtill'st and most subdolous peeple upon Earth; the
reason why they are thus degenerated from their primitive simplicity, and
innocence, is their often ^ptivities, their desperate fortunes, the necessity
and hatred to which they have been habituated, for nothing depraves ingenuous
spirits, and corrupts clear wits more than want and indigence. By their
profession they are for the most part Broakers, and Lombardeers, yet by that
base and servile way of Frippery trade, they grow rich whersoever they nest
themselves; and this with their multiplication of Children, they hold to be an
argument that an extraordinary providence attends them still. Me thinks that so
clear accomplishments of the Prophecies of our Savior, touching that peeple,
should work upon them for their conversion, as the destruction of their City
and Temple; that they should become despicable, and the tail of all Nations;
that they should be Vagabonds, and have no firm habitation.

Touching the first, they know it came punctually to pass, and so have the
other two; for they are the most hateful race of men upon earth; insomuch,
that in Turkey where they are most valued, if a Musulman com to any of their
houses, and leave his shoos at the door, the Jew dare not com in all the while,
till the Turk has don what he would with his Wife: For the last, it is
wonderful to see in what considerable numbers they are dispersed up and down
the World, yet they can never reduce themselves to such a coalition and unity
as may make a Republic, Principality, or Kingdom.

They hold that the Jews of Italy, Germany, and the Levant, are of Benjamins
Tribe; ten of the Tribes at the destruction of Ieroboams Kingdom were led
Captives beyond Euphrates, whence they never returned, nor do they know what
became of them ever after; yet they believe they never became Apostats and
Gentiles. But the Tribe of Judah, whence they expect their Messiah, of whom one
shall hear them discourse with so much confidence, and self-pleasing conceit,
they say, is settled in Portugal; where they give out to have thousands of their
race, whom they dispense withal to make a semblance of Christianity, even to
Church degrees.

This makes them breed up their children in the Lusitanian Language; which
makes the Spaniard have an odd saying, that El Portuguez se crio del pedo de un
Iudia. A Portugues was engendered of a Jews Fart; as the Mahu^ans have a passage
in their Alcaro^, That a Cat was made of a Lions breath.

As they are the most contemtiblest peeple, and have a kind of fulsom sent, no
better then a stink, that distinguishes them from others, so are they the most
timorous peeple on earth, and so, utterly incapable of Arms, for they are made
neither Soldiers nor Slaves: And this their Pusillanimity and cowardice, as
well as their cunning and craft, may be imputed to their various thraldo us,
contempt, and poverty, which has cowed and dast^rdiz'd their courage* Besides
these properties, they are light and giddy headed, much symbolizing in spirit
with our Apolalypticall zelots, and fiery interpreters of Daniel and other
Prophets, whereby they often sooth, or rather fool themselves into some
illumination, which really proves but some egregious dorage.

They much glory of their mysterious Cabal, wherein they make the reality of
things to depend upon Letters, and Words: but they say that Hebrew only has
this privilege: This Cabal, which is naught else but Tradition, they say, being
transmitted from one age to another, was in some measure a reparation of our
knowledge lost in Adam, and they say ^was revealed four times; First to Adam,
who being thrust out of Paradise, and sitting one day very sad, and sorrowing
for the loss of the knowledge he had of that dependence the creatures have with
their Creator; the Angel Raguel was sent to comfort him, and to instruct him
and repair his knowledge herein: And this they call the Caball, which was lost
the second time by the Flood, and ^abell* then God discovered it to Moses in
the bush. The third time to Solomon in a dream, whereby he came to know the
beginning, m^diety, and coasummati^ of times, and so wrote diverse Books, which
were lost in the gran captivity The last time they hold, that God restored the
Cabal to Esdras (a Book they value extraordinarily) who by Gods command
withdrew to the Wilderness forty days with five Scribes, who in that space
wrote two hundred and four Books: The first one hundred thirty and four, were
to be read by all; but the other seventy were to pass privately amongst the
Levites, and these they pretend to be Cabalistic, and not yet all lost.

There are this day three Sects of Jews; the Africans first, who besides the
holy Scriptures, embrace the Talmud also for authentic; the second receive only
the Scriptures; the third, which are called the Samaritans (whereof there are but
few) admit only of the (...), the five Books of Moses.

The Jews in general drink no Wine, without a dispensation; when they kill any
creature, they turn his face to the East, saying, Be it sanctified in the great
name of God; they cut the throat with a knif without a gap, which they hold
very profane.

In their Synagogs they make one of the best sort to read a Chapter of Moses,
then some mean Boy reads a piece of the Prophets; in the midst, there is a round
place arched over, wherein one of their Rabbis walks up and down, and in
Po^tuguez magnifies the Messiah to com, comforts their captivity, and rails at
Christ.

They have a kind of Cupboard to represent the Tabernacle, wherein they lay the
Tables of the Law, which now and then, they take out and kiss; they sing many
Tunes, and Adonai, they make the ordinary name of God: Jehovah is pronounced at
high Festivalls; at Circumcision Boys are put to sing some of David's Psalms so
loud, as drowns the Infants cry: The Synagog is hung about with Glass. Lamps
burning; every one at his entrance puts on a Linnen-Cope, first kissing it,
else they use no manner of reverence all the while; their Elders sometimes fall
together by the ears in the very Synagog, and with the Holy Utensiles, as
Candlesticks, Incense-Pans, and suchlike, break one another Pates.

Women are not allowed to enter the Synagog, but they sit in a Gallery without,
for they hold they have not so divine a soul as men, and are of a lower
creation, made only for sensual pleasure and propagation.

Amongst the Mahumetans, there is no Jew capable of a Turkish habit, unless he
acknowledge Christ as much as Turks do, which is to have bin a great Prophet,
whereof they hold there are three only, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet.

Thus my Lord, to perform your commands, which are very prevalent with me, have
I couched in this Letter, what I could, of the condition of the Jews, and if it
may give your Lordship any satisfaction, I have my reward abundantly. So I rest

Westmin. 3 of June. 1633. Your Lordships most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XV. To Mr. Philip Warrick, at Paris.
SIR,
YOur last unto me was in French of the first current, and I am glad you are
com so safe from Swisserland to Paris; as also, that you are grown so great a
Proficient in the Language: I thank you for the variety of news you sent me so
hansomly couched and knit together.

To correspond with you, the greatest news we have here, is, that we have a
gallant Fleet-Royall ready to set to sea, for the security of our Coasts and
Commerce, and for the Soverainty of our Seas. Hans said the King of England was
asleep all this while, but now he is awake; nor do I hear, does your French
Cardinal tamper any longer with our Kings Title and Right to the Dominion of
the Narrow-Seas. These are brave fruits of the shipmoneys.

I hear that the In^ante Cardinal having bin long upon his way to Brussells,
has got a notable Victory of the Swedes at Nordlinghen, where 8000 were slain,
Gustavus Horn, and other of the prime Commanders taken prisoners. They write
also that Monsieurs marriage with Madame of Lorain, was solemnly celebrated at
Brussels; she had followed him from Nancy in Pages apparel, because there were
forces in the way. It must needs be a mighty charge to the King of Spain, to
maintain Mother, and Son in this manner.

The Court affords little news at present, but that there is a Love called
Platonic love, which much swayes there of late; It is a love abstracted from
all corporeal gross impressions, and sensual appetit, but consists in
contemplation and Idaeas of the mind, not in any carnal fruition: This love
sets the wits of the Town on work; and they say there will be a Masko shortly
of it, whereof Her Majesty, and her Maids of Honor will be part.

All your friends here in Westminster are well, and very mindful of you, but
none more often then

Westmin. 3 June, 1634. Your most affectionate Servitor, J. H.

XVI. To my brother Mr H. P.
Brother,
MY brain was ore cast with a thick clowd of melancholy, I was become a lump I
know not of what, I could scarce find any palpitation within me on the left
side, when yours of the first of September was brought me, it had such a
virtue, that it begot new motions in me, like the Lodestone, which by its
attractive occult quality, moves the dull body of Iron, and makes it active; so
dull was I then, and such a magnetic property your Letter had to quicken me.

There is some murmuring against the Shipmon^y, because the tax is indefinit; as
also by reason, that it is levied upon the Country Towns, as well as Maritim,
and for that, they say N^ himself cannot show any record: There are also diverse
Patents granted, which are muttered at, as being no better then Monopolies:
Amongst others a Scotchman got one lately upon the Statute of levying twelve
pence for every Oath, which the Justices of Peace, and Constables had power to
raise, and have still: but this new Patentce is to quicken and put more life in
the Law, and see it executed. He has power to nominat one or two, or three, in
some Parishes, which are to have Commission from him for this Public Service,
and so they are to be exempt from bearing Office, which must needs deserve a
gratuity; And I believe this was the main drift of the Scot Patentce, so that
he intends to keep his Office in the Temple, and certainly, he is like to be
mighty gainer by it; for who would not give a good piece of money to be freed
from bearing all cumbersom Offices? No more now, but that with my dear love to
my sister, I rest

Westmin. 1 Aug. 1633. Your most affectionat Brother, J. H.

XVII. To the Right Honble the Lord Vicount Savage, at Long-Melford.
My Lord,
THe old Steward of your Courts, Master Attorney-Generall Noy, is lately dead,
nor could Tunbridg-waters do him any good: Though he had good matter in his
brain, he had, it seems, ill materials in his body, for his heart was
shrivelled like a Leather peny-purse when he was dissected, nor were his lungs
sound.

Being such a great Clerk in the Law, all the World wonders he left such an odd
Will, which is short, and in Latin: The substance of it is, that having
bequeathd a few Legacies, and left his second son 100 Marks a year, and 500
pounds in Money, enough to bring him up in his Fathers Profession; he
concludes, Reliqua meorum omnia progenito meo Edoardo, dissipanda (nec melius
unquam speravi) lego. I leave the rest of all my goods to my firstborn Edward,
to be consumed or scatterd (for I never hoped better.) A strange, and scarce a
Christian Will, in my opini^, for it argues uncharitablenes. Nor does the World
wonder less* that he should leave no Legacy to some of your Lordships children,
considering what deep Obligations he had to your Lordship; for I am confident
he had never bin Attorney General else.

The Vintners drink Carowses of joy that he is gone, for now they are in hopes
to dress Meat again, and sell Tobacco, Beer, Sugar and Fagots, which by a
sullen Capricio of his he would have restraind them from. He had his humors, as
other men; but certainly he was a solid rational man; and though no great
Orator, yet a profound Lawyer, and no man better versd in the Records of the
Tower. I heard your Lordship often say with what infinite pains and
indefatigable study he came to this knowledge: And I never heard a more
pertinent Anagram then was made of his name, William Noye, I moyle in law. If
ans be added, it may be applied to my Countryman Judge Jones, an excellent
Lawyer too, and a far more Gentile man. William Jones, I moile in laws. No more
now, but that I rest,

Westmin. 1 Octo. 1635. Your Lopps most humble and obliged Servitor, J. H.

XVIII. To the Right Honble the Countess of Sunderland.
Madam,
HEre enclosed I send your Ladyship a Letter from the Lord Deputy of Ireland,
wherein he declares that the disposing of the Attorniship in York, which he
passed over to me, had no relation to my Lord at all, but it was merely don out
of a particular respect to me: your Ladyship may please to think of it
accordingly, touching the accounts.

*It is now a good while the two Nephew-Princes have bin here, I mean the
Prince Elector, and Prince Robert. The King of Swedens death, and the late blow
at Norlingen has half blasted their hopes to do any good for recovery of the
Palatinat by land; Therefore I hear of some new designs by Sea. That the one
shall go to Madagascar, a great Island 800 miles long in the East Indies, never
yet coloniz'd by any Christian, and Captain Bo^d is to be his Lieutenant; the
other is to go with a considerable Fleet to the West Indies, to seize upon some
place there that may countervail the Palatinat, and Sir Henry Mervin to go with
him: But I hear my Lady Elizabeth opposes it, saying, that she will have none
of her sons to be Knights-errant. There is now professed actual enmity twixt
France and Spain, for there was a Herald at Arms sent lately to Flanders from
Paris, who by sound of Trumpet denounced and proclaimed open War against the
King of Spain and all his Dominions; this Herald left and fixed up the Defiance
in all the Towns as he passed: so that whereas before, the War was but
collateral and auxiliary, there is now proclaimed Hostility between them,
notwithstanding that they have one another sister^ in their beds evry night:
What the reason of this War is, truly Madame I cannot tell, unless it be
reason of state, to preve^ the further growth of the Spanish Monarchy; and there
be multitude of examples how Preventive Wars have been practis^ from all times.
Howsoever it is too sure that abundance of Christian blood will be spilt. So I
humbly take my leave, and rest,

Westminster, 4 June, 1635. Madame, Your Ladyships most obedient and faithful
Servitor, I. H.

XIX. To the Earl of Leicester at Penshurst.
My Lord,
I Am newly returned out of France, from a flying Journey as far as Orleans,
which I made at the request of Mr. Secretary Wind^. bank, and I hope I shall
receive some fruits of it hereafter. There is yet a great resentment in many
places in France, for the beheading of Montmorency, whom Henry the fourth was
used to say to be a better Gentleman than himself, for in his Colors he carried
this Motto, Dieu aid le premier Chevalier de France: God help the first Knight
of France. He dyed upon a Sca^told in Tholouze, in the flower of his years, at
34, and has left no Issue behind, so that noble old Family extinguished in a
snust: His Treason wa^ very foul, having received particular Commissions from
the King to make an extraordinary Levy of men and money in Languedoc, which he
turned afterward directly against the King, against whose person he appeared
armed in open field; and in a hostile posture, for fomenting of Monsieurs
Rebellion.

The Insante Cardinal is com to Brussells at last, through many difficulties:
and some few days before, Monsieur made semblance to go a Hawking, and so fled
to France, but left his mother behind, who since the Arch-Dutchess death is not
so well looked on as formerly in that Country.

Touching your business in the Exchequer, Sir Robert Pie we^ with me this
morning of purpose to my Lord Tresurer about it, and told me with much
earnestnes and assurance, that there shall be a speedy course taken for your
Lordships satisfaction.

I deliverd my Lord of Lins^y the Manuscript he lent your Lordship of his
Fathers Embastie to Denmark: and herewith I present your Lordship with a
complete Dia^y of your own late legation, which has cost me some oil and labor.
So I rest always,

Westminster. 19 June 1635. Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XX. To my Honored Friend and Fa. Mr. Ben: John^n.
Fa. B^n,
BEing lately in France, and returning in Coach from Paris to Rouen, I lighted
upon the Society of a knowing Gentleman, who related unto me a choice Story,
wher^f peradventure you may make some use in your way.

Some hundred and odd years since, there was in France one Captain Coucy a
gallant Gentleman of an ancient extraction, and* Keeper of Coucy* Castle, which
is yet standing and in good repair. He fell in love with a young Gentlewoman,
and courted her for his wife: there was reciprocal love between them, but her
parents understanding of it, by way of prevention they shuffled up a forced
Match twixt her and one Monsieur Fai^l, who was a great Heir: Captain Coucy
hereupon quitted France in discontent, and went to the wars in Hungary against
the Turk, where he received a mortal wound, not far from Buda. Being carried
to his lodging, he languished some days; but a little before his death, he
spoke to an ancient Servant of his, that he had many profs of his fidelity and
truth, but now he had a great business to entrust him with, which he conjured
him by all means to do, which was, That after his death, he should get his body
to be opened, and then to take his heart out of his breast, and put it in an
earthen Pot to be baked to powder, then to put the powder into a hansome Box,
with that Bracelet of hair he had worn long about his left wrist, which was a
lock of Madamois^lle Faiels hair, and put it amongst the powder, together with
a little Note he had written with his own blood to her; and after he had given
him the Rites of Burial, to make all the speed he could to France, and deliver
the said box to Mademoiselle Faiel. The old Servant did as his Master had
commanded him, and so went to France, and coming one day to Monsieur Faiels
house, he suddenly met him with one of his servants, and examined him, because
he knew he was Captain Coucy's servant, and finding him timorous, and faltering
in his speech, he searched him, and sound the said Box in his pocket, with the
Note which expressed what was therein: He dismissed the Bearer with menaces that
he should com no more near his house. Monsieur Faiel going in, sent for his
Cook and delivered him the Powder, charging him to make a little well-relish'd
dish of it, without losing a jot of it, for it was a very costly thing; and
commanded him to bring it in himself, after the last course at Supper. The Cook
bringing in the Dish accordingly, Monsieur Faiel commanded all to void the
room, and began a serious discourse with his wife, how ever since he had married
her, he observed she was always melancholy* and he feared she was inclining to
a Consumption, therefore he had provided for her a very precious Cordial, which
he was well assured would cure her: Thereupon he made her eat up the whole dish;
and afterward much importuning him to know what it was, he told her at last
she had eaten Coucy's heart, and so drew the Box out of his pocket, and showed
her the Note and the Bracelet: in a sudden exultation of joy, she with a
far-fetched sigh said, This is a precious Cordial indeed, and so licked the
Dish saying, It is so precious, that it is pity to put ever any meat upon it. So
she went to bed, and in the morning she was found stone-dead.

This Gentleman told me that this sad story is painted in Coucy-Castle, and
remains fresh to this day.

In my opinion, which vails to yours. this is choice and rich stuff for you to
put upon your Loom, and make a curious Web of.

I thank you for the last regalo you gave me at your Musaeum, and for the good
company. I heard you censured lately at Court, that you have lighted too foul
upon Sir Inigo, and that you write with a Porcupins quill dipped in too much
Gall. Excuse me that I am so free with you, it is because I am in no common way
of friendship,

Westmin. 3 of May. 1635. Yours, I. H.

XXI. To Captain Thomas Porter.
Noble Captain,
YOu are well returned from Brussels, from attending your Brother in that noble
employment of congratulating the Infant Cardinals coming thither. It was
well that Monsieur went a Hawking away before to France, for I think those two
young spirits would not have agreed. A Frenchman told me lately, that was at
your Audience, that he never saw so many complete Gentlemen in his life, for
the number, and in a neater equipage. Before you go to Sea I intend to wait on
you, and give you a frolic. So I am,

De todas mis entranas.

Yours to dispose of, I. H.
To this I Will add the Duke of Ossuna's Complement,

Quisiere aunque soy chico
Ser, enserville Gigante.
Though of the tallest I am none you see,
Yet to serve you I would a Giant be.

Westmin. 1 November. 163^.
To my Cousin Captain Saintgeon.
Noble Cousin,
THe greatest news about the Town, is of a mighty Prize that was taken lately
by Peter van Heyn of Holland, who had met some straggling Ships of the
Plate-fleet, and brought them to the ^exel: they speak of a Million of Crowns.
I could wish you had been there to have shared of the Booty, which was the
greatest ^n money that ever was taken.

One sent me lately from Holland this Distic of Peter van Heyn, which savors of
a little profaness.

Roma sui sileat posthac miracula Petri,
Petrus apud Batavos plura stupenda facit.
Let Rome no more her Peter's Wonders tell,
For Wonders, Hollands Peter bears the bell.
To this Distic was added this Anagram, which is a good one*

PETRUS HAINU'S.
HISPANUS RUET.
So I rest,

Totus tuus, Yours whole, I. Howell.
Westmin. 10 July.
XXIII. To my Lord Viscount S.
My Lord,
HIs Majesty is lately returned from Scotland, having given that Nation
satisfaction to their long desires, to have him com thither to be Crowned: I
hear some mutter at Bishop Lauds carriage there, that it was too haughty and
Pontifical.

Since the death of the King of Sweden, a great many Scotch Commanders are com
over, and make a shining show at Court, what trade they will take hereafter, I
know not, having been so inured to the Wars; I pray God keep us from commotions
at home, 'twixt the two Kingdoms, to find them work: I hear one Colonel Lesley
is gone away discontented because the King would not (...) him.

The old rotten Duke of Bavaria, for he has diverse Issues abo^ his body, has
married one of the Emperors Sisters, a young Lady little above twenty, and he
near upon fourscore; there is another remaining, who they say is intended for the
King of Poland, notwithstanding his pretenses to the young Lady Elizabeth;
about which Prince Razevill, and other Ambassadors have been here lately but
that King being Electif must mary as the Estates will have him His Mother was
the Emperors sister, therefore sure he will not offe^ to mary his Cousin German;
but it is no news for the House (...) Austria to do so, to strengthen their race.
And if the Bavarian has Male-Issue of this young Lady, the Son is to succeed
him in the Electorship, which may conduce much to strengthen the continuance of
the Empire in the Austrian Family. So with a constant perseverance of my hearty
desires to serve your Lordship, I rest,

My Lord, Your most humble Servitor, J. H.
Westmin. 7 Sep.
XXIV. To my Cousin Mr. Will. Saint Geon, at St. Omer.
Cousin,
I Was lately in your Fathers Company, and I found him much discontented at the
course you take, which he not only protests against, but he vows never to give
you his blessing, if you perseve^ in it; I would wish you to descend into your
self, and seriously ponder, what a weight a Fathers blessing, or curse, carries
with it; for there is nothing conduces more to the happiness or infelicity of
the child: Amongst the ten Commandments in the Decalog, that which enjoins
obedience from Children to Parents, has only a benediction (of Longaevity)
added to it: There be Clouds of examples for this, but one I will instance in;
When I was in Valentia in Spain, a Gentleman told me of a miracle which
happened in that Town; which was, That a proper young man under twenty, was
executed there for a crime, and before he was taken down from off the Tree,
there were many gray and white Hairs had budded forth of his Chin, as if he had
been a man of sixty. It struck amazement in all men, but this interpretation
was made of it, That ^he said young man might have lived to such an age, if he
had been dutiful to his Parents, unto whom he had been barbarously disobedient
all his lifetime.

There coms herwith a large Letter to you from your Father, let me advise you to
conform your courses to his Counsel, otherwise it is an easy matter to be a
Prophet what misfortunes ^il inevitably befall you, which by a timely obedience
you may Prevent, and I wish you may have grace to do it accordingly: So I rest

Your loving, well-wishing Cousin, J. H.
Land. 1 of May. 1634.
XXV. To the Lord Deputy of Ireland.
My Lord,
THe Earl of Arundell is lately returned from Germany, and his gallant
comportment in that Ambassie deserved to have had better success; He found the
Emperor conformable, but the old Bavarian froward, who will not part with any
thing, till he have moneys reimbours'd, which he spent in these wars, and for
which he has the upper Palatinat in deposito; insomuch, that in all
probability all hopes are cut off of ever recovering that Country, but by the
same means that it was taken away, which was by the Sword* Therefore they write
from Holland of a new Army, which the Prince Palatin is like to have shortly,
to go up to Germany, and push o^ his fortunes with the Swedes.

The French King has taken Nancy, and almost all Lorain lately, but he was
forced to put a Fox-tail to the Lions-skin, which his Cardinal helped him to,
before he could do the work. The quarrel is, that the Duke should marry his
sister to Monsieur, contrary to promise; that he sided with the Imperialists,
against his confederan^ in Germany, that he neglected to do homage for the
Duchy o^ Bar.

My Lord Vicount Savage is lately dead, who is very much li^ mented by all that
knew him; I could have wished, had it pleased God, that his Father in law, who
is riper for the other worl^ had gone before him. So I rest

Westmin. 6 Apr. Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXVI. To his honored Friend Mis C. at her House in Essex.
There was no sorrow sunk deeper into me a great while, than that which I
conceived upon the death of my dear friend your Husband: The last Office I
could do him, was to put him in his grave; and I am sorry, to have met others
there, (who had better means to come in a Coach with six horses, than I) in so
mean equipage to perform the last act of respect to so worthy a Friend. I have
sent you herewith an Elegy, which my melancholy muse has breathed out upon his
Hearse. I shall be very careful about the Tomb you intend him, and will think
upon an Epiraph. I pray present my respects to Mris Anne Main. So wishing you
all comfort and contentment, I rest

Land. 5 Mar. Yours most ready to be commanded, J. H.

XXVII. To Mr. James Howard, upon his Banished Virgin, translated out of
Italian.
SIR,
I Received the Manuscript you sent me, and being a little curious to compare
it with the Original, I find the version to be very exact and faithful: So
according to your Friendly request I have sent you this Decastic.

Some hold translations not unlike to be,
The wrong-side of a Turkey Tapistry.
Or Wine drawn off the Lees, which filled in Flask,
Loose somewhat of the strength they had in Cask.
It Is true, each language has an Idiome,
Which in another couched comes not so home:
Yet I never saw a piece from Venice come,
Had fewer thrums set on our Country Loome.
This Wine is still one-eard, and brisk, thought put
Out of Italian Cask in English Butt.
Upon your Eromena.
Fair Eromena in her Toscan tire
I viewed, and liked the fashion wondrous well,
But in this English habit I admire,
That still in her the same good grace should dwell:
So I have seen trans- Alpin Cions grow,
And bear rare fruit, removed to Thames from Po.
Land. 6 Octo. 1632. Your true Servitor and Compatriot, J. H.

XXVIII. To Edward Noy Esquire at Paris.
SIR,
I Received one of yours lately, and I am glad to find the delight that Travel
begins to instill into you.

My Lord Ambassador Aston reckons upon you, that you will be one of his train
at his first Audience in Madrid, and to my knowledge he has put by some
Gentlemen of quality: Therefore I pray let not that durty Town of Paris detain
you too long from your intended journey to Spain, for I make account my Lord
Aston will be there a matter of two months hence. So I rest

London, 5 May. 1633, Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

XXIX. To the right Honble Sir Peter Wicks, Lo: Ambassador at Constantinople.
My Lord,
IT seems there is some angry Star that has hung over the business of the
Palatinat from the beginning of these German Wars to this very day; which will
too evidently appear, if one should mark and deduce matters from their first
rise.

You may remember how poorly Prague was lost: The Bishop of Halverstat and
Count Mansfelt shuffled up and down a good while, and did great matters, but
all came to nothing at last. You may remember how one of the Ships-Royall was
cast away in carrying over the last, and the 12000 men he had hence perished
many of them very miserably, and he himself, as they write, died in a poor
Hostrey with one Laquay, as he was going to Venice to a bank of money he had
stored up there for a dead lift. Your Lordship knows what success the King of
Denmark had (and our 6000 men under Sir Charles Morgan) for while he thought to
make new acquests, he was in hazard to lose all that he had, had not he had
favorable Propositions tendered him. There were* never poor Christians perished
more lamentably than those 6000 we sent under M. Hamilton for the assistance of
the King of Sweden, who did much, but you know what became of him at last: How
disastrously the Prince Palatin himself fell, and in what an ill conjuncture of
time, being upon the very point of being restored to his Country.

But now we have as bad news as any we had yet; for the young Prince Palatin,
and his Brother Prince Rupert, having got a jolly considerable Army in Holland,
to try their fortunes in Germany with the Swedes, they had advanced as far as
Munsterland, and Westphalia, and having lain before Lengua, they were forced to
raise the siege; and one General Ha^zfield pursuing them, there was a fore
battle fought, wherein Prince Rupert, my Lord Craven, and others were taken
prisoners. The Prince Palatin himself, with Major King, thinking to get over
the Weser in a Coach, the Water being deep and not sordable, he saved himself
by the help of a Willow, and so went a foot all the way to Minden, the Coach
and the Coachman being drowned in the River: There were near upon 2000 slain on
the Palsgraves side, and scarce the twentieth part so many on Ha^zfields, Major
Gaeuts, one of the chief Commanders, was killed.

I am sorry I must write unto you this sad story; yet to countervail ^t
something, Saxen Weymar thrives well, and is like to get B^isac by help of the
French forces. All your friends here are well, and remember your Lordship often,
but none more often than

Land. 5 Iun. 1635. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXX. To Sir Sackvill C. Knight.
SIR,
I Was as glad that you have lighted upon so excellent a Lady, as if an
Astronomer by his Optics had found out a new Star; and if a wi^e be the best or
worst fortune of a man, certai^ you are one of the fortunat'st men in this
Island.

The greatest news I can write unto you is, of a bloody Banquet that was lately
at Liege; where a great faction was a somenting 'twixt the Imperialists, and
those that were devoted to France, amongst whom, one Ruelle a popular
Bourgue-master was chief: The Count of Warfuzee a vassal of the King of
Spains, having fled thither from Flanders for some offense, to ingratiat himself
again into the King of Spains favor, invited the said Ruelle to a Feast, and
after brought him into a private Chamber, where he had provided a ghostly-father
to confess him, and so some of the Soldiers whom he had provided before to
guard the House, dispatched the Bourgue-master; The Town hearing this, broke
unto the House, cut to pieces the said Count, with some of his Soldiers, and
dragged his body up and down the Streets. You know such a fate befell Walstein
in Germany of late years, who having got all the Emperors Forces into his
hands, was found to have intelligence with the Swede, therefore the Imperial
Ban was not only pronounced against him, but a reward promised to any that
should dispatch him; some of the Emperors Soldiers at a great Wedding in Egra,
of which Band of Soldiers, Colonel Buttler an Irishman was chief, broke into
his lodging when ho was at dinner, killed him, with three Commanders more that
were at Table with him, and threw his body out at a Window into the streets.

I hear Buttler is made since Count of the Empire. So humbly kissing your noble
Ladies hand, I rest

Land. 5 Iun. 1634. Your faithful servitor, J. H.

XXXI. To Dr. Duppa, L. B. of Chichester, his Highness Tutor at St. James.
My Lord,
IT is a welbecoming, and very worthy work you are about, not (...) suffer Mr.
Ben. Johnson to go so silently to his grave, or rot so su^ly: Being newly com
to Town, and understanding that your Iohnsonus Virbius was in the Press, upon
the solicitation of Sir Thomas Hawkins, I suddenly fell upon the ensuing
Decastic, which if your Lordship please, may have room amongst the rest.

Upon my honored Friend and F. Mr. Ben. Johnson.
ANd is thy Glass run out, is that Oil spent
Which light to such strong Sinewy labors lent?
Well Ben; I now perceive that all the nine,
Though they their utmost forces should combine,
Cannot prevail against Nights three Daughters, but
One still must spin, one wind, the other cut.
Yet in despite of distaff, clue, and knife,
Thou in thy strenuous lines have got a life,
Which like thy Bays shall flourish every age,
While ^oc or bu^kin shall ascend the Stage.
-- Sic vaticinatur Hoellus.
So I rest with many devoted respects to your Lordship, as being

Land. 1 of May, 1636. Your very humble Servitor, J. H.

XXXII. To Sir Ed. B. Knight.
SIR,
I Received yours this Maunday-Thursday: and whereas amongst other passages,
and* high endearments of love, you desire to know what method I observe in the
exercise of my devotlons, I thank you for your request, which I have reason to
believe does proceed from an extraordinary respect unto me; and I will deal
with you herein, as one should do with his Confessor.

It Is true, though there be rules and rubrics in our Liturgy sufficient to guide
evry one in the performance of all holy duties, yet I believe evry one has some
mode and model or formulary of his own, specially for his private cubicular
devotions.

I will begin with the last day of the week, and with the latter end of that
day, I mean Saturday evening, on which I have fasted ever since I was a youth
in Venice, for being delivered from a very great danger: This year I use some
extraordinary acts of devotion to usher in the ensuing Sunday in Hymns, and
various prayers of my own penning, before I go to bed. On Sunday Morning I rise
earlier than upon other days, to prepare my self for the Sanctifying of it;
nor do I use Barber, Tailor, Shoo-maker, or any other Mechanic that morning;
and whatsoever diversions, or lets, may hinder me the week before, I never
miss, but in case of sickness, to repair to Gods holy House that day, where I com
before prayers begin, to make my self fitter for the work by some praevious
Meditations, and to take the whole Service along with me; nor do I love to
mingle speech with any in the interim about news or worldly negotiations. In
Gods holy House I prostrat my self in the humblest and decent'st way of
genuflection I can imagine; nor do I believe there can be any excess of exterior
humility in that place; therefore I do not like those squatting unseemly bold
postures upon ones tail, or muffling the face in the Hat, or thrusting it in
so^ hole, or covering it with ones hand; but with bended knee, and an open
confident face, I fix my Eyes on the East part of the Church, and Heaven. I
endeavor to apply evry tir^le of the Service to my own Conscience and
Occasions; and I believe the want of this, with the huddling up, and careless
reading of some Ministers, with the commoness of it, is the greatest cause that
many do undervalue and take a Surfeit of our public Service.

For the reading and singing Psalms, whereas most of them are either Petitions
or Eucharisticall ejaculations, I listen to them more attentively, and make
them mine own: When I stand at the creed, I think upon the custom they have in
Poland, and elsewhere, for Gentlemen to draw their Swords all the while,
intimating thereby, that they will defend it with their lives and blood; And for
the Decalog, whereas others use to rise, and sit, I ever kneel at it in the
humblest and trembling'st posture of all, to crave remission for the breaches
passed of any of Gods holy Commandments (specially the week before) and future
grace to observe them.

I love a holy devout Sermon, that first checks and then cheers the Conscience,
that begins with the Law and ends with the Gospel; but I never prejudicat or
censure any Preacher, ^aking him as I find him.

And now that we are not only Adulted but ancient Christians, I believe the
most acceptable Sacrifice we can send up to Heaven, is prayer and praise, and
that Sermons are not so essential as either of them to the true practice of
devotion. The rest of the holy Sabbath, I sequester my body and mind as much as
I can from worldly affairs.

Upon Monday morn, as soon as the Cinq-ports are open, I have a particular
prayer of thanks, that I am reprieved to the beginning of that week; and evry
day following, I knock thrice at Heavens gate, in the Morning, in the Evening,
and at Night; besides, Prayers at Meals, and some other occasional
ejaculations, as upon the putting on of a clean Shirt, washing my hands, and at
lighting of Candles, which because they are sudden, I do in the third person.

Tuesday morning I rise Winter and Summer as soon as I awake, and send up a
more particular sacrifice for some reasons; and as I am disposed, or have
business, I go to bed again.

Upon Wensday night, I always fast, and perform also some extraordinary acts of
Devotion, as also upon Friday night; and Saturday morning, as soon as my senses
are unlocked I get up. And in the Summer time, I am oftentimes abroad in some
private field, to attend the Sunrising: And as I pray thrice evry day, so I
fast thrice evry week, at least I eat but one meal upon Wensdays, Fridays, and
Saturdays, in regard I am jealous with my self, to have more infirmities to
answer for, than other.

Before I go to bed, I make a scrutiny what peccant humors have reigned in me
that day, and so I reconcile my self to my Creator, and strike a tally in the
Exchequer of Heaven for my quie^us est, ere I close my eyes, and leave no
burden upon my Conscience.

Before I presume to take the Holy Sacrament, I use some extraordinary acts of
Humiliation to prepare my self some days before, and by doing some deeds of
Charity; and commonly I compose some new Prayers, and diverse of them written in
my own blood.

I use not to rush rashly into prayer without a trembling precedent Meditation,
and if any odd thoughts intervene, and grow upon me, I check my self, and
recommence; and this is incident to long prayers, which are more subject to
man's weakness, and the devils malice.

I thank God I have this fruit of my foreign Travels, that I can pray unto him
evry day of the week in a several Language, and upon Sunday in seven, which in
Orisons of my own I punctually perform in my private Pomeridian devotions.

Et sic aeternam contendo attingere vitam. By these steps I strive to clime up
to heaven, and my soul prompts me I shall thither; for there is no object in the
world delights me more, than to cast up my eyes that way, specially in a
Starlight night; and if my mind be overcast with any odd clouds of
melancholy, when I look up and behold that glorious Fabric, which I hope shall
be my Country hereafter, there are new spirits begot in me presently, which
make me scorn the World, and the pleasures thereof, considering the vanity of
the one, and the inanity of the other.

Thus my soul still moves Eastward, as all the Heavenly bodies do; but I must
tell you, that as those bodies are over-master'd, and snatched away to the
West, raptu primi mobilis, by the general motion of the tenth sphere, so by
those Epidemicall infirmities which are incident to man, I am often snatched
away a clean contrary course, yet my soul persists still in our own proper
motion: I am often at variance, and angry with my self (nor do I hold this
anger to be any breach of charity) when I consider, That whereas my Creator
intended this body of mine, though ^ lump of Clay, to be a Temple of his holy
Spirit, my affections should turn it often to a Brothell-house, my passions to
a Bedlam, and my excesses to an Hospital.

Being of a Lay profession, I humbly conform to the Constitutions of the
Church, and my spiritual Superiors; and I hold this obedience to be an
acceptable Sacrifice to God.

Difference in opinion may work a disaffection in me, but not a detestation: I
rather pity, than hate, Turk or Insidell, for they are of the same metal, and
bear the same stamp as I do, though the Inscriptions differ. If I hate any,
it is those Scismatics that puzzle the sweet peace of our Church, so that I
could be content to see an Anabaptist go to Hell on a Brownists back?

Noble Knight, now that I have thus eviscerated my self, and dealt so clearly
with you, I desire by way of correspondence that you would tell me, what way
you take in your journey to Heaven; for if my Breast lie so open to you, it is
not sitting yours should be shut up to me; therefore I pray let me hear from
you when it may stand with your Convenience.

So I wish you your hearts desire here, and Heaven hereafter, because I am

Yours in no vulgar way of friendship, J. H.
London, 25 July, 1635.
XXXIII. To Simon Digby Esquire, at Mosco, the Emperor of Russia's Court.
SIR,
I Received one of yours by Mr. Pickhurst, and I am glad to find, that the
rough clime of Russia agrees so well with you; so well, as you write, as the
Catholic air of Madrid, or the Imperial air of Vienna, where you had such
honorable employments.

The greatest News we have here is, that we have a Bishop Lord Tresurer, and
it is News indeed in these times, though 'twas no news you know in the times of
old to have a Bishop Lord Tresurer of England. I believe he was merely passive
in this business; the active instrument that put the white Staff in his hands,
was the Metrapolitan at Lambeth.

I have other News also to tell you, we have a brave new Ship, a Royal Galeon,
the like, they say, did never spread Sail upon Salt Water, take her true and
well compacted Symmetry, with all dimensions together; for her burden, she
has as many Tuns as there were years since the Incarnation, when she was built,
which are sixteen hundred thirty and six; she is in length one hundred twenty
and seven foot; her greatest breadth within the planks, is forty six foot, and
six inches; her depth from the breadth is nineteen foot, and four inches: she
carries a hundred Pieces of Ordnance wanting four, whereof she has three
tire; half a score men may stand in her Lantern; the charges His Majesty has
been at in the building of her, are computed to be fourscore thousand pounds,
one whole years Ship Money: Sir Robert Mansell launc'd her, and by his
Majesty's command called her, The Soverain of the Sea: Many would have had her
to be named the Edgar; who was one of the most famous Saxon Kings this Island
had, and the most potent at sea: Ranulphus Cestrensis writes, that he had four
hundred ships, which evry year after Easter, went out in four Fleets to scour
the Coasts. Another Author writes, that he had four Kings to row him once upon
the Dee. But the Title he gave himself, was a notable lofty one, which was
this* Altitonantis Dei largiflua clementia qui est Rex Regum, Ego Edgarus
Anglorum Basileus, omnium Regum Insularum Oceanique Britanniam circum^acent is,
cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includu^tur, Imperator and Dominus, etc. I
do not think your gran Emperor of Russia has a loftier title; I confess the
Sophy of Persia has a higher one, though profane and ridiculous in comparison
of this* For he calls himself, The Star high and mighty, whose head is covered
with the Sun, whose motion is comparable to the aethereall Firmament, Lord of
the Mountains, Caucasus and Taurus, of the four Rivers, Euphrates, Tygris,
Araxis and Indus; Bud of honor, Mirror of virtue, Rose of delight, and Nutmeg
of comfort; It is a huge descent methinks to begin with a Star, and end in a
Nutmeg.

All your friends here in Court and City are well, and often mindful of you,
with a world of good wishes, and you cannot be said to be out of England, as
long as you live in so many noble memories: Touching mine, you have a large
room in it, for you are one of my chief inmates: So with my humble Service to
your Lady I rest

Land. 1 July, 1635. Your most faithful Servitor while J. H.

XXXIV. To Dr. Tho: Prichard.
Dear Dr.
I Have now had too long a supersede as from employment, having engaged my self
to a fatal man at Court (by his own seeking) who I hoped, and had reason to
expect (for I waved all other ways) that he would have bin a Scale toward my
rising, but he has rather proved an instrument to my ruin: it may be he will
prosper accordingly.

I am shortly bound for Ireland, and it may be the Stars will cast a more
benign Aspect upon me in the West; you know who got the Persian Empire by
looking that way for the first beams of the Sunrising, rather than toward the
East.

My Lord Deputy has made often professions to do me a pleasure, and I intend
now to put him upon it,

I purpose to pass by the Bath, for a pain I have in my Arm, proceeding from a
Defluxion of Rheum, and then I will take Brecknock in my way, to comfort my
Sister Penry, who I think has lost one of the best husbands in all the
thirteen shires of Wales.

So with apprecation of all happiness to you, I rest

London, 10 Feb. 1637. Yours while J. H.

XXXV. To Sir Kenelme Digby Knight, from Bath.
SIR,
YOur being then in the Country, when I began my journey for Ireland, was the
cause I could not kiss your hands, therefore I shall do now from Bath, what I
should have don at London.

Being here for a distillation of Rheum that pains me in one of my Arms, and
having had about three thousand strokes of a pump upon me in the Queens Bath:
*And having bin here now diverse days and viewed the several qualities of
these Waters, I fell to contemplat a little what should be the reason of such
an extraordinary actual heat, and medicinal virtue in them. I have seen and
read of diverse Baths abroad, as those of Caldanel and Avinian in agro Senensi,
the Grotta in Viterbio, those between Naples and Puteolum in Campania; And I
have bin a little curious to know the reason of those rare Lymphaticall
properties in them above other waters. I find that some impute it to Wind, or
Air, or some Exhalations shut up in the Bowels of the Earth, which either by
their own nature, or by their violent motion and agitation, or attrition upon
Rocks, and narrow passages do gather heat, and so impart it to the Waters.

Others attribut this balneal heat unto the Sun, whose allsearching Beams
penetrating the Pores of the Earth, do heat the Waters.

Others think this heat to proceed from quicklime, which by common experience
we find to heat any Water cast upon it, and also to kindle any combustible
substance put upon it.

Lastly, there are some that ascribe this heat to a subterranean fire kindled in
the bowels of the Earth upon sulphury and bituminous matter.

It Is true, all these may be general concurring causes, but not the adaequat
proper and peculiar reason of balneal heats; and herein truly our learned
Countryman Dr. Jorden has got the start of any that ever writ of this subject,
and goes to work like a solid Philosopher; for having treated of the generation
of mineralls, he finds that they have their Seminaries in the Womb of the Earth
replenished with active spirits; which meeting with apt matter and adjuvant
causes, do proceed to the generation of several species, according to the
nature of the efficient, and fitnes of the matter: In this work of generation,
as there is generatio unius, so there is corruption alterius; and this cannot be
don without a superior power, which by moisture dilating it self, works upon
the matter like a leav'ning and ferment, to bring it to its own purpose.

This motion 'twixt the agent spirit, and patient matter, produces an actual
heat; for motion is the fountain of heat, which serves ^s an instrument to
advance the work; for as cold dulls, so heat quickneth all things: Now for the
nature of this heat, it is not a destructive violent heat, as that of fire, but
a generative gentle heat joined with moisture, nor needs it air for
eventilation: This natural heat is daily observed by Digg^n in the Mines; so
then while Mineralls are thus engendring, and in solutis principiis, in their
liquid forms, and not consolidated into hard bodies, (for then they have not
that virtue) they impart heat to the neighboring Waters. So then it may be
concluded, that this soil about the Bath is a mineral vein of earth, and the
fermenting gentle temper of generative heat that goes to the production of the
said Mineralls, do impart and actually communicate this balneal virtue and
medicinal heat to these Waters.

This subject of Mineral Waters would afford an Ocean of matter, were one to
compile a solid discourse of it: And I pray excuse me, that I have presumed in
so narrow a compass as a Letter, to comprehend so much, which is nothing I
think, in comparison of what you know already of this matter.

So I take my leave, and humbly kiss your hands, being always

From the Bath ^3 July, 1638. Your most faithful and ready Servitor, J. H.

XXXVI. From Dublin, to Sir Ed: Savage Knight, at Tower Hill.
SIR,
I Am com safely to Dublin, over an angry boisterous Sea; whether 'twas my
voyage on Salt Water, or change of Air, being now under another clime, which
was the cause of it, I know not, but I am suddenly freed of the pain in my Arm;
when neither Bath, nor Plasters, and other remedies could do me good.

I delivered your Letter to Mr. James Dillon, but nothing can be don in that
business till your brother Pain coms to Town. I meet here with diverse of my
Northern friends, whom I knew at York: Here is a most splendid Court kept at the
Castle, and except that of the Viceroy of Naples, I have not seen the like in
Christendom, and in one point of Grandeza, the Lord Deputy here goes beyond
him, sor he can confer honors and dub Knights, which that Viceroy cannot, or
any other I know of. Trafic increases here wonderfully, with all kind of
bravery, and buildings.

I made an humble motion to my Lord, that in regard businesses of all sorts did
multiply here daily, and that there was but one Clerk of the Counsel (Sir Paul
Davis) who was able to dispatch business, (Sir Will. Usher his Colleague being
very aged and bedrid) his Lordship would please to think of me, My Lord gave me
an answer full of good respects to succeed Sir William after his death.

No more now, but with my most affectionat respects unto you, I rest

Dublin, 3 May, 1639. Your faithful Servitor, J. H.

XXXVII. To Dr. Usher Lo: Primat of Ireland.
MAy it please your Grace to accept of my most humble Acknowledments for those
Noble favors I received at Droghedah, and that you pleased to communicate unto
me those rare Manuscripts in so many Languages, and diverse choice Authors in
your Library.

Your learned Work, De primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum which you pleased
to send me, I have sent to England, and so it shall be conveyed to Jesus College
in Oxford, as a gift from your Grace.

I hear that Cardinal Barberino, one of the Popes Nephews, is setting forth the
works of Fastidius a British Bishop, called, De vita Christiana. It was written
300 years after our Savior, and Holstenius has the care of the Impression.

I was lately looking for a word in S^idas, and I lighted upon a strange
passage in the name (...): That in the Reign of Justinian the Emperor, one
Theodosius a Jew, a man of great Authority, lived in Jerusalem, with whom a
rich Goldsmith, who was a Christian, was in much favor, and very familiar. The
Goldsmith, in private discourse, told him one day, that be wondered, ^e being a
man of such a great understanding, did not turn* Christian, considering how he
found all the Prophecies of the Law so evidently accomplished in our Savior,
and our Saviors Prophecies accomplished since. Theodosius answered, That it
did not stand with his security and continuance in Authority to turn Christian,
but he had a long time a good opinion of that Religion; and he would discover a
secret unto him which was not yet com to the knowledge of any Christian: It was,
That when the Temple was founded in Jerusalem, there were 22 Priests, according
to the number of the Hebrew letters, to officiat in the Temple; and when any
was chosen, his name, with his fathers and mothers, were used to be registered in
a fair Book. In the time of Christ, a Priest died, and he was chosen in his
place; but when his name was to be entered, his father Joseph being dead, his
mother was sent for, who being asked who was his father, she answered, that she
never knew man, but that she conceived by an An^: So his name was registered in
these words: JESUS CHRIST THE SON OF GOD, AND OF THE VIRGIN MARY. This Record
at the destruction of the Temple was preserved, and is to be seen in Tyberias
to this day. I humbly desire your Graces opinion heerof in your next.

They write to me from England of rare news in France, which is, that the Queen
is delivered of a Daulphin, the wonderfull'st thing of this kind that any Story
can parallel; for this is the three and twentieth year since she was married,
and has continued childles all this while; so that now Monsieurs cake is
dough, and I believe he will be more quiet hereafter. So I rest

Dublin, 1 March, 1639. Your Graces most devoted, Servitor, J. H.

XXXVIII. To my Lord Clifford, from Edinburgh.
My Lord,
I Have seen now all the King of Great Britain's Dominions; and he is a good
Traveller that has seen all his Dominions. I was born in Wales, I have bin in
all the four corners of England; I have trave^sed the Diameter of France more
than once, and now I am com through Ireland into this Kingdom of Scotland. This
Town of Edinburgh is one of the fairest streets that ever I saw (exepting that
of Palermo in Sicily) it is about a mile long, coming sloping down from the
Castle (called of old the Castle of Virgins, and by Pliny, Castrum alatum) to
Holy-Rood-House, now the Royal Palace; and these two begin and terminat the
town. I am com hither in a very convenient time, for here is a National
Assembly and a Parliament, my Lord Traquair being His Majesty's Commissioner.
The Bishops are all gone to w^ack, and they have had but a sorry Funeral; the
very name is grown so contemptible, that a black Dog, if he have any white
marks about him, is called Bishop. Our Lord of Canterbury is grown here so
odious, that they call him commonly in the Pulpit The Priest of Baal, and the
son of Belial. I Will tell your Lordship of a passage which happened lately in my
lodging* which is a Tavern: I had sent for a Shoo-maker to make me a pair of
Boots, and my Landlord, who is a pe^t smart man, brought up a chopin of
Whitewine (and for this particular, there are bette^ French-wines here than in
England, and cheaper; for they are but at a Groat a quart; and it is a crime of
a high nature, to mingle or sophisticat any Wine here.) Over this Chopin of
White wine, my Vintner and Shoo-maker fell into a hot Dispute about Bishops:
The Shoo-maker grew very furious, and called them The firebrands of hell, the
Pamlers of the Whore of Babylon, and the Instruments of the d^vill, and that
they were of his institution, not of Gods. My Vintner took him up smartly, and
said, Hold, neighbor, there; Do not you know, as well as I, that Titus and
Timothy were Bishops, that our Savior is entitled The Bishop of our souls,
that the word Bishop is as frequently mentioned in Scripture as the name
Pastor, Elder, or Deacon? then why do you inv^igh so bitterly against them? The
Shoo-maker answered, I know the Name and Office to be good, but they have
abused it. My Vintner replies, Well then, you are a Shoo-maker by your
Prefession, imagine that you, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred
thousand of your Trade should play the knaves, and sell Caltskin-leather Boots
for Neats-leather, or do other cheats; must we therefore go barefoot? must the
Gentle-cra^t of Shoo-makers fall therefore to the ground? It is the fault of the
Men, not of the Calling. The Shoo-maker was so gravelled at this, that he was
put to his Last; for he had not a word more to say: so my Vintner got the day.

There is a fair Parlement-house built here lately, and 'twas hoped His Majesty
would have taken the maidenhead of it, and com hither to sit in person; and
they did ill who advised him otherwise.

I am to go hence shortly back to Dublin, and so to London, where I hope to find
your Lordship, that, according to my accustomed boldness, I may attend you: In
the interim I rest

Edinburgh. 1639. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.

XXXIX. To Sir K. Digby Knight.
SIR,
I Thank you for the good opinion you please to have of my fancy of Trees: It
is a maiden one, and not blown upon by any yet: But for the merits you please
to ascribe unto the Author, I utterly disclaim any, specially in that
proportion you please to give them me. It Is you that have parts enough to
complete a whole Jury of men. Those small perquisits that I have, are thrust up
into a little narrow lobby; but those perfections that beautify your noble
soul, have a spacious Palace to walk in, more sumptuous than either the Louvre,
Seralio, or Escuriall. So I most affectionatly kiss your hands, being always

Westmin. 3 December. 1639. Your most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XL. To Sir Sackvill Crow, His Majesty's Ambassador, at the Post of
Constantinople.
Rigl^ Honble Sir,
THe greatest news we have here now, is a notable navall fight that was lately
'twixt the Spanierd and Hollander in the Downs; but to make it more
intelligible, I will deduce the business from the beginning.

THe King of Spain had provided a (...) Fleet of Galeons, whereof the
Vice-Admiralls of Naples and Portugal were two, (whereof he had sent advice to
England long before.) The design was to meet with the French Fleet, under the
command of the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and in default of that, to land some
treasure at Dunkirk, with a recruit of Spaniards which were grown very thin in
Flanders. These recruits were got by an odd trick; for some of the Fleet being at
Saint Anderas, a report was blown up of purpose, that the French were upon the
Coasts; heerupon all the youngmen of the Country came to the Seaside, and so a
great number of them were tumbled a shipboard, and so they set sai^e toward
the Coasts of France; but the Archbishop it seems had drawn in his Fleet: Then
striking into the Narrow-Seas, they met with a Fleet of about sixteen
Hollanders, whereof they sunk and took two, and the rest got away to Holland, to
give an alarm to the States, who in less than a month, got together a Fleet
of about one hundred sail, and the wind being a long time Easterly, they came
into the Downs, where Don Antonio d' Oquendo, the Spanish Admiral had stayed
for them all the while. Sir John Pennington was then abroad with seven of His
Majesty's Ships: and Don Antonio being daily warned what forces were preparing
in Zealand and Holland, and so advised to get over to the Flemish Coasts: in
the interim with a haughty spirit, he answered, Tengo de quedarme aqui para
castigar estos Rebeldes: I will stay here to chastise these Rebels. There were
ten more of His Masties Ships appointed to go join with Sir John Pennington, to
observe the motions of these Fleets, but the wind continuing still East, they
could not get out of the River.

The Spanish Fleet had Fresh-waters, Victuals, and other necessaries from our
Coasts for their money, according to the capitulations of peace, all this
while; at last, being half surprised by a cloud of Hollanders, consisting of
one hundred and fourteen ships, the launc'd out from our Coasts, and a most
furious fight began, our ships having retired hard by all the while: The
Vice Admiral of Portugal, a famous Sea Captain, Don Lope de Hozes, was
engaged in close fight with the Vice Admiral of Holland, and after many tough
rancounters they were both blown up, and burnt together. At last, night came
and parted the rest; but six Spanish ships were taken, and about twenty of the
Hollanders perished. Oquendo then crossed over to Nardic, and so back to Spain,
where he died before he came to the Court; and it is thought, had he lived, he
had bin questioned for some miscarr^ages; for if he had suffered the Dunkerkers,
who are nimbler and more fit for fight, to have had the Van and dealt with the
Hollander, it is thought matters might have gone better with him; but his
ambition was, that the great spa^ish Galeons should get the glory of the day.

The Spaniards give out that they had the better, in regard they did the main
work, for Oquendo had conveyed all his recruits and tresure to Flanders, while
he lay hovering on our Coasts.

One thing is herein very observable, what a mighty Navigable power the
Hollander is com to, that in so short a compass of time, he could appear with
such a numerous Fleet of one hundred and fourteen Sails of Men of War, in such
a perfect equippage.

The times afford no more at present, therefore with a tender of my most humble
service to my noble Lady, and my thankful acknowledgment for those great
favors which my Brother Edward writes to me he has received from your
Lordship in so singular a manner, at that Port, desiring you would still oblige
me with a continuance of them; I rest, amongst those multitudes you have left
behind you in England,

Land. 3 Aug. 1639. Your Lopps most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XLI. To Sir J. M. Knight.
SIR,
I Hear that you begin to blow the cole, and offer sacrifice to Demogorgon, the
God of Mineralls: Be well advised before you engage your self too deep;
Chemistry, I know, by a little experience, is wonderful pleasing for the
trial of so many rare conclusions it carries with it, but withal it is costly,
and an enchanting kind of thing; for it has melted many a fair Manor in
crusibles, and turned them to smoke* One presented Sixtus quintus (Sice-cinq,
as Queen Elizabeth called him) with a Book of Chemistry, and the Pope gave him
an empty purse for a reward.

There be few whom Mercury the father of miracles does favor: The Queen of
Sbeba, and the King Crowned with fire, are not propitious to many: He that has
water turned to ashes, has the Magistery, and the true Philosophers stone;
there be few of those: There be some that commit fornication in Chemistry, by
Heterogentous and Sophistical citrinations; but they never com to the Phoenix
nest.

I know you have your share of wisdom, therefore I confess it a presumption in
me, to give you Counsel. So I rest

Westminster. 1 Feb. 1638. Your most faithful Servitor, J. H

XLII. To Simon Digby Esquire, at the gran Moseo in Russia.
SIR,
I Return you many thanks for your last of the first of I^ne, and that you
acquaint me with the state of things in that Country.

I doubt not but you have heard long since of the revolt of Catala^nia from the
King of Spain; it seems the sparkles of those fires are flown to Portugal,
and put that Country also in combustion. The Duke of Braganza, whom you may
well remember about the Court of Spain, is now King of Portugal, by the name
of El Rey Don Iuan, and he is as generally obeyed, and quietly settled, as if he
had bin King these twenty years there; for the whole Country fell suddenly to
him, not one Town standing out. When the King of Spain told Olivares of it
first, he slighted it, saying, That he was but Rey de Havas, a Bean-cake King.
But it seems strange to me, and so strange, that it transforms me to wonder,
that the Spaniard being accounted so politic a Nation, and so full of
precaution, could not foresee this; specially, there being diverse intelligences
given, and evident symptoms of the general coffeehouse of that Kingdom
(because they could not be protected against the Hollander in Brasil) and of
some designs a year before, when this Duke of Braganza was at Madrid. I wonder
I say, they did not secure his person by engaging him in some employment out of
the way: Truly, I thought the Spaniard was better sighted, and could could see
further off than so. You know what a huge lim the Crown of Portugal was to the
Spanish Monarchy, by the Islands in the Atlantic Sea; the Towns in Afric; and
all the East Indies, insomuch, that the Spaniard has nothing now left beyond
the Line.

There is no offensive war yet made by Spain against King John, she only stands
upon the defensive part, until the Catalan be reduced; and I believe, that
will be a long-winded business; for this French Cardinal stirs all the devils
of Hell against Spain, insomuch, that most men say, that these formidable fires
which are now raging in both these Countries, were kindled at first by a
G^anado hurled from his brain: Nay, some will not stick to say, that this breach
'twixt us and Scotland is a reach of his.

There was a ruthful distaster happened lately at Sea, which makes our
Merchants upon the Exchange hang down their heads very sadly. The Ship Swan,
whereof one Limery was Master, having bin four years abroad about the Streights,
was sailing home with a Cargazon, valued at eight hundred thousand pounds,
whereof four hundred and fifty thousand was in Money, the rest in Jewels and
Merchandise; but being in sight of shore, she sprung a leak, and being
ballasted with Salt, it choked the Pump, so that the Swan could swim no
longer: Some sixteen were drowned, and some of them with ropes of Pearl about
their necks, the rest were saved by an Hamburgber not far off. The King of
Spain loses little by it (only his affairs in Flanders may suffer) for his
Money was insur'd, and few of the Principalls, but the Insurers only, who were
most of them Genowayes and Hollanders: A most infortunat chance, for had she
com to safe port, she had bin the richest ship that ever came into the Thames;
so that Neptun never had such a morfell at one bit.

All your friends here are well, as you will understand more particularly by
those Letters that go herewith. So I wish you all health and comfort in that
cold Country, and desire that your love may continue still in the same degree
of heat toward

Land. 5 of Mar. 1639. Your faithful servitor, J. H.

XLIII. To Sir K. D. Knight.
SIR,
IT was my fortun to be in a late communication where a Gentleman spoke of a
hideous thing that happened in High Holborn, how one John Pennant a young man
of 21, being dissected after his death, there was a kind of Serpent with diverse
tails found in the left Ventricle of his heart, which you know is the most
defended part, being thrice thicker than the right, and in the Cell which holds
the purest and most illustrious liquor, the arteriall blood, and the vital
spirits. This Serpent was it seems three years ingendring, for so long time he
found himself indisposed in the breast; and it was observed, that his eye in the
interim grew more sharp* and fiery, like the eye of a Cock, which is next to a
Serpents eye in rednes; so that the symptom of his inward Disease might have
been told by certain exterior Rays and Signatures.

God preserve us from public calamities; for Serpentin Monsters have been often
ill favored presages. I remember in the Roman story, to have read how, when
Snakes or Serpents were found near the statues of their gods, as one time about
Jupiters neck, another time about Minerva's thigh, there followed bloody Civil
War after it.

I remember also, few years since, to have read the relation and deposition of
the Carrier of Tewxbury, who, with diverse of his servants, passing a little
before the dawn of the day with their packs over Cots-hill, saw most sensibly
and very perspicuously in the air, Musketeers, harnassed men, and horsemen,
moving in Battell-aray, and assaulting one another in diverse furious postures.
I doubt not but that you heard of those fiery Metcors and Thunderbolts that
have fallen upon sundry of our Churches, and don hurt. Unless God be pleased to
make up these ruptures 'twixt us and Scotland, we are like to have ill days.
The Archb. of Canterbury was lately out-rag'd in his House by a pack of common
peeple: and Captain Ma^un was pitifully massacred by his own men lately; so
that the common peeple, it seems, have strange principles infused into them,
which may prove dangerous: for I am not of that Lords mind who said, That they
who fear any popular Insurrection in England, are like boys and women, that are
afraid of a Turnip (...) like a Deaths head with a candle in it.

I am shortly for France, and I will receive your Commands before I go. So I am

Land. 2 May* 1640. Your most humble Servitor, J. H.

XLIV. To my Lord Herbert of Cherbery, from Paris.
My Lord,
I Send herewith Dodonas Grove couched in French, and in in the newest French,
for though the main version be mine, yet I got one of the Academie des beaux
Esprits here to run it over, to correct and refine the language, and reduce it
to the most modern Dialect. It took so here, that the new Academy of wits have
given a public and far higher Elogium of it than it deserves. I was brought to
the Cardinal at Ruelle, where I was a good while with him in his private Garden,
and it were a vanity in me, to insert here what Propositions he made me. There
be some sycophants here that idolize him, and I blush to read what profane
Hyperboles are Printed up and down of him; I will instance in a few.

Cedite Richelio mortales, cedite Divi,
Ille homines vincit, vincit and ille Deos.
Then

Et si nous faisons des ghirlandes,
C'est pour en couronner un Dieu,
Qui soubs le nom de Richelieu,
Resoit nos ^oeus and nos offrandes.
Then

Richelii adventu Rupellae porta patescit,
Christo Infernales ut patuere fores.
Certainly he is a rare man, and of a transcendent reach, and they are rather
miracles than exploits that he has don, though those miracles be of a sanguin
Die (the color of his habit) steeped in blood; which makes the Spaniard call
him the gran Caga-fuego of Christendom. Diverse of the scientific all'st, and
most famous win here, have spoken of your Lordship with admiration, and of your
great work De veritate; and were those excellent notions and theoricall precepts
actually applied to any particular Science, it would be an infinite advantage to
the Commonwealth of learning all the* World over. So I humbly kiss your hands,
and rest

Paris, April 1. 1641. Your Lordships most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XLV. To the Right Honble M^ Elizabeth Altham, now Lady Digby.
Madam,
There be many sad hearts for the loss of my Lord Robert Digby; but the greatest
weight of sorrow falls upon your Ladyship. Amongst other excellent virtues,
which the world admires you for, I know your Ladyship to have that measure of
high discretion, that will check your passions; I know also, that your patience
has been often exercised, and put to trial in this kind: For besides the
Baron your Father, and Sir James, you lost your Brother, Master Richard Altham,
in the verdant'st time of his age, a Gentleman of rare hopes, and I believe
this sunk deep into your heart; you lost Sir Francis Astl^y since, a worthy
virtuous Gentleman: And now you have lost a noble Lord. We all owe nature a
debt, which is payable some time or other, whenever she demands it; nor does
Dame Nature use to seal Indentures, or pass over either Lease or Patent for a
set term of years to any; For my part I have seen so much of the world, that if
she offered me a lease, I would give her but a small fine for it; specially now
that the times are grown so naught, that peeple are become more than half mad:
But Madam, as long as there are men, there must be malignant humors, there must be
vices, and vicissitudes of things; as long as the world wheels round, there must
be tossings and tumblings, distractions and troubles, and bad times must be
recempenc'd with better. So I humbly kiss your Ladyships hands, and rest,

Madam, Your constant Servant, J. H.
York 1 of Aug. 1642.
XLVI. To the Honorable Sir P. M. in Dublin.
SIR,
I Am newly returned from France, and now that Sir Edw. Nicholas is made
Secretary of State, I am put in fair hopes, or rather assurances to suceed him
in the Clerkship of the Counsel.

The Duke de la Valette is lately fled hither for sanctuary* having had ill
luck in Fonta-rabia, they say his Process was made, and that he was executed in
Effigy in Paris. It Is true, he could never square well with his Eminency, the
Cardinal, (for this is a peculiar Title he got long since from Rome, to
distinguish him from all other) nor his father neither, the little old Duke of
Espernon, the ancient'st Soldier in the world, for he wants but one year of a
hundred.

When I was last in Paris, I heard of a faceti^us passage '(...) him, and the
Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who in effect is Lord High Admiral of France, and
'twas thus: The Archbishop was to go General of a great Fleet, and the Duke
came to his House in Bourdeaux one morning to visit him; the Archbishop sent
some of his Gentlemen to desire him to have a little patience, for he was
dispatching away some Sea-Commanders, and that he would wait on him presently:
The little Duke took a pett at it, and went away to his house at Cad^llac some
fifteen miles off: The next morning the Archbishop came to pay him the visit,
and to apologize for himself; being com in, and the Duke told of it, he sent
his Chaplain to tell him, that he was newly fallen upon a Chapter of Saint
Austins de civitate Dei, and when he had read that Chapter, he would com to
him.

Some years before, I was told he was at Paris, and Richelieu came to visit him,
he having notice of it, Richelieu found him in a Cardinals Cap, kneeling at a
Table Altar-wise, with his Book and Beads in his hand, and Candles burning
before him.

I hear the Earl of Leicester is to com shortly over, and so over to Ireland to
be your Deputy. No more now, but that I am

Land. Sept. 7. 1641. Your most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XLVII. To the Earl of B. from the Fleet.
My Lord,
I Was lately com to London upon some occasions of mine own, and I had bin
diverse times in Westminster Hall, where I conversed with many Parliament men of
my acquaintance; but one morning betimes, there rushed into my Chamber five
armed men with Swords, Pistolls and Bills, and told me they had a Warrant from
the Parliament for me; I desired to see their Warrant, they denied it, I desired
to see the date of it* they denied it, I desired to see my name in the Warrant,
they denied all, at last one of them pulled out a greasy Paper out of his
Pocket, and showed me only three or four names subscribed, and no more; so they
rushed presently into my Closet, and seized on all my Papers, and Letters, and
any thing that was Manuscript, and many Printed Books they took also, and
hurled all into a great Hair Trunk, which they carried away with them: I had
taken a little Physic that morning, and with very much ado, they suffered me to
stay in my Chamber with two Guards upon me till the Evening; at which time they
brought me before the Committee for Examination, where I confess I found good
respects; and being brought up to the close Committee, I was ordered to be
forthcoming, till some Papers of mine were perused, and Mr. Corbet was
appointed to do it: Some days after, I came to Mr. Corbet, and he told me he had
perused them, and could find nothing that might give offense; heerupon, I
desired him to make a report to the House accordingly; which (as I was told) he
did very fairly, yet such was my hard hap, that I was committed to the Fleet,
where I am now under close restraint: and as far as I see, I must lie ^t dead
anchor in this Fleet a long time, unless some gentle gale blow thence to make me
la^nce out. Gods will be don, and amend the times, and make up these ruptures
which threaten so much calamity. So I am

Fleet. Nov. 20. 1643. Your Lopps most faithful (though now afflicted)
Servitor, J. H.

XLVIII. To Sir Bevis Thelwall Knight (Petri ad vincula) at Peter- House in
London.
SIR,
THough we are not in the same prison, yet are we in the same predicament of
suffrance; therefore I presume you are subject to the like fits of melancholy
as I: The fruition of liberty is not so pleasing, as a conceit of the want of
it is irksom, specially to one of such freeborn thoughts as you. Melancholy
is a black noxious humor, and much annoys the whole inward man; if you would
know what cordial I use against it in this my sad condition, I Will tell you, I
pore sometimes on a Book, and so I make the dead my companions, and this is one
of my chiefest solaces: If the humor work upon me stronger, I rouse my
spirits, and raise them up toward Heaven, my future Country; and one may be
on his journey thither, though shut up in Prison, and happly go a straighter
way, than if he were abroad: I consider, that my soul while she is cooped up
within these walls of flesh, is but in a kind of perpetual prison. And now my
body corresponds with her in the same condition; my body is the prison of the
one, and these brick-walls the prison of the other: And let the English peeple
flatter themselves as long as they will, that they are free, yet are they in
effect, but prisoners, as all other Islanders are; for being surrounded and
closed about with Salt Water (as I am with these Walls) they cannot go where
they list, unless they ask the Winds leave first, and Neptun must give them a
pass.

God Almighty amend the times, and compose these woeful divisions, which menace
nothing but public ruin, the thoughts whereof drown in me the sense of mine own
private affliction.

So wishing you courage (whereof you have enough, if you put it in practice) and
patience in this sad sad condition, I rest

From the Fleet, Aug. 2, 1643. Your true Servant and Compatriot, J. H.

LIX. To Mr. E. P.
SIR,
I Saw such prodigious things daily don these few years, that I had resolved
with my self to give over wondering at any thing; yet a passage happened this
week, that forced me to wonder once more, because it is without parallel. It
was, that some odd fellows went skulking up and down London-streets, and with
Figs and Reasons allured little Children, and so pourloyn'd them away from
their Parents, and carried them a Shipboard for beyond Sea, where by cutting
their hair, and other devises, they so disguised them, that their Parents could
not know them. This made me think upon that miraculous passage in Hamelen, a
Town in Germans, which I hoped to have passed through when I was in Hamburgh,
had we returned by Holland; which was thus, (nor would I relate it unto you were
there not some ground of truth for it.) The said Town of Hamelen was annoyed with
Rats and Mice; and it chanced, that a Pied-coated Piper came thither, who
covenanted with the chief Burgers for such a reward, if he could free them
quite from the said Vermin, nor would he demand it, till a twelvemonth, and a
day after: The agreement being made, he began to play on his Pipes, and all the
Rats, and the Mice followed him to a great Lough hard by, where they all
perished; so the Town was infected no more. At the end of the year, the
Pied-Piper returned for his reward, the Burgers put him off with slightings,
and neglect; offering him some small matter, which he refusing, and staying some
days in the Town, on Sunday morning at High Mass, when most peeple were at
Church, he fell to play on his Pipes, and all the children up and down,
followed him out of the Town, to a great Hill not far off, which rent in two,
and opened, and let him and the children in, and so closed up again: This
happened a matter of two hundred and fifty years since; and in that Town, they
date their Bills and Bonds, and other Instruments in Law, to this day, from the
year of the going out of their children: Besides, there is a great pillar of
stone at the foot of the said Hill, whereon this story is engraven,

No more now, for this is enough in conscience for one time: So I am

Fleet. 1 Octo. 1643. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

L. To my Lord G. D.
My Lord,
There be two weighty sayings in Seneca, Nihil est infaelicius ^o, cui nil
unquam contigit adversi: There is nothing more unhappy than he, who never felt
any adversity: The other is, Nullum est majus malum, quam non posse far
malum: There is no greater cross, than not to be able to bear a cross. Touching
the first, I am not capable of that kind of unhappiness; for I have had my
share of adversity, I have bin hammered, and dilated upon the Anvill, as our
Countreyman Breakspear (Adrian the fourth) said of himself; I have b^n strained
through the limbic of affliction. Touching the second, I am also free of that
cross; for, I thank God for it, I have that portion of Grace, and so much
Philosophy, as to be able to endure, and confront any misery: It Is not so
tedious to me, as to others to be thus immured, because I have bin inured, and
habituated to troubles. That which sinks deepest into me, is the sense I have
of the common calamities of this Nation; there is a strange Spirit has got in
amongst us, which makes the Idaea of holiness, the formality of good, and the
very faculty of reason to be quite differing from what it was. I remember to
have read a tale of the Ape in Paris, who having got a child out of the cradle,
and carried him up to the top of the tiles, and there sat with him upon the
ridg; The parents beholding this ruthful spectacle, gave the Ape fair and
smooth language, so he gently brought the child down again, and replac'd him in
the cradle. Our Country is in the same case this child was in, and I hope there
will be sweet and gentle means used to preserve it from precipitation.

The City of London sticks constantly to the Parliament, and the Common Council
swayes much, insomuch, that I believe, if the Lord Chancellor Egerton were now
living, he would not be so pleasant with them, as he was once to a new Recorder
of London, whom he had invited to dinner to give him joy of his office, and
having a great Woodcock* Pyserv'd in about the end of the repast, which had bin
sent him from Cheshire, he said, Now Master Recorder you are welcome to a
Common Council.

There be many discreet brave Patriots in the City, and I hope they will think
upon some means to preserve us and themselves from ruin: Such are the prayers,
early and late, of

Fleet, a Ian. 1643. Your Lopps most humble Servi^or, J. H.

LI. To Sir Alex. R. Knight.
SIR,
SUrely, God Almighty is angry with England, and it is more sure, that God is
never angry without cause: Now to know this cause the best way is, for every
one to lay his hand on his Breast, and examine himself thoroughly, to summon his
thoughts, and win now them, and so call to remembrance how far he has offended
Heaven, and then it will be found, that God is not angry with England, but with
Englishmen. When that doleful charge was pronounced against Israel, Perditio
tua ex te Israel, It was meant of the concret, (not the abstract;) Oh
Israelites, your ruin coms from your selves. When I make this serutiny within my
self, and enter into the closest cabinet of my soul, I find (God help me) that
I have contributed as much to the drawing down of these judgments on England,
as any other: when I ransack the three Cells of my Brain, I find that my
imagination has bin vain and extravagant; my memory has kept the bad, and let
go the good, like a wide Sieve that retains the Bran, and parts with the Flour;
my understanding has bin full of error and obliquities; my will has bin a
rebel to reason; my reason a rebel to Faith, (which I thank God I have the
grace to quell presently with this caution,

Succumbat Ratio Fidei, and captiva quiescat.) When I descend to my heart, the
center of all my affections, I find (...) has swelled often with Timpanies of
vanity, and Tumors of wrath: when I take my whole self in a lump, I find that I
am naught else but a Cargazon of malignant humors, a rabble of unruly passions,
amongst which my poor soul is daily crucified, as 'twixt so many thieves.
Therefore as I pray in general, that God would please not to punish this Island
for the sins of the peeple, so more particularly I pray, that she suffer not
for me in particular; who, if one would go by way of Induction, would make one
of the chiefest instances of the argument. and as I am thus conscious to my
self of my own demerits, so I hold it to be the duty of every one, to
contemplat himself this way, and to remember the saying of a noble English
Captain, who, when the Town of Calis was lost (which was the last footing we
had in France) being geer'd by a Frenchman, and asked, Now Englishman, when
will you com back to France? answered, Oh, Sir, mock not, when then the sins of
France are greater than the sins of England, the Englishmen will com again to
France,

Before the Sac of Troy, 'twas said and sung up and down the streets.

Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra.
The verse is as true for sense and feet,
Intra Londini muros peccatur and extra.
Without and eke within
The walls of London there is sin.
The way to better the times, is for every one, to mend one. I will conclude
with this serious invocation. I pray God ave^ those further judgments (of
Famine and pestilence) which are hovering over this populous, and
once-flourishing City, and dispose of the Brains and Hearts of this people, to
seek and serve him a* right.

I thank you for your last visit, and for the Poem you sent (...) since. So I am

Fleet 3 Iun. Your most faithful servitor, J. H.

LII. To Mr John Batty Merchant.
SIR,
I Received the Printed discourse you pleased to send me, called the Merchants
Remonstrance, for which I return you due and deserved thanks.

Truly Sir, it is one of the most material and solid pieces I have read of
this kind: And I discover therein two things; first, the affection you bear to
your Country, with the resentment you have of these woeful distractions; then,
the judgment and choice experience you have purchased by your negotiations in
Spain and Germany. In you may be verified the tenet they hold in Italy, That
the Merchant bred abroad, is the best Commonwealths man being properly
applied: For my part, I do not know any profession of life (specially in an
Island) more to be cherished and countenanced with honorable employments than
the Marchant-Adventurer, (I do not mean only the Staplers of Hambo^ough and
Rotterdam) for if valiant and dangerous actions do ennoble a man, and make him
merit, surely, the Merchant-Adventurer deserves more honor than any, for he is
to encounter not only with men of all tempers and humors (as a French
Counselor has i^) but he contests and tugs oftimes with all the Elements:
Nor do I see how some of our Country Squires who sell Calves, and Runts, and
their Wives perhaps Cheese and Apples, should be held more gent^le than the
noble Marchant-Adventurer, who sells Silks and Sattins, Tissues and cloth of
Gold, Diamonds and Pearl, with Silver and Gold.

In your discourse, you fore tell the sudden calamities which are (...) to be
fall this poor Island, if Trade decay; and that this decay (...) inevitable, if
these commotions last: Heerin you are proved (...) a Prophet already, and I
fear your Prophecy will be fully ac^omplish'd if matters hold thus. Good Lord!
was there ever pee^ so active to draw on their own ruin, which is so visible,
that a (...) man may take a prospect of it. We all see this appa^ently, and
hear it told us every minut; but we are fallen to the ^ondition of that foolish
peeple the Prophet speaks of, Who had eyes (...) would not see, and ears but
would not hear. All know there is nothing imports this Island more than Trade;
it is that great Wheel of Industry, which sets all other a going; it is that
which preserves the chiefest Castles and Walls of this Kingdom, I mean the
Ships; and how these are impaired within these four years, I believe other
Nations (which ow us an invasion) observe and know better than we; For truly, I
believe a million (I mean of Crowns) and I speak within compass, will not put
the Navy Royal in that strength as it was four years since, besides the decay
of merchants ships. A little before Athens was orecom, the Oracle told one of
the Areopagitae, that Athens had seen her best days, for her Wooden walls
(meaning her ships) were decayed. As I told you before, there is a Nation or
two, that ow us an invasion.

No more now, but that with my most kind and friendly respects unto you, I rest
always

Fleet 4 May, 1644. Yours to dispose of, J. H.

LIII. To my honored friend Mr. E. P.
SIR,
THe times are so ticklish, that I dare not adventure to send you any London
intelligence, she being now a Garrison Town, and you know, as well as I, what
danger I may incur; but for foreign, indifferent news, you shall understand that
Pope U^ban the eighth is dead, having sat in the chair above twenty (...) a
rare thing; for it is observed, that no Pope yet arrived to the years of St.
Peter, who they say was Bishop of Rome twenty an^ five. Cardinal Pamfillo, a
Roman born, a knowing man, and ^ great Lawyer, is created Pope by assumption of
the name of In^cent the tenth: There was tough canvasing for voices, and a great
contrasto in the Conclave, 'twixt the Spanish and French faction, wh^ with the
Barberini, stood for Sachetri, but he was excluded, as (...) so another (...);
by these exclusions, the Spanish party, when of the Cardinal of (...) was
chief, brought about Barberio^ (...) join with them for (...), as being also a
creature of the dece^sed Pope. He (...) Nuncio in Spain eight years, so that it
conceived he is much devoted to that Crown, as his Predecess^ was to the
French, who had bin Legate there near upon twenty years, and was Godfather to
the last King, which made him to be Fleurdelize, to be Flowerdeluc'd all over.
This new Pope has already passed that number of years which the Prophet
assigns to man, for he goes upon seventy one, and is of a strong promising
constitution to live some years longer. He has but one Nephew, who is but
eighteen, and so not capable of business; he has therefore made choice of some
Cardinals more, to be his Coadjutors; Pancirellio is his prime confident, and
lodged in Saint Peter's. It Is thought he will presently set all wheels a going to
mediat an universal peace. They write of one good augury amongst the rest,
that part of his Arms is a Dove, which has bin always held for an emblem of
peace; but I believe it will prove one of the knottiest, and difficult'st tasks
that ever was attempted, as the case stands 'twixt the House of Austria and
France, and the roughest and hardest knot I hold to be, that of Portugal; for
it cannot yet enter into any man's imagination, how that may be accommodated,
Though many Polliticians have beaten their brains about it. God almighty grant,
that the appeasing of our civil wars prove not so intricat a work, and that we
may at last take warning by the devastations of other Countries, before our own
be past cure.

The write from Paris, that Sir Kenelm Digby is to be employed to Rome from Her
Majesty in quality of a high Messenger of Honor, to congratulat the new Pope,
not of Ambassador, as the vulgar give out; for none can give that character to
any, but a Soverain independent Prince; and all the World knows, that Her
Majesty is under Couvert Baron, notwithstanding, that some cry her up for Queen
Regent of England, as her Sister is of France. The Lord Aubeny has an Abbacy
of one thousand five hundred Pistols a year given him yearly there, and is fair
for a Cardinals Har.

I continue still under this heavy pressure of close restraint, nor do I see
any hopes (God help me) of getting forth, till the wind shift out of this
unlucky hole: Howsoever, I am resolved, that if Innocence cannot free my body,
yet Patience shall preserve my mind still in its freeborn thoughts: Nor shall
this storm slacken a whit that firm ligue of love, wherein I am eternally tied
unto you. I will conclude with a Distic, which I found amongst those excellent
Peems of the late Pope.

Quem valide strinxit praestanti pollice virtus,
Nescius est solvi nodus Amicitiae,
Fleet, 1 Iun. 1644. Your constant Servitor, J. H.

LIVE. To the L. Bishop of London, late Lord Tresurer of England.
My Lord,
YOu are one of the miracles of these times, the greatest miror of moderation
our age affords; and as heertofore when you carried the white Staff, with such
clean incorrupted hands, yet the Crosier was still your chief care; nor was it
perceived that that high all-obliging office did alter you a jot, or alienat
you from your self, but the same candor, and countenance of mecknes appeard
still in you, as whosoever had occasion to make their address to your Gates,
went away contented, whether they sped in their business, or not (a gift your
Predecessor was said to want.) So since the turbulency of these times, the same
moderation shines in you, notwithstanding that the Miter is so trampled upon,
and that there be such violent factions a foot, insomuch, that you live not
only secure from outrages, but honored by all parties: It Is true, one thing fell
out to your advantage, that you did not subscribe to that Petition which proved
so fatal to Prelacy: But the chief ground of the constant esteem the
distracted world has still of you, is your wisdom and moderation, passed and
present: This puts me in mind of one of your Predecessors (in your late office)
Marquis Pawlet, who it seems sailed by the same Compass, for there being diverse
bandings, and factions at Court in his time, yet was he beloved by all parties,
and being asked how he stood so right in the opinion of all, he answered, By
being a Willow, and not an Oak.

I have many thanks to give your Lordship for the late visits I had, and when
this cloud is scattered, that I may respite f^ee air, one of my first journeys
shall be to kiss your Lordships hands: In the interim, I rest*

The Fleet, 3 Sept. 1644. Your most devoted and ready Servitor, J* H.

LV. To Sir E. S. Knight.
SIR,
THough I never had the least umbrage of your love, or doubted of the reality
thereof, yet since I tell into this plunge, it has been much confirmed unto me.
It is a true observation, that amongst other effects of affliction, one is, to
try a friend; for those proofs that are made in the fawnings, and dazzling
Sunshine of prosperity, are not so clear, as those which break out, and
transpeer through the dark clouds of adversity. You know the difference the
Philosophers make twixt the two extreme colors black and write, that the one is
congregativum, the other disgregativum visus: Black does congregate, unite, and
fortify the sight; the other does disgregat, scatter, and enfeeble it, when it
fixes upon any object: So, through the Sable clouds of advers fortune, one may
make a truer inspection into the breast of a friend. Besides this, affliction
produces another far more excellent effect, it brings us to a better, and a
more clear knowledge of our Creator; for as the rising, and setting Sun,
appears bigger unto us, than when he is in the Meridian (though the distance be
still the same) the cause whereof is ascribed to the interposition of mists,
which lie twixt our eyes and him; so through the thick fogs of adversity (which
in this point are as pellucid and diaphanous as any Crystal) we com to see
God, and the immensity of his love in a fuller proportion. There cannot be
clearer evidences of his care, than his corrections; when he makes the world to
frown, then he smiles most upon us, though it be through a mask; besides, it is
always his method, to stroke them whom he strikes. We have an ordinary salute
in English, God bless you; and though the verb be radically derived from the
Dutch word, yet it would bear good sense, and be very pertinent to this
purpose, if we would fetch it from the French word blesser, which is to hurt:
This speculation raises my spirits to a great hight of comfort, and patience,
that notwithstanding they have been a long time weighed down and quashd, yet I
shall at last ore^om all these pressures, survive my debts, and surmount my
enemies.

God pardon them, and preserve you, and take it not ill, that in this my
conclusion, I place you so near my enemies: Whatsoever Fortune light on me, com
fair or foul Weather, I shall be still

Fleet, 5 of Aug. 1644. Your constant Servitor, J. H.

LVI. To Tho. Ham. Esqr.
SIR,
There is no such tresure as a true friend, it is a tresure far above that of
Saint Marks in Venice; a tresure that is not liable to those casualties, which
others are liable unto, as to plundering and burglary, to bankrups and ill
debtors, to firing and shipwracks; for when one has lost his fortunes by any
of these disasters, he may recover them all in a true friend, who is always a
set and staple commodity: This is verified in you who have stuck so close unto
me in these my pressures; Like a Glowworm (the old emblem of true friendship)
you have shined unto me in the dark: Nor could could you do offices good to any
that wishes you better; for I always loved you for the freedom of your genius,
for those choice parts and fancies I found in you, which I confess, has made
me more covetous of your friendship, than I use to be of others; And to deal
clearly with you, one of my prime arrands to this Town (when this disaster fell
upon me) was to see you.

God put a speedy period to these sad distempers; but this wish, as I was
writing it, did vanish in the impossibility of the thing, for I fear they are
of a long continuance: So I pray God keep you, and comfort me, who am

The Fleet, May 5. 1643* Your true friend to serve you, J. H.

LVII. To Phil. Warwick Esquire.
SIR,
THe earth does not always produce Roses and Lillies, but she brings forth
also Nettles and Thistles: So the world affords us not always contentments and
pleasure, but sometimes afflictions and trouble; Ut illa tribulos, sic iste
tribulationes producit: The Sea is not more subject to contrary blasts, nor the
Surges thereof to tossings and tumblings, as the actions of men are to
encombrances and crosses: The Air is not fuller of meteors, than man's life is
of miseries; but as we find that it is not a clear sky, but the clouds that
drop fa^es, as the holy Text tells us, so adversity is far more fertile than
prosperity, it uses to water and mollify the heart, which is the center of
all our affections, and makes it produce excellent fruit, whereas the glaring
Sunshine of a continual prosperity would enharden and dry it up, and so make
it barren.

There is not a greater evidence of Gods care and love to his creature than
affliction; for as a French Author does illustrat it by a familiar example, If
two Boys should be seen to fight in the streets, and a ring of peeple about
them, one of the standers by parting them, lets the one go untouched, but he
falls a correcting the other, whereby the beholders will infer, that he is his
child, or at least one whom he wishes well unto: So the strokes of adversity
which fall upon us from heaven, show that God is our Father, as well as our
Creator: This makes this bitter cup of ^ffliction become Nectar, and the bread
of carefulnes I now eat, to be true Ambrosia unto me. This makes me esteem
these walls, wherein I have been immured these thirty months, to be no other
than a College of instruction unto me; and whereas Varro said, That the great
World was but the House of little man, I hold this Fl^ct to be one of the best
lodgings in that House.

There is a peeple in Spain called Los Pattuecos who some threescore and od years
since were discoverd by the flight of a Hawk of the Duke of Alva's; this peeple,
then all Savage (though they dwelt in the center of Spain, not far from Toledo,
and are yet held to be part of those Aborigines that Tubal Cain brought in)
being hemmed in, an^ imprisoned, as it were, by a multitude of craggy huge
mountains, thought that behind those Mountains there was no more Earth: I have
bin so habituated to this prison, and accustomd to the walls thereof so long,
that I might well be brought to think, that there is no other world behind them.
And in my extravagant imaginations, I often compare this Fleet to Noah's Ark,
surrounded with a vast Sea, and huge deluge of calamities, which has
overwhelmd this poor Island. Nor although I have been so long aboard here, was
I yet under Hatches, for I have a Cabin upon the upper Deck, whence I breath
the best air the place affords; Ad heerunto, that the society of Master Hopkins
the Warden is an advantage to me who is is one of the knowingst, and most
civil Gentlemen that I have conversd withal. Moreover there are here some
choice Gentlemen who are my Co-Martyrs, for a Prisoner and a Martyr are the
same thing, save, that the one is buried before his death, and the other after.

God Almighty amend these times, that make imprisonment to be preferred before
liberty, it being more safe, and desirable by some, though not by

From the Fleet, Nov. 3. 1643. Your affectionat Servitor, J. H.

LVIII. To Sir Ed. Sa. Knight.
SIR,
Were there a Physician that could cure the maladies of the mind, as well as
those of the body, he needed not to wish the Lord Major, or the Pope for his
Uncle, for he should have Patients without number: It is true, that there be some
distempers of the mind that proceed from those of the body, and so are cureable
by Drugs and Dyets; but there are others that are quite abstracted from all
corporeal impressions, and are merely mental; these kind of Agonies are the
more violent of the two, for a^ the one use to drive us into Fevers, the other
precipitat us oftentimes into Frensies: And this is the ground I believe, which
made the Philosopher think, that the rational soul was infused into man partly
for his punishment, and the understanding for his executioner, unless wisdom
sit at the Helm, and steer the motions of his Will.

I thank God I have felt both (for I am not made of stone or steel) having had
since I was shut in here a shrewd fit of the new disease; and for the other,
you must needs think that thirty one months close restraint, and the
barbarousnes of the times, must discompose and torture the imagination,
sometimes with gripings of discontent and anguish, not as much for my own sad
condition, as for my poor Country and friends, who have a great share in my
Nativity, and particularly for your self, whose gallant worth I highly honor;
and who have not been the least sufferer.

The Moralist tells us, that a quadrat solid wise man, should involve and
tackle himself within his own virtue, and slight all accidents that are
incident to man, and be still the same Etiam si fractus illabatur Orbis; t^er
may be so much virtue and valor in you, but I profess to have neither of them
in that proportion. The Philosopbers often prescribe us Rules, that they
themselves, nor any flesh and blood can observe: I am no statue, but I must
resent the calamities of the time, and the desperate case of this Nation, who
seem to have fallen quite from the very faculty of reason, and to be possessed
with a pure Lycanchropy, with a Wolvish kind of disposition to tear one another
in this manner, insomuch, that if ever the old saying was verified, Homo homini
lup^, it is certainly now: I will conclude with this Distic,

They err, who write no Wolves in England range,
Her Men are all turned Wolves, O monstrous change!
No more, but that I wish you Patience, which is a Flower that grows not in
evry Garden;

Your faithful Servitor, J. H.
From the Fleet, December. 1. 1644.
LIX. To my Noble friend Mr. E. P.
SIR,
I Have no other news to write to you hence, but that Levantanse los muladares,
y abaxanse los adarues, The World is turned topsey turvey.

From the Fleet, Jan. 2. 1644. Yours, J. H.

LX. To Tho. Young Esquire
SIR,
I Received yours of the fifth of March, and 'twas as welcome to me as flowers
in May, which are now coming on apace* You seem to marvel I do not marry all
this while, considering that I am past the Meridian of my age, and that to your
knowledge there have been overtures made me of parties above my degrees. Truly
in this point I will deal with you as one should do with his Confessor; Had I
been disposed to have married for wealth without affection, or for affection
without wealth, I had been in bonds before now; but I did never cast my eyes
upon any yet, that I thought I was born for, where both these concurred. It Is the
custom of some (and it is a common custom) to choose Wives by the weight, that is,
by their wealth: Others fall in love with light wives, I do not mean Venerean
lightness, but in reference to portion: The la^e Earl of Salisbury gives a
caveat for this, That beauty without a Dowry (without that unguentum Indicum)
is as a gilded shell without a kernel; therefore he warns his son to be sure to
have something with his Wife, and his reason is, Because nothing can be bought
in the Market without money. Indeed it is very fitting that He or She should
have wherewith to support both, acording to their quality, at least to keep the
Woolf from the door, otherwise 'twere a mere madness to marry: But he who has
enough of his own to maintain a Wife, and marries only for money, discovers
a poor sordid disposition. There i^ nothing that my nature disdaines more, than
to be a slave to silver or gold; for though they both carry the Kings face, yet
they shall never reign over me, and I would I were free from all other
infirmities as I am from this: I am none of those Ma^monists who adore white
and red earth, and make their Prince's picture their Idol that way; such may
be said to be under a perpetual eclips, for the earth stands always 'twixt
them, and the fair face of Heaven. Yet my genius prompts me, that I was born
under a Planet, not to die in a Lazaretto. At my nativity, my ascendant was
that hot constellation of Cancer about the midst of the Dog-daies, and as my
Ephemerides tells me, Mars was then predominant: Of all the Elements fire
swayes most in me; I have many aspirings* and airy od thoughts swell often in
me, according to the quality of the ground whereon I was born, which was the
belly of a huge Hill situated South-East, so that the house I came from
(besides my Father and Mothers Coat) must needs be Illustrious, being more
obvious to the Sunbeams than ordinary. I have upon occasion of sudden
distemper, sometimes a madman, sometimes a fool, sometimes a melancholy od fellow
to deal withal, I mean my self, for I have the humors within me that belongs
to all three, therefore who would cast herself away upon such a one? Besides, I
came tumbling out into the World a pure Cadet, a true Cosmopolite, not born to
Land, Lease, House or Office; it is true, I have purchased since, a small spot
of ground upon Parnassus, which I hold in fee of the Muses, and I have
endeavored to man^e it as well as I could, though I confess it has yielded me
little fruit hitherto: And what woman would be so mad, as to take that only for
her jointure?

But to com to the point of Wiving, I would have you know, that I have, though
never married, diverse children already; some French, some Latin, one Italian, and
many English; and though they be but poor bra^s of the brain, yet are they
legitimat, and Apollo himself vouchsafed to co-operat in their production: I
have exposed them to the wide world, to try their fortunes; and some (out of
complement) would make me believe they are long lived.

But to com at last to your kind of Wiving, I acknowledge, that marriage is an
honorable condition, nor dare I think otherwise without profanenes, for it is
that Epithet the Holy Text gives it: Therefore it was a wild speech of the
Philosopher to say, That if (...) co^rsasition could be without women, Angels
would com down and dwell amongst us; And a wilder speech it was of the Cynic,
when passing by a Tree where a Maid had made her self away, wished, That all
Trees might bear such fruit. But to pass from these mothe^* ten Philosophers,
to a modern Physician of our own, it was a mo^ unmanly thing in him, while he
displaies his own Religion, to wish that there were a way to propagat the world
otherwise than by conjunction with women, (and Paracelsus undertakes to show
him the way) whereby he seems to repine (though I understand he wa^ Wiv'd a
little after) at the honorable degree of marriage, which I hold to be the
prime Link of human society, the chiefest happiness of Mortals, and wherein
heaven has a special hand.

But I wonder why you write to me of Wiving, when you know I have much ado to
man or maintain my self, as I told you before; yet, notwithstanding, that the
better part of my days are already threeded upon the string of time, I will
not despair, but I may have a Wife at last, that may perhaps enable me to build
Hospitalls; for although nine long lustres of years have now passed ^re my
head, and some winters more, (for all my life, considering the few Sun-shines I
have had, may be called nothing but winters) yet, I thank God for it, I find no
symptom of decay, either in body, senses, or intellectualls. But writing thus
extravagantly, me thinks I hear you say, That this Letter shows I begin to
dote, and grow idle, therefore I will display my self no further unto you at
this time.

To tell you the naked truth my dear Tom; The highest pitch of my aim is, that
by some condition or other, I may be enabled at last (though I be put to sow,
the time that others use to reap) to quitt scores with the World, but never to
cancel that precious obligation, wherein I am indissolubly bound to live and die

From the Fleet, 28 of April, 1645. Your true constant Friend, J. H.

AD LIBRUM
-- Sine me, Liber, ibis in Aulam,
Hei mihi, quod Domino non licet ire tuo.
Ovid. To his Book.
Thou may to Court, and progress too and fro,
Oh, that thy captived Master could do so.
A New VOLUME OF FAMILIAR LETTERS,

Partly Philosopicall, Political, Historical.

The second Edition, with Additions.

By JAMES HOVVELL Esquire.

Ut clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus. LONDON,

Printed by W. H. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in St, Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

To His Highness JAMES Duke of YORK; A Star of the greatest Magnitude in the
Constellation of CHARLES-WAYN.
SIR,
THis Book was engendered in a Cloud, born a Captive, and bred up in the dark
shades of Melancholy; He is a true Benoni the son of sorrow, nay, which is a
thing of wonderment, He was begot in the Grave by one who has been buried
quick any time these five and fifty months: Such is the hard condition of the
Author, wherein he is like to continue, until some good Angel roll off the
stone, and raise him up, for Prisoners are capable of a double Resurrection; my
Faith acertains me of one, but my fears make me doubtful of the other, for, as
far as I see yet, I may be made to moulder away solong among these walls, till
I be carried hence with my feet forward: Welcome be the will of God and the
Decrees of Heaven.

Your Highnesses, most humble and most obedient Servitr. JAMES HOWELL.
From the Prison of the Fleet. this May day 1647.
THE STATIONER to the Reader.
IT pleased the Author to send me these ensuing Letters as a supplement to the
greater volume of Epistolae Ho-Elianae, where they could not be inserted then,
because most of his papers, whence diverse of these letters are derived, were
under sequestration: And thus much I had in Commission to deliver.

Humphrey Moseley.

A New Volume of FAMILIAR LETTERS.
I. To Master Tho. Adams.
SIR,
I Pray stir nimbly in the business you imparted to me last, and let it not
languish; You know how much it concerns your credit, and the convenience of a
friend who deserves so well of you: I fear you will meet with diverse obstacles
in the way, which if you cannot remove, you must overcom: A lukewarm
irresolute man did never any thing well, evry thought entangles him; therefore
you must pursue the Point of your design with heat, and set all wheels a going:
It Is a true badge of a generous nature being once embarked in a business to hoise
up, and spread every sail, Main, ^isen, sprit!, and top sail, by that means he
will sooner arrive at his Port: If the winds be so cross, and that there be
such a fate in the thing, that it can take no effect, yet you shall have
wherewith to satisfy an honest mind, that you left nothing unattempted to
compassit, for in the conduct of human affairs it is a rule, That a good
conscience has always withi^dores enough to reward it self, though the success
fall not out according to the merit of the endeavor.

I was according to your desire, to visit the late new married couple more than
once, and to tell you true, I never saw such a disparity between two that were
made one flesh in all my life; He, handsome outwardly, but of od conditons; she
excell^otly qualified, but hard favord; so that the one may be compard to a
cloth of Tissue Doublet, cut upon course Canvas; the other to a Buckram
Pettico^t lined with Satin: I think Cloth^ had her fingers smutted in snuffing
the candle, when she began to spin the thread of her life, and Lachesis frownd
in twisting it up, but Aglaia with the rest of the Graces were in a good humor,
when they formed her inner parts: A blind man is fittest to hear her sing, one
would take delight to see her dance if masked, and it would please you to
discourse with her in the dark, for there she is best company, if your
imagination can forbear to run upon her face: when you marry, I wish you such
an inside of a wife, but from such an outward Phisnomy the Lord deliver you, and

Westminster. 25 of Aug. 1633. Your faithful friend to serve you, J. H.

II. To Mr. B. J.
F. B. The fangs of a Bear, and the Tusks of a wild Bore, do no^ bite worse,
and make deeper gashes than a Goose-quill sometimes, no not the Badger himself,
who is said to be so tenac^s of his bite, that he will not give over his hold,
till he feels his teeth meet, and the bone crack: your quill has proved so to
Mr. In-Iones but the pen wherewith you have so gash'd him, it seems was made
rather of a Porcupine, than a Goose quill, it is so keen and firm: You know

Anser, Apis, Vitulus, populos and Regna gubernant; The Goose, the Be, and the
Calf (meaning Wax, Parchment, and the Pen) rule the world, but of the three,
the Pen is most predominant; I know you have a commanding one, but you must no^
let it tyrannize in that manner, as you have don lately; some give out there was
a hair in it, or that your in^ was too thick with Gall, else it could not have so
bespartered and shaken the reputation of ^ Royal Architect, for reputation,
you know is like a fair struct^ long time a rearing, but quickly ruined: If
your spirit will not let you retract, yet you shall do well to repress any more
copies of the Satyr, for to deal plainly with you, you have lost some ground at
Court by it, and as I hear from a good hand, the King who has so great a
judgment in Poetry (as in all other things else) is not well pleased therewith.
Dispense with this freedom of

Westmin. 3 July, 1635. Your respectfull S. and Servitor, J. H.

III. To D. C. Esqr.
SIR,
IN my last I writ to you that Chapter Mor. was dead, (I meant in a moral sense)
He is now alive again, for he has abjured that Club which was used to knock
him in the head so often, and drown him commonly once a day: I discover diverse
symptoms of regeneration in him, for he rayls bitterly against Bacchus, and
swears there is a devil in evry berry of his grape, therefore he resolves
hereafter, though he may dabble a little sometimes, he will be never drowned
again: you know Kit has a Poetic fancy, and no unhappy one, as you find by his
compositions, you know also that Poets have l^rge souls, they have sociable
free generous spirits, and the^ are few who use to drink of H^licons waters,
but they love to mingle it with some of Lyaeus liquor to heighten their spirits.
There Is no Creature that's kneaded of Clay, but has his frailties,
extravagancies and excesses some way or other, for you must not think that man
can be better out of Paradise than he was within't: Nemo fine crimine, He that
censures the good fellow commonly makes no conscience of gluttony, and
gormandising at home, and I believe more men do dig their graves with their
teeth than with the t^kard. They who tax others of vanity and pride, have
commonly that fordid vice of covetousnes attends them, and he who traduceth
others of being a servant to Ladies, does baser things: We are no Angels upon
earth, but we are transported with some infirmity or other, and 'twill be so
while these frail, fluxible humors reign within us, while we have ^luces of
warm blood running through our veins, there must be ofttimes some irregular
motions in us.

This as I conceiye is that black bean which the Turks Alchoran speaks of when
they feign, that Mahomet being asleep among the mountains of the Moon, two
Angels descended, and ripping his breast, they took his heart, and washed it in
snow, and after pulled out a black bean, which was the portion of the devil,
and so replac'd the heart.

In your next you shall do well to congratulat his resurrection or
regeneration, or rather emergency from that course he was plunged in formerly
you know it as well as I; and truly I believe he will grow newer and newer
evry day; we find that a stumble makes one take firmer footing, and the base
suds which vice uses to leave behind it, makes virtue afterward far more
gustfull, no knowledge is like that of contraries: Kit has now o^e-com himself,
therefore I think he will be too hard for the Devil hereafter. I pray hold on
your resolution to be here the next Term, that we may tattle a little of Tom
Thumb, mine Host of Andover, or some such matters, so I am

West. 15. Aug. 1636. Your most affectionate Servitor, J. H.

IV. To T. D. Esquire.
SIR,
I Had yours lately by a safehand, wherein I find you open unto me all the boxes
of your breast; I perceive you are sorehurt, and whereas all other creatures run
away from the instrument, and hand that wounds them, you seem to make more and
more toward b^th; I confess such is the nature of love, and which is worse,
the nature of Women is such, That like shadows the more you follow them, the
faster they fl^ from you. Nay some Femalls are of that od humor, that to feed
their pride, they will famish affection, they will starve those natural
passions which are owing from them to Man; I confess coins becoms some beauties
if handsomely acted, a frown from some faces penetrats more and makes deeper
impression than the fawning, and soft glances of a mincing smile, yet if this
coins and these frowns savor of Pride they are odious, and it is a rule that
where this kind of pride inhabits Honor sits not long Porter at the Gate. There
are some beauties so strong that they are leagerproof, they are so barricadoed
that no battery, no Petard, or any kind of Engine sapping or mining can do good
upon them; There are others that are tenable a good while, and will endure the
brunt of a siege, but will incline to parley at last, and you know that Fort
and Femall which begins to parley is half won; for my part, I think of beauties
as Philip King of Macedon thought of Cities, there is none so inexpugnable but
an Ass laden with gold may enter into them; you know what the Spaniard says,
Dadivas quebrant anpenas, presents can rend rocks; Pearl and golden bullets may
do much upon the impregnablest beauty that is; It must be partly your way: I
remember a great Lord of this Land sent a puppie with a rich collar of Diamonds
to a rare French Lady Madam St. L. that had com over hither with an Ambassador,
she took the dog, but returned the collar, I will not tell you what effect it
wrought afterward: It Is a powerful sex, they were too strong for the first,
the strongest, and wisest man that was; they must needs be strong when one hair
of a woman can draw more then a hundred pair of oxen, yet for all their
strength, in point of value, if you will believe the Italian, A man of straw is
worth a woman of gold; Therefore if you find the thing pervers, rather then to
undervalue your sex (your manhood) retire hansomly, for there is as much honor
to be won as an hansom retrait as at a hot onset, it being the difficultest
piece of War; by this retrait you will get a greater victory then you are aware
of, for thereby you will over-com your self which is the greatest conquest that
can be; without seeking abroad, we have enemies enough within doors to
practice our valor upon, we have tumultuary and rebellious passions with whole
hosts of humor^ within us, He who can discomfit them is the greatest Captain
and may defy the Devil; I pray recollect your self, and think on this advice
of your true and most affectionat servitor,

Westminster. 4 December. 1637. J. H.

V. To G. G. Esquire at Rome.
SIR,
I Have more thanks to give you then can be folded up in this narrow paper,
though it were all writ in the closest kind of Stenography, for the rich and
acurat account you please to give me of that renowned City wherein you now
sojourn: I find you have most iudiciously pryed into all matters both civil
and clericall, especially the latter, by observing the poverty and penances of
the Friar, the policy and power of the Jesuit, the pomp of the Prelat and
Cardinal: Had it not bin for the two first, I believe the two last, and that
See had bin at a low ebb by this time; for the learning, the prudentiall state,
knowledge and austerity of the one, and the venerable opinion the peeple have
of the abstenious and rigid condition of the other, specially of the
Mendicants, seem to make some compensation for the lux and magnificence of the
two last: Besides, they are more beholden to the Protestant then they are aware
of, for unles he had rise up about the latter end of the last century of years,
which made them more circumspect and wary of their ways, life, and actions, to
what an intolerable high exces that Court had com to by this time, you may
easily conjecture. But out of my small reading I have observed that no age ever
since Gregory the great has passed, wherein some or other have not repind and
murmurd at the pontifical pomp of that Court, yet for my part I have bin
always so charitable as to think that the Religion of Rome, and the Court of
Rome were different things. The counterbuffe that happened 'twixt Leo the
tenth, and Francis the first of France is very remarkable, who being both met
at Bolonia, the King seemd to give a light touch at the Popes pomp, saying, '
it was not used to be so in former time. It may be so, said Leo, but it was then
when Kings kept sheep, (as we read in the old Testament.) no, the King replied,
I speak of times under the Gospel, then, rejoind the Pope, ' it was than when
Kings did visit Hospitalls, hinting by those words at St. Lewis who used often to
do so. It is memorable what is recorded in the life of Robert Grosted Bishop of
Lincoln who lived in the time of one of the Leo's, That he feared the same sia
would overthrow L^o, as overthrew Lucifer.

For news hence, I know none of your friends but are at well as you left them,
Hombres y Hembras: you are fresh and very frequent in their memory, and
mentioned with a thousand good wishes and benedictions; Amongst others you have
a larg room in the memory of my Lady Elizabeth Carry, and I do not think all
Rome can afford you a fairer lodging. I pray be cautious of your carriage under
that meridian, it is a searching (Inquisitive) air, you have two eyes, and two
ears, but one tongue, you know my meaning; This last you must imprison (as
nature has already done with a double fence of teeth and lips) or else she may
imprison you, according to our Countryman Mr. Hoskins advice when he was in the
Tower.

Vincula da linguae, vel tibi lingua dabit. Have a care of your health, take
heed of the seren's, of exces in fruit, and be sure to mingle your wine well
with water: no more now, but that in the large catalog of friends you have left
behind here, there is none who is more mindful of you then

Your most affectionat and faithful Servitor, J. H.

VI. To Dr. T. P.
SIR,
I Had yours of the tenth current, wherein you write me tidings of our friend
Tom D. and what his desires tend unto; in my opinion they are somewhat
extravagant. I have read of one, that loving honey more then ordinary, seemed
to complain against nature, that she made not a Be, as big as a Bull, that we
might have it in greater plenty, another who was much given to fruit wished
that Pears and Plums were as big as Pumpions, these were but filly vulgar wishes;
for if a Be were as big as a Bull, it must have a sting proportionable, and
what mischiefs do you think such stings would do, when we can hardly endure the
sting of that small insected animal as now it is? and if Pears and Plums were as
big as Pumpions 'twere dangerous walking in an Orchard about the aurumnall
equinoctial, (at which time they are in their full maturity) for fear of being
knocked in the head* Nature the hand maid of God Almighty does nothing but with
good advice i^ we make researches into the true reason of things, you know wha^
answer the Fox gave the Ape when he would have borrowed part of his tail to
cover his posteriors.

The wishes you write that T. D. lately made, were almost a^ extravagant in
civil matters, as the before mentioned were in natural, for if he were
partaker of them, they would draw more inconveniences upon him then benefit,
being nothing sortable either to his disposition or breeding, and for other
reasons besides, which I will reserve till my coming up, and I pray let him
know so much from me, with my commendations, so I rest

Westmin. 5 Sept. 1640. Yours in the perfect'st degree of friendship, J. H.

VII. To Mr T. B. Merchant in Sevill.
SIR,
THough I have my share of infirmities as much as another man, yet I like my
own nature in one thing, that requitalls to me are as sweet as revenges to an
Italian; I thank my stars I find my self far proner to return a courtesy then
to resent an injury: This made me most gladly apprehend the late occasion of
serving you (notwithstanding the hard measure I have received from your
brother) and to make you some returns of those frequent favors I received from
you in Spain, I have taken away (as you may perceive by the enclosed papers)
the weights that hung to that great business in this Court, it concerns you now
to put wings unto it in that, and I believe you will quickly obtain, what uses
to be first in intention though last in execution, I mean your main end: I
heartily wish the thing may be prosperous unto you, and that you may take as
much pleasure in the fruition of it, as I did in following of it for you,
because I love you dearly well, and desire you so much happiness, that you may
have nothing but heaven to wish for; In which desires I rest.

White Hall, 3 May, 1633. Your constant true friend to serve you, J. H.

VIII. To Doctor B.
SIR,
VVHeras upon the large theoricall discourse and bandings of opinions we had
lately at Gresham College, you desired I should couch in writing what I
observed abroad of the extent and amplitude of the Christian Commonwealth in
reference to other Religions, I obtained leave of my self to put pen to paper,
rather to obey you then oblige you with any thing that may add to your
judgment or enrich that rare knowledge I find you have already treasured up;
but I must begin with the fulfilling of your desire in a preambular way for the
subject admits it.

(...) a principle all the earth over, except amongst Atheists, that (...)
verum est a Deo, omne falsum est a diabolo, and omnis error ab homine; All
truth is from God, all falsehood from the devil, and all error from man; the
last goes always under the visard of the first, but the second confronts truth
to the face and stands in open defiance of her, Error and sin are contemporary,
when one crept first in at the fore-dore, the other came in at the postern,
this made Trismegistus, one of the great Lords of Reason, to give this
character of man, homo est imaginatio quaedam, and imaginatio est supremum
mendacium; Man is naught else but a kind of imagination, and imagination is the
greatest lie; Error therefore entering into the world with sin among us poor
Adamites, may be said to spring from the tree of knowledge it self, and from the
rotten kernells of that fatal Apple: This, besides the infirmities that attend
the body, has brought in perversity of will, depravation of mind, and has
cast a kind of cloud upon our intellectualls that they cannot discern the true
essence of things with that clearnes as the protoplast our first Parent could,
but we are involved in a mist, and grope as it were ever since in the dark, as
if truth were got into some dungeon, or as the old wisard said into some deep pit
which the shallow apprehension of men could not fathom: Hence comes it that the
earth is rent into so many religions, and those religions torn into so many
schisms, and various forms of devotion, as if the heavenly Majesty were
delighted as much in diversities of worship as in diversities of works.

The first Religion that ever was reduced to exact rules and ^iruall
observances was that of the Hebrews, the ancient peeple of God, called
afterward Iudaisme, the second Christianity, the third Mahometisme which is
the youngest of all religions; Touching Paganism, and heathenish Idolatry
they scarce deserve the name of Religion, but for the former three there is this
analogy between them, that they all agree in the first person of the Trinity
and all his attributes; What kind of Religion there was before the Flood, it is
in vain to make any researches, there having bin no monuments at all left,
(besides that little we find in Moses and the Phaenician story) but Seths
pillars, and those so defaced, that nothing was legible upon them, though
Josephus says that one was extant in his days: as also the oak under which
Abraham feasted God Almighty, which was 2000 years after. The religion (or
Cab^l) of the Hebrews was transferred from the Patriarchs to Moses and from him
to the Prophets. It was honored with the apearance, and promulgations of God
himself, specially the better part (...) I mean the decalogue containing the
ten Commandments, (...) being most of them moral and agreeing with the common
notions of man are in force all the world over.

The Jews at this day are divided to three Sects, the first, which is the
greatest, are called the Talmudists, in regard that besides the Holy Scriptures
they embrace the Talmud, which is stuffed with the traditions of their Rabbis
and Ca^ams; The second receive the Scripture alone; The third the Pentateuch
only, viz. the five Books of Moses which are called Samaritanes. Now touching
what part of the earth is possessed by Jews, I cannot find they have any at all
peculiar to themselves, but in regard of their murmurings, their frequent
Idolatries, defections, and that they crucified the Lord of life, this once
select Nation of God, and the Inhabitants of the Land flowing with milk and
honey, is become now a scorned squandered peeple all the earth over, being ever
since incapable of any coalition or reducement into one body politic; There
where they are most without mixture is Tiberias in Palestine which Amurath gave
Mendez the Jew, whither, and to Jerusalem, upon any convenience they convey the
bones of their dead friends from all places to be reinterred: They are to be
found in all Mercantile Towns and great Marts, both in Africa, Asia, and
Europe, the dominions of England, of the Spaniard and French excepted, and as
their persons so their profession is despicable, being for the most part but
Brokers every where: Among other places they are allowed to be in Rome her self
near St. Peter's chair, for they advance trade whersoever they com; with the
banks of money, and so are permitted as necessary evils: but put case the whole
Nation of the Jews now living were united into one collective body, yet,
according to the best conjecture and exactest computation that I could hear
made by the knowingst men, they would not be able to peeple a country bigger
then the seventeen Provinces: Those that are dispersed now in Christendom, and
Turkey, are the remnants only of the Tribes of Judah, and Benjamin with some
Levites which returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel: The common opinion is,
that the other ten are utterly lost, but they themselves fancy that they are in
India a mighty nation environed with stony rivers, which always cease to run
their course on their Sabbath, from whence they expect their Messiah who shall
in the fulness of time ore run the world with fire and sword, and reestablish
them in a temporal glorious state; But this opinion swayes most among the
Oriental Jews, whereas they of the West attend the coming of their Messiah from
Portugal; which language is more common among them then any other: and thus
much in brief of the Jews as much as I could digest, and comprehend within the
compass of this paper-sheet and let it serve for the accomplishment of the first
part of your desire; In my next I shall give you the best satisfaction I can
concerning the extent of Christianity up and down the globe of the earth, which
I shall speedily send, for now that I have undertaken such a task my pen shall
not rest till I have finished it, so I am

Westmin. 1 Aug. 1635. Your most affectionat ready Servant, J. H.

IX. To Doctor B.
SIR,
HAving in my last sent you something touching the state of Iudaisin up and down
the world, in this you shall receive what extent Christianity has, which is
the second Religion in succession of time and truth; A Religion that makes not
sense so much subject to reason, as reason succumbent to Faith: There is no
Religion so harsh and difficult to flesh and blood, in regard of diverse
mysterious positions it consists of, as the Incarnation, Resurrection, the
^nity, etc. which as one said, are bones to Philosophy, but milk to Faith. There
is no Religion so purely spiritual and abstracted from common natural idea's,
and sensual happiness as the Christian: No Religion that excites man more to
the love and practice of virtue, and hatred of vice, or that prescribes greater
rewards for the one, and punishments for the other: A Religion that in a most
miraculous manner did expand her self and propagat by simplicity, humblenes,
and by a mere passive way of fortitude, growing up like the palm tree under the
heavy weight of persecution; for never any Religion had more powerful
opposition, by various kinds of punishments, oppressions and tortures which may
be said to have deckd her with rubies in her very cradle; In so much that it is
granted by her very enemies, that the Christian in point of passive valor has
exceeded all other nations upon earth: And *it is a thing of wonderment how at
her very first growth, she flew over the heads of so many interjacent vast
Regions into this remote Isle so soon, that her rays should shine upon the
Crown of a British King first of any, I mean King Lucius, the true Proto
Christian King in the days of Eleutherius, at which time she received her
propagation; but for her plantation she had it long before by some of the
Apostles themselves. Now, as Christian Religion has the purest and most
abstracted, the hardest and highest spiritual notions, so it has bin most
subject to differences of opinions and distractions of conscience, the purer
the wheat is the more subject it is to tares, and the most precious gems to
flaws. The first bone that the Devil flung was into the Eastern Churches, then
twixt the Greek and the Roman, but it was rather for jurisdiction and power
then for the fundamentalls of faith, and lately twixt Rome and the North-west
Churches: Now the extent of the Eastern Church is larger far then that of the
Roman (excluding America) which makes some accuse her as well of uncharitablenes
as of arrogance that she should positively damn so many millions of Christian
souls who have the same common simboll of faith with her, because they are not
within the close of her fold.

Of those Eastern and Southeast Churches, there are no less the^ eleven Sects,
whereof the three principallest are the Grecian, the Iacobite, and the
Nestorian, with whom the rest have some dependence or conformity, and they
acknowledge canonical obedience either to the Patriarch of Constantinople, of
Alexandria, of Ierus^lem, or Antioch: They concur with the Western Reformed
Churches in diverse positions against Rome, as in denial of Purgatory; in
rejecting extremeunction, and celebrating the Sacrament under both kinds; in
admitting their Clergy to marry* in abhorring the use of massy statues, and
celebrating their Liturgy in the vulgar language; Among these the Russe, and
the Habassi^ Emperors are the greatest, but the latter is a Jew also from the
girdle downward, for he is both circumcised and christened, having received the
one from Solomon, and the other from the Apostle Saint Thomas; They observe
other rites of the Leviticall Law; they have the cross in that esteem that they
imprint the sign of it upon some part of the child's body when he is baptized;
that day they take the holy Sacrament they spit not till after sunset, and the
Emperor in his progresses as soon as he comes to the fight of a Church, lights
off his camel, and foots it all along, till he loses the sight of it.

Now touching that proportion of ground that the Christians have on the
habitable earth, (which is the main of our task) I find that all Europe with
her adjacent Isles is peepled with Christians, except that ruthful Country of
Lapland where Idolaters yet inhabit; toward the East also that Region which
lies 'twixt Tana^ and Boristhenes the ancient Country of the Goths is
possessed by Mahumetan Tartars; but in these Territories which the Turk has
'twixt the Danube and the sea, and 'twixt Ragusa, and Buda, Christians are
intermixed with Mahometans, yet in this cohabitation Christians are computed to
make two third parts at least, for here and elsewhere, all the while they pay
the Turk the quarter of their increase, and a Sulta^y for every poll, and speak
nothing in derogation of the Alcoran, they are permitted to enjoy both their
religion and lives securely. In Constantinople her self under the Grand
signiours nose, they have twenty Churches, in Saloni^e (or Thessa^onica) 30.
There are 150 Churches under the Metropolitan of Philippi, as many under him of
Atheus, and he of Corinth has about an hundred suffragan Bishops under him.

But in Africa (a thing which cannot be too much lamented) that huge extent of
Land which Christianity possessed of old 'twixt the Mediterranean Sea, and the
Mountain Atlas, yea as far as Egypt, with the large Region of Nubia, the
Turks have overmastered: We read of 200 Bishops met in Synods in those parts;
and in that Province where old Carthage stood, there were 164 Bishops under one
Metropolitan; but Mahometisme has now overspread all there about, only the
King of Spain has a few Maritim ^ownes under Christian subjection, as Septa,
Tonger, Oran and others. But through all the huge continent of Afric, which it
estimated to be thrice bigger then Europe, there is not one Region entirely
Christian, but Habassia or Ethiopia, besides there is in Egypt a considerable
number of them yet sojourning: Now Habassia according to the itineraries of the
observingst travelers in those parts, is thought to be in respective magnitude
as big as Germany, Spain, France, and Italy conjunctly; an estimate which comes
nearer truth then that which some make, by stretching it from one tropic to the
other, viz. from the Red Sea to the Western Ocean; there are also diverse Isles
upon the Coast of Afric that are coloniz'd with Christians, as the Madera, the
Canari^, Cape Verd, and Saint Thomas; but on the Eastside there is none but
Zoeotora.

In Asia there is the Empire of Russia that is purely Christian, and the Mountain
Libanus in Syria; in other parts they are mingled with Mahometanes, who exceed
them one day more then another in numbers specially in those Provinces (the
more's the pity) where the Gospel was first preached, as Anatolia, Armenia,
Siris, Mesopotamia, Palestina, Chaldea, Assiria, Persia, the north of Arabia,
and south of India; in some of these parts I say, specially in the four first,
Christians are thick mixed with Mahometanes, a^ also in East India since the
Portugalls discovery of the passage by the cape of good hope, christians by
Gods goodness have multiplied in considerable numbers, as likewise in Goa since
it was made a^ Archbishopric, and the Court of a Viceroy: They speak also of a
Christian Church in Quinsay in China the greatest of all earthly Cities; but in
the Islands thereabouts called the Philippinas, which they say are above 1100
in number, in thirty whereof the Spaniard has taken firm footing. Christianity
has made a good progres, as also in Iaponia: in the North-east part of Asia
some 400 years since, Christianity had taken deep root under the King of Tenduc,
but he was utterly overthrown by Chingis one of his ow^ vassalls, who came
thereby to be the first founder of the Tartarias Empire, this King of Tenduc was
the true Prester John, not the Ethiopian King of the Habassins, as Scaliger
would have it, whose opinion is as far distant from truth in this point, as the
Southernest part of Afric from the Northeast part of Asia, or as a Iecobite is
from a Nestorian: Thus far did Christianity find entertainment in the old
world, touching the new, I mean America* which is conjectured to equal, well
near, the other three parts i^ magnitude, the Spanish Authors and Merchants
(with whom ^ have conve^sed) make report of a marvelous growth that
Christianity has made in the Kingdoms of Mexico, Peru, Brasil, and Castilia
delore, as also in the greater Islands adjoining, as Hispaniola, Cuba,
Portoric^, and others, insomuch that they write of one ancient Priest who had
christened himself 700 Savages some years after the first discovery; but there are
some who seeming to be no friends to Spain, report that they did not baptize
half so many as they butcherd.

Thus have you as compendiously as an epistle could make it, an account of that
extension of ground which Christians possess upon earth, my next shall be of
the Mohammedan, wherein I could wish I had not occasion to be so large as I fear
I must be; So I am Sir,

Westmin. 9 Aug. 1635. Your respectfull and humble Servant, J. H.

X. To Doctor B.
SIR,
MY two former were of Iudaisme and Christianity, I *com now to the Mahometane
the modernst of all Religions, and the most mischievous, and destructive to the
Church of Christ, for this fatal sect has justled her out of diverse large
Regions in Afric, in Tartarie, and other places, and attenuated their number in
Asia which they do whersoever they com; having a more politic and per^icious
way to do it then by fire and faggot, for they having understood well that the
dust of Martyrs were the thrivingst seeds of Christianity, and observed that
there r^ignes naturally in mankind, being composed all of one lump, and carrying
the same stamp, a general kind of compassion and sympathy, which appears most
toward them who lay down their lives, and postpose all worldly things for the
preservation of their consciences, (and never any diedso, but he drew followers
after him) therefore the Turk goes a more cunning way to work, he meddles not
with life and limb to prevent the sense of compassion which may arise that
^ay, but he grinds their faces with Taxes, and makes them inca^able of any
offices either of authority, profit or honor, by which means he renders them
despicable to others, and makes their ^yes irksom to themselves: yet the Turks
have a high opinion of Christ that he was a greater Prophet then Moses; that he
was the S^ of a Virgin who conceived by the smell of a Rose presented to her by
Gabriel the Angel, they believe he never sinned, nay in their Alcoran they
term him the breath and word of God, they punish all that blasphem^ him, and no
Jew is capable to be a Turk but he must be first an ABDULA a Christian, he must
eat hogs flesh, and do other things for three days, then he is made a
Mohammedan, but by abjuring of Christ to be a greater Prophet then Mahomet.

It is the Alfange that ushers in the faith of Mahomet every where, nor can it
grow in any place, unles it be planted and sown with Gunpowder intermixed; when
planted, there are diverse ways of policy to preserve it, they have their
Alcoran in one only language, which is the Arabic, the mother tongue of their
Prophet, it is as bad as death for any to raise scruples of the Alcoran;
Thereupon there is a restraint of the study of Philosophy, and other learning,
because the impostors of it may not be di^cernd; the Mus^ is in as great
reverence among them, as the Pope is among the Romanists; For they hold it to
be a true principle in divinity, that no one thing preserves and improves
Religion more then a venerable big^ pious esteem of the chiefest ministers;
They have no other guide o^ ^aw both for temporal and Church Affairs then the
Alcoran which they hold to be the rule of civil justice, as well as the divine
cha^ of their salvation; so that their Judges are but expositors of tha^ only,
nor do they trouble themselves, or puzle the plaintiff with any moth-eaten
records, or precedents to entangle the business, but they immediately determine
it, according to the fresh circumstances of the action, and secundum allegata,
and probata by witnesses; They have one extraordinary piece of humanity to be
(...) tender of the rational soul, as not to put Christian, Jew, Gree^ or any
other to his Oath, in regard that if for some advantage (...) gain or occasion
of inconvenience and punishment any should (...) swear himself, they hold the
imposers of the Oath to be accessory to the damnation of the perjurd man; By
these and diverse oth^ reaches of policy (besides their arms) not practiced
elsewhere they conserve that huge bulk of the Ottoman Empire which exten^
without interruption (the Hell^spont only between) in one cont^-nued piece of
earth two and thirty hundred miles, from Buda (...) Hungary to a good way into
Persia; by these means they keep al^ their Religion from distracting opinions,
from every vulgar fa^cy, and Scismes in their Church, for there is no where fewer
the here; the difference that is, is only with the Persian, and that (...) in
fundamentalls of faith, but for priority of Government in (...) of Religion.
This so universal conformity in their Religion, is ascribed as to other
politic institutions, so specially to the rigorous inhibition they have of
raising Scruples and disputes of the Alcoran under pain of death, specially
among the laity and common peeple, whose zeal commonly is stronger then their
judgment.

That part of the world where Mahomet has furthest expanded himself is Asia,
which as I said before, exceeds Afric in greatness, and much more in peeple; he
has firm footing in Persia, Tartary (upon the latter of which the Musulman
empire is entayld) in Turcomania it self, and Arabia, four mighty Kingdoms;
the last of these was the nest where that Cocatrice egg was hatched, which has
diffused its poison so far and near, through the veins of so many Regions; All
the Southerly coasts of Asia, from the Arabian Bay to the river Indus is
infected therewith, the vast Kingdom of Cambaia and Bengula, and about the
Southpart of the inhabitants of Malabar have drank of this poison; insomuch
that by no wrong computation it may well be said that Mahometisme has
dispersed it self over almost one half of the huge continent of Asia, besides
those multitudes of Isles, specially seven, Moldivia, and Ceylan, the sea
coasts of Sumatra, Iava, Sunda, the ports of Banda, Borneo, with diverse other
whereof there are many thousands about Asia, who have entertaind the Alcoran: In
Europe the Mahometanes possess all the Region twixt Don and Meper, called of
old Tanais, and (...), being about the twentieth part of Europe, the King of
Poland dispenceth with some of them in Lituania: Touching Greece, Macedon,
Thracia, Bulgaria, Servia, Bosnia, Epire, the greatest part of Hungary and
Dalmatia, although they be wholly under Turks obedience, yet Mahometans scarce
make the third part of the Inhabitants. In Afric this contagion is further
spread; It has intoxicated all the shore of Ethiopia as far as Mosumbic, which
lies opposite to the midst of Madagascar; It Is worse with the firm Land of
Afric on the North and West parts, For from the Mediterranean Sea to the great
River Niper, and along the banks of Nile all Egypt and Barbary, with Lybia and
the Negro's Country, are tainted and tand with this black Religion.

The vast propagation of this unhappy Sect may be ascribed first to the Sword,
for the conscience commonly is apt to follow the Conqueror; Then to the loose
reins it gives to all sensual liberty, as to have eight wives and as many
concubines as one can maintain, with the assurance of Venerean delights in a
far higher degree to succeed after death to the religious observers of it, as
the fruition of beautiful damsells, with large rolling eyes, whose virginity
shall renew after every act, their youth shall last always with their lust,
and love shall be satiared with only one, where it shall remain inalienable.
They concu^ with the Christian but only in the acknowledgment of one God, and
in his attrib^tes: With the Jew they symbolize in many things more, as in
circumcision, in refraining from swines flesh, in detestation of images, and
somewhat in the quality of future happiness, which, as was said before, they
place in Venerean pleasure, as the Jew does in feasting and banquetings, so
that neither of their laws have punishment enough to deter mankind from
wickedness and vice, nor do they promise adaequat rewards for virtue and piety;
for in the whole Alcoran, and through all the writings of Moses there is not a
word of Angelical joys and eternity: And herein Christianity far excels both
these Religions, for she places future happiness in spiritual, everlasting and
unconceivable bliss, abstracted from the fading and faint grossenes of sense;
The Jew and Turk also agree in their opinion of women, whom they hold to be of
an inferior creation to man, which makes the one to exclude them from his
Moscoes, and the other from his Synagogues.

Thus far have I rambled through the vast Ottoman Empire, and taken a cursary
survey of Mahomets Religion; In my next I shall tak the best view I can of
Pagans and Idolaters, with those who go for Atheists; And in this particular,
this earth may be said to be worse then Hell it self, and the Kingdom of the
Devil, in regard there are no Atheists there, for the very damned souls find
and feel in the midst of their tortures that there is a God by his justice and
punishments; nay the Prince of darkness himself and all the cacadaemons by an
historical faith believe there is a God; whereunto the Poet alludes very
divinely;

Nullos in Inferno est Atheos, ante fuit. So I very affectionatly kiss your
hand, and rest,

westmin. 17. Aug. 1635. Your faithful ready Servitor, J. H.

XI. To Doctor B.
SIR,
HHaving in my three former letters washed my hands of the Mohammedan and the
Jew, and attended Christianity up and down the earth, I com now to the Pagan,
Idolater, or Heathen, who (the more to be lamented) make the greatest part of
mankind; Europe her self, though the beams of the cross have shined upon her
above these sixteen ages, is not free of them; for they possess to this day
Lappia, Corelia, Biarmia, Scrifinnia, and the north parts of Finmark, there are
also some shreds of them to be found in diverse places of Lutuania, and Somogitia
which make a region nine hundred miles in compass.

But in Afric their number is incredible, for from cape Blanc the most westerly
Point of Afric all southward to the Cape of good Hope, and thence turning by
the back of Afric to the Cape of Mozambric, all these coasts being about the
one half of the circumference of Afric is peepled by Idolaters, though in some
places intermixed with Mahometans and Christians, as in the Kingdom of Congo and
Angola: But if we survey the inland territories of Afric between the river of
Nile, and the west sea of Ethiopia, even all that Country from about the north
parallel of ten degrees, to the south parallel of six degrees, all is held by
Idolaters, besides, the Kingdom of Borno, and a great part of Nubia and Lybia,
continue still in their old Paganism, so that by this account above one half
of that immence continent of Afric is peepled by Idolaters. But in Asia, which
is far more spacious and more populous then Afric, Pagans, Idolaters, and
Gentiles, Swarm in greater numbers, for from the River Pechora Eastward to the
Ocean, and thence Southward to the Cape of Cincapura, and from that point
returning Westward by the South coasts to the out-lets of the River Indus, all
that maritine tract which makes a good deal more then half the circumference of
Asia is inhabited by Idolaters; so are the inland parts: There are two mighty
mountains that traverse all Asia, Taurus and Imaus, the first runs from West
to East, the other from North to South, and (...) quarter and cut that huge
mass of earth into equal parts, this side those mountains most of the peeple
are Mahometans, but the other side, they are all Idolaters: And as on the firm
continent Paganism thus reigns, so in many thousand Islands that lie squandred
in the vast Ocean, on the East and South east of Asia, Idolatry orespreads all,
except in some few Islands that are possessed by Spaniards and Arabs.

Lastly if one take a survey of America (as none has done yet exactly) which
is estimated to be as big as all the old earth, Idolaters there possess four
parts of five; It Is true some years after the first Navigation thither, they
were converted daily in great multitudes, but afterward observing the
licentious lives of the Christians, their greedines for gold, and their
cruelty, they came not in so fast: which made an Indian answer a Spanish Friar
who was discoursing with him of the joys of Heaven, and how all Spaniards went
thither after this life, Then said the Pagan, I do not desire to go thither if
Spaniards be there, I had rather go to Hell to be free of their Company:
America differs from the rest of the earth in this, that she has neither Jew
nor Mohammedan in her, but Christians and Gentiles only: There are besides all
those Religions and peeple before mentioned, an irregular confused nation in
Europe called the Morduits; which occupy the middle confines betwixt the
Tartars and the Russe, that are mingled in Rites of Religion with all those
that have been fore-spoken; for from the privy members upward they are
Christians in regard they admit of Baptism, from the Navell downward they are
Mahometans or Jews for they are circumcised, and besides they are given to the
adoration of heathenish Idols: In Asia there are the Card^ which inhabit the
mountanous Country about Mozall, between Armenia and Mesop^tamia, and the Druci
in Syria who are demi Mahometans, and Christians.

Now concerning Pagans and heathenish Idolaters whereof there are innumerable
sorts up and down the surface of the earth, in my opinion those are the
excusablest kind who adore the Sun and Moon with the Host of Heaven, and in
Ireland, the kerns of the mountains, with some of the Scotch Isles, use a
fashion of adoring the new Moon to this very day, praying she would leave them
in as good health as she found them, this is not so gross and Idolatry as that
of other Heathens; for the adoration of those glorious Celestial bodies is
more excusable than that of Garlic, and Onions with the Egyptian, who I think
(with the Sicyonian) was the ancientest Idolater upon earth which he makes
thrice older than we do, for Diodorus S^culus reports that the Egyptian had a
Religion and Kings, eighteen thousand years since: yet for matter of Philosophy
and Science, he had it from the Chaldean, He from the Gymnotophists and
Brachmans of India, which Country as she is the next neighbor to the rising
Sun, in reference to this side of the Hemisphear, so the beams of learning did
first enlighten her: Egypt was the Nurse of that famous Hermes Trismagistus,
who having no other scale but that of natural reason, mounted very high
toward heaven, for he has many very divine sayings, whereof I think it not
impertinent to insert here a few, first he says, that all humane sins are
venial with the Gods, impiety excepted. 2. That g^odnes belongs to the Gods,
piety to men, revenge and wickedness to the devils. 3. That the Word is lucens
Dei silius, the bright Son of God, etc.

From Egypt Theoricall knowledge came down the Nile and landed at some of the
Greek Islands, where 'twixt the 33, 34, and the 35 Century of years after the
Creation, there flourished all those renowned Philosophers that sway now in our
Schools; Plato flew highest in divine notions, for some call him another Moses
speaking athenian; In one of his Letters to a friend of his, he writes thus,
When I seriously salute thee, I begin my Letter with one God, when otherwise
with many, his Scholar Aristotle commended himself at his death to the Being
of Beings; and Socrates may be said to be a Martyr for the first Person of the
Trinity: these great Secretaries of Nature by studying the vast Volume of the
World came by main strength of reason to the knowledge of one Deity or primus
motor, and of his attributes; they found by undeniable consequences that he was
infinite, eternal, ubiquitary, omnipotent, and not capable of a definition;
which made the Philosopher, being commanded by his King to define God, to ask
the respite of a day to meditat thereon, then two, then four, at last he
ingeniously confessed that the more he thought to dive into this mystery, the
more he was ingulph'd in the speculation of it: for the quiddity and essence of
the incomprehensible Creator, cannot imprint any formal conception upon the
finite intellect of the Creature, to this I might refer the Altar which Saint
Paul found among the Greeks, with this Inscription, (...)* To the unknown God.

From the Greek Isles, Philosophy came to Italy, thence to this Western world
among the Druydes, whereof those of this Isle were most celebrous, for we read
that the Gauls (now the French) came to Britanny in great numbers to be
instructed by them. The Romans were mighty great Zelots in their Idolatry, and
their best Authors affirm, that they extended their Monarchy so far and near,
by a particular reverence they had of their Gods, (which the Spaniard seems now
to imitate) though those Gods of theirs were made of men, and of good fellows at
first, besides in the course of their conquest, they adopted any strange Gods
to the society of theirs, and brought them solemnly to Rome, and the reason as
one says was, that they believed the more Gods they had the safer they were, a
few being not sufficient to conserve and protect so great an Empire: The Roman
Gentiles had their Altars and Sacrifices, their Archflamins, and vestall Nuns;
And it seems the same genius reigns still in them, for in the Primitive Church,
that which the Pagans misliked most in Christianity was, that it had not the
face and form of a religion, in regard it had no Oblations, Altars and Images,
which may be a good reason why the Sacrifices of the Mass and other Ceremonies
were first instituted to allure the Gentiles to Christianity. But to return a
little further to our former subject in the condition that mankind stands now,
if the Globe of the earth were divided to thirty parts, it is thought that
Idolaters (with horror I speak it) having as I said before, the one half of
Asia and Afric, both for the inland Country and Maritim Coasts with four parts
of five in America inhabit twenty parts of those Regions that are already found
out upon earth, besides in the opinion of the knowingst and most inquisitive
Mathematitions, there is toward the southern clime as much land yet
undiscovered as may equal in dimension the late new world, in regard, as they
hold there must be of necessity such a portion of earth to balance the Center on
all sides, and it is more than probable, that the Inhabitants there must be
Pagans. Of all kind of Idolaters those are the horridest, who adore the Devil
whom they call Tantara, who appears often unto them specially in a Haraucane
though he be not visible to others; In some places they worship both God and the
Devil, the one, that he may do them good, the other, that they may do them no
hurt; the first they call tantum, the other squantum. 'Twere presumption beyond
that of Lucifers or Adam's for man to censure the justice of the Creator in
this particular, why he makes daily such innumerable vessels of dishonor; It
is a wiser and safer course far to sit down in an humble admiration and cry
out, on the profound inscrutable judgments of God! his ways are past finding
out, and so to acknowledge with the divine Philosopher, Quod oculus
vespertilionis ad solemn, idem est omnis intellectus humanus ad Deum, what the
Eye of a Bat is to the Sun, the same is all human understanding to God-wards.

Now to draw to a Conclusion, touching the respective largnes of Christianity
and Mahometisme upon the earth, I find the first to exceed, taking the new
world with the old, considering the spacious Plantations of the Spaniard in
America, the Colonies the English have there in Virginia, New England and
Charibbi Islands; with those of the French in Canada, and of the Hollander in
East India: nor do I find that there is any region purely Mohammedan without
intermixtures, as Christianity has many: which makes me to be of a differing
opinion to that Gentleman, who held that Christianity added little to the
general religion of mankind.

Now touching the latitude of Christian faith, in reference to the differing
Professors thereof, as in my former I showed that the Eastern Churches were more
spacious than the Latin or Roman (excepting the two Indies) so they who have
fallen off from her in the Western parts are not so far inferior to her in
Europe as some would make one believe; which will appear if we cast them in
counterbalance.

Among Roman Catholics there is the Emperor, and in him the King of Hungary,
the three Kings of Spain, France, and Poland; all Italy, the Dukes of Savoy,
Bavaria, and Lorain, the three spiritual Electors with some few more; Touching
them who have renounced all obedience to Rome, there are the three Kings of
great Britain, Denmark and Swethland, the Duke of Saxon, Holstein, and
Wittemberg: the Marquis of Brandenburg, and Baden, the Landgrave of Hesse; most
of the Hansiatic Towns which are 88 in number* some whereof are equal to
Republiques, the (almost) seven Provinces the Hollander has. The five Cantons
of Swiss and Geneva, They of France who are reputed the fifth part of the
Kingdom; the Prince of Transylvania, They of Hungary, and of the large Kingdom
of Bohemia, of the Marchisats of Lusatia, M^ravia, and the Dukedom of Silesia;
As also they of the huge Kingdom of Poland, wherein Protestants are diffused
through all quarters in great numbers, having in every Province their public
Churches and Congregations orderly severed and bounded with Diocesses, whence
are sent some of the chiefest and most principal men of worth, unto their
General Synods: For although there are diverse sorts of these Polenian
Protestants, some embracing the Waldensian or the Bohennic, others the
Augustane, and some the Helvetian Confession; yet they all concur in opposition
to the Roman Church; as also they of the Anglitan, Scotican, Gallic, Argentine,
Saxonick, Wirtinbergick, Palatin, and ^elgick Confessions: They also
harmoniously symbolize in the principal Atticles of Faith, and which mainly
concern eternal salvation, as in the infallible verity and full sufficiency of
the Scriptures, divine Essence, and unity of the Everlasting Godhead, the
sacred Trinity of the three glorious Persons, the blessed Incarnation of
Christ, the Omnipotent Providence of God, the absolute supreme head of the
Church, Christ himself, justification by Faith through his merits, and touching
the nature of lively faith, repentance, regeneration, and sanctification, the
difference between the Law and the Gospel, touching free will, sin, and good
works, the Sacraments, their number, use and efficacy, the marks of the
Church,, the resurrection and state of souls deceased: It may seem a rambling
wild speech at first view, of one who said that to make one a complete
Christian, he must have the works of a Papist, the words of a Puritan, and the
Faith of a Protestant, yet this wish if well expounded, may bear a good sense,
which were unfitting for me to give, you, being better able to put a gloss upon
it your self.

Thus learned Sir, have I exercised my pen, according to my small proportion of
knowledge, and conversation with books, men and mapps, to obey your desire,
though in comparison of your spacious literature I have held all this while but
a candle to the Sun, yet by the light of this small candle you may see how
ready I am to show my self

Westmin. 25 Aug. 1635. Your very humble and affectionat Servitor, J. H.

XII. To Mr. T. W.
SIR,
I Am heartily glad you have prevaild so far with my Lady your Mother as to
have leave to travel a while, and now that you are bound for France and Italy,
let me give you this caution to take heed of a speedy friend in the first, and
of a slow enemy in the second; The courtesies of an Italian, if you suspect him
jealous of you, are dangerous and so are his complements, he will tell you that
he kisseth your hand a thousand times over, when he wishes them both cut off.

The French are a free and debonnaire acostable peeple, both men and women;
Among the one, at first entrance one may have acquaintance, and at first
acquaintance one may have entrance; For the other, whereas the old rule was,
that there could be no true friendship without commessation of a bushel of salt,
one may have enough there before he eat a spoon-full with them. I like that
friendship which by soft gentle pauses steals upon the affection, and grows
mellow with time, by reciprocal offices and trialls of love, that friendship is
like to last long, and never to shrink in the wetting.

So hoping to enjoy you before you go, and to give you a friendly joy, I rest

Westmin. 28 Feb. 1634. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

XIII. To Sir Tho. Hawk. Knight.
SIR,
I Was invited yesternight to a solemn supper by B. I. where you were deeply
remembered, there was good company, excellent cheer, choice wines, and joviall
welcome; one thing intervened which almost spoyld the relish of the rest, that
B. began to engross all the discourse, to vapor extremely of himself, and by
villifying others to magnify his own muse; T. Ca. buz'd me in the ear, that
though Ben had barreld up a great deal of knowledge, yet it seems he had not
read the Ethiques, which among other precepts of morality forbid
self-commendation, declaring it to be an ill favored solecism in good manners;
It made me think upon the Lady (not very young) who having a good while given
her guests neat entertainment, a capon being brought upon the table, instead of
a spoon she took a mouthfull of claret and spouted it into the poope of the
hollow bird; such an accident happend in this entertainment you know -- Proprio
laus sordet in ore; be a man's breath never so sweet, yet it makes ones praises
stink, if he makes his own mouth the conduit pipe of it; But for my part I am
content to dispense with this Roman infirmity of B. now that time has snowed
upon his pericranium. You know Ovid, and (your) Horace were subject to this
humor, the first bursting out into,

Iamque opus exegi quod nec Iovis ira, nec ignis, etc. The other into,

Exegi monumentum ae're perennius, etc. As also Cicero while he forced himself
into this Exameter; O fortunatam natam me consule Romam. There is another reason
that excuses B. which is, that if one be allowed to love the natural issue of
his body, why not that of the brain, which is of a spiritual and more noble
extraction; I preserve your manuscripts safe for you till your return to
London, what news the times afford this bearer will impart unto you. So I am,

Westmin. 5 Apr. 1636. Sir, Your very humble and most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XIV. To my Cosen Mr. I. P. at Graves-end.
Cousin,
GOd send you a good passage to Holland, and the world to your mind when you
are there; Now, that you intend to traile a pike and make profession of arms,
let me give you this caveat, that nothing must be more precious to you then
your reputation; As I know you have a spirit not to receive wrong, so you must
be careful not to offer any, for the one is as base as the other, your pulls
will be quickly felt, and trial made what mettle you are made of after your
first coming, If you get but once handsomely off, you are made ever after, for
you will be free from all baffles and affronts. He that has once got the same
of an early riser, may sleep till noon; Therefore be wondrous wary of your first
comportments, get once a good name, and be very tender of it afterward, for
it is like venice glass quickly crackd, never to be mended, patched it may be;
To this purpose take along with you this Fable: It happened that Fire, water
and Fame went to travel together (as you are going now) they consulted, that
if they lost one another, how they might be retreevd and meet again; Fire said
where you see smoke there you shall find me, Water said where you see marsh and
morish low grounds, there you shall find me; but Fame said, take heed how you
lose me, for if you do, you will run a great hazard never to meet me again,
there is no retreeving of me.

It imports you also to conform your self to your Commanders, and so you may
more confidently demand obedience, when you com to command your self, as I
doubt not but you may do in a short time: The Hoghen Moghen are very exact in
their polemicall government, their pay is sure though small, 4. s. a week being
too little a hire, as one said, to kill men. At your return I hope you will
give a better account of your doings than he who being asked what exploits he
had don in the Low Countries, answered that he had cut off a Spaniards legs,
reply being made that that was no great matter, it had bin something if he had
cut off his head, O said he, you must consider his head was off before; excuse
me that I take my leave of you so pleasantly, but I know you will take any
thing in good part from him who is so much

Westmin. 3. Aug. 1634. Your truly affectionat Cosen, J. H.

XV. To Cap. B.
Much endeared Sir,
There is a true saying that the spectator often times sees more than the
gamester; I find that you have a very hazardous game in hand therefore give it
up and do not vie a farthing upon it. Though you be already imbarqued, yet there
is time enough to strike sail, and make again to the port, otherwise, it is no
hard matter to be a Prophet what will become of you; there be so many ill
favored quicksands, and rocks in the way, (as I have it from a good hand) that
one may easily take a prospect of your shipwreck if you go on; therefore desist
as you regard your own safety, and the seasonable advice of your

Westminst. 1 May, 1635. J. H.

XVI. To Mr. Thomas W. at his chamber in the Temple.
SIR,
YOu have much straightened that knot of love which has bin long tied between
us, by those choice manuscripts you sent me lately, amongst which I find diverse
rare pieces, but that which afforded me most entertainment in those
miscellanies, was Doctor Henry Kings Poems, wherein I find not only heat and
strength, but also an exact concinnity and evennes of fancy: they are a choice
race of brothers, and it seems the same Genius diffuseth it self also a* among
the sisters: It was my hap to be lately where Mistress A. K. was, and having a
paper of verses in her hand I got it from her, they were an Epitaph and an
Anagram of her own composure and writing, which took me so far that the next
morning, before I was up, my rambling fancy fell upon these lines.

For the admitting of Mistress Anne King to be the tenth Muse.
Ladies of Helicon do not repine
I add one more unto your number nine,
To make it even, I among you bring,
No meaner than the daughter of a King,
Fair Basil-Ana, quickly pass your voice,
I know Apollo will approve the choice,
And gladly her install, for I could name,
Some of less merit Goddesses became.
(...) Anna King.

F. C. soars higher and higher every day in pursuance of his platonic love,
but T. Man. is out with his, you know whom, he is fallen to that aversness to
her, that he sw^ares he had rather see a Basilisk than her. This shows that the
sweetest wines, may turn to the tartest vinegar; no more till we meet,

Westmin. 3 Feb. 1637. Yours inviolably, J. H.

XVII. To the Lord C.
My Lord,
There are two sayings which are fathered upon Secretary Walsingham and
Secretary Cecil, a pair of the best weighd Statesmen this Island hathbred: one
was used to say at the Council Table, My Lords stay a little, and we shall
make an end the sooner: the other would oft-times speak of himself, It shall
never be said of me that I will d^fer till to morrow what I can do to day: At
first view these sayings seemed to clash with one another, and to be
diametrically opposite, but being rightly understood, they may be very well
reconciled: Touching the first, It Is true, that have and choler are enemies to
all great actions; for as it is a principle in Chimistry that omnis festinatio
est a Diabolo, all have comes from Hell; so in the consultations, contrivings
and conduct of any business of State, all rashness and precipitation comes from
an ill spirit: There cannot be a better pattern for a grave and considerat way
of deliberation than the ancient course of our High Court of Parliament, who
when a Law is to be made, which concerns the welfare of so many thousands of
men, after a mature debate and long discussion of the point beforehand, cause
the bill to be read solemnly three times in the House, ere it be transmitted to
the Lords, and there also it is so many times canvas'd and then presented to the
Prince: That which must stand for law, must be long stood upon, because it
imposes an universal obedience, and is like to be everlasting according to
the Ciceronian maxim, Deliberandum est diu quod stat^endum est semel: such a
kind of cunctation, advisednes, and procrastination is allowable also in all
Counsels of State and War, for the day following may be able commonly to be a
master to the day passed, such a world of contingencies human actions are
subject unto: yet under favor I believe this first saying to meant of matters
while they are in agitation and upon the anvill, but when they have received
form and are fully resolved upon, I believe then nothing is so advantageous as
speed; And at this, I am of opinion, the second saying aims at, for when the
weights that use to hang to all great businesses are taken away, it is good then
to put wings unto them, and to take the ball before the bound, for Expedition
is the life of action, otherwise Time may show his bald occiput and shake his
posteriors at them in de^ision: Among other Nations the Spaniard is observed to
have much phlegm, and to be most dilatory in his proceedings; yet they who
have pryed narrowly into the sequel and success of his actions, do find that
this gravity, reservednes, and tergiversations of his, have turned rather to
his prejudice than advantage, take one time with another: The two last
matrimonial treaties we had with him, continued long, the first 'twixt
Ferdinand and Henry the seventh for Catherine of Aragon seven years; That
'twixt King James, and the now Philip the fourth for Mary of Austria lasted
eleven years (and seven and eleven's eighteen) the first took effect for Prince
Arthur, the latter miscarried for Prince Charles, and the Spaniard may thank
himself and his own slow pace for it, for had he mended his pace to perfect the
work, I believe his Monarchy had not received so many ill favored shocks
since. The late revolt of Portugal was foreseen, and might have bin prevented,
if the Spaniard had not bin too slow in his purpose to have sent the duke of
Braganza out of the way upon some employment as was projected.

Now will I reconcile the former savings of those two renowned Secretaries,
with the gallant comparison of Charles the Emperor (and he was of a more
temperat mould, than a Spaniard, being a Flemin born) he was used to say, that
while any great business of State was yet in consultation we should observe the
motion of Saturn which is plumbeous long and heavy, but when it is once
absolutely resolved upon, then we should observe the motion of Mercury the
nimblest of all the planets, ubi desinit Saturnus ibi in^ipiat Mercurius.
Whereunto I will add, that we should imitate the Mulberry, who of all trees
casts out her buds latest, for she does it not till all the cold weather be
passed, Quoda^ cum Streptu as Pliny says.
and then she is sure they cannot be nipped, but then she shoots them all out
in one night, so though she be one way the slowest, she is another way the
nimblest of (...).

Thus have I obeyed your Lordships command in expounding the sense of these two
sayings according to my mean apprehension but this exposition relates only to
public affairs, and political^ negotiations, wherein your Lordship is so
excellently versed; (...) shall most willingly conform to any other injunctions
of yo^ Lordships, and esteem them always as favors, while I am

Westmin. 5 Sept. 1633. J. H.

XVIII. To Sir I. Brown Knight.
SIR,
ONE would think that the utter falling off of Catalonia and Portugal in so
short a compass of time should much lessen the Spaniard, the peeple of both
these Kingdoms being from subjects become enemies against him, and in actual
hostility: without doubt it has done so, yet not so much as the world
imagines; It Is true in point of Regal power, and diverse brave subordinat
commands for his servants, he is a great deal lessened thereby, but though he be
less powerful, he is not a penny poo^er thereby, for there comes not a farthing
less every year into his Exchequer, in regard that those countries were rather a
charge than benefit unto him, all their Revenue being drunk up in pensions, and
payments of Officers and Garrisons; For if the King of Spain had lost all except
the West Indies, and all Spain except Castile her self, it would little
diminish his treasury; Touching Catalonia, and Portugal, specially the latter,
it is true they were mighty members of the Castilian Monarchy, but I believe
they will sooner want Castile than Castile them; because she filled them with
treasure; Now that Barcelona and Lisbon has shaken hands with Sevill, I do not
think that either of them has the tith of that treasure they had before; in
regard the one was the scale whereby the King of Spain sent his money to Italy,
the other, because all her East Indian commodities were bartered commonly in
Andal^zia and elsewhere for Bullion; Catalonia is fed with money from France,
but for Portugal she has little or none; therefore I do not see how she could
support a war long to any purpose if Castile were quiet, unless soldiers would
be contented to take cloves and pepper-corns, for Patacoon^ and Pistolls. You
know Money is the sinew and soul of War: This makes me think on that blunt
answer which Captain Talbot returned Hen. the 8 from Calais, who having
received special command from the King, to erect a new fort at the water gate,
and to see the townwell fortified, sent him word that he could neither fortify
nor fi^ifie without money. There is no news at all stirring here now, and I am
of the Ialians mind that said Nulla nuova, buona nuova, no news good news. But
it were great news to see you here, whence you have bin an Alien so long to

Holborn, 3 June. 1640. Your most affectionat friend, J. H.

XIX. To Captain C. Price.
Cosen,
YOu have put me upon such an od intri^t piece of business, that I think there
was never (...) ^ike of it, I am more puzzled, and entangled with it, than often
times* use t^ be with my Bandstrings when I go hastily to bed, and wan^ ^u a
fair femall hand as you have to unty them* I must imput^ (...) this to the
peevish humor of the peeple I deal withal; I find it true now that one of the
greatest tortures that can be in the negotiation of the world is, to have to
do with perverse irrational half-witted men, and to be worded to death with
nonsense; besides as much brain as they have, is as full of scruples, as a Burr
is of prickles, which is a quality incident to all those, that have their heads
lightly ballasted, for they are like buys in a barrd Port, waving perpetually
up and down. The Father is scrupulous of the Son, the Son of the Sisters* and
all three of me, to whose award they referred the business three several times:
It is as hard a task to reconcile the Fan^s of St. Sepulchers steeple which
never look all four upon one point of the Heavens, as to reduce them to any
conformity of reason; I never remember to have met with Father and Children, or
Children among themselves of a more differing genius and contrariety of humors,
insomuch that there cannot be a more pregnant instance to prove that human souls
com not ex traduce, and by seminall production from the parents. For my part I
intend to spend my breath no longer upon them, but to wash my hands quite of
the business, and so I would wish you to do, unles you love to walk in a
labyrinth of Briars, so expecting with impatience your return to London, I rest

Westmin. 27 Apr. 1632. Your most faithful Servitor, J. H.

XX. To my Cosen Mr. I. P. at Lincolns Inn.
Cosen,
THe last week you sent me word, that you were so crampd with Business, that you
could not put Pen to Paper; if you write not this week, I shall fear you are
not only crampd but cripled; at least I shall think you are crampd in your
affection rather than your fingers, and that you have forgot how once it was my
good fortune to preserve you from drowning when the cramp took you in St. John's
Pool at Oxford. The Cramp, as I take it, is a sudden Convulsion of the Nerves.
For my part the ligaments and sinews of my love to you have been so strong,
that they were never yet subject to such spasmaticall shrinkings and
Convulsions. Now, letters are the very Nerves and Arteries of friendship, nay,
they are the vital sp^rits and elixar of love, which in case of distance and
long absence would be in hazard to languish, and quite moulder away without
them. Amongst the Italians and Spaniards it is held one of the greatest
solecismes that can be in good manners, not to answer a Letter with like
civility, by this they use to distinguish a Gentleman from a Clown; besides
they hold it one of the most ^ertuous ways to employ time. I am the more
covetous of a punctual correspondence with you in this point, because I
commonly gain by your Letters, your style is so polite, your expressions so
gallant, and your lines interspersed with such dainty flowers of Poetry and
Philosophy. I understand there is a very able Doctor that reads the Anatomy
Lecture this term, if Ploydon will dispense with you, you cannot spend your
hours better than to hear him. So I end for this time, being crampd for want of
more matter, and rest

West. 3 Iul. 1631. Your most affectionat loving Cosen, J. H.

XXI. To my Nephew J. P. at St. John's in Oxford.
Nephew,
I Had from you lately two Letters, the last was well freighted with very good
stuff, but the other, to deal plainly with you, was no^ so; There was as much
difference between them, as twixt a Scots* Pedlars pack in Poland, and the
Magazine of an English Merchant in Naples, the one being usually full of
Taffaty, Silks and Satins; the other of Calicoes, threed-ribbands, and such
polldavy ware; I perceive you have good Commodities to vent, if you take the
pains: your trifles and bagatells are ill bestowed upon me, therefore hereafter
I pray let me have of your best sort of wares: I am glad to find that you have
stored up so much already; you are in the best Mart in the world to improve
them; which I hope you daily do, and I doubt not when the time of your
apprentiship there is expired, but you will find a good Market to expose them
for your own and the public benefit abroad. I have sent you the Philosophy
Books you writ to me for; any thing that you want of this kind for the
advancement of your studies, do but write and I shall furnish you: When I was a
student as you are, my practice was to borrow rather than buy some sort of
Books, and to be always punctual in restoring them upon the day assigned, and
in the intrim to swallow of them as much as made for my turn; this obligd me to
read them through with more haste to keep my word, whereas I had not been so
careful to peruse them had they been my own Books, which I knew were always
ready at my dispose. I thank you heartily for your last Letter, in regard I
found it smelt of the Lamp, I pray let your next do so, and the oil and labor
shall not be lost which you expend upon

Westminster. 1 Aug. 1633. Your assured loving Uncle, J. H.

XXII. To Sir Tho. Haw.
SIR,
I Thank you a thousand times for the choice Stanzas you pleased to send me
lately: I find that you were thoroughly heated, that you were inspired with a true
enthusiasme when you composed them; And whereas others use to flutter in the
lower Region, your Muse soars up to the upper, and transcending that too, takes
her flight among the Celestial bodies to find a fancy: your desires, I should
do something upon the same subject, I have obeyed, though I fear not satisfied,
in the following numbers.

1.
Could I but catch those beamy Rays,
Which Phoebus at high noon displayes,
I Would set them on a Loom, and frame
A Scarf for Delia of the same.
2.
Could I that wondrous black com near,
Which Cynthia* when eclipsed, does wear,
Of a new fashion I would trace
A Mask thereof for Delia's face.
3.
Could I but reach that green and blue,
Which Iris decks in various hue,
From her moist Bow I Would drag them down,
And make my Delia a Summer Gown.
4.
Could I those whitely Stars go nigh,
Which make the milky way in sky,
I Would poach them, and at Moonshine dress
To make my Delia a curious mess.
5.
Thus would I diet, thus attire
My Delia Queen of hearts and fire,
She should have every thing divine
That would befitt a Seraphin.
And 'cause ungirt unblessed we find,
One of the Zones her wast should bind.
They are of the same cadence as yours and aireable, so I am

Westminster. 5 Sept* 1633. Your humble Servitor, J. H.

XXIII. To the R. H. the Lady Eliz. Digbye.
Madame,
IT is no improper comparison, that a thankful heart is like a box of precious
ointment, which keeps the smell long after the thing is spent: Madame, (without
vanity be it spoken) such is my heart to you, and such are your favors to me,
the strong aromatic odor they carried with them, diffused it self through all
the veins of my heart, specially through the left Ventricle, where the most
illustrious blood lies, so that the persume of them remains still fresh within
me, and is like to do, while that triangle of flesh dilates and shuts it self
within my breast; nor does this perfume stay there, but as all smells naturally
tend upwards, it has ascended to my brain, and sweetened all the cells thereof
specially the memory, which may be said to be a Cabinet also to preserve
courtesies, for though the heart be the box of love, the memory is the box of
lastingnes, the one may be termed the source whence the motions of gratitude
flow, the other the cistern that keeps them.

But your Ladyship will say, these are words only; I confess it, it is but a
verbal acknowledgment; but, Madame, if I were made happy with an opportunity,
you should quickly find these words ^urnd to actions, either to go, to run or
ride upon your arrand; In expectation of such a favorable occasion, I rest,

Madame, Your Ladyships most humble and enchained Servitor, J. H.
West. 5 Aug. 1640.
XXIV. To Sir I. B.
Noble Sir,
THat od opinion the Jew and Turk have of women, that they are of an inferior
Creation to man, and therefore exclude them, the one from their Synagogues, the
other from their Meskeds, is in my judgment not only partial, but profane; for
the Image of the Creator shines as clearly in the one as in the other, and I
believe there are as many female-Saints in heaven as male, unless you could make
me adhere to the opinion that women must be all Masculine before they be
capable to be made Angels of. Add heerunto that there went better and more
refined stuff to the creation of woman than man; It Is true, 'twas a weak part
in Eve to yield to the seducements of Satan, but it was a weaker thing in Adam
to suffer himself to be tempted by Eve being the weaker vessel.

The ancient Philosophers had a better opinion of that Sex, for they ascribed
all Sciences to the Muses, all sweetness and morality to the Graces, and
Prophetic Inspirations to the Sybills. In my small revolving of Authors I find
as high examples of virtue in Women as in Men, I could produce here a whole
Regiment of them, but that a Letter is too narrow a field to muster them in, I
must confess, there are also counter instances of this kind: if Qu* ^bia was
such a precise pattern of continency, that after the act of Conception, she
would know her husband no more all the ^me of her pregnancy till she had been
delivered; there is another example of a Roman Empress, that when she found the
vessel f^ugheed, would take in all passengers, when the Barn was* full any one
might thresh in the haggard but not till then* for fear the right Father should
be discovered by the countenance of the child* But what need I go so far off to
^ake the ashes of the dead, there are living examples enough pro and con of both
Sexes, yet woman, being as I said before, the weaker vessel, her failings are
more ve^iall than those of man, though man indeed being more conversant with
the world, and meeting more opportunities abroad (and opportunity is the
greatest Bawd) of falling into infirmities as he follows (...) worldly
negotiations, may on the the other side be judged the ^ore excusable.

But you are far fitter than I, to discourse of this subject, being better
versed in the theory of women, having had a most vertuou^ Lady of your own
before, and being now linked to another. (...) wish a thousand benedictions may
fall upon this your second choice* and that -- tam bona sit quam bona prima
fuit. This option shall be my conclusion for the present, whereunto I ad that I
am in no vulgar degree of affection

West. 5. Aug. 1632. Your most humble and faithful Servitor, J. H.

XXV. To Mr. P. W.
SIR,
There are two things which ad much to the merit of courtesies, viz. cheerfulnes
and speed, and the contraries of these lessen the value of them; that which
hangs long twixt the fingers, and is don with difficulty and a sullen
supercilious look, makes the obligation of the receivers nothing so strong, or
the memory of the kindness half so grateful: the best thing the gods themselves
liked of in the entertainments they received of those poor wretches Baucis and
Philemon, was open hearty looks,

-- Super omnia vultus,
Accessere boni --
A clear unclouded countenance makes a Cottage appear like a Castle in point of
hospitality, but a beetle-brow'd sullen face makes a Palace as smoaky as an
Irish Hut: There is a mode in giving entertainment, and doing any courtesy else,
which trebly binds the receiver to an acknowledgment, and makes the remembrance
of it far more acceptable. I have known two Lord high Tresurers of England of
quite contrary humors, one successively after the other, the one though he did
the suitors business, yet he went murmuring, the other, though he did not, was
used to dismiss the party with some satisfaction: It Is true, money is welcome,
though it be in a dirty Clout, but it is far more acceptable if it com in a
clean handkercher.

Sir, you may sit in the chair, and read Lectures of Morality to all mankind
in this point, you have such a dextrous discreet way to handle suitors in that
troublesome Office of yours, wherein as you have already purchased much, I wish
you all increase of honor and ^ppines,

Your humble and much obliged Servitor, J. H.

XXVI. To Master F. Coll. at Naples.
SIR,
IT IS confessed I have offended by my overlong filence, and abused our maiden
friendship; I appear before you now in this white, sheet to do penance, I pray
in your next to send me an absolution; Absolutions they say are as cheap in
that Town, as curtesans, whereof 'twas said there were 20000 on the common list,
when I was there, at which time I remember one told me a tale of a Cal^brian
who had bugger'd a Goat, and having bought an Absolution of his Confessor, he
was asked by a friend what it cost him, he answered, I procured it for four
P^stolets, and for the other od one, I think I might have had a dispensation to
have married the beast.

I thank you for the exact relation you sent me of the fearful Earthquakes and
fires which happened lately in that Country, and particularly about Vesuvius;
It seems the huge Giant whom the Poets say was hurld under the vast mountain by
the gods for thinking to scale heaven, had a mind to turn from one side to the
other, which he uses to do at the revolution of evry hundred years, and
stirring his body by that action, he was taken with a ^t of the cough, which
made the hill shake, and belch out fire in that hideous manner. But to repay
you in the like coin, they send us stranger news from Lisbon, for they write of
a spick and span new Island that has peeped up out of the Atlantic Sea, near
the Tarc^ras, which never appeard before, since the Creation, and it begins to
be peepled already; me thinks the King of Spain needs no more Countries, he
has too many already, unles they were better united. All your friends here are
well, and mind you often in Town and Country, as does

Westmin. 7 Apr. 1629. Your true constant Servitor, J. H.

XXVII. To Mr T. Lucy in Venice.
SIR,
YOur last you sent me was from Genoa, where you write that gli mariti
ingravidano l^r moglie cento miglia lontano, Husbands get their wives with
child a hundred miles off; It Is a great virtue I confess, but it is nothing to
what our East India Mariners can do here, because they can do so, forty times
further, for though their wives be at Ratcliffe, and they at the Red Sea,
though they be at Madagasca^, the Magors Court, or Iapan, yet they use to get
their wives bellies up here about London, a strange virtue at such a huge
distance, but I believe the active part is in the wives, and the husbands are
merely passive, which makes them among other wares to bring home with them a
sort of precious horns, the powder whereof, could one get some of it, would be
of an invaluable virtue; This operation of our Indian Mariner at such a
distance is more admitable in my judgment than that of the weapon salve, the
ung^entum armarium, for that can do no good unles the surgeon have the
instrument, and blood, but this is don without both, for the husband
contributes neither of them.

You are now I presume in Venice, there also such things are don by proxy,
while the husband is abroad upon the Galleys, there be others that shoot his
gulf at home. You are now in a place where you may feed all your senses very
cheap, I allow you the pleasing of your eye, your ear, your smell and taste,
but take heed of being too indulgent of the fist sense: The Poets feign that
Venus the goddess of pleasure, and therefore called Aphrodite, was engendered of
the froth of the sea (which makes fish more salacious commonly, than flesh) it
is not improbable that she was got and coagulated of that foam which Neptune
uses to disgorge upon those pretty Islands whereon that City st^nds. My Lady
Miller commends her kindly unto you, and she desires you to send her a complete
cupboard of the best crystal glasses Murano can afford by the next shipping,
besides she entreats you to send her a pot of the best mithridate, and so much
of treacle.

All your friends here are well and joviall, T. T. drank your health
yesternight, and wished you could send him a handsome Venetia^ Cour^isan
enclosed in a letter, he would willingly be at the charge of the postage, which
he thinks would not be much for such a light commodity. Farewell my dear Tom,
have a care of your courses, and continue to love him who is

Westmin. 15 Ian. 1635. Yours to the altar, J. H.

XVIII. To Mr. T. Jackson. at Madrid.
SIR,
THough a great sea severs ^s now, yet it is not all the water of the Ocean can
drown the remembrance of you in me, but that it floats and flows daily in my
brain; I must confess (for it is impossible the mind of man should fix it self
always upon one object) it has sometimes its ebbs in me, but it is to rise up
again with greater force; At the writing heerof 'twas flood, 'twas springtide
which sweld so high, that the thoughts of you overwhelmed all others within me,
they engrossed all my intellectualls for the time.

You write to me fearful news ^ouching the revolt of the Catalan from
Castillia, of the tragical murdering of the Viceroy, and the burning of his
House; Those mountaneers are mad Lads. I fear the sparkles of this fire will
fly further, either to Portugal or to Sicilia and Italy, all which Countries,
I observed the Spaniard holds as one would do a Woolf by the ^ar, fearing they
should run a^ay ever and anon from him.

The news here is that Lambeth House bears all the sway at White Hall, and
the Lord Deputy Kings it notably in Ireland, some that love them best, could
wish them a little more moderation.

I pray buy Suarez works for me of the last edition, Mr. William Pawley, to
whom I desire my most hearty commends may be presented, will see it safely sent
by way of Bil^ao; your friends here are all well, as is thanks be to God,

Holborn, 3 Mar. 1638. Your true friend to serve you, J. H.

XXIX. To Sir Edward Sa. Knight.
Sir Edward,
I Had a shrewd disease hung lately upon m^, proceeding as the Physicians told
me from this long reclused life, and close restraint, which had much wasted my
spirits and brought me low: when the Crisis was past, I began to grow
doubtful, that I had but a short time to breath in this elementary world, my
fever still increasing, and finding my soul weary of this muddy mansion, and
me thought more weary of this prison of flesh, than this flesh was of this
prison of the Fleet. Therefore after some gentle slumbers, and unusual dreams
about the dawnings of the day, I had a lucid intervall, and so I fell a
thinking how to put my little house in order, and to make my last will.
Heerupon my thoughts ran upon Grunnius sophista's last Testament, who having
nothing else to dispose of but his body, he bequeathed all the parts thereof in
Legacies, as his skin to the Tanners, his bones to the Dice makers, his guts to
the Musicians, his fingers to the Scriveners, his tongue to his fellow
sophisters, (which were the Lawyers of those times) and so forth: as he thus
dissected his body so I thought to divide my mind into legacies, having as you
know little of the outward pelf and gifts of fortune to dispose of, for never
any was less beholden to that blind baggage. In the highest degree of
Theoricall contemplation, I made an entire sacrifice of my soul to her maker,
who by infusing created her, and by creating infused her to actuate this small
bulk of flesh, with an unshake^ confidence of the redemption of both in my
Savior, and consequently of the salvation of the one, and resurrection of the
other: my thoughts then reflected upon diverse of my noble friends, and I ^ell to
proportion unto them what Legacies I held most proper* I thought to bequeath
unto my Lord of Cherbery, and Sir K. Dig^y that little Philosophy and knowledge
I have in the Mathematics; My historical observations and critical
researches I made into antiquity, I thought to bequeath unto Dr. Usher Lord
Primate of Ireland; My observations abroad, and inspection into foreign States,
I thought to leave to my Lord G. D.: My poetry such as it is, to Mistress A. K.
who I know is a great minion of the Muses: School languages I thought to
bequeath unto my dear mother the University of Oxford: My Spanish to Sir Lewis
Dives, and Master Endimion Porter, for though they are great masters of that
language, yet it may stead them something when they read la picara Iustina: My
Italian to the worthy company of Turkey and Levantine Merchants, from diverse of
whom I have received many noble favors: My French to my most honored lady the
Lady Cor, and it may help her something to understand Rablais: The little
smattering I have in the Dutch, British, and my English I did not esteem worth
the bequeathing: My love I had bequeathed to be duf^'d among all my dear
friends, specially those that have stuck unto me this my long affliction; My
best natural ^ffections, betwixt the Lord B: of Br. my brother Howell, and my
three dear Sisters, to be transferred by them to my cousins their children:
This little sackfull of bones, I thought to bequeath to Westminster Abbey, to
be interred in the cloister within the Southside of the Garden, close to the
wall, where I would have desired Sir H. F. (my dear Friend) to have inlayed a
small piece of black marble, and caused this motto to have bin insculp'd upon
it, Huc usque peregrinus, heic domi, or this, which I would have left to his
choice, Huc usque Erraticus, beie fixus; and instead of strewing my grave with
flowers, I would have desired him to have grafted thereon some little Tree of
what sort he pleased, that might have taken root downward to my dust, because I
have bin always naturally affected to woods and groves, and those kind of
vegetables, insomuch that if there were any such thing as a Pythagorean
Metempsuchosis, I think my soul would transmigrat into some Tree, when she bids
this body farewell.

By these extravagancies, and od Chimera's of my brain, you may well perceive
that I was notwell, but distempered, specially in my intellectualls, according
to the Spanish proverb siempre desvarios (...) la calentura, fevers have
always their fits of dotage. Among those to whom I had bequeathed my dearest
love, you were one, to whom I had intended a large proportion, and that love
which I would have left you then in legacy, I send you now in this letter, for
it has pleased God to reprieve me for a longer time to creep upon this earth,
and to see better days I hope when this black dismal cloud is dispelled; but
com foul or fair weather, I shall be as formerly

Fleet, 26 Mar. 1643. Your most constant faithful Servitor, J. H.

XXXI. To the Right Honorable the Lady Wichts.
Madam,
SInce I was hurled amongst these walls, I had diverse fits of melancholy, and
such turbid intervalls that use to attend close prisoners, who for the most
part, have no other companions, but confused troops of wandering cogitations;
Now, Melancholy it far more fruitful of thoughts than any other humor, for it
is like the mud of Nile, which, when that Enigmaticall vast River is got again
to her former bed, engenders diverse sorts of new creatures, and some kind of
Monsters; my brain in this Fleet has bin often thus overwhelmd, yet I never
found it so muddy, nor the Region of my mind so much clowded, as it was lately
after notice had of the sad tidings of Master Controulers death; The news
heerof struck such a damp into me, that for s^m space me thought, the very
pulse of my blood, and the motions of my heart were at a stand; for I was
surpised with such a consternation that I felt no pulsations in the one, or
palpitations in the other. Well Madam, he was a brave solid wise man, of a
noble free disposition, and so great a controuler of his passions, that he was
always at home within himself, yet I much fear, that the sense of these
unhappy times made too deep impressions in him.

Truly Madam, I loved and honored him in such a perfection that my heart shall
wear a broad black ribband for him while I live, as long as I have a retentive
faculty to remember any thing, his memory shall be fresh within me.

But the truth is, that if the advantageous exchange which he has made were
well considered, no friend of his should be sorry; for in lieu of a white staff
in an earthly Court, he has got a scepter of immortality; He that had bin
Ambassador at the Port to the greatest Monark upon earth where he resided so
many years an honor to his King and Country, is is now arrived at a far more
glorious port than that of Constantinople, though as I intimated before, I fear
that this boisterous weather has blown him thither before his time. God
Almighty give your Ladyship patience for so great a loss, and comfort in your
hopeful issue; with this prayer I conclude my self,

Madam, Your Lapps most humble and sorrowful servant, J. H.
From the Fleet, 15 April.
XXXII. To Mr. ES. Counselor, at the middle Temple.
SIR,
I Had yours this morning, and I thank you for the news you send me that
diverse of my fellow sufferers are enlarged out of Lambeth, Winchester, London,
and Ely House: whereunto I may answer you as the Cheapside Porter did one that
related Court news unto him, how such a one was made Lord Treasurer, another
Chancellor of the Exchequer, another was made an Earl, another sworn privy
Counselor, I, said he, yet I am but a Porter still; So I may say, I am but a
prisoner still notwithstanding the releasement of so many: Mistake me not as if
I repined heerby at any ones liberty; for I could heartily wish that I were the
Unic Martyr in this kind, that I were the figure of one with never a cipher
after it, as God wot there are two many, I could wish that as I am the least in
value, I (...) the last in number. A day may com that a favorable wind may
blow that I may launch also out of this Fleet, in the mean time and always
after I am

Fleet, 1 Feb. 1645. Your true constant Serv^tor, J. H.

XXXIII. To Mr. R. B. at Ipswich,
Gentle Sir,
I Value at a high rate the sundry respects you have bin pleased to show me;
for as you obliged me before by your visits, so you have much endeerd your self
unto me since by your late letter of the 11 current: Believe it Sir, the least
scruple of your love is not lost (because I perceive it proceeds from the pure
motions of virtue) but returned to you in the same full proportion; But what you
please to ascribe unto me in point of merit, I dare not own: you look upon me
through the wrong end of the prospective, or rather through a multiplying
glass, which makes the object appear far bigger than it is in real dimension;
such glasses as Anatomists use in the dissection of bodies which can make a
flea look like a cow, or a fly as big as a vulture.

I presume you are constant in your desire to travel, if you intend it at all
you cannot do it in a beter time, there being little comfort, God wot, to breath
English air, as matters are carried: I shall be glad to steed you in any thing
that may tend to your advantage; for to tell you truly, I take much contentment
in this inchoation of friendship, to improve and perfect which, I shall lie
centinell to apprehend all occasions.

If you meet Master R, Brownrigg in the Country, I pray present my very kind
respects unto him, for I (...) my self to be both his, and

Fleet, 15 Aug. 1646. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

XXXIV. To Cap. C. Price Prisoner at Coventry.
Cousin,
YOu, whom I held always as my second self in affection, (...) now so in
afliction, being in the same predicament of sufferance though not in the same
prison as I; There is nothing sweetneth friendship more than a participation and
identity of danger and durance: The day may com that we may discourse with
comfort of these sad times, for adversity has the advantage of prosperity it
self in this point, that the commemoration of the one, is ofttimes more
delightsom than the fruition of the other: Moreover adversity and prosperity,
are like virtue and vice; the two foremost of both which, begin with anxieties
and pain, but they end comically in contentment and joy; the other two quite
contrary, they begin with pleasure, and end in pain, there is a difference in the
last scene.

I could wish if there be no hopes of a speedy releasement you would remove your
body hither, and rather than moulder away in idleness, we will devoutly blow
the coal, and try if we can ex^lt gold, and bring it over the helm in this
Fleet; we will transmute metalls, and give a resurrection to mortified
vegetables, to which end the green Lion and the dragon, ye Demogorgon and
Mercury himself with all the Planets shall attend us, till we com to the
Elixer, the true powder of projection which the vulgar call the Philosophers
stone: If matters hit right we may heerby get better returns than Cardigan
silver mines afford: but we must not melt our selves away as I. Meridith did,
nor do as your Countryman Morgan did. I know when you read these lines, youl'
say I am grown mad, and that I have taken Opium in lieu of Tobacco: If I be
mad, I am but sick of the disease of the time which reigns more among the
English, than the sweating si^knes did some six score years since amongst them,
and only them, both at home and abroad.

There Is a strange Magot has got into their brains, which possesses them with
a kind of vertigo, and it reigns in the pulpit more than any where else; for some
of our Preachmen are grown dog mad, there is a worm got into their toungs, as
well as their heads.

Hodge Powell commends him unto you, he is here under hatches as well as I;
howsoever I am still in fair or foul weather,

Fleet, 3 Ian. 1643. Your truly affectionat Cosen to serve you, J. H.

XXXV. To the Right Honorable the Lord of Cherberry.
My Lord,
GOd send you joy of your new habitation, for I understand your Lordship is
removed from the Kings-street to the Queens: It may be with this enlargment of
dwelling, your Lordship may need a recruit of Servants: The bearer heerof has
a desire to devote himself to your Lordships service, and I find that he has a
concurrence of such parts that may make him capable of it; He is well studied
in men, and books, versed in business of all sorts, and writes a very fair hand;
He is well extracted, and has diverse good friends that are dwellers in the
Town, who will be responsible for him: Moreover besides this Letter of mine your
Lordship will find that he carries one in his countenance, for an honest
ingenious look is a good Letter of recommendation of it self; If your Lordship
has not present occasion to employ him, he may be about you a while like a
spare Watch, which your Lordship may wind up at pleasure. So my aim being to do
your Lordship service, as much as him a pleasure by this recommendation, I rest

Fleet, 13 Iul. 1646. Your L^pps most humble Servant, J. H.

XXXVI. To Mr. R. Br.
Gentle Sir,
YOurs of the fourth current came safely to hand, and I acknowledge with much
contentment, the fair respects you please to show me; you may be well assured
that the least grain of your love to me is not lost but counterbalanc'd with
the like in full weight; For although I am as frayl a piece, and as full of
infirmities as another man, yet I like my own nature in one thing, that I could
never endure to be in the arrear to any for love; where my hand came short, my
heart was bountiful, and helped to make ^n equal compensation:

I hope you persist in your purpose for foreign travel to study a while the
world abroad; It is the way to perfect you, and I have already discovered such
choice ingredients, and parts of ingenuity in you, that will quickly make a
complete Gentleman. No more now, but that I am seriously

Fl^t, 3 July. 1646. Yours to dispose of J. H.

XXXVII. To Sir L. D. in the Tower.
SIR,
TO help the passing away of your weary hours between those disconsolat Walls,
I have sent you a King of your own name to bear you company Lewis the
thirteenth, who, though dead three yeer^ since, may peradventure afford you some
entertainment, and I think that dead men of this nature are the fittest
companions, for such that are buried alive as you and I are. I doubt not but
you who have a spirit to overcom all things, will overcom the sense of this
hard condition, that you may survive these sad times and see better days, I
doubt not, as weak as I am, but I shall be able to do it my self, in which
confidence I style my self,

Fl^t, 15 Feb. 1646. Your most obliged and ever faithful Servant, J. H.
My most humble Service to Sir J. St: and Sir H. V.
XXXVIII. To Master R. B.
Gentle Sir,
I Had yours of the second current by Master Bloys, which obliges me to send
you double thanks, first for your Letter, then for the choice hand that brought
it me.

When I had gone through it, me thought your lines were as leaves, or rather so
many branches, amongst which there sprouted diverse sweet blossoms of ingenuity,
which I find may quickly com to a rare maturity; I confess this clyme (as
matters go) is untoward to improve such buds of virtue, but the times may mend,
now that our King with the Sun; makes his approach unto us more and more, yet I
fear we shall not com yet a good while to our former serenity, therefore, it were
not amiss in my judgment if some foreign air did blow upon the foresaid
blossoms, to ripen them under some other Meridian in the interim, it is the
opinion of

Fleet, 3 Aug. 1645. Your very respectfull friend to dispose of J. H.

XXXIX. To Mr. G: C. at Dublin.
SIR,
THe news of this week, have been like the waves of that boisterous Sea,
through which this Letter is to pass over unto you; Diverse reports for peace
have swollen high for the time, but they suddenly fell low, and flat again. Our
relations here, are like a peal of bells in a windy blustering weather, sometimes
the sound is strong on this side, sometimes on that side of the steeple, so our
Relations sound diversely as the ^yr of affection carries them, and sometimes in
a whole volley of news, we shall not find one true report.

There was in a Dunkirk ship taken some months ago, hard by Ar^ndell Castle,
amongst other things a large Picture seas'd upon, and carried to Westminster
Hall, and put in the Star Chamber to be publicly seen; It was the legend of
Conanus a British Prince in the time of Gratian the Emperor, who having married
Ursula the King of Cornwalls daughter, were imbarqued with 11000 Virgins for
Britany in France to colonize that part with Christians, but being by distress
of weather beaten upon the Rhine, because they would not yield to the lusts of
the Infidels, after the example of Ursula they were all slain, their bodies were
carried to Colen where there stands to this day a stately Church built for them:
this is the Story of that picture, yet the Common peeple here takes Conanus for
our King, and Vrsula for the Queen, and the Bishop which stands hard by to be
the Pope, and so stare upon it accordingly, notwithstanding that the Prince
there represented, has Sandalls on his feet after the old fashion, that the
Coronets on their heads resemble those of Dukes and Earls, as also that there
are Rays about them, which never use to be applied to living persons, with
diverse other incongruities: yet it cannot be beaten out of the belief of
thousands here, but that it was intended to represent our King and Queen, which
makes me conclude with this interjection of wonder, Oh the ignorance of the
common peeple?

Fleet, 12 Aug. 1644. Your faithful friend to command, J. H.

XL. To Master End. Por. at Paris.
SIR,
I Most affectionatly kiss your hands for the account (and candid opinion) you
please to give me of the History I sent Her Majesty of the late K. her brothers
reign, I return you also a thousand thanks for your comfortable advice, that
having bin so long under hatches in this Fleet I should fancy my self to be in
a long voyage at Sea: It Is true, opinion can do much, and indeed she is that
great Lady which rules the world; There is a wise saying in that Country where
you s^ journ now, that c^st nest pas la place, mais la pensee qui sait la
prison, It Is not the place but opinion that makes the prison, the conceit is
more than the condition: you go on to prefer my Captivity in this Fleet to that
of a Voyager at Sea, in regard that he is subject to storms and springing of
Leaks, to pirates and Pica^oons, with other casualties; you write I have other
advantages also, to be free from plundering, and other Barbarismes, that reign
now abroad; it is true I am secured from all these, yet touching the first, I
could be content to expose my self to all those chances, so that this were a
floating Fleet, that I might breath free air, for I have not been suffered to
stir ore the threshold of this House this four years; whereas you say I have a
Book for my companion, it is true, I convers sometimes with dead men, and what
fitter associats can there be for one that is buried alive (as I am) than dead
men, and now will I adventure to send you a kind of Epitaph I made of my self
this morning, as I was lolling a bed,

Here lies entombed a walking thing,
Whom Fortune (with the States) did fling
Between these Walls; Why? ask not that,
That blind whore does she knows not, what.
It Is a strange world you will say, when men make their own Epitaphs in their
graves, but we that are thus buried alive, have one advantage above others,
that we are like to have a double resurrection; I am sure of one, but if these
times hold, I cannot ascertain my self of the other, for I may be suffered to
rot here for ought I know: It being the hard destiny of some in these times,
when they are once clapped up, to be so forgotten as if there were no such men in
the world.

I humbly thank you for your avisos, I cannot correspond with you in that kind
as freely as I would, only in the general I must tell you, that we are com to
such a pass, that the Posie which a young couple did put upon their wedding
ring, may fit us in the general, which was, God knows what will become of us.
But I trust these bad times will be recompensed with better; for my part that
which keeps me alive is your Motto there of the house of Bourbon, and it is but
one word, L'Sperance. So I pray God preserve you, and

Fleet, 2 Ian. 1646. Your most faithful humble Servitor, J. H.

XLI. To Master J. H. at Saint John's College in Cambridge.
Master Hall,
YOurs of the thirteenth of this instant came safely, though slowly, to hand,
for I had it not till the twentieth of the same, and the next day your Essays
were brought me; I enterrain'd both with much respect, for I found therein many
choice and ripe notions, which I hope proceeds from a pregnancy rather than
precocity of spirit in you.

I perceive you have entered the Suburbs of Sparta already, and that you are in
a fair way to get the Town it self, I know you have wherewith to adorn her; nay
you may in time gain Athens her self, with all the knowledge she was ever
Mistress of, if you go on in your Carreer with constancy; I find you have a
genius for the most solid and ^everest sort of studies, therefore, when you have
passed through the Briers of Logic, I could wish you to go strongly on in the
fair fields of Philosophy and the Mathematics, which are true Academicall
studies, and they will afford rich matter of application for your inventive
spirit to work upon; by all means understand Aristotle in his own Language,
for it is the Language of Learning; Touching Poetry, History, and other humane
studies, they may serve you for recreation, but let them not by any means
allure your affections from the first. I shall delight to hear sometimes of your
proceedings, for I profess a great deal of good will unto you, which makes me
rest

Your respectfull friend to serve you, J. H.
Fleet 3 December.
XLII. To my B. the L. B. of B. in France.
My good Lord and Br.
ALthough the sense of my own hard condition be enough to make me melancholy,
yet when I contemplat yours, (as I often do) and compare your kind of
banishment with my imprisonment, I find the apprehension of the first wherein so
many have a share, ads a double weight unto my sufferings, though but single;
Truly these thoughts to me are as so many corrosives to one already in a
Consumption. The World cries you up to be an excellent Divine and Philosopher,
now is the time for you to make advantage of both; Of the first, by calling to
mind that afflictions are the portion of the best Theophiles; Of the other, by
a well weighed consideration that crosses and troubles are entaild upon
mankind, as much as any other inheritance: In this respect I am no Cadet, for
you know I have had a double if not a treble share, and may be rather called
the elder brother, but (...), I hope I shall not sink under the burden, but
that we shall be both reserved for better days, specially now that the King
(with the Sun and the Spring) makes his approach more and more toward us from
the North.

God Almighty (the God of our good old Father) still guard you and guide you,
that after so long a separation we may meet again with comfort to confer notes
and recount matters passed; for advers fortune, among other properties, has
this for one, that her present pressures are not so irksom, as the remembrance
of them being passed are delightsom. So I remain

Your most loving brother, J. H.
Fleet, 1 Maii. 1645.
XLIII. To Sir L. Dives in the Tower.
SIR,
AMong diverse other properties that attend a long captivity, one is that it
purges the humors, specially it corrects chol^r, and attempers it with
phlegm, which you know in Spanish is taken for patience: It has also a
chymicall kind of quality to refi^e the dross and feculency of a corrupt
nature, as fire uses to purify metalls, and to destroy that terram Adamicam
in them as the chemist calls it, for Demogorgon with his vegetables partak'd of
Adams malediction as well as other creatures, which makes some of them so foul
and imperfect, nature having designed them all for gold and silver at first,,
and it is fi^e can only rectify, and reduc^ them toward such a perfection.
This Fleet has bin such a furnace to me, it has bin a kind of Perillus Bull,
or rather to use the paracelsian phrase, I have bin here in ventre equino in
the limbec and crusible of affliction: And whereas the chemist commonly requires
but 150 days antequam corvus in columba^ vertatur, before the crow turns to a
dove; I have bin here five times so many days, and upward. I have ^een here
time enough in conscience to pass all the degrees and effects of fire, as
distillation, sublimation, mortification, calcination, solution, descension,
dealbation, rubification, and fixation, for I have bin fastened to the walls of
this prison any time these fifty five months; I have bin here long enough, if
I were matter capable thereof, to be made the Philosophers stone, to be converted
from water to powder which is the whole Magistery: I have been besides, so long
upon the anvill, that me thinks I am grown malleable, and hammer proof, I am so
habituated to hardship: But indeed you that are made of a choicer mold, are
fitter to be turned into the Elixer than I who have so much dross and
corruption in me, that it will require more pains and much more expense, to be
purged and defecated: God send us both patience to bear the brunt of this fiery
trial, and grace to turn these decoctions into aquam vitae, to make sovereign
treacle of this viper. The Trojan Prince was forced to pass over Phlegeton, and
pay Charon his freight, before he could get into the Elyzian fields, you know
the moral, that we must pass through hell to heaven, and why not as well
through a prison to Paradise, such may the Tower prove to you, and the Fleet to
me, who am

From the prison of the Fleet, 23 Feb. 1645. Your humble and hearty Servitor,
J. H.

XLIV. To the right Honble the Lord R.
My Lord,
SUre there is some angry planet has lowred long upon the Catholic King; and
though one of his titles to Pagan Princes be, that he wears the sun for his
helmet, because it never sets upon all his dominions, in regard some part of
them he on the to'ther side of the Hemisphere among the Antipodes, yet me
thinks that neither that great star, or any of the rest are now propitious unto
him* they cast it seems more benign influxes upon the flower de lu^ which
thrives wonderfully, but how long these favorable aspects will last, I will
not presume to judge, This among diverse others of late, has bin a fatal year
to the said King, for Westward he has lost Dunkirk; Dunkirk which was the
terror of this part of the world, the scourge of the occidentall seas, whose
name was grown to be a bugbear for so many years, has now changed her master,
and thrown away the ragged staff; doubtless a great exploit it was to take this
town: But whether this be advantageous to Holland? (as I am sure it is not to
England) time will show; It is more than probable that it may make him careless
at sea, and in the building and arming of his ships, having no enemy now near
him; besides I believe it cannot much benefit Hans to have the French (...)
contiguous to him, the old saying was Ayezle Francois pour ton (...) non pas
pour ton Voison: Have the Frenchman for thy friend, not (...) ^hy neighbor.

Touching England, I believe these distractions of ours have bi^ one of the
greatest advantages that could befall France, and they happened in the most
favorable conjuncture of time that might be, else I believe he would never have
as much as attempted Dunkirk; for England in true reason of State had reason to
prevent nothing more, in regard no one place could have added more to the
navall power of France; this will make his s^iles swell bigger, and I ^car make
him claim in time as much regality in these narrow sea^ as England her self.

In Italy the Spaniard has also had ill successes at Piombino, and Porto
longone: Besides they write that he has lost Il prete, and il medico, the
Priest and the Physician, to wit the Pope, and the Duke of Florence (the House
of Medici) who appear rather for the French than for him.

Ad to all these disasters that he has lost within the revolution of the same
year the Prince of Spain his unic Son in the very flower of his age being but
seventeen years old. These with the falling off of Catalonia and Portugal,
with the death of his Queen not above forty, are heavy losses to the Catholic
King, and must needs much enfeeble the great bulk of his Monarchy, falling out
in so short a compass of time one upon the neck of another, and we are not to
enter into the secret Counsels of God Almighty for a reason. I have read 'twas
the sensuality of the flesh that drove the Kings out of Rome, the French out of
Sicily, and brought the Moors into Spain, where they kept firm footing above
seven hundred years: I could tell you how not long before her death the late
Queen of Spain took off one of her chapines, and clowted Olivares about the
noddle with it, because he had accompanied the King to a Lady of pleasure,
telling him, that he should know, she was Sister to a King of France, as well
as wife to a King of Spain; For my part, France and Spain is all one to me in
point of affection. I am one of those indifferent men that would have the
scales of power in Europe kept even: I am also a Philerenus a lover of peace,
and I could wish the French were more inclinable to it, now that the common
enemy has invaded the territories of Saint Mar^. Nor can I but admire that at
the same time the French should assail Italy at one side, when the Turk was
doing it on the other: But had that great navall power of Christians which were
this summer upon the coasts of Toscany gone against the Mohammedan Fleet which
was the same time setting upon Candie, they might in all likelihood have
achieved a glorious exploit, and driven the Turk into the Hellespont. Nor is
poor Christendom torn thus in pieces by the German, Spaniard, French and Sweds,
but our three Kingdoms have also most pitifully scratched her face, wasted her
spirits, and let out some of her illustrious blood, by our late horrid
distractions: Whereby it may be inferred that the Musti and the Pope seem to
thrive in their devotion one way, a chief part of the prayers of the one being,
that discord should still continue 'twixt Christian Princes, of the other, that
division should still increase between the Protestants* This poor Island is a
woeful example th^of

I hear the peace 'twixt Spain and Holland is absolutely concluded by the
plenipotentiary Ministers at Munster, who have beat their heads so many years
about it, but they write that the French and Swed do mainly endeavor, and set
all the wheels of policy a going to puzzle and prevent it; If it take effect,
as I do not see how the Hollander in common honesty can evade it, I hope it
will conduce much to an universal peace, which God grant, for Wa^ is a fire
struck in the Devils tinder box. No more now but that I am,

My Lord, Your most humble Servitor, J. H.
Fleet, 1 December. 1643.
XLV. To Mr. E. O. Counselor, at Grayes Inn.
SIR,
THe sad tidings of my dear friend Doctor Prichards death sunk deep into me, and
the more I ruminat upon it, the more I resent it: But when I contemplat the
order, and those Adamantine laws which nature put in such strict execution
throughout this elementary world; When I consider that up and down this frail
globe of earth we are but strangers, or sojourners at best, being designed for
an infinitely better Country; when I think that our egress out of this life,
is as natural to us as our ingress (all which he knew as much as any,) these
thoughts in a checking way turn my melancholy to a counter passion, they beget
another spirit within me: You know that in the disposing of all sublunary
things, Nature is Gods Handmaid, Fate his Commissioner, Time his Instrument,
and Death his Executioner; By the first we have generation, by the second,
successes good or bad, And the two last* bring us to our end; Time with his
vast since mowes down all things, and Death sweeps away those mowings: Well, he
was a rare, and a complete judicious Scholar, as any that I have known born
under our Meridian, He was both solid and acute, nor do I remember to have seen
soundnes and quaintnes with such sweet strains of morality concur so in any. I
should think that he fell ^ick of the times, but that I knew him to be so good
a Divine and Philosopher, and to have studied the theory of this world so much,
that nothing could take impression in him to hurt himself, therefore I am
content to believe, that his glass ran out without my jogging: I know you loved
him deerly well, which shall make ^e the more

Fleet, 3 Aug. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

XLVI. To I. W. Esquire at Grayes Inn.
Gentle Sir,
I Value at a high rate the fair respects you show me, by the late ingenious
expressions of your Letter; But the merit you ascribe unto me in the
superlative, might have very well served in the positive, and it is well if I
deserve in that degree. You write that you have singular contentment and
profit, in the perusal of some things of mine, I am heartily glad they afforded
any entertainment to a Gentleman of so choice a judgment as your self.

I have a foolish working brain of mine own, in labor still with something,
and I can hardly keep it from superfetations, though oftimes it produce a Mouse
in lieu of a Mountain; I ^ust confess it is best productions are but homely and
hard fa^our'd, yet in regard they appear handsome in your eyes, I shall (...)
them the better, So I am,

Sir, Yours most obliged to serve you, J. H.
Fleet, 3 Ian. 1644.
XLVII. To Mr. Tho. H.
SIR,
THough the times abound with Schisms more than ever ((...) more is our
misery) yet, I hope, you will not suffer any (...) creep into our friendship,
though I apprehend some fears thereof b^ your long silence, and cessation of
literal correspondence; Yo^ know there is a peculiar Religion attends
friendship, there is according to the Etymology of the word, a ligation and
solemn (...) the res^inding whereof may be truly called a Schism, or a (...)
which is more; There belongs to this Religion of friendship (...) due rites, and
decent ceremonies, as visits, messages and (...) sives; Though I am content to
believe that you are firm in the fundamentalls, yet I find under favor, that
you have lately (...) ^en short of performing these exterior offices, as if
the ceremo^ ^ll law were quite abrogated with you in all things: Frends^ also
allows of merits, and works of supererogation sometimes (...) make her capable
of Eternity: You know that pair which were (...) ken up into the heaven, and
placed amongst the brightest stam^ for their rare constancy and fidelity one to
the other; you kno^ also they are put among the fixed stars not the ^ratices,
to (...) ^her must be no inconstancy in love; Navigators steer their cour^ by
them, and they are their best friends in working Seas, (...) nights, and
distresses of weather, whence may be inferred that (...) friends should shine
clearest in adversity, in clowdy and doubtf^ times. On my part this ancient
friendship is still pure, (...) dox and incorrupted, and though I have not the
opportunity ((...) you have) to perform all the ^ites thereof in regard of this
rec^ life, yet I shall never err in the essentialls, I am still yours (...)
though I cannot be (...), for in statu quo nunc I am grown (...) less and good
for nothing, yet in point of possession I am as (...) as ever

Fleet, 7 Novem. 1643. Your firm inalterable Servitor, J. H.

XLVIII. To Mr. S. B. Merchant, at his house in the old Jury.
SIR,
I Return you those two famous speeches of the late Queen Elizabeth, with the
addition of another from Ba^dius at an Embassy here from Holland; It is with
languages as it is with li^uors which by transfusion use to take wind from one
vessel to another, so things translated into another tongue lose of their
primative vigor and strength, unless a paraphrasticall version be permitted,
and then the traduct may exceed the Original, not otherwise though the version
be never so punctual, specially in these Orations which are framed with such
art, that like Vitruvius his palace, there is no place left to ad one stone more
without defacing, or to take any out without hazard of destroying the whole
fabric.

Certainly she was a Princess of rare endowments for learning and languages,
she was blessed with a long life, and triumphant reign attended with various
sorts of admirable successes, which will be taken for some Romance a thousand
winters hence, if the world lasts so long: She freed the Scot from the French,
and gave her successor a royal pension to maintain his Court; She helped to
settle the Crown on Henry the greats head; She gave essence to the state of
Holland; She civilized Ireland, and suppres'd diverse insurrections there; She
preserved the dominion of the Narrow Seas in greater glory than ever; She
maintained open War against Spain when Spain was in her highest flourish for
diverse years together, yet She left a mighty treasure behind, which shows that
she was a notable good huswife; Yet I have read diverse censures of her abroad;
that she was ungrateful to Her Brother of Spain, who had bin the chiefest
instrument under God to preserve her from the block, and had left her all Queen
Mary's jewels without diminution, accusing her that afterward She should
first infringe the peace with him, by intercepting his treasure in the Narrow
Seas, by suffering her Drake to swim to his Indies, and rob him there, by
fomenting and supporting his Belgique Subjects against him then when he had an
Ambassador resident at her Court: But this was the censure of a Spanish Author,
and Spain had little reason to speak well of her; The French handle her worse,
by terming her, among other contumelies, l' (...) de ses propres vassaux.

Sir, I must much value the frequent respects you have shown me, and am very
covetous of the improvement of this acquaintance, for I do not remember at home
or abroad to have seen in the person of any, a Gentleman and a Merchant so
equally met, as in your, which makes me style my self,

Fleet 3 May, 1645. Your most affectionat friend to serve you, J. H.

XLIX. To Dr. D. Featley.
SIR,
I Received your answer to that futilous pamphlet, with your desire of my
opinion touching it. Truly Sir, I must tell you that never poor Curr was tossed
in a blanquet, as you have tossed that poor coxcomb in the sheet you pleased to
send me, For whereas (...) fillip might have felled him, you have knocked him
down with a kind of Herculean club sans resource. These times (more's the
pity) labor with the same disease that France did during the Ligue, (...) a
famous Author has it prurig^ scripturi^ntium erat scabies temp^rum. The
itching of scriblers, was the scab of the time; It i^ just so now, that any
triobolary pasquiller, evry tr^ssis agas^ any sterquilinious rascal, is
licensed to throw dirt in the faces (...) Sovereign P^inces in open printed
language: But I hope t^ times will mend, and your man also if he has any
grace, you ha^ so well corrected him, So I rest

Fleet, 1 Aug. 1644. Yours to serve and reverence you, J. H.

L. To Captain T. L. in Westchester.
Captain L.
I Could wish that I had the same advantage of speed to send unto you at this
time, that they have in Alexandre^ia, now called Scanderoon, when upon the
arrival of any ships into the Bay, or any other important occasion, they use
to send their Letters by Pigeons, trained up purposely for that use, to Aleppo
and other places; such an airy Messenger, such a volatile postillon would I
desire now to acquaint you with the sickness of your mother in law, who I
believe will be in another world (and I wish it may be heaven) before this
paper comes to your hands; for the Physicians have forsaken her, and Doctor
Burton told me it is a miracle, if she lasts a natural day to an end, therefore
you shall do well to post up as soon as you can, to look to your own affairs,
for I believe you will be no more sick of the Mother; Master Davies in the mean
time told me he will be very careful, and circumspect that you be not wronged.
I received yours of the tenth current, and I return a thousand thanks for the
warm and melting sweet expressions you make of your respects unto me; All that
I can say at present in answer, is, that I extremely please my self in loving
you, and I like my own affections the better, because they tell me that I am

Westminster. 10 December. 1631. Your entirely devoted friend, J. H.

LI. To my Honorable friend Sir C. C.
SIR,
I Was upon point of going abroad to steal a solitary walk, when yours of the
twelfth current came to hand, the high researches, and choice abstracted
Notions I found therein seemed to heighten my Spirits, and make my fancy fitter
for my intended retirement and meditation; ad heerunto that the countenance of
the weather invited me, for it was a still evening, it was also a clear open
sky, not a speck, or the least wrinkle appeard in the whole face of heaven,
'twas such a pure deep azur all the Hemisphere over that I wondered what was
become of the three Regions of the air with their Meteors; So having got into a
close field, I cast my face upward, and tell to consider what a rare
prerogative the optic virtue of the eye has, much more the intutitive virtue
of the thought, that the one in a moment can reach heaven, and the other go
beyond it: Therefore sure that Philosopher was but a kind of frantic fool, that
would have plucked out both his eyes because, they were a hinderance to his
speculations: Moreover I began to contemplat as I was in this posture the vast
magnitude of the Univers, and what proportion this poor globe of earth might
bear with it, for if those numberless bodies which stick in the vast roof of
heaven, though they appear to us but as spangles, be, some of them, thousands of
times bigger than the earth take the sea with it to boot, for they both make
but one Sphere, surely, the Astronomers had reason to term this sphere an
indivisible point, and a thing of no dimension at all being compared to the
whole world; I fell then to think that at the second general destruction it is
no more for God Almighty to fire this earth, than for us to blow up a small
Squibb, or rather one grain of Gunpowder: As I was musing thus, I spyed a
swarm of Gnats waving up and down the air about me, which I knew to be part of
the Univers as well as I, and me thought it was a strange opinion of our
Aristotle to hold that the least of those small insected ephemerans should be
more noble than the Sun, because it had a sensitive soul in it, I fell to think
that the same proportion which those animalillios bore with me in point of
bigness, the same I held with those glorious Spirits which are near the Throne
of the Almighty: what then should we think of the magnitude of the Creator
himself, doubtless it is beyond the reach of any human immagination to conceive
it; In my private devotions I presume to compare him to a great mountain of
light, and my soul seems to discern some glorious form therein, but suddenly as
she would fix her eyes upon the object, her sight is presently dazzled and
disgregated with the ^efulgency and coruscations thereof.

Walking a little further I spyed a young boisterous Bull breaking over hedge
and ditch to a heard of kine in the next pasture, which made me think that if
that fierce strong Animal, with others of that kind knew their own strength,
they world never suffer man to be their Master; Then looking upon them quietly
grasing up and down, I fell to consider that the flesh which is daily dish'd
upon our Tables is but concocted grass, which is recarnified in our stomachs,
and transmuted to another flesh; I fell also to think what advantage those
innocent Animalls had of man, who, as soon as nature casts them into the world,
find their meat dressed, the cloth laid, and the table covered, they find their
drink brewed and the buttery open, their beds made, and their clothes ready;
And though man has the faculty of reason to make him a compensation for the
want of these advantages, yet this reason brings with it a thousand
perturbations of mind, and perplexities of spirit, griping cares, and anguishes
of thought, which those harmles silly creatures were exempted from: Going on, I
came to repose my self upon the trunk of a tree, and I fell to consider further
what advantage that dull vegetable had of those feeding Animalls, as not to be
so troublesome and beholding to nature, nor to be so subject to starving, to
diseases, to the inclemency of the weather, and to be far longer lived: I then
spyed a great stone, and sitting a while upon it, I fell to weigh in my thoughts
that that stone was in a happier condition in some respects, than either those
sensitive creatures or vegetables I saw before, in regard that that stone,
which propagates by assimilation as the Philosophers say, needed neither grass
nor hay, or any aliment for restoration of nature, nor water to refresh its
roots, or the heat of the Sun to attract the moisture upwards to increase
growth as the other did: As I directed my pace homeward, I spyed a Kite soa^ing
high in the air, and gently gliding up and down the clear Region so far above
my head, I fell to envy the Bird extremely, and ^epine at his happiness that he
should have a privilege to make a nearer approach to heaven than I.

Excuse me that I trouble you thus with these rambling meditations, they are to
correspond with you in some part for those accurat fancies of yours you lately
sent me. So I rest

Holborn, 17 Mar. 1639. Your entire and true Servitor. J. H

LII. To master Sergeant D. at Lincolns*Inn.
SIR,
I Understand with a deep sense of sorrow of the indisposition of your son: I
fear he has too much mind for his body, and that he superabounds with fancy,
which brings him to these fits of distemper proceeding from the black humor of
Melancholy: Moreover I have observed that he is too much given to his study
and self-society, specially to convers with dead men, I mean Books: you know
any thing in excess is naught: Now Sir were I worthy to give you advice, I could
wish he were well married, and it may wean him from that bookish and thoughtfull
humor; women were created for the comfort of men, and I have known that to some
they have proved the best Heleborum against Melancholy: As this course may
beget new spirits in him, so it must needs ad also to your comfort. I am thus
bold with you, because I love the Gentleman dearly well, and honor you, as being

West. 13 June, 1632. Your humble obliged servant, J. H.

LIII. To my noble Lady, the Lady M. A.
Madame,
There is not any thing wherein I take more pleasure, than in the accomplishment
of your commands, nor had ever any Queen more power over her Vassalls, than you
have over my intellectualls; I find by my inclinations, that it is as natural
for me to do your will, as it is for fire to fly upward, or any body else to
rend to his center; but touching the last command your Ladyship was pleased to
lay upon me (which is the following Hymn) if I answer not the fullness of your
expectation, it must be imputed to the suddennes of the command, and the
shortness of time.

A Hymn to the Blessed Trinity.
To the First Person.
To thee dread Sovereign, and dear Lord,
Which out of naught did me afford
Essence and life, who made me man,
And, oh, much more a Christian,
Lo, from the center of my heart
All laud and glory I impart.
Hallelujah.
To the Second.
To thee blessed Savior who did free
My soul from Satan's tyranny,
And made her capable to be
An Angel of thy Hierarchy,
From the same center I do raise,
All honor and immortal praise.
Hallelujah.
To the Third.
To thee sweet Spirit I return
That love wherewith my heart does burn,
And these blessed notions of my brain
I now breath up to thee again,
O let them redescend, and still
My soul with holy raptures fill.
Hallelujah.
They are of the same measure, cadence, and air, as was that angelical Hymn
your Ladyship pleased to touch upon your instrument, which as it so enchanted
me then that my soul was ready to com out at my ears, so your voice took such
impressions in me, that me thinks the sound still remains fresh with

Westminster. 1 Apr. 1637. Your Ladyships most devoted Servitor, J. H.

XLIV. To Master P. W. at Westminster.
SIR,
THe fear of God is the beginning of Wisdom, and the Love of God is the end of
the Law; the former saying was spoke by no meaner man than Solomon; but the
latter has no meaner Author than our Savior himself; Touching this beginning,
and this end, there is a near relation between them, so near, that the one
begets the the other; a harsh mother may bring forth sometimes a mild daughter, so
fear begets love, but it begets knowledge first, for -- Ign^ti nulla cupido, we
cannot love God, unless we know him before; both fear and love are necessary to
bring us to heaven, the one is the fruit of the Law, the other of the Gospel;
when the clouds of fear are vanished, the beams of love then begin to glance
upon the heart, and of all the members of the body, which are in a manner
numberless, this is that which God desires, because, it is the center of Love,
the source of our affections, and the cistern that holds the most illustrious
blood; and in a sweet and well devoted harmonious soul, cor is no other than
Camera Omnipotentis Regis, it is one of Gods closets, and indeed nothing can
fill the heart of man whose desires are infinite, but God who is infinity
itself: Love therefore must be a necessary attendant to bring us to him; but
besides Love there must be two other guides that are required in this journey,
which are Faith and Hope, now that fear which the Law enjoins us, turns to
faith in the Gospel, and knowledge is the scope and subject of both, yet these
last two bring us only toward the haven, but love goes along with us to
heaven, and so remains an inseparable sempiternall companion of of the soul:
Love therefore is the most acceptable Sacrifice which we can offer our Creator,
and he who does not study the Theory of it here, is never like to com to the
Practice of it hereafter: It was a high hyper physical expression of St.
Austustine when he fell into this rapture, that if he were King of Heaven, and
God Almighty Bishop of Hippo, he would exchange places with him, because he
loved him so well. This Vote did so take me, that I have turned it to a
paraphrasticall Hymn, which I send you for your Violl, having observed often
that you have a harmonious soul within you.

The Vote.
Oh God who can those passions tell
Wherewith my heart to thee does swell!
I cannot better them declare
Than by the wish made by that rare
Au^elian Bishop who of old
Thy Orac^es in Hippo told.
If I were Thou and thou were I,
I would resign the Deity,
Thou should be God, I would be man,
Is It possible that love more can?
Oh pardon, that my soul has taken
So high a flight and grows profane:
For my self my dear Phil, because I love you so dearly well, I will display my
very intrinsecalls to you in this point, when I exmine the motions of my heart,
I find that I love my creator a thousand degrees more than I fear him, me
thinks I feel the little needle of my soul touched with a kind of magnetical
attractive virtue, that (...) always moves toward him, as being her sum mum
bonum, the ^rue center of her happiness: For matter of fear, there is none that
(...) fear more than my self, I mean those frailti^ which lodge within (...) and
the extravagancies of my affections and thoughts, in this particular I may say,
that I fear my self more than I fear the Devil (...) death who is the King of
fears. God guard us all, and guide us (...) our last home through the briers of
this cumbersom life; in this ^yer I rest

Holborn, 21 Mar. 1639. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

LV. To the Right Honorable the Lord Cliff.
My Lord,
SInce among other passages of entertainment we had lately at the Italian
ordinary (where your Lordship was pleased to honor us with your presence)
their happened a large discourse of wines, and of other drinks that were used by
several Nations of the earth, and that your Lordship desired me to deliver
what I observed therein abroad, I am bold now to confirm and amplify in this
letter what I then let drop extempore from me, having made a recollection of my
self for that purpose.

It is without controversy that in the nonage of the world, men and beasts had
but one buttery which was the fountain and river, nor do we read of any vines
or wines till two hundred years after the flood, but now I do not know or hear
of any nation that has water only for their drink except the Iaponois^, and
they drink it hot too; but we may say that what beverage soever we make either
by brewing, by distillation, decoction, percolation or pressing, it is but
water at first, nay wine it self is but water sublimed, being nothing else but
that moisture and sap which is caused either by rain or other kind of
irrigations about the roots of the vine and drawn up to the branches and
berries by the virtuall attractive heat of the Sun, the bowels of the earth
serving as a limbec to that end, which made the Italian vineyard-man (after a
long drouth, and an extreme hot summer, which had parched up all his grapes,)
to complain that per mancamento d'acqua, bevo del'acqua, se io havessi acqua,
beverei el vino, for want of water, I am forced to drink water, if I had water
I would drink wine; it may be also applied to the Miller when he has no water
to drive his mills.

The vine does so abhor cold, that it cannot grow beyond the 49 degree to any
purpose; Therefore God and nature has furnished the Northwest Nations with
other inventions of beverage. In this Island the old drink was Ale, noble Ale,
than which, as I heard a great foreign Doctor affirm, there is no liquor that
more increases the radical moisture, and preserves the natural heat, which
are the two pillars that support the life of man; but since Beer has hopp'd in
among us, Ale is thought to be much adulterated, and nothing so good as Sir
John Old Castle and Smug the Smith was used to drink: Besides Ale and Beer, the
natural drink of part of this Isle may be said to be Metheglin, Braggot, and
Mead, which differ in strength according to the three degrees of comparison:
The first of the three, which is strong in the superlatif, if taken
immoderately, does stupifie more than any other liquor, and keeps a humming in
the brain, which made one say that he loved not Metheglin because he was used
to speak too much of the house he came from, meaning the hive: Sider and Perry
are also the natural drinks of part of this Isle; But I have read in some old
Authors of a famous drink the ancient Nation of the Picts, who lived 'twixt
Trent and Tweed and were utterly extinguished by the over-powring of the Scot,
were used to make of decoction of flowers, the receipt whereof they kept as a
secret and a thing sacred to themselves, so it perished with them: These are
all the common drinks of this Isle, and of Ireland also, where they are more
given to milk and strong waters of all colors, the Prime is Vsquebagh which
cannot be mado any where in that perfection, and whereas we drink it here in
aqua vitae measures, it goes down there by beer glassfulls, being more natural
to the nation.

In the seventeen Provinces hard by, and all low Gernmany, beer is the common
natural drink, and nothing else, so is it in Westfalia, and all the lower
circuit of Saxony, in Denmark, Swethland, and Norway; The Prusse has a beer as
thick as honey, in the Duke of Saxes Country, there is beer as yellow as gold
made of wheat, and it inebriates as soon as Sack. In some parts of Germany they
use to spice their beer, which will keep many years, so that at some weddings
there will be a but of beer drunk out as old as the Bride. Poland also is a beer
Country, but in Russia, Muscovie, and Tartary they use mead, which is the
naturallest drink of the Country, being made of the decoction of water, and
honey, this is that which the Ancients called Hydromel; Mares milk is a great
drink with the Tartar, which may be a cause why they are bigger then ordinary,
for the Physicians hold, that milk enlarges the bones, Beer strengthens the
nerves, and wine breeds blood sooner than any other liquor. The Turk when he
has his tripe full of pelaw, or of Muton and Rice, will go to natures cellar,
either to the next Well or River to drink water, which is his natural common
drink, for Mahomet taught them, that there was a devil in evry berry of the
grape, and so made a strict inhibition to all his sect from drinking of wine as
a thing profane; he had also a reach of policy therein, because they should no^
b^ in^umbred with luggage when they went to war as other Nation^ do, who are so
troubled with the carriage of their wine and beverages: yet has the Turk
peculiar drinks to himself besides, ^ Sherbet made of juice of lemon, sugar,
amber and other ingredients; he has also a drink called Cauphe, which is made
of a brow^ berry, and it may be called their clubbing drink between meale^
which though it be not very gustfull to the palate, yet it is ver^ comfortable
to the stomach, and good for the sight; but notwithstanding their prophets
Anathema, thousands of them will venture to drink wine, and they will make a
precedent prayer to their souls to depart from their bodies in the interim,
for fear she partake of the same pollution: nay, the last Turk died of excess
o^ wine, for he had at one time swallowed three and thirty oaks ^ which is a
measure near upon the bigness of our quart, and tha^ which brought him to this,
was the company of a Persian Lord that had given him his daughter for a
present, and came with him from Bagdat; besides one accident that happened to
him was, the he had an Eunuch who was used to be drunk, and whom he had
commanded twice upon pain of life to refrain, swearing by Mahomet that he would
cause him to be strangled if he found him the third time so, yet the Eunuch
still continued in his drunkenes* heerupon the Turk conceiving with himself
that there must needs be some extraordinary delight in drunkenes because this man
preferred it before his life, fell to it himself, and so drunk himself to death

In Asia there is no beer drunk at all, but Water, Wine, and an incredible
variety of other drinks made of Dates, dried Raisons, Rice, diverse sorts of
Nutts, fruits and roots: In the Oriental Countries as Cambaia, Calicut,
Narsingha, there is a drink called Banque, which is rare and precious, and it is
the height of entertainment they give their guests before they go to sleep,
like that Nepenthe which the Poets speak so much of, for it provokes pleasing
dreams, and delightful fantasies, it will accommode it self to the humor of
the sleeper, as if he be a soldier he will dream of victories and taking of
towns, if he be in love he will think to enjoy his mistress, if he be covetous
he will dream of mountaine^ of Gold, etc. In the Moluccas and Philippines there
is a curious drink called Tampoy, m^de of a kind of Gilliflowers, and another
drink called Otraqua that comes from a Nut, and is the more general drink. In
China they have a holy kind of liquor made of such sort of flowers for
ratifying and binding of bargains, and having drunk thereof, they hold it no
less than perjury to break what they promise, as they write of a River in
Bythinia, whose water has ^ peculiar virtue to discover a perjurer, for if he
drink thereof, it will presently boil in his stomach, and put him to visible
tortures; this makes me think of the River Styx among the Poets which the Gods
were used to swear by, and it was the greatest oath for performance of any
thing.

Nubila promise Styx mihi testis erit. It puts me in mind also of that which
some write of the River of Rhine for trying the legitimation of a child being
thrown in, if he be a basterd he will sink, if otherwise he will not.

In China they speak of a tree called Maguais, which affords not only good
drink being pierced, but all things else that belong to the subsistence of man;
they bore the trunk with a n^wger, and there issues out sweet potable liquor;
'twixt the rind and the tree there is a cotton or hempie kind of moss which
they wear for their clothing; it bears huge nuts which have excellent food in
them; it shoots out hard prickles above a fathom long, and those arm them,
with the bark they make Tents, and the dotard trees serve for firing.

Afric also has a great diversity of drinks, at having more need of them being
a hotter Country far: In Guiney or the lower Ethiopia there is a famous drink
called Mingol, which issues out of a tree much like the Palm, being bored; But
in the upper Ethiopia or the Habassi^ country, they drink Mead decocted in a
different manner, there is also much wine there; the common drink of Barbary,
after water, is that which is made of Dates: But in Egypt in times passed there
was beer drunk, called Zithus in latin, which was no other than a decoction of
Barley and water, they had also a famous composition (and they use it to this
day) called Chiffi, made of diverse cordialls and provocative ingredients, which
they throw into water to make it gustfull, they use it also for fumigations,
But now the general drink of Egypt is Nile water, which of all waters may be
said to be the best, insomuch that Pindars words might be more appliable to
that than to any other (...). It does not only fertilize, and extremely fatten
the soil which it covers, but it helps to impregnat barren women, for there is
no place on earth where peeple increase and multiply faster; it is yellowish and
thick, but if one cast a few Almonds into a potfull of it, it will become as
clear as rock water, it is also in a degree of lukewarmnes as Martialls boy

Toll puer calices tepidique toreumata Nili. In the new world they have a
world of drinks, for there i^ no root, flower, fruit or pulse but is reducible
to a potable liquor, as in the Barbado Island the common drink among the
English, is Mobbi made of Potato roots: In Mexico, and Peru which is the great
continent of America, with other parts, it is prohibited to make Wines under
great penalties for fear of starving of trade, so that all the Wines they have
are sent from Spain.

Now for the pure Wine Countries, Greece with all her Islands, Italy, Spain,
France, one part of four of Germany, Hungary, with diverse Countries
therabouts, all the Islands in the mediterranean and Atlantic sea, are Wine
Countries.

The most generous wines of Spain, grow in the mid-land parts of the continent,
and Saint Martin bears the bell which is near the Court; Now as in Spain so in
all other wine Countries one cannot pass a days journey but he will find a
differing race of wine* those kinds that our Merchants carry over are those
only that grow upon the seaside, as Malagas, Sheries, Tents, and Aligants; of
this last there is little comes over right, therefore, the Vinteners make Tent
(which is a name for all Wines in Spain except white) to supply the place of
it; There is a gentile kind of white wine grows among the mountains of Galicia,
but not of body enough to bear the sea, called Ribadavia; Portugal affords no
wines worth the transporting; they have an od stone we call Yef which they use
to throw into their Wines, which clarifieth it, and makes it more lasting.
There Is also a drink in Spain called Al^sha, which they drink between meals in
hot weather, and it is a Hydromel made of water and honey, much of the taste of
our Mead: In the Court of Spain there is a German or two that brews beer; but for
that ancient drink of Spain which Pliny speaks of, composed of flowers, the
receipt thereof is utterly lost.

In Greece there are no wines that have bodies enough to bear the sea for long
voyages, some few Muscadells, and Malm^es are brought over in small Casks; nor
is there in Italy any wine transported to England but in bottles, as Verde and
others, for the length of the voyage makes them subject to pricking and to lose
color, by reason of their delicacy.

France participating of the clymes of all the Countries about her, affords
wines of quality accordingly, as toward the Alps and Italy she has a
luscious rich wine called Frontiniac; In the Country of Province toward the
Pyr^nies in Languedoe there are wines congustable with those of Spain; one of
the prime sort of white wines is that of Beaume, and of Clarets that of
Orleans, though it be interdicted to wine the Kings Cellar with it in regard of
the corrosivenes it carries with it; As in France so in all other wine
Countries the white is called the female, and the Claret or red wine is called
the male, because commonly it has more sulpher, body and heat in it: The wines
that our Merchants bring over upon the River of Garond near Bourdeaux in
Gascogny which is the greatest Mart for wines in all France; The Scot because
he has always bin an useful confederate to France against England has
(among other privileges) right of preemption or first choice of wines in
Bourdeaux; he is also permitted to carry his Ordnance to the very walls of the
Town, whereas the English are forced to leave them at Blay a good way distant
down the river: There is a hard green wine that grows about Roch^ll and the
Islands therabouts, which the cunning Hollander sometime used to fetch, and he
has a trick to put a bag of herbs, or some other infusions into it (as he does
b^imstone in Rhenish) to give it a whiter tincture, and more sweetness, then
they reimbark it ^or England, where it passes for good B^hrag, and this is
called stooming of wines; In Normandy there is little or no wine at all grows,
therefore the common drink of that Country is cider, specially in low Normandy;
There are also many beer houses in Paris and elsewhere, but though their barley
and water be better then ours, or that of Germany, and though they have English
and Dutch brewers amongst them, yet they cannot make beer in that perfection,

The prime wines of Germany grow about the Rhine specially in the Pfalts or
lower Palatinat about Backrag, which has its Etimologie from Bacchi a^a, for
in ancient times there was an Altar erected there to the honor of Bacchus, in
regard of the richnes of the wines. Here and all France over it is held a great
part of incivility for maidens to drink wine until they are married, as it is
in Spain for them to wear high shoes or to paint till than; The Germain
mothers, to make their sons fall into hatred of wine, do use when they are
little to put some owls eggs into a cup of Rhenish, and sometimes a little
living eel which twingling in the wine while the child is drinking so scares
him that many com to abhor and have an antipathy to wine all their lives after.
From Backrag the first stocks of vines which grow now in the grand Canary
Island were brought, which with the heat of the Sun and the Soil, is grown now
to that height of perfection, that the wine which they afford are accounted the
richest, the most firm, the best bodied and lastingst wine, and the most
defecated from all earthly grossenes of any other whatsoever, it has little or
no sulphur at all in it, and leaves less dreggs behind, though one drink it to
exces; French wines may be said but to pickle meat in the stomach, but this is
the wine that disgests, and does not only breed good blood, but it nutrifieth
also, being a glutinous substantial liquour; of this wine, if of any other,
may be verified that merry induction, That good wine makes good blood, good
blood causes good humors, good humors cause good thoughts, good thoughts bring
forth good works, good works carry a man to heaven, ergo good wine carries a
man to heaven; if this be true surely more English go to heaven this way then
any other, for I think there is more Canary brought into England then to all the
world besides, I think also there is a hundred times more drunk under the name
of Canary wine then there is brought in, for Sherries and Malagas well mingled
pass for Canaries in most Taverns more often then Canary it self, else I do not
see how 'twere possible for the Vintner to save by it; or to live by his
calling unless he were permitted sometimes to be a Brewer. When Sacks and
Canaries were brought in first among us, they were used to be drunk in Aquavita
measures, and 'twas held fit only for those to drink of them who used to carry
their legs in their hands, their eyes upon their noses, and an Almanac in
their bones; but now they go down every ones throat both young and old like
milk.

The Countries that are freest from exces of drinking are Spain and Italy; If a
Woman can prove her Husband to have been thrice drunk, by the the ancient laws
of Spain she may plead for a divorce from him: Nor indeed can the Spaniard
being hot brain^ bear much drink, yet I have heard that Gondamar was once too
hard for the King of Denmark when he was here in England; But the Spanish
Soldiers that have bin in the Wars of Flanders will take their cups freely,
and the Italians also; when I lived to' (...) side the Alps, a Gentleman told
me a merry tale of a Liguria^ Soldier who had got drunk in Genoa, and Prince
Doria going horseback to walk the round one night, the Soldier took his horse
by the bridle, and asked what the price of him was for he wanted horse, the
Prince seeing in what humor he was, caused him (...) be taken into a house and
put to sleep: In the morning he (...) for him and askd him what he would give
for his horse, Sir, (...) the recovered Soldier, the Merchant that would have
bought (...) yyesternight of your Highness, went away betimes in the morning
The boonest compagnions for drinking are the Greeks and Germains; But the Greek
is the merrier of the two, for he will sing and dance and kiss his next
compagnion; but the other will drink as deep as he; if the Greek will drink as
many glasses as there be letters in his Mistresses name, the other will drink
the number of his years, and though he be not apt to break out into singing,
being not of so airy a constitution, yet he will drink often musically a health
to every one of these 6. notes, Ut, Re, Mi, ^a, Sol, La; which, with his
reason, are all comprehended in this Exameter.

Ut Relevet Miserum Fatum Solitosque Labores. The fewest draughts he drinks are
three, the first to quench the thirst passed, the second to quench the present
thirst, the third to prevent the future: I heard of a company of low Dutchmen
that had drunk so deep, that beginning to stagger and their heads turning round
they thought verily they were at Sea, and that the upper chamber, where they
were, was a ship, insomuch that it being soul windy weather they fell to throw
the stools, and other things out of the window to lighten the vessel for fear
of suffering shipwreck.

Thus have I sent your Lordship a dry discourse upon a fluent subject, yet I
hope your Lordship will please to take all in good part* because it proceeds
from

Westmin. 17 Octo. 1634. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.

LVI. To the R. H. the E. R.
My Lord,
YOur desires have bin always to me as commands, and your commands as binding
as Acts of Parliament; Nor do I take pleasure to employ head or hand in any
thing more then in the exact performance of them; Therefore if in this crabbed
difficult task, you have bin pleased to impose upon me about languages, I com
short of your Lorships expectation, I hope my obedience will apologize for my
disability: But whereas your Lordship desires to know what were the original
Mother Tongues of the Countries of Europe, and how these modern speeches that
are now in use were first introduced, I may answer hereunto, that it is almost
as easy a thing to discover the source of Nile, as to find out the original
of some languages, yet I will attempt it as well as I can, and I will take my
first rise in these Islands of great Britain and Ireland; for to be curious and
Eagle-eyd abroad, and to be blind and ignorant at home (as many of our
Travelers are now a days) is a curiosity that carries with it more of
affectation than any thing else.

Touching the Isle of Albion or great Britany, the Cambrian or Cymraccan tongue
commonly called Welsh (and Italian also is so called by the Dutch) is without
controversy the prime maternall tongue of this Island, and connaturall with
it, nor could any of the four conquests that have bin made of it by Roman,
Saxon, Dane or Norman ever extinguish her, but she remains still pure and
incorrupt; of which language there is as exact and methodicall a Grammar, with
as regular precepts, rules, and institutions both for prose and verse compild
by Doctor David Rice as I have read in any tongue whatsoever: some of the
authentiquest Annalists report that the old Gauls (now the French) and the
Britains understood one another, for they came thence very frequently to be
instructed here by the British Druydes which were the Philosophers and Divines
of those times, and this was long before the latin tongue came a this side the
Alps, or books written, and there is no meaner man (...) Caesar himself records
this.

This is one of the fourteen vernacular and independent tongues of Europe, and
she has diverse dialects; the first is the Cornish, the second the Armonicans
or the inhabitants of Britany in France, whither a colony was sent over hence
in the time of the Romans. There was also another dialect of the British
language among the Picts, who kept in the North parts in Northumberland,
Westme^land, Cumberland, and some parts beyond Tweed, until the whole Nation of
the Scot poured upon them with such multitudes that they utterly extinguished
both them and their language. There are some which have been curious in the
comparison of tongues, who believe that the Irish is but a dialect of the
ancient British, and the learned of that Nation in a private discourse I
happened to have with him, seemd to incline to this opinion; but this I can
assure your Lordship of, that at my being in that Country I observed by a
private collection which I made, that a great multitude o^ their radical words
are the same with the Welsh, both for seal and sound, the tone also of both
the Nations is consonant, ^or when I first walked up and down Dublin markets,
me thought verily I was in Wales, when I listened unto their speech; but I
found that the Irish tone is a little more querulous and whining than the
British, which I conjecturd with my self proceeded from their often being
subjugated by the English. But my Lord you would think it strange that diverse
pure Welsh words should be found in the new found World in the West Indies, yet
it is verified by some Navigators, as Grando, (hark) N^f (heaven) Lluynog (a
fox) Pengwyn (a bird with a white head) with sundry others, which are pure
British, nay I have read a Welsh Epitaph which was found there upon one Madoc a
British Prince, who some years before the Norman conquest not agreeing with his
brother then Prince of South- Wales went to try his fortunes at sea, imbarquing
himself at Milford haven* and so carried on those coasts: This if well proved
might well entitle out crown to America, if first discovery may claim a right
to any country.

The Romans though they continued here constantly above 300 years, yet could
they not do as they did in France, Spain and other Provinces, plant their
language as a mark of Conquest, but the Saxons did, coming in far greater
numbers under Hengist from Holstein land in the lower circuit of Saxony, which
peeple resemble the English more than any other men upon earth, so that it is
more than probable that they came first from thence, besides there is a town
there called Lund^n, and another place named Angles, whence it may be presumed
that they took their new denomination here; Now the English though as Saxons
(by which name the Welsh and Irish call them to this day) they and their
language is ancient, yet in reference to this Island they are the modernst
nation in Eu^pe both for habitation, speech and denomination; which makes ^e
smile at Mr Fox his error in the very front of his Epistle before the Book of
Martyrs, where he calls Constantine the first Christian Emperor, the son of
Hellen an English woman, whereas she was (...) British, and that there was no
such Nation upon earth cal^ed English at that time, nor above 100 years after,
till Hengist invaded this Island and settling himself in it, the Saxons who came
with him, took the appellation of English men. Now the English speech though it
be rich, copious, and significant, and that there be di^ers Dictionaries of it,
yet under favor, I cannot call it a regular language in regard though often
attempted by some choice ^its, there could never any Grammar or exact Syntaxis be
made of it; yet has she diverse subdialects, as the Western and Northern
English, but her chiefest is the Scotic which took footing beyond Tweed about
the law conquest; but the ancient Language of Scotland is Irish, which the
mountaineers and diverse of the plain, retain to this day. Thus my Lord,
according to my small model of observation, have I endeavored to satisfy you
in part, I shall in my next go on, for in the pursuance of any command from
your Lordships my mind is like a stone thrown into a deep water, which never
rests till it goes to the bottom; so for this time and always I rest,

My Lord, Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
West. 9 Aug. 1630,
LVII. To the Right Hon. the Earl R.
My Lord,
IN my last I fulfild your Lordships commands, as far as my reading and
knowledge could extend, to inform you what were the radical primitive Languages
of those Dominions that belong to the Crown of great Britain, and how the
English, which is now predominant, entered in first, I will now hoise sail for
the Netherlands, whose language is the same dialect with the English, and was
so from the beginning, being both of them derived from the high Dutch; The
Danish also is but a branch of the same tree, no more is the Swedish and the
speech of them of Norway and Island* Now, the high Dutch or Teutonic Tongue is
one of the prime and most spacious maternall languages of Europe, for besides
the vast extent of Germany it self with the Countries and Kingdoms before
mentioned whereof England and Scotland are two, it was the Language of the Goths
and Vandalls, and continues yet of the greatest part of Poland and Hungary,
who have a dialect of hers for their vulgar tongue; yet though so many dialects
and subdialects be derived from her, she remains a strong sinewy Language pur^
and incorrupt in her first center toward the heart of Germany: Some of her
Writers would make the World believe that she was the Longuage spoken in
Paradise for they produce many Words and proper names in the five books of
Moses which fetch their Etymology from her, as also in Persia to this day
diverse radical words are the same with her, as Fader, Mocder, Brother, Star:
And a Germain Gentleman speaking heerof one day to an Italian, that she was the
Language of Paradise, sure said the Italian (alluding to her roughnes) then it
was the tongue that God Almighty chid Adam in; It may be so, replied the
Germain, but the devil had tempted Eve in Italian before: A full mouthd
language she is, and pronounced with that strength as if one had bones in his
tongue instead of nerfs.

Those Countries that border upon Germany as Bohemia, Silesia, Poland, and
those vast Countries North-Eastward as Russia and Muscovia speak, the Slavonic
Language; And it is incredible what I have heard some Travelers report of the
vast extent of that language, for besides Slavonia it self, which properly is
Dalmatia and Libin^ia, it is the vulgar speech of the Macedonians, Epirots,
Bosnians, Servians, Bulgarians, Moldavians, Rascians, and Podolians, nay it
spreads her self over all the Eastern parts of Europe, Hungary and Walachia
excepted, as far as Constantinople, and is frequently spoken in the Seraglio
among the Ianizaries; nor does ^e rest there, but crossing the Hellespont
diverse nations in Asia have her for their popular tongue, as the Circassians,
Mongrelians and Gaza^ites: Southward, neither in Europe or Asia does she extend
her self further to the North parallel of forty Degrees; But those Nations
which celebrate divine Service after the Greek Ceremony, and profess obedience
to the Patriark of Constantinople, as the Russ, the Muscovit, the Moldavian,
Ruscian, Bosnian, Servian, and Bulgarian, with diverse other Eastern, and
North-East peeple that speak Slavonic, have her in a different Character from
the Dalmatian, Croation, Istrian, Polonian, Bohemian, Silesian, and other
Nations toward the West: these last have the Illirian Character, and the
invention of it is attributed to St. Ierom, the other is of Cyrists devising,
and is called the Servian Character; Now, although there be above threescore
several Nations that have this vast extended language for their vulgar speech,
yet the pure primitive Slavonic dialect is spoken only in Dalmatia, Croatia,
Liburnia and the Countries adjacent, where the ancient Slavonians yet dwell, and
they must needs be very ancient, for there is in a Church in Prague an old
Charter yet extant given them by Alexander the great, which I thought not amiss
to insert here. We Alexander the great of King Philip founder of the Grecian
Empire, Conqueror of the Persians, Medes, etc. and of the whole world from East
(...) West, from North to South, Son of great Jupiter by, etc. so called; T^ you
the noble stock of Slavonians, and to your Language because (...) have been
unto us a help, true in faith, and valiant in war, we confi^ all that tract of
earth from the North to the South of Italy from (...) and our Successors, to
you and your posterity for ever; And if any other Nation be found there let
them be your slaves. Dated at Alexandria the 12. of the Goddess Minerva, witness
Ethra and the eleven Princ^ whom we appoint our Successors: With this rare and
one of the ancientest record in Europe, I will put a period to this second
account I send your Lordship touching Languages; My next shall be of Greece,
Italy, Fance and Spain, and so I shall shake hands with Europe, till when, I
humbly kiss your hands, and rest,

West* 2 of Aug. 1630. My Lord, Your most obliged Servitor, J. H.

LVIII. To the Right Hon. the E. R.
My Lord,
HAving in my last rambled through high and low Germa^ Bohemy, Denmark, Poland,
Russia; and those vast North-Ea^ Regions, and given your Lordship a touch of
their Languages, (for 'twas no Treatise I intended at first, but a cursory
short literal account) I will now pass to Greece and speak something of that
large and learned Language, for it is she indeed upon whom the bean^ of all
scientificall knowledge did first shine in Europe, which she afterward diffused
through all the Western world.

The Greek tongue was first peculiar to Hellas alone, but i^ tract of time the
Kingdom of Macedon, and Epire had her, then she arrived on the Isles of the
Egean Sea, which are interjacent and divide Asia and Europe that way; then she
got into the fifty thre^ Isles of the Cyclades that lie 'twixt Negrepont and
Candy, and so go up to the Hellespont to Constantinople; She then crossed over
to Anatolia, where though she prevailed by introducing multitudes of Colonies,
yet she came not to be the sole vulgar speech any where ther^ as far as to
extinguish the former languages: Now Anatolia is the most populous part of the
whole earth, for Strabo speaks of sixteen several nations that slept in her
bosom, and it is thought the two and twenty Languages which Mithrydates the
great Polyglot King of P^ntus did speak were all within the circumference of
Anatolia in regard his dominions extended but a little further: She glided then
along the Maritime coasts of Thrace, and passing Byzantium got into the
out-lets of Danube and beyond her also to Taurica, yea beyond that to the River
Phosis and thence compassing to Trebizond she took footing on all the
circumference of the Euxine Sea: This was her course from East to North, whence
we will return to Candy, Cyprus and Sycily, thence crossing the Phare of
Messina, she got all along the Maritime Coasts of the Tirrh^ne Sea to Calabria:
she rested her self also a great while in Apulia; There was a populous Colony of
Greeks also in Marseilles in France, and along the Sea Coasts of Savoy: In
Afric likewise Cyr^ne, Alexandria, and Egypt with diverse other, were peepled
with Greeks: and three causes may be alleged why the Greek tongue did so expand
her self, First it may be imputed to the Conquests of Alexander the Great, and
the Captains he left behind him for Successors; Then the love the peeple had to
the Sciences, speculative learning, and civility whereof me Greeks accounted
themselves to be the grand Masters, accounting all other Nations Barbarians
besides themselves; Thirdly, the natural inclination and dexterity the Greeks
had to commerce, whereunto they employed themselves more than any other Nation
except the Phaenician and Armenian, which may be a reason why in all places
most commonly they colonized the Maritime parts, for I do not find they did
penetrate far into the Bowels of any Country, but ^iek'd on the Sea side in
obvious mercantile places, and accessible Ports.

Now many ages since the Greek tongue is not only impaired, and pitifully
degenerated in her purity and eloquence, but extremely decayed in her amplitude
and vulgarnes: For first there is no trace at all left of her in France or
Italy, the Slavonic tongue has abolished her in Epire and Macedon, the Turkish
has outed her from most parts of Anatolia, and the Arabian has extinguished
her in Sir a, Palestine, Egypt, and sundry other places; Now touching her
degeneration from her primitive suavity and elegance, it is not altogether so
much as the deviation and declension of the Italian from the Latin, yet it is
so far that I could set foot on no place, nor hear of any peeple, where either
the Attic, Doric, Eoli^ or Bucolic ancient Greek is vulgarly spoken; only in
some places near Heraclea in Anatolia and in P^loponesus (now called the Morea)
*hey speak of some Towns called the Lacocones which retain yet and vulgarly
speak the old Greek but incongruously, yet though they cannot themselves speak
according to rules, they understand thos^ that do: Nor is this corruption
happened to the Greek Language, as it uses to happen to others, either by the
Law of the Conqueror, or inundation of strangers, but it is insensibly crept in
by their own supin^ negligence, and fantasticknes: specially by that common
fatality and changes which attend time and all other sublunary things: nor is
this ancient Scientificall Language decayed only but the nation of the Greeks
it self, is as it were mouldred away and brought in a manner to the same
condition, and to (...) contemptible a pass as the Jew is: insomuch that there
cannot be two more pregnant instances of the lubricity and instablenes of
mankind as the decay of these two ancient Nations, the one the select peeple
of God, the other the most famous, that ever was for Arts, Arms, Civility and
Government; so that in statu quo nunc they who termed all the world Barbarians
in comparison of themselves in former times, may be now termed more than any
other Barbarians themselves, as having quite lost not only all inclination and
aspirings to Knowledge and Virtue, but likewise all courage and bravery of mind
to recover their ancient freedom and honor.

Thus have you my Lord, as much of the Greek Tongue as I could comprehend
within the bounds of a Letter, a Tongue that both for knowledge, for comerce,
and for copiousnes was the principallest that ever was; in my next I will
return nearer home, and give your Lordship account of the Latin Tongue, and of
her three daughters the French, Italian and Spanish, in the interim you find
that I am still

West. 25 Iul. 1630 My Lord, Your most obedient Servitor, J. H.

LIX. To the Right Honorable the E. R.
My Lord,
MY last was a pursuit of my endeavors to comply with your Lordships desires
touching Languages, And I spent more Oil and Labor than ordinary in displaying
the Greek Tongue, because we are more beholden to her for all Philosophical
and Theori^ knowledge, as also for rules of commerce and commutative justice,
than unto any other, I will now proceed to the latin Tongue, which had her
source in Italy, in Latium called now ^ompagna di Roma, and received her growth
with the monstrous en^ase of the City and Empire; Touching the one, she came
from poor mud walls at Mount Palatine which were scarce a mile about it first,
to be afterward fifty miles compass, (as she was in the reign of Aurelianus) and
her Territories which were hardly a days jour^eys extent, came by favorable
successes and ^ortune of War to be above three thousand in length, from the
banks of Rhine, or rather from the shores of this Island to Euphrates, and
sometimes to the Ri^er Tigris: with this vast expansion of Roman Territories the
Tongue also did spread, yet I do not find by those re-searches I have made into
Antiquity that she was vulgarly spoken by any nat^on or in any entire Country
but in Italy it self; For notwithstanding that it was the practice of the Roman
with the Lance to usher in his Laws and Language as marks of Conquest; yet I
believe his Tongue never took such firm impression any where, as to become the
vulgar epedemic speech of any peeple else* or that she was able to null and
extinguish the native Languages she found in those places where she planted her
Standard: nor can there be a more pregnant instance hereof than this Island, for
notwithstanding that she remained a Roman Province four hundred years together,
yet the Latin Tongue could never have the vogue here so far as to abolish the
British or Cambrian tongue.

It Is true that in France and Spain she made deeper impressions, the reason may
be in regard there were far more Roman Colonies planted there, for whereas there
were but four in this Isle, there were nine and twenty in France, and fifty seven
in Spain, and the greatest entertainment the Latin Tongue found out of Italy
her self, wa^ in these two Kingdoms; yet I am of opinion that the pure
congruous grammatical Latin was never spoken in either of them a^ a vulgar
vernacular Language common amongst women and children; no nor in all Italy it
self except Latium: In Afric, though there were sixty Roman Colonies dispersed
upon that continent, yet the Latin Tongue made not such deep impressions there
nor in Asia either, nor is it to be thought that in those Colonies themselves
did the common Soldier speak in that congruity as the Flamins, the Judges, the
Magistrates and chief Commanders did: When the Romans sent Legions, and planted
Colonies abroad 'twas for diverse political considerations, partly to secure
their new acquests, partly to abate the superfluous numbers and redundancy of
Rome, then by this way they found means to employ and reward men of worth, and
to heighten their minds, for the Roman spirit did rise up, and take growth with
his good successes, conquests, commands and employments.

But the reason that the Latin Tongue found not such entertainment in the
oriental parts, was that the Greek had fore-stall'd her, which was of more
esteem among them because of the learning that was couched in her, and that she
was more useful for negotiation and trafic, whereunto the Greeks were more
addicted than any peeple: therefore though the Romans had an ambition to make
those foreign Nations that were under their yoke to speak as well as to do what
pleased them, and that all orders, edicts, letters, and the Laws themselves
civil as well as martial, were published and executed in Latin, yet I believe
this Latin was spoken no otherwise among those Nations than the Spanish or
Castillian Tongue is now in the Netherlands, in Sicily, Sardinia, Naples, the
two Indies, and other Provincial Countries which are under that King: Nor did
the pure Latin Tongue continue long at a stand of perfection in Rome and
Latium it self among all sorts of peeple, but she received changes and
corruption, neither do I believe that she was born a perfect Language at first,
but she received nutriment, and degrees of perfection with time, which matures,
refines and finisheth all things: The verses of the Salii composed by Numa
Pompilius were scarce intelligible by the Flamins and Judges themselves in the
wane of the Roman Commonwealth, nor the Laws of the Decemviri: And if that
Latin wherein were couched the capitulations of peace 'twixt Rome and Carthage
a little after the expulsion of the Kings, which are yet extant upon a pillar
in Rome, were compared to that which was spoken in Caesar's reign 140. after, at
which time the Latin Tongue was mounted to the Meridian of her perfection she
would be found a^ differing as Spanish now differs from the Latin: After
Caesar and Ciceroes time, the Latin Tongue continued in Rome and Italy in her
purity four hundred years together, until the Goths* rushed into Italy first
under Alaric, then the Hunns under Attila, then the V^ndalls under Gensericus,
and the Heruli under Odoacer who was proclaimed King of Italy, but the Goths a
little after under Theoderic thrust out the Heruli, which Theodoric was by Zeno
the Emperor formally invested King of Italy, who with his successor reigned
there peaceably sixty years and upwards; so that in all probability the Go^hs
cohabiting so long among the Italians must adulterat their language as well as
their women.

The last barbarous peeple that invaded Italy about the year 570* were the
Lombards, who having taken firm rooting in the very bowels of the Countr^y
above 200 years without interruption during the reign of twenty Kings, must of
necessity alter and deprave the general speech of the natural inhabitants,
and among others one argument may be that the best and midland part of Italy
changed its name and took its appellation from these last Invaders, calling it
self Lombardy, which name it retains to this day: yet before the intrusions of
these wandering and warlike peeple into Italy, there may be a precedent cause of
some corruption that might creep into the Latin Tongue in point of vulgarity;
first the incredible confluence of forreners that came daily far and near, from
the coloniz'd Provinces to Rome, then the infinite number of slaves which
surpassed the number of free Citizens, might much impair the purity of the
Latin Tongue, and lastly those inconstancies and humor of novelty, which is
naturally inherent in man who according to those frail elementary principles
and ingredients whereof he is composed, is subject to insensible alterations and
apt to receive impressions of any change.

Thus, my Lord, as succinctly as I could digest it into the narrow bounds of an
Epistle, have I sent your Lordship this small survay of the Latin, or first
Roman Tongue; In my next I shall fall aboard of her three daughters, viz. the
Italian, the Spanish, and the French, with a diligent investigation what might
be the original native Languages of those Countries from the beginning before
the Lat^ne gave them the Law; in the interim I crave a candid interpretation of
what is passed, and of my ^udiousnes in executing your Lordships Injunctions,
so I am

West. Iul. 16. 1630. My Lord, Your most humble obedient Servant, J. H.

XL. To the right Honble the E R.
My Lord,
MY last was a discourse of the Latin or Primitive Roman tongue, which may be
said to be expired in the mark^ though living yet in the Schools, I mean she
may be said to be defunct in point of vulgarity any time these 1000 years
passed: Out of her urne have sprung up the Italian, the Spanish and the French,
whereof I am now to treat, but I think it not improper to make a research first
what the radical prime mother tongues of these Countries were before the Roman
Eagle planted her talons upon them.

Concerning Italy, doubtless there were diverse before the Latin did spread all
over that Country, the Calabrian and Apulian spoke Greek, whereof some relics
are to be found to this day, but it was an adventitious no mother language to
them; it is confessed that Latium it self and all the territory about Rome had
the Latin for its maternall and common first vernacular tongue, but Toscany
and Lig^ria had others quite discrepant, viz. the Hetruscane and Mesapian,
whereof though there be some records yet extant, yet there are none alive that can
understand them; the Oscan, the Sabin and Tusculan, are thought to be but
dialects to these.

Now the Latin Tongue with the coincidence of the Goths language, and other
Northern peeple, who like waves tumbled off one another, did more in Italy then
any where else, for she utterly abolished (upon that part of the continent) all
other maternall tongues as ancient as her self, and thereby her eldest daughter
the Italian came to be the vulgar universal tongue to the whole Country; yet
the Latin tongue had not the sole hand in doing this, but the Goths and other
septentrionall Nations who rushed into the Roman dition, had a share in it as I
said before, and pegg'd in some words which have been ever since irremovable not
only in the Italian, but also in her two younger sisters the Spanish and the
French who felt also the fury of those peeple: Now the Italian is the smoothest
and softest running language that is, for there is not a word except some few
Monosyllables Conjunctions and Propositions, that ends with a Consonant in the
whole language, nor is there any vulgar speech which has more subdialects in so
small a tract of ground, for Italy it self affords above eight. There you have
the Roman, the Toscane, the Venetian, the Mil^tz, the Neapolitan^, the
Calabresse, the Genoevais, the Picmonlez, you have the Corsican, Sycilian, with
diverse other neighboring Islands; and as the cause why from the beginning there
were so many differing dialects in the Greek tongue was because it was sliced
into so many Islands; so the reason why there be so many subdialects in the
Italian is the diversity of governments that the Country is squandred into,
there being in Italy at this day two Kingdoms, viz. that of Naples and
Calabria; Three Republics, viz. Venice, Genoa and Luca, and diverse other
absolute Princes.

Concerning the original language of Spain it was without any controversy,
the Bascuence or Cantabrian, which tongue and territory neither Roman, Goth,
(whence this King has his pedigree, with diverse of the Nobles) or Moore, could
ever conquer; though they had overrun and taken firm footing in all the rest
for many ages, therefore as the remnant of the old Britains here, so are the
^scainers accounted the ancient'st and unquestionablest Gentry of Spain;
insomuch that when any of them is to be dubbed Knight, there is no need of any
scrutiny to be made whether he be clear of the blood of the Morisco's who had
mingled and incorporated with the rest of the Spaniards about 700 years: And
as the Arcadians and Attiques in Greece for their immemoriall antiquity, are
said to vaunt of themselves, that the one are (...) before the Moon; the other
(...) issued of the earth it self, so the ^iscayner has such like Rodomontados.

The Spanish or Castilian language has but few subdialects, the Portugues is
most considerable touching the Catalan, and Valentiane; they are rather
dialects of the French, Gascon or Aquitani^; The purest dialect of the
Castilian tongue is held to be in the Town of Toledo, which above other Cities
of Spain has this privilege to be arbitress in the decision of any
controversy that may arise touching the interpretation of any Castilian word.

It is an infallible rule to find out the mother and ancient'st tongue of any
Country, to go among those who inhabit the barren'st and most mountainous
places, which are posts of security and fastnes, whereof diverse instances could
be produced, but let the Biscayner in Spain, the Welsh in great Britain, and
the Mountaineers in Epire serve the turn, who yet retain their ancient unmixt
mother tongues, being extinguished in all the Country besides.

Touching France it is not only doubtful, but left yet undecided what the true
genuine Gallic tongue was, some would have it to be the German, some the Greek,
some the old British or Welsh, and the last opinion carries away with it the
most judicious Antiquaries; Now all Gallia is not meant by it, but the Country
of the Celtae that inhabit the middle part of France, who are the true Gauls;
Caesar and Tacitus tell us that these Celtae, and the old Britains (whereof I
gave a touch in my first letter) did mutually understand one another, and some
do hold that this Island was tied to France, as Sycily was to Calabria, and
Denmark to Germany by an Istmos or neck of land 'twixt Dover and Bullen, for it
one do well observe the rocks of the one, and the cliffes of the other, he will
judge them to be one homogeneous piece, and that they were cut and shivered
asunder by some act of violence.

The French or Gallic tongue has diverse dialects, the Picard, that of Iersey
and Garnsey (appendixes once to the Duchy of Normandy) the Provensall, the
Gascon or speech of Languedoc, which Scaliger would etymologize from
Languedo'uy, whereas it comes rather from Langue de Got, for the Saracens and
Goths who by their incursions and long stay in Aquitain corrupted the language
of that part of Gallia: Touching the Britain and they of Bearn, the one is a
dialect of the Welsh, the other of the Bascuence; The VVall^n who is under the
King of Spain, and the Liegois is also a dialect of the French, which in their
own Country they call Romand: The Spaniard also terms his Castilian Roman,
whence it may be inferred that the first rice and derivation of the Spanish and
French were from the Roman tongue, not from the Latin, which makes me think
that the language of Rome might be degenerated and become a dialect to our own
mother tongue (the Latin) before she brought her language to France and Spain.

There is besides these subdialects of the Italian, Spanish and French another
speech that has a great stroke in Greece and Turkey called Franco, which may be
said to be composed of all the three, and is at this day the greatest language
of comerce and negotiation in the Levant.

Thus have I given your Lordship the best account I could of the sister
dialects, of the Italian, Spanish, and French; In my next I shall cross the
Mediterranean to Afric and the Hellespont to Asia, where I shall observe the
generall'st languages of those vast continents where such numberless swarms
and differing sorts of Nations do crawl up and down this earthly Globe,
therefore it cannot be expected that I should be so punctual there as in
Europe, so I am still,

My Lord, Your obedient Servitor, J. H.
Wystmin. 7. Iul. 1630.
LXI. To the Right Hon. the E. R.
My Lord,
HAving in my former letters made a flying progress through the Europaean
world, and taken a view of the several languages, dialects, and subdialects
whereby people convers one with another, and being now windbound for Afric, I
held it not altogether supervacaneous to take a review of them, and inform your
Lordship what languages are Original independent mother tongues of
Christendom, and what are dialects, derivations, or degenerations from their
originalls.

The mother toungs of Europe are thirteen, though Scaliger would have but
eleven; There is the Greek 1, the Latin 2, the Dutch 3, the Slavonian 4, the
Welsh or Cambrian 5, the Bascuence or Cantabrian 6, the Irish 7, the Albanian
in the Mountains of Epire 8, the Tartarian 9, the old Illirian 10, remaining
yet in Liburnia, the Iazrgian 11, on the North of Hungary, the Cauchian 12, in
East Frizeland, the Finnic 13, which I put last with good reason, because they
are the only heathens of Europe; all which were known to be in Europe in the
time of the Roman Empire; There is a learned antiquary that makes the Arabic to
be one of the mother toungs of Europe, because it was spoken in some of the
mountains of South Spain, it is true 'twas spoken for diverse hundred years all
Spain over after the conquest of the Moors, but yet it could not be called a
mother tongue, but an adventitious tongue in reference to that part of Europe.

And now that I am to pass to Afric which is far bigger than Europe, and to
Asia which is far bigger than Afric, and to America which is thought to be as
big as all the three, if Europe her self has so many mother languages quite
discrepant one from the other, besides secondary tongues and dialects which
exceed the number of their mothers, what shall we think of the other three huge
continents in point of differing languages? Your Lordship knows that there be
diverse meridians and clymes in the heavens whence influxes of differing
qualities fall upon the inhabitants of the earth, and as they make men to
differ in the idea's and conceptions of the mind, so in the motion of the
tongue, in the tune and tones of the voice, they com to differ one from the
other: Now, all languages at first were imperfect confused sounds, then came
they to be syllables, then words, then speeches and sentences, which by
practice, by tradition, and a kind of natural instinct from Parents to
children, grew to be fixed. Now to attempt a survay of all the languages in the
other three parts of the habitable earth were rather a madness than a
presumption, it being a thing of impossibility, and not only above the
capacity, but beyond the search of the activ'st, and knowingst man upon earth:
Let it therefore suffice while I behold those Nations that read and write from
right to left, from the Liver to the heart, I mean the Africanes, and Asians,
that I take a short view of the Arabic in the one, and the Hebrew or Syriac in
the other, for touching the Turkish language, it is but a dialect of the
Tartarian though it have received a late mixture of the Armenian, the Persian,
and Greek tongues, but specially of the Arabic, which was the mother tongue of
their Prophet, and is now the sole language of their Alchoran, it being
strictly inhibited, and held to be a profaneness to translate it to any other,
which they say preserves them from the encroachment of Schisms.

Now the Arabic is a tongue of vast expansion, for besides the three Arabia's
it is become the vulgar speech of Syria, Mesoptoamia, Palestine and Egypt, from
whence she stretches her self to the straight of Gibraltar, through all that
vast tract of earth, which lies 'twixt the Mountain Atlas and the
Mediterranean Sea, which is now called Barbary, where Christianity and the
Latin tongue with diverse famous Bishops once flourished. She is spoken
likewise in all the Northern parts of the Turkish Empire, as also in petty
Tartary, and she above all other has a reason to learn Arabic, for she is in
hope one day to have the Crescent and the whole Ottoman Empire, it being
entailed upon her in case the present race should fail, which is now in more
danger than ever, in (...) whersoever the Mohammedan Religion is profes'd, the
Arabic is either spoken or taught.

My last view shall be of the first language of the earth, the ancient language
of Paradise, the language wherein God Almighty himself pleased to pronounce and
publish the Tables of the Law, the language that had a benediction promised her
because she would not consent to the building of the Babylonish Tower; yet this
holy tongue has had also her Eclypses, and is now degenerated to many
dialects, nor is she spoken purely by any Nation upon the earth, a fate also
which is befallen the Greek and Latin; The most spacious dialect of the Hebrew
is the Syriac which had her beginning in the time of the captivity of the Jews
at Babylon, while they cohabited, and were mingled with the Chaldeans, in which
tract of seventy years time the vulgar sort of Jews neglecting their own
matern^ll tongue (the Hebrew) began to speak the Chaldee, but not having the
right accent of it, and fashioning that new learned language to their own
innotation of points, affixes and conjugations, out of that intermixture of
Hebrew and Chaldee, resulted a third language called to this day the Syri^c,
which also after the time of our Savior began to be more adulterated by
admission of Greek, Roman, and Arabic: in this language is the Talmud and
Targum couched, and all their Rabbis, as Rabby Jonathan, and Rabby Oakelos
with others have written in it: Insomuch that as I said before, the ancient
Hebrew had the same fortune that the Greek and Latin tongues had, to fall from
being naturally spoken any where, to lose their general communicableness and
vulgarity, and to become only School and book languages.

Thus we see, that as all other sublunary things are subject to corruption and
decay, as the poten'st Monarchies, the proudest Republiques, the opulentest
Cities have their growth, declinings, and periods; As all other elementary
bodies likewise by reason of the frailty of their principles, com by in
sensible degrees to alter and perish, and cannot continue long at a stand of
perfection; so the learned and more eloquent languages, are not free from
this common fatality, but they are liable to those alterations and resolutions,
to those fits of inconstancy, and other destructive contingencies which are
unavoidably incident to all earthly things.

Thus my noble Lord have I evertuated my self, and strech'd all my sinnews, I
have put all my small knowledge, observations and reading upon the tenter to
satisfy your Lordships desires touching this subject; If it afford you any
contentment I have hit the white I aimed at, and hold myself abundantly
rewarded for my oil and labor: so I am,

My Lord, Your most humble and ever obedient Servitor, J. H.
Westminster. 1 Iul. 1630.
XLIII. To the Hon. Master Car. Ra.
SIR,
YOurs of the 7th current was brought me, whereby I find that you did put your
self to the penance of perusing some Epistles, that go imprinted lately in my
name; I am bound to you for your pains and patience (for you write, you read
them all thorough) much more for your candid opinion of them, being right glad
that they should give entertainment to such a choice and judicious Geetleman as
your self: But whereas you seem to except against something in one Letter, that
reflects upon Sir Walter Raleigh's voyage to Guyana, because I term the gold
Mine he went to discover, an ayrie and supposititious Mine, and so infer that
it touches his honor; Truly sir, I will deal clearly with you in that point,
that I never harbored in my brain the least thought to expose to the world any
thing that might prejudice, much less traduce in the least degree that could
be, that rare and renowned Knight, whose fame shall contend in longaevity with
this Island it self, yea with that great World which he Historiseth so
gallantly; I was a youth about the Town when he undertook that expedition, and
I remember most men suspected that Mine then to be but an imaginary politic
thing, but at his return, and missing of the enterprise, these suspicions
turned in most to real beliefs that 'twas no other. And king James it that
Declaration which he commanded to be printed and published afterward touching
the circumstances of this action (upon which my Letter is grounded, and which I
have still by me) terms it no less; And if we may not give faith to such
public regal instruments, what shall we credit? besides, there goes another
p^inted kind of Remonstrance annexed to that Declaration which intimates as
much; And there is a worthy Captain in this Town, who was a coadventurer in that
expedition, who, upon the storming of St. Thoma, heard young Mr. Rawleigh
encouraging his men in these whods, com on my noble hearts, this i^ the Mine we
com for, and they who think there is any other, are fo^lt. Add heerunto that Sir
Richard Baker in his last Historical collections intimates so much, therefore
'twas far from being any opinion broached by my self, or bottomed upon weak
grounds, for I was careful of nothing more, than that those Letters, being to
breath open air, should relate nothing but what should be derived from good
fountains; And truly sir, touching that Apology of Sir Walter Rawleighs you
write of, I never saw it, and I am very sorry I did not, for it had let in more
light upon me of the carriage of that great action, and then you might have bin
well assured that I would have don that noble Knight all the right that could
be.

But sir, the several arguments that you urge in your Letters are of that
strength, I confess, that they are able to rectify any indifferent man in this
point, and induce him to believe that it was no Chymera, but a real Mine; for
you write of diverse pieces of gold brought thence by Sir Walter himself, and
Captain Kemys, and of some Ingotts that were found in the Governors Closet at
St. Thoma, with diverse crusibles, and other refining instruments; yet, under
favor, that might be, and the benefit not countervail the charge, for the
richest Mines that the King of Spain has upon the whole Continent of America,
which are the Mines of Potos^, yield him but six in the hundred all expenses
defrayed, You write how King James sent privately to sir Walter being yet in
the Tower, to entreat and command him, that he would impart his whole design
unto him under his hand, promising upon the word of a King to keep it secret,
which being don accordingly by Sir Walter Rawleigh, that very original paper
was found in the said Spanish Governors closet at St. Thoma; whereat, as you
have just cause to wonder, and admire the activeness of the Spanish Agents
about our Court at that time, so I wonder no less at the miscariage of some of
His late Majesty's Ministers, who notwithstanding that he had passed his royal
word to the contrary, yet they did help Count Gondamar to that paper, so that
the reproach lies more upon the English than the Spanish Ministers in this
particular: Whereas you allege that the dangerous sickness of Sir VVatler being
arrived near the place, and the death of (that rare spark of courage) your
brother upon the first landing, with other circumstances discouraged Captain
Kemys from discovering the Mine, but to reserve it for another time, I am
content to give as much credit to this as any man can; as also that Sir
Walter, if the rest of the Fleet according to his earnest motion had gone with
him to revictuall in Virginia (a Country where he had reason to be welcome unto,
being of his own discovery) he had a purpose to return to Guyana the Spring
following to pursue his first design: I am also very willing to believe that
it cost Sir Walter Rawleigh much more to put himself in equipage for that long
intended voyage, than would have paid for his liberty, if he had gone about to
purchase it for reward of money at home, though I am not ignorant that many of
the co-adventurers made large contributions, and the fortunes of some of them
suffer for it at this very day. But although Gondamar, as my Letter mentions,
calls Sir Walter Pyrat, I, for my part am far from thinking so, because as you
give an unanswerable reason, the plundering of St. Thoma, was an act done
beyond the Equator, where the Articles of Peace 'twixt the two Kings do not
extend; yet, under favor, though he broke not the Peace, he was said to break
his Patent by exceeding the bounds of his Commission, as the foresaid
Declaration relates, for King James had made strong promises to Count Gondamar,
that this Fleet should commit no outrages upon the King of Spain's Subjects by
Land, unless they began first, and I believe that was the main cause of his
death, though I think if they had proceeded that way against him in a legal
course of trial, he might have defended himself well enough.

Whereas you alledg that if that action had succeeded, and afterward been well
prosecuted, it might have brought Gondamar's great Catholic Master to have been
begged for at the Church doors by Friars, as he was once brought in the latter
end of Queen Elizabeth's days; I believe it had much damnified him, and
interrupted him in the possession of his West Indies, but not brought him,
under favor, to so low an ebb; I have observed that it is an ordinary thing in
your Popish Countries for Princes to borrow from the Altar, when they are
reduced to any straights, for they say, the ^iches of the Church are to serve
as anchors in time of a storm; diverse of our Kings have don worse, by pawning
their Plate and Jewels: Whereas my Letter makes mention that Sir Walter Rawleigh
mainly labored for his Pardon before he went, but could not compass it, this is
also a passage in the foresaid printed Relation, but I could have wished with
all my heart he had obtaind it, for I believe, that neither the transgression
of his Commission, nor any thing that he did beyond the Line, could have
shortened the line of his life otherwise, but in all probability we might have
been happy in him to this very day, having such an Heroic heart as he had, and
other rare helps, by his great knowledge, for the preservation of health; I
believe without any scruple what you write, that Sir William St. geon made an
overture unto him of procuring his pardon for 1500 l. but whether he could have
effected it I doubt a little, when he had com to negotiat it really: But I
extremely wonder how that old sentence which had lain dormant above sixteen
years against Sir Walter Rawleigh could have been made use of to take off his
head afterward, considering that the Lord Chancellor Verulam, as you write,
told him positively (as Sir Walter was acquainting him with that proffer of Sir
William St. geons for a pecunia^y pardon) in these words, Sir, the knee timber
of your voyage is money, spare (...) purse in this particular, for upon my life
you have a sufficient part for all that is passed already, the King having
under his broad Seal made you Admiral of your Fleet, and given you power of
the Martial Law over your Officers and Soldiers: One would think that by this
Royal Patent, which gave him power of life and death over the Kings liege
peeple, Sir Walter Rawleigh should become Rectus in ^ia, and free from all old
convictions; but Sir, to tell you the plain truth, Count Gondamar at that time
had a great stroke in our Court, because there was more than a mere ^verture of
a match with Spain, which makes me apt to believe that* that great wise Knight
being such an Anti-Spaniard, was made a Sacrifice to advance the Matrimonial
Treaty: But I must needs wonder, as you justly do, that one and the same man
should be condemned for being a friend to the Spaniard, (which was the ground of
his first condemnation) should afterward lose his head for being their enemy
by the same sentence: Touching his return I must consess I was utterly ignorant
that those two noble Earls Thomas of Arundell and William of Pemb^oke were
engaged for him in this particular, nor does the prin^ed Relation, make any
mention of them at all, therefore I must say that envy her self must pronounce
that return of his, for the ^quitting of his fiduciary pledges to be a most
noble act, and wa^ing that of King Alphonso's Moor, I may more properly compare
it to the act of that famous Roman Commander ( Regulus as I take (...)) who to
keep his promise and faith returned to his enemies ^her he had been prisoner,
though he knew he went to an inevi^able death: But well did that faithles
cunning Knight who betray^d Sir Walter Rawleigh in his intended escape being
com ashore, fall to that contemptible end, as to dye a poor distracted Beggar
in the (...) of Lyndey having for a bag of money falsified his Faith, confirmed
by the tie of the holy Sacrament as you write, as also before the year came
about to be found clipping the same coin in the Kings own house at White Hall
which he had received as a reward for his perfidiousnes, for which being
condemned to be hanged, he was driven to sell himself to his shirt, to
purchase his pardon of two Knights.

And now Sir, let that glorious and gallant Cavalier Sir Walter Rawleigh (who
lived long enough for his own honor though not for his Country, as it was said
of a Roman Consul) rest quietly in his grave and his virtues live in his
posterity, as I find they do strongly, and very eminently in you; I have heard
his enemies confess that he was one of the weightiest and wisest men that this
Island ever bred, Mr. Nath. Carpenter a learned and judicious Author was not in
the wrong when he gave this discreet Character of him, who has not known or
read of that Prodigy of wit and fortune, Sir Walter Rawleigh, a man infortunat
in nothing else but in the great of his wit and advancement, whose eminent worth
was such both in domestic Policy, foreign Expeditions and Discoveries, in Arts
and Literature, both practic and contemplative, that it might seem at once to
conq^ bo^ example and imitation.

Now Sir, hoping to be rectified in your judgment touching my opinion of that
illustrious Knight your father, give me leave to kiss your hands very
affectionatly for the respectfull mention you please to make of my brother once
your neighbor; he suffers, good soul, as well as I, though in a differing
manner; I also much value that favorable censure you give of those rambling
Letters of mine, which indeed are naught else than a Legend of the cumbersom
lif^ and various fortunes of a Cadet; but whereas you please to say, that the
world of learned men is much beholden to me for them, and that son of them are
freighted with many excellent and qaaint passages delivered in a masculine and
solid style, adorned with much eloquence, a^ stuck with the choicest flowers
picked from the Muses garden; whereas you also please to write that you admire
my great Travells, my stren^ous endeavors, at all times and in all places to
accumulate knowledge, ^y active laying hold upon all occasions, and on every
handle that mig^ (with reputation) advantage either my wit or fortune: These
high gallant strains of expressions, I confess, transcend my merit, and are a
garment too gaudy for me to put on, yet I will lay it up among by best
Relics, whereof I have diverse sent me of the kind: And whereas in publishing
these Epistles at this time you please to say, That I have don like Hezekiah
when he shewedhis Treasures to the Babylonians, that I have discovered my
riches to theev^ who will bind me fast and share my goods; To this I answer,
that i^ those innocent Letters (for I know none of them but is such) fall among
such thieves they will have no great prize to carry away, it will be but
pettylarceny; I am already, God wot, bound fast enough, having been a long time
coopt up between these Walls* bere^t of all my means of subsistence and
employment, nor do I know wherefore I am here, unless it be for my sins; For I
bear as upright ^ heart to my King and Country, I am as conformable and well
affected to the government of this land, specially to the high Court of
Parliament as any one whatsoever that breaths air under this Meridian, I will
except none: And for my Religion I defy any creature 'twixt heaven and earth
that will say, I am not a true English Protestant. I have from time to time
employed diverse of my best friends to get my liberty, at leastwise leave to go
abroad upon Bail (for I do not expect, as you please also to believe in your
Letter, to be delivered hence as Saint Peter was by miracle) but nothing will
yet prevail.

To conclude, I do acknowledge in the highest way of recognition, the free and
noble proffer you please to make me of your endeavors to pull me out of this
doleful Sepulcher, wherein you say I am entombed alive; I am no less obliged to
you for the opinion I find you have of my weak abilities, which you please to
wish heartily may be no longer eclypsed, I am not in despair, but a day will
shine that may afford me opportunity to improve this good opinion of yours
(which I value at a very high rate) and let the world know how much I am,

Fleet, 5 May, 1645. Sir, Your real and ready Servitor, J. H.

LXIIII. To Mr. T. V. at Brussells.
My dear Tom,
Who would have thought poor England had been brought to this pass? could it
ever have entered into the imagination of man that the Scheme and whole frame of
so ancient and well-molded a government should be so suddenly struck off the
hinges, quite put out of joint, and tumbled into such a horrid Confusion? who
would have held it possible that to fly from Babylon, we should fall into such
a Babel? that to avoid superstition some peeple should be brought to belch out
such horrid prophanenes, as to call the Temples of God the Tabernacles of
Satan; The Lords Supper a Two-penny Ordinary; to make the Communion Table a
Manger, and the Font a Trough to water their Horses in; to term the white
decent Robe of the Presbyter the Whores Smock; the Pipes through which nothing
came but Anthems and holy Hymns, the Devils Bag-pipes; the Liturgy of the
Church, though extracted most of it out of the Sacred Text, called by some
another kind of Alchoran, by others raw Porredge, by some a piece forged in
Hell; Who would have thought to have seen in England the Churches shut and the
Shops open upon Christmas day? Could any soul have imagined that this Isle
would have produced such Monsters, as to rejoice at the Turks good successes
against Christians, and wish he were in the midst of Rome? Who would have
dreamed ten years since, when Archbishop Lawd did ride in state through London
streets, accompanying my Lord of London to be sworn Lord high Tresurer of
England, that the Mitre should have now com to such a scorn, to such a
National kind of hatred, as to put the whole Island in a combustion; which
makes me call to memory a saying of the Earl of Kildare in Ireland, in the
reign of Henry the eighth, which Earl, having deadly feud with the Bishop of
Cass^es, burnt a Church belonging to that Diocese, and being asked upon his
Examination before the Lord Deputy at the Castle of Dublin, why he had
committed such a horrid Sacrilege as to burn Gods Church? he answered, I had
never burnt the Church unles I had thought the Bishop had been in it. Lastly,
who would have imagined that the Accise would have taken footing here? a word I
remember in the last Parliament save one, so odious, that when Sir D. Carleton
then Secretary of State, did but name it in the House of Commons, he was like
to be sent to the Tower; although he named it to no ill s^nse but to show what
advantage of happiness the peeple of England had over other Nations, having
neither the Gabells of Italy, the Tallies of France, or the Accise of Holland
laid upon them, yet upon this he was suddenly interrupted, and called to the
Bar; Such a strange Metamorphosis poor England is now com unto, and I am afraid
our Miseries are not com to their height, but the longest shadows stay till
the Evening.

The freshest News that I can write unto you is, that the Kentish Knight of
your acquaintance whom I writ in my last had an apostasy in his Brain, dyed
suddenly this week of an Impostume in his breast, as he was reading a Pamphlet
of his own that came from the Press, wherein he showed a great mind to be
nibling with my Trees; but he only showed his Teeth, for he could not bite them
to any purpose.

Willi. To: is returned from the Wars, but he is grown lame in one of his Arms,
so he has no mind to bear Arms any more, he confesses himself to be an
egregious fool to leave his Mercership, and go to be a Musqueteer: It made me
think upon the Tale of the Gallego in Spain, who in the Civil Wars against
Aragon being in the field he was shot in the forehead, and being carried away
to a Tent, the Surgeon searched his wound and found it mortal; so he advised
him to send for his Confessor, for he was no man for this world in regard the
Brain was touched; the Soldier wished him to search it again, which he did, and
told him that he found he was hurt in the Brain and could not possibly escape,
whereupon the Gallego ^ell into a chafe, and said he lied, for he had no brain
at all por que si tuviera seso, nunca huniera venido a esta guerra, for if I
had had any brain, I would never have com to this War: All your friends here are
well, except the maym'd Soldier, and remember you often, specially Sir I.
Brown, a good gallant Gentleman, who never forgets any who deserved to have a
place in his memory. Farewell my dear Tom: and God send you better days than
we have here, for I wish you as much happiness as possibly man can have, I wish
your mornings may be good, your noons better, your evenings and nights best of
all; I wish your sorrows may be short, your joys lasting, and all your desires
end in success; let me hear once more from you before you remove thence, and
tell me how the squares go in Flanders: So I rest,

Fleet, 3 Aug. 1644. Your entirely affectionat Servitor, J. H.

LXV. To His Majesty at Oxon.
SIR,
I Prostrate this Paper at your Majesty's feet, hoping it may find way thence
to your eyes, and so de^cend to your Royal heart.

The foreign Minister of State, by whose conveyance this com^, did lately
intimat unto me, that among diverse things which go abroad under my name
reflecting upon the times, there are some which are not so well taken, your
Majesty being informed that they discover a spirit of Indifferency, and
luke-warmnes in the Author* This added much to the weight of my present
suffrances; and exceedingly embittered the sense of them unto me, being no
other than a corrosif to one already in a hestic condition: I must confess that
some of them were more moderat than others; yet (most humbly under favor) there
were none of them but displayed the heart of a constant true loyal Subject, and
as diverse of those who are most zealous to your Majestics Service told me, they
had the good succes to rectify multitudes of peeple in their opinion of some
things; Insomuch that I am not only not conscious, but most confident that none
of them could tend to your Majesty's disservice any way imaginable: Therefore I
humbly beseech, that your Majesty would (...) to conceive of me accordingly,
and of one who by this recluse passive condition has his share of this hideous
storm* yet he is in assurance, rather than hopes, that though diverse crosswinds
have blown, these times will bring in better at last. (...) have bin diverse of
your Royal Progenitors who have had as shrewd shocks; And it is well known, how
the next transmarine Kings have been brought to lower ebbs: At this very day he
of Spain is in a far worse condition, being in the midst of two sorts of
peeple, (the Catalan and Portuguais) which were lately his Vassalls, but now
have torn his Seals, renounced all bonds of allegiance, and are in actual
hostility against him: This great City I may say is like a Chesboard checkered,
inlayd with white and black spots, though I believe the white are more in
number, and your Majesty's countenance by returning to your great Counsel and
your Court at White Hall would quickly turn them all white: That Almighty
Majesty who uses to draw light out of darkness, and strength out of weakness*
making man's extremity his opportunity, preserve and prosper your Majesty
according to the Prayers early and late of your Ma^esties most loyal Subject,
Servant* and Martyr,

Fleet 3. Septem. 1644. Howell,

LXVI. To E. Benlowes Esqr. upon the receipt of a Table of exquisit Latin
Poems.
SIR,
I Thank you in a very high degree for that precious Table of Poems you pleased
to send me: When I had well viewd them, I thought upon that famous Table of
Proportion, which Ptolomy is recorded by Aristaeus to have sent Eleazar to
Jerusalem, which was counted a stupendous piece of* Art, and the wonderment
of those times: what the curiosity of that Table was, I have not read, but I
believe it consisted in extern mechanical artifice only: The beauty of your
Table is of a far more noble extraction being a pure spiritual work, so that
it may be called the Table of your soul, in confirmation of the opinion of that
divine, though Pagan Philosopher, the high winged Plato, who fancied that our
souls at the first infusion were as so many Tables, they were abrasae Tabulae,
and that all our future knowledge was but a reminiscence; But under favor these
rich and elaborate Poems which so loudly echo out your worth and ingenuity
deserve a far more lasting monument to preserve them from the injury of time
than such a slender board, they deserve to be engraven in such durable dainty
stuff that may be fit to hang up in the Temple of Apollo; your Echo deserves
to dwell in some marble or porphyry grot, cut about Parnassus Mount near the
source of Helicon, rather than upon such a slight suprfiecies.

I much thank you for your visits, and other fair respects you show me;
specially that you have enlarged my quarters among these melancholy Walls, by
sending me a whole Isle to walk in, I mean that delicate purple Island I
received from you, where I meet with Apollo himself and all his daughters, with
other excellent society; I stumble also there often upon my self, and grow
better acquainted with what I have within me and without me: Insomuch that you
could not make choice of a fitter ground for a Prisoner, (...) I am, to pass
over, than of that purple Isle, that Isle of man you see^ me, which as the
ingenious Author* has made it, is a far more dainty soil than that Scarlet
Island which lys near the Baltic sea.

I remain still wind-bound in this Fleet, when the weather mend^ and the wind
sifts that I may launch forth, I will repay you your visits, and be ready to
correspond with you in the reciprocation of any other offices of friendship, for
I am,

Sir, Your affectionat Servitor, J. H.
Fleet, 25 Aug. 1645.
LXVII. To my Honorable La: the La: A. Smith.
Madame,
VVHeras you were pleased lately to ask leave, you may now take authority to
command me; And did I know any of the faculties of my mind, or lims of my body
that were not willing to serve you, I would utterly renounce them, they should
be no more mine, at least I should not like them near so well; but I shall not
be put to that, for I sensibly find that by a natural propensity they are all
most ready to obey you, and to stir at the least beck of your commands as Iron
moves towords the lodestone; Therefore Madame if you bid me go, I will run; If
you bid me run, I Will fly, (if I can) upon your arrand; But I must stay till I
can get my heels at liberty from among these Walls, till when, I am as
perfectly as man can be,

Madame, Your most obedient humble Servitor, J. H.
Fleet, 5 May. 1645.
LXVIII. To Master G. Stone.
SIR,
I Heartily rejoice with the rest of your friends, that you are safely returned
from your Travells, specially that you have made so good returns of the time of
your Travel; being as I understand, come home fraighted with observations and
languages; your Father tells me tha the finds you are so wedded to the Italian
and French, that you utterly neglect the Latin Tongue, That Is not well, though
you have learnt to play at Baggammon, you must not forget Irish, which is a
more serious and solid game; but I know you are so discreet in the course and
method of your studies, that you will make the daughters to wait upon their
mother, and love still your old friend: To truck the Latin for any other vulgar
Language, is but an ill ba^ter, it is as bad as that which Glaucus made with
Diomedes when he parted with his golden Arms for brazen ones; the proceed of
this exchange will come far short of any Gentleman's expectations, though happily
it may prove advantageous to a Merchant, to whom common Languages are more
useful. I am big with desire to meet you, and to mingle a days discourse with
you, if no^ two, how you escaped the claws of the Inquisition, whereunto I
understand you were like to fall, and of other Traverses of your Pe^egrination:
Farewell my precious Stone, and believe it, the least grain of those high
respects you please to profess unto me* (...) not lost, but answered with so
many Cara^ts: So I rest,

(...). 30 Novem. 163^. Your most affectionate Servitor, J. H.

XLIX. To Mr. J. J. Esquire.
SIR,
I Received those sparks of piety you pleased to send me in a manuscript, and
whereas you favor me with a desire of my opinion concerning the publishing of
them; Sir I must confess that I found among them many most fervent and
flexanimous strains of devotion; I found some prayers so piercing and powerful
that they are able to invade Heaven, and take it by violence, if the heart does
i'ts office as well as the tongue: But Sir, you must give me leave (and for this
leave you shall have authority to deal with me in such a case) to tell you,
that whereas they consist only of requests being all supplicatory prayers, you
should do well to intersperse among them some eucharisticall ejaculations, and
doxologies, some oblation^ of thankfulness; we should not be always whining in
a puling petitionary way (which is the tone of the time now in fashion) before
the gates of Heaven with our fingers in our eyes, but we should lay our hands
upon our hearts and break into raptures of joy and praise, a soul thus elevated
is the most pleasing sacrifice that can be offered to God Almighty, it is the
best sort of in^ense: Prayer causes the first shower of rain, but praise brings
down the second, the one fructifieth the earth, the other makes the Hills to
skip; all prayers aim at our own ends and interest, but praise proceeds from
the pure motions of love and gratitude, having no other object but the glory of
God, that soul which rightly discharges this part of devotion may be said to
do the duty of an Angel upon earth. Among other attributes o^ God, praescience
or foreknowledge is one, for he knows ou^ thoughts, our desires, our wants
long before we propound them* And this is not only one of his attributes but
prerogative royal, therefore to use so many iterations, inculcatings, and
tautologie^, as it is no good manners in moral Philosophy, no more is it i^
divinity, it argues a pusillanimou^ and mistrustfull soul: of the two, I had
rather be overlong in praise, than prayer: yet I wou^ be careful it should be
free from any Pharisaicall babbling; prayer compared with praise, is but a
fuliginous smoke issuing from the sense of sin, and human infirmities, praises
are the true clear sparks of piety, and sooner fly upwards.

Thus have I been free with you in delivering my opinion touching that piece of
devotion you sent me, whereunto I ad my humble thanks to you for the perusal of
it, so I am

Fleet, 8 Sept. 1645. Yours most ready to be commanded, J. H.

LXX. To Captain William Bridges in Amsterdam.
My noble Captain,
I Had yours of the tenth current, and besides your avisos, I must thank you
for those rich flourishes wherewith your letter was embrodered evry where; The
news under this clyme is that they have mutinied lately in diverse places about
the Excise, a bird that was first hatched there first amongst you; here in
London the tumult came to that height that they burnt down to the grownd the
Excise house in Smithfield, but now all is quiet again; God grant our Excise
here have not the same fortune as yours there, to become perpetual; or as that
new gabell of Orleans, which began in the time of the Ligue, which continues
to this day, notwithstanding the cause ceased about threescore years since;
touching this I remember a pleasant tale that is recorded of Henry the Great,
who some years after peace was established throughout all the whole body of
France, going to his town of Orleans, the Citizens petitioned him that his
Majesty would be pleased to abolish that new tax; the King asked who had
imposed it upon them, they answered Monsieur de la Chatre, (during the civil
Wars of the Ligue) who was now dead; the King replied Monsieur de la Cha'tre
vous a ligue qu'il vous desligue, Monsieur dela Chatre ligu'd you, let him then
unligue you for my part; now that we have a kind of peace, the goals are full
of soldiers, and some Gentlemen's sons of quality suffer daily, the last week
Judge Riv^s condemned four in your County at Maidstone Assizes, but he went out
of the world before them though they were executed four days after; you know
the saying in France, that la guerre sait les larrons, and la paix les ameine
an gibet, War makes thieves, and peace brings them to the gallows. I lie still
here in limbo, in limbo innocentium, though not in limbo infantion, and I know
not upon what star to cast this misfortune; Others are here for their good
conditions, but I am heet for my good qualities as your cousin Fortescue geer'd
me not long since, I know none I have, unless it be to love you, which I would
continue to do, though I tug'd at an oar in a Gallie, much more as I walk in
the Galleries of this Fleet: In this resolution I rest

Fleet, 2 Sept. 1645. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

LXXI. To Mr. W. B. at Grundesburgh.
Gentle Sir,
YOurs of the seventh I received yesternight, and read ore with no vulgar
delight; in the perusal of it me thought to have discerned a gentle strife
'twixt the fair respects you pleased to show me therein, and your ingenuity in
expressing them, who should have superiority; so that I knew not to which of
the two I should adjudge the Palm.

If you continue to wrap up our young acquaintance, which you say is but yet in
fasciis, in such warm choice swadlings, it will quickly grow up to maturity,
and for my part I shall not be wanting to contribute that reciprocal
nourishment which is due from me.

Whereas you please to magnify some pieces of mine, and that you seem to spy the
Muses pearching upon my Trees, I fear it is but deceptio visus, for they are but
Satyrs, or happily some of the homelier sort of Wood Nymphs, the Muses have
choicer walks for their recreation.

Sir, I must thank you for the visit you vouchsafed me in this simple cell, and
whereas you please to call it the cabinet that holds the jewel of our times,
you may rather term it a wicker casknet that keeps a jet ring, or a horn
lantern that holds a small taper of course wax; I hope this taper shall not
extinguish here, and if it may afford you any light, either from hence or
hereafter, I should be glad to impart it in a plentiful proportion, because I
am Sir

Fleet, 1 July, 1646. Your most affectionat friend to serve you, J. H.

LXXII. To I. W. of Grayes Inn, Esquire
SIR,
I Was yours before in a high degree of affection, but now I am much more yours
since I perused that parcel of choice Epistles you sent me; they discover in
you a knowing and a candid clear soul, for familiar letters are the keys of the
mind, they open all the (...) of ones breast, all the cells of the brain, and
truly set forth the inward man, nor can the pensill so lively represent the
face, as the pen (...) the Fancy: I much thank you that you would please to
impart them unto

Fleet, 1 April, 1645. Your most faithful servitor, J. H.

LXXIII. To Cap. T. P. from Madrid.
Captain Don Tomas,
COuld I write my love unto you, with a ray of the Sun, as once Aurelius the
Roman Emperor wished to a friend of his, you ^ow this clear horizon of Spain
could afford me plenty, which cannot be had so constantly all the seasons of
the year in your clowdy ^yme of England; Apollo with you makes not himself so
common, (...) keeps more State, and does not show his face, and shoot his ^ams
so frequently as he does here, where it is Sunday all the (...): I thank you a
thousand times for what you sent by Mr Gres^ and that you let me know how the
pulse of the times bears with you; I find you cast not your eyes so much
southward as you were used to do toward us here, and when you look this way
you cast a clowdy countenance, with threatening looks; which maket me apprehend
some fear that it will not be safe for me to be longer under this meridian.
Before I part I will be careful to send you those things you writ for, by some
of my L. Ambassador Aston's Gentlemen; I cannot yet get that Grammar which was
made for the Constable of Castile, who you know was born dumb, wheri^ an Art is
invented to speak with hands only, to carry the Alphab^t upon ones joints, and
at his fingers ends, which may be learned without any great difficulty by any
mean capacity, and whereby one may discourse and deliver the conceptions of his
mind witho^ ever wagging of his tongue, provided there be reciprocal knowledge,
and co-understanding of the art 'twixt the parties, and it i^ a very ingenious
piece of invention. I thank you for the copy of verses you sent me glancing
upon the times; I was lately perusing some of the Spanish Poets here, and
lighted upon two Epigrams, or Epitaphs more properly, upon our* Henry the
eighth, and upon his daughter Queen Elizabeth, which in requital I thought
worth the sending you:

A Henrique octavo Rey de Ingalatierra
Mas de esta losa fria
Cubre Henrique tu valor,
De una Muger el amor,
Y de un Error la porsia
Como cupo en tu grandeza,
Dezidme enzanado Ingles
Querer una muger a lospies,
Ser de la yglesia cabesa?
Pros'd thus in English, for I had no time to put it on feet.

O Henry more than this cold pavemeut covers thy worth, the love of a woman and
the pertinacy of error; How could it sub^ with thy greatness, tell me O cosen'd
English man, to cast the self at a woman's feet, and yet to be head of the
Church? That upon Queen Elizabeth was this.

De Isabela Reyna de Ingalatierra
Aqui yaze Iesabel,
Aqui lanueva Athalia,
Del oro Antartico Harpia,
Del mar incendio cruel:
Aqui el ingenio, mas dino
De loor que ha tenido el suelo,
Si para llegar al cielo
No huuiera errado el camino.
Here lies Iesabel, here lies the new Athalia, the Hrapy of the Western gold,
the cruel firebrand of the Sea; Here lies a wit the most worthy of fame which
the earth had, if to arrive to heaven she had not mist her way.

You cannot blame the Spaniard to be Satyricall against Queen Elizabeth, for he
never speaks of her, but he fetches a shrink in the thoulder; since I have
begun I will go on with as witty an Anagram as I have heard or read, which a
Gentleman lately made upon his own name Tomas, and a Nun called Maria, for she
was his devota; the occasion was, that going one evening to discourse with her
at the grate, he wrung her by the hand, and joined both their names in this
Anagram, To Maria mas, I would take more; I know I shall not need to expound it
to you; here unto I will add a strong and deep fetched character, as I think
you will confess when you have read it, that one made in this Court of a
Cour^san.

Eres put a tan arte^^
Qu'en el vientre de tu madre
Tu tuvistes de manera
Que te cavalgue el padre,
To this I will join that which was made of de Vaca husband to Iusepe de Vaca
the famous Comedian, who came upon the Stage with a cloak lined with black
plush and a great chain about his neck, whereupon the Duke of Mediana broke into
these witty lines.

Con tanta selpa en la Capa
Y tanta cadena de oro,
El marido de la Vaca
Que puede ser sino toro?
The conclusion of this rambling letter shall be a rhyme of certain hard throaty
words which I was taught lately, and they are accounted the difficulst in all
the whole Castilian language, insomuch that he who is able to pronounce them,
is accounted Buen Romancista, a good speaker of Spanish: Abcia y oueia y piedra
que rabeia, y pendola ^as oreia, y lugar en la ygre^a, dessea a su hijo la
vieia. A be and a sheep, ^ mill, a jewel in the ear, and a place in the
Church, the old woman desires her son. No more now, but that I am, and will
ever be, my noble Captain in the front of

Madrid, 1 Aug. 1622. Your most affectionat Servitors, J. H.

LXXIV. To Sir Tho. Luke, Knight.
SIR
HAd you traversed all the world over, specially those large continents, and
Christian Countries which you have so exactly surveyed, and whence you have
brought-over with you such useful observations and languages, you could not
have lighted upon a choicer piece of womankind for your wife; the earth could
not have afforded a Lady, that by her discretion and sweetness could better
quadrate with your disposition: as I heartily congratulat your happiness in this
particular, so I would desire you to know that I did no ill offices toward the
advancement of the work, upon occasion of some discourse with my Lord George of
Rutland not long before at Hambledon.

My thoughts are now puzzled about my voyage to the Baltie sea upon the Kings
service, otherwise I would have ventur'^ upon an Epithalamium, for there is
matter rich enough to work upon: and now that you have made an end of wooing, I
could wish you had made an end of wrangling, I mean of lawing, specially with
your mother, who has such resolutions where she once takes: law is not only a
pickpurse, but a Purgatory; you know the saying they have in France, les
plaideurs sont les oyseaux, le palais le Champ. les Iuges les rets, les
Advocats les Rats, les procureurs les souris del' estat, The poor clients are
the birds, Westminster Hall the field, the Judge the net, the Lawyers the rats,
the Atturnies the mice of the common wealth; I believe this saying was spoken
by an angry clyent; for my part I like his resolution who said he would never
use Lawyer nor Physician but upon urgent necessity: I will conclude with this
rhyme

Puuvre playdeur,
jay gran pity de ta douleur.
Westmin. 1 May, 1629. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.

LXXV. To Mr. R. K.
Dear Sir,
YOu and I are upon a journey, though bound for several places, I for
Hamborough, you for your last home, as I understand by Doctor Baskervill, who
tells me much to my grief, that this hectieall disease will not suffer you to
be long among us: I know by some experiments which I have had of you, you have
such a noble soul within you, that will not be daunted by those natural
apprehensions which death does usually carry along with it among vulgar
spirits: I do not think that you fear death as much now (though it be to some)
(...), as you did to go into the dark when you were a child; you have had a fair
time to prepare your self, God give you a boon voyage to the haven you are
bound for (which I doubt not will be heaven) and me the grace to follow, when I
have passed the boisterous sea, and swelling billows of this tumultuary life,
wherein I have already shot diverse dangerous gulfs, passed over some quick sands,
rocks, and sundry ill favored reaches, while others sail in the sleeve of
fortune; you and I have eaten a great deal of salt together, and spent much oil
in the communication of our studies by literal correspondence and otherwise
both in verse and prose, therefore I will take my last leave of you now in these
few stanza's.

1.
Weak crazy Mortal, why do fear
To leave this earthly Hemisphear?
Where all delights away do pass,
Like thy effigies in a glass;
Each thing beneath the Moon is frail and sickle,
Death sweeps away what time cuts with his sickle,
2.
This life, at best, is but an Inn,
And we the passengers, wherein
The cloth is laid to some, before
They peep out of dame nature's door,
And warm lodgings left, Others there are
Must trudg to find a room, and shift for fare?
3.
This life's, at longest, but one day,
He who in youth posts hence away,
Leave's us i'^h Morn, He who has run
His race till Manhood, part's al noon,
And who at seventy odd forsakes this light,
He may be said to take his leave at night.
4.
One past makes up the Prince and peasan,
Though one eat roots, the other seasan,
They nothing differ in the stuff,
But both extinguish like a snuff;
Why then fond man should thy soul take dismay,
To sally out of these gross walls of clay?
And now my dear friend adieu, and live eternally in that world o^ endless bliss
where you shall have knowledge as well as all things else commensurat to your
desires; where you shall clearly see the real causes, and perfect truth of what
we argue with that incertitude, and beat our brains about here below, yet
though you be gone hence, you shall never die in the memory of

Westmi. 15 Aug. 1630. Your J. H.

LXXVI. To Sir R. Gr. Knight and Bar.
Noble Sir,
I Had yours upon Maunday Thursday late, and the reason that I suspended my
answer till now, was, that the season engaged me to sequester my thoughts from
my wonted negotiations to contemplat the great work of man's Redemption, so
great, that were it cast in counterballance with his creation, it would
out-poyze it far, I summond all my intellectuals to meditat upon those
passions, upon those pangs, upon that despicable and most dolorous death, upon
that cross whereon my Savior suffered, which was the first Christian altar that
ever was, and I doubt that he will never have benefit of the sacrifice who
hates the harmeles resemblance of the altar whereon it was offered; I applied my
memory to fasten upon it, my understanding to comprehend it, my will to embrace
it; from these three faculties, me thought I found by the mediation of the
fancy some beams of love gently gliding down from the head to the heart, and
inflaming all my affections* If the human soul had far more powers than the
Philosophers afford her, if she had as many faculties within the head as there
be hairs without, the speculation of this mystery would find work enough for
them all; Truly the more I scrue up my spirits to reach it, the more I am
swallowed in a gulf of admiration, and of a thousand imperfect notions, which
makes me ever and anon to quarrel my soul that she cannot lay hold on her
Savior, much more my heart, that my purest affections cannot hug him as much
as I would.

They have a custom beyond the Seas (and I could wish it were the worst custom
they had) that during the passion week diverse of their greatest Princes, and
Ladies will betake themselves to some covent or reclus'd house to wean
themselves from all worldly encombrances, and convers only with heaven, with
performance of some kind of penances all the week long; A worthy Gentleman that
came lately from Italy, told me that the Count of Byren now Marshall of France,
having bin long persecuted by Cardinal Richelieu, put himself so into a
Monastery, and the next day news was brought him of the Cardinals death, which
I believe made him spend the rest of the week with the more devotion in that
way. France braggs that our Savior had his face turned toward her when he was
upon the Cross, there is more cause to think that it was toward this Island, in
regard the rays of Christianity first reverberated upon her, her King being
Christian 400 years before him of France, (as all Historians concur)
notwithstanding that he arrogates to himself the title of the first Son of the
Church.

Let this serve for part of my Apology: The day following, my Savior being in
the grave, I had no list to look much abroad, but continued my retirednes; there
was another reason also why, because I intended to take the holy Sacrament the
Sunday ensuing, which is an act of the greatest consolation, and consequence
that possibly a Christian can be capable of; it imports him so much that he is
made or marred by it, it tends to his damnation, or salvation, to help him up
to heaven, or tumble him down headlong to hell: Therefore it behooves a man to
prepare and recollect himself, to winnow his thoughts from the chaff and tares
of the world beforehand; This then took up a good part of that day to provide
my self a wedding garment, that I might be a fit guest at so precious a
banquet, so precious, that manna and angels food are but course viands in
comparison of it.

I hope that this excuse will be of such validity that it may procure my pardon
for not corresponding with you this last week. I am now as freely as formerly*

Fleet, 30. April, 1647. Your most ready and humble Servitor, J. H.

LXXVII. To Mr. R. Howard.
SIR,
There is a saying that carries with it a great deal of caution, from him whom
I trust God defend me, for from him whom I trust not, I will defend my self.
There be sundry sorts of musts, but that of a secret is one of the greatest; I
trusted T. P. with a weighty one, conjuring him that it should not take air and
go abroad, which was not don according to the rules and religion of friendship,
but it went out of him the very next day; Though the inconvenience may be mine,
yet the reproach is his, nor would I exchange my damage for his disgrace; I
would wish you take heed of him, for he is such as the Comic Poet speaks of
plenus rimarum, he is full of Chinks, he can hold nothing; you know a secret is
too much for one, too little for three, and enough for two, but Tom must be
none of those two, unless there were a trick to sodder up his mouth: If he had
committed a secret to me, and injoynd me silence, and I had promised it, though
I had bin shut up in Perillus brazen Bull, I should not have bellowed it out; I
find it now true that he who discovers his secrets to another, sells him his
Liberty, and becoms his slave: well, I shall be warier hereafter, and learn
more wit, In the interim the best satisfaction I can give my self is to expunge
him quite ex alb^ amicorum, to raze him out of the catalogue of my friends,
(though I cannot of my acquaintance) where your name is inserted in great golden
Characters; I will endeavor to lose the memory of him, and that my thoughts
may never run more upon the fashion of his face, which you know he has no
cause to brag of, I hate such blat^roons

Odi illos seu claustra Erebi* -- I thought good to give you this little mot of
advice, because the times are ticklish, of committing secrets to any; though
not to

From the Fleet, 14. Febr. 1647. Your most affectionat friend to serve you, J. H.

LXVIII. To my Hon. friend, Mr. E. P. at Paris.
SIR,
LEt me never sally hence, from among these discon^olat Walls, if the literal
correspondence you please to hold so punctually with me be not one of the
greatest solaces I have had in this sad condition; for I find so much salt,
such indearments and flourishes, such a gallantry and nea^nes in your lines,
that you may give the law of lettering to all the world: I had this week a twin
of yours, of the 10 and 15 current, I am sorry to hear of your achaques, and so
often indisposition there, it may be very well (as you say) that the air of
that dirty Town does not agree with you because you speak Spanish, which
language you know is used to be breathed out under a clearer clyme, I am sure
it agrees not with the sweet breezes of peace, for it is you there that would
keep poor Christendom in perpetual whirle-winds of war; but I fear, that while
France sets all wheels a going, and stirs all the Cacodaemons of hell to pull
down the house of Austria, she may chance at last to pull it upon her own
head: I am sorry to understand what they write from Venice this week, that there
is a discovery made in Italy, how France had a hand to bring in the Turk, to
invade the Territories of Saint Mark, and puzzle the peace of Italy, I want
faith to believe it yet, nor can I entertain in my breast any such conceit of
the most Christian King, and first Son of the Church, as he terms himself: yet
I pray in your next to pull this thorn out of my thoughts, and tell me whether
one may give any credit to this report.

We are now ^ot-free as touching the Northern Army, for our dear Brethren have
trussed up their Baggage, and put the Tw^d 'twixt us and them once again, deer
indeed, for they have cost us first and last, above nineteen hundred thousand
pound Sterling, which amounts to near upon eight Millions of Crowns with you
there: yet if reports be true, they left behind them more than they lost, if
you go to number of men, which will be a brave race of mestisos hereafter, who
may chance meet their Fathers in the field, and kill them unwittingly; he will
be a wise child that knows his right father* Here we are like to have four and
twenty Seas emptied shortly, and some do hope to find abundance of Tresure in
the bottom of them, as no doubt they will, but many doubt that it will prove
but ^um Tolosanum to the finders, God grant that from Aereans we turn not to
be Arrians: The Earl of Strafford was accounted by his very enemies to have an
extraordinary talent of judgment and parts, (though they say he wanted
moderation) and one of the prime Precepts he left his Son upon the Scaffold
was, that he should not ^ddle with Church Lands, for they would prove a Canker
to his estate: Here are started up some great knowing men lately that can show
the very track by which our Savior went to Hell, they will tell you* precisely
whose names are written in the Book of Life, whose no^* God deliver us from
spiritual pride, which of all sorts is the most dangerous: Here are also
notable Sta^-gazers, who obtrude to the world such confident bold Predictions,
and are so familiar with heavenly bodies, that P^elomy, and Tychobrach were but
ninnies to them; we have likewise multitudes of witches among us, for in Essex
and Suffolk there were above two hundred indicted within these two years, and
above the one half of them executed, more I may well say, than ever this Island
bred since the Creation, I speak it with horror, God guard us from the Devil,
for I think he was never so busy upon any part of the earth that was
enlightened whith the beams of Christianity, nor do I wonder at it, for there is
never a Cross left to fright him away: Edinburgh I hear is fallen into a
rel^pse of the Plague, the last they had raged so violently, that the fortieth
man and woman lives not of those that dwelt there four years since, but it is
all peepled with new faces; Don and Hans, I hear are absolutely accorded, nor
do I believe that all the Artificers of policy that you use there can hinder
the peace, though they may puzzle it for a while, if it be so, the peeple which
button their doublets upward will be bettor able to deal with you there.

Much notice is taken that you go on there too fast in your acquests, and now
that the Eagles wings are pretty well clyp'd, it is time to look that your
^ower-de-l^e grow not too rank, and spread too wide. Whereas you desire to know
how it fares with your Ma^er, I must tell you, that like the glorious Sun, he
is still in his own Orb, though clowded for a time that he cannot shoot the
beams of Majesty with that luster he was wont to do: never did Cavalier woo
fair Lady as he wooes the Parliament to a peace, it is much the Head should so
stoop to the Members.

Farewell my noble friend, cheer up, and reserve your self for bet^r days; take
our Royal Master for your pattern, who for his longanimity, patience, courage
and constancy is admired of all the world, and in a passive way of fortitude
has out-gon all the nine Worthies. If the Cedar be so weather-beaten, we poor
shrubs must not murmr to bear part of the storm; I have had my share, and I
know you want not yours; The Stars may change their Aspects, and we may live to
see the Sun again in his full Meridian; in the in^erim com what com will, I am

Fleet, 3 Feb. 1646. Entirely yours, J. H.

LXXIX. To Sir K. D. at Rome.
SIR,
THough you know well, that in the carriage and course of my rambling life, I
had occasion to be as the Dutchman says, a Landloper, and to see much of the
world abroad, yet me thinks, I have traveled more since I have been immured
and martyrd 'twixt these walls than ever I did before, for I have traveled the
Isle of Man, I mean this little world, which I have carried about me and within
me so many years, for as the wisest of Pagan Philosophers said, that the
greatest learning was the knowledge of ones self, to be his own Geometrician: If
one do so, he need not gad abroad to see new fashions, he shall find enough at
home, he shall hourly meet with new fancies, new humors, new passions within
doors.

This traveling over of ones self, is one of the paths that leads a man to
Paradise; it is true, that it is a dirty and a dangerous one, for it is thick
set with extravagant desires,' irregular affections and concupiscences, which
are but od Comerades, and often times do^ly in ambush to cut our throats; there
are also some melancholy companions in the way, which are our thoughts, but they
turn many times to be good fellows, and the best company; which makes me, that
among these disconsolat walls, I am never less alone, than when I am alone, I
am often times sole, but seldom solitary: some there are, who are over-pestered
with these companions, and have too much mind for their bodies, but I am none
of those.

There have been (since you shook hands with England) many strange things
happened here, which posterity must have a strong faith to believe, but for my
part I wonder not at any thing, I have seen such monstrous things: you know
there is nothing that can be casual, there is no success good or bad, but is
contingent to man, sometimes or other, nor are there any contingencies present or
future, but they have their parallels from times passed: ^ot the great Wheel of
Fortune, upon whose Rim (as the twelve signs upon the Zodiac) all Worldly
chances are embossed, turns round perpetually, and the Spokes of that Wheel,
which point at all human Actions, return exactly to the same place after such a
time of revolution; which makes me little marvail at any of the strange
traverses of these distracted times, in regard there has been the like, or such
like formerly; if the Liturgy is now suppressed, the Missall and Roman Breviary
was used so a hundred years since; If Crosses, Church-Windows, Organs and Fonts
are now battered down, I little wonder at it, for Chapells, Monasteries,
Hermitages, Nunneries, and other Religious Houses, were used so in the time of
old King Harry; If Bishops and Deans are now in danger to be demolished, I
little wonder at it, for Abbots, Priors, and the Pope himself had that fortune
here an age since: That our King is reduced to this pass, I do not much wonder
at it, for the first time I traveled France, Iewis the thirteenth (afterward
a most triumphant King as ever that Country had) in a dangerous civil War was
brought to such streights, for he was brought to dispense with part of his
Coronation Oath, to remove from his Court of Justice, from the Counsel Table,
from his very Bedchamber his greatest Favourtis; He was driven to be content
to pay the expense of the War, to reward those that took Arms against him, and
publish a Declaration that the ground of their quarrel was good, which was the
^ame in effect with ours, viz. A discontinuance of the Assembly of the three
Estates, and that Spanish Counsels did praedominat in France.

You know, better than I, that all events, good or bad, com from the
all-disposing high Deity of Heaven, if good, he produces them, if bad, he
permits them; He is the Pilot that sits at the stern* and steers the great
Vessel of the World, and we must not presume to direct him in his course, for
he understands the use of the Compass better than we; He commands also the
winds and the weather, and after a storm he never fails to send us a calm, and
to recompense ill times with better, if we can live to see them, which I pray
you may do, whatsoever becomes of

Your still most faithful humble Servitor, J. H.
From the Fleet, Land. 3 Mar. 1646.
LXXX. To Sir K. D. at his house in Saint Martins Lane.
SIR,
THat Poem which you pleased to approve of so highly in a Manuscript, is now
manumitted, and made free denizen of the World; it has gone from my Study to
the Stall, from the Pen to the Press, and I send one of the maiden Copies
heerwith to attend you; 'Twas your judgment, which all the world holds to be
sound and sterling, induced me heerunto, therefore, if there be any, you are to
bear your part of the blame.

Holborn, 3 Ian. 1641. Your most entirely devoted Servitor, J. H,

THE VOTE, OR, A POEM ROYAL, Presented To His MAJESTY for a New-yeers-Gift, by
way of Discourse 'twixt the Poet and his Muse. Calendis Ianuarii 1641.
POEMA (...). THe world's bright Ey, Times measurer, begun
Through watery Capricorn his course to run,
Old Ianus hastened on, his Temples bound
With Ivy, his gray hairs with Holly crowned;
When in a serious quest my thoughts did muse
What gift, as best becoming, I should choose,
To Britains Monarch (my dread Sovereign) bring,
Which might supply a New Years offering.
^ rummag'd all my stores, and searched my cells,
Where naught appeared, God wot, but Bagatells:
No far fetched Indian Gem cut out of Rock,
Or fished in shells were trusted under lock,
No piece which (...) strong fancy hit,
Or Titians Pensill, or rare Hylliards wit,
No Ermins, or black Sables, no such skins,
As the grim Tartar hunts or takes in gins;
No Medalls, or rich stuff of Tyrian Die,
No costly Bowls of frosted Argentry,
No curious Land-skip, or some Marble piece
Dug up in Delphos, or elsewhere in Greece;
No Rom^n Perfumes, Buffs or Cordovans
Made drunk with Amber, by Moreno's hands,
No Arras or rich Carpets freighted over
The surging Seas from Asia's doubtful shore,
No Lions Cub or Beast of strange Aspect,
Which in Numidia's fiery womb had slept,
No old Toledo Blades, or Damaskins,
No Pistolls, or some rare-spring Carrabins,
No Spanish Ginet, or choice Stallion sent
From Naples or hot Africs Continent:
In fine, I nothing found I could descry
Worthy the hands of Caesar or his eye.
My wits were at a stand, when, lo, my Muse
(None of the Quire, but such as they do use
For Laundresses or Handmaids of mean rank
I knew sometimes on P^ and Isis bank)
Did softly buz, --

Muse. -- Then let me something bring,
May hansell the New-year to CHARLES my King*
May usher in bifronted Ianus --

Poet. Thou fond foolhardy Muse, thou silly thing,
Which amongst the shrubs and reeds do use to sing,
Dare thou perk up, and the tall Cedar clime*
And venture on a King with gingling rhyme?
Though all thy words were Pearls, thy letters gold,
And cut in Rubies, or c^st in a mould
Of Diamonds, yet still thy Lines would be
Too mean a gift for such a Majesty.

Muse. I Will try, and hope to pass without disdain,
In New-yeers gifts the mind stands for the main.
The Sophy, finding 'twas well meant, did daign
Few drops of running-water from a Swain;
Then sure, 'twill please my Liege, if I him bring,
Some gentle drops from the Castalian Spring;
Though Rarities I want of such account,
Yet have I something on the forked mount.
It Is not the first, or third access I made
To Caesar's feet, and thence departed glad.
^or as the Sun with his male heat does render
Nile's muddy slime fruitful, and apt t'engender,
And daily to produce new kind of creatures
Of various shapes and thousand differing features,
So is my fancy quickened by the glance
Of His benign aspect and countenance,
It makes me pregnant and to super^aete,
Such is the vigor of His beams and heat.
Once in a Vocal Forest I did sing,
And made the Oak to stand for CHARLES my King,
The best of Trees, whereof (it is no vant)
The greatest Schools of Europe sing and chant:
There you shall also find Dame Arhetine id est virtuous. Anagram of Henrieta.
ARHETINE,
Great Henry's Daughter, and great Britains Queen,
Her name engraven in a Laurel Tree,
And so transmitted to Eternity.
For now I hear that Grove speaks besides mine,
The Language of the Loire, the Po and Rhine.
(And to my Prince (my sweet Black Prince) of late,
I did a youthful subject dedicate.)
Nor do I doubt but that in time my Tre^s
Will yield me fruit to pay Apollo's Fees,
To offer up whole Hecatom^s of praise
To Caes^r, ^f on them he cast his rays,
And if my Lamp have oil, I may compile
The Modern Annalls of great Albion's Isle
To vindicate the truth of CHARLES his reign,
From scribbling Pamphletors who Story stain
With loose imperfect passages, and thrust
Lame things upon the world, t'ane up in trust.
I have had audience (in another strain)
Of Europs greatest Kings, when German main
And the Cantabrian waves I crossed, I drank
Of Tagus, Seine, and sat at Tybers bank,
Through Scylla and Charybdis I have steered,
Where restles Aeina belching flames appeared,
By Greece, once Palla's Garden, then I passed
Now all o're-spread with ignorance and wast.
Nor has fair Europ her va^t bounds throughout,
An Academe of note I found not out.
But now I hope in a successful pro^e,
The Fates have fixed me on sweet Englands shore,
And by these various wanderings (...) I found,
Earth is our com^n Mother, every ground
Man be one's Country, for by birth each man
Is (...) this world a Cosmopolitan,
A freeborn Bu^gess, and receives thereby
H^ (...) from Nativety:
Nor is this lower world but a huge Inn,
And men the rambling p^ssengers, wherein
S^m do warm lodgings find, and that as soon
As out of natures ^lossets they see noon,
An^ find the Table ready laid; but some
Must for their commons trot and trudg for room:
With easy pace some climb Promotions Hill,
Some in the Dale, do what they can, stick still;
Some through false glasses Fortune smiling spy,
Who still keeps off, though she appears hard by:
Some like the Ostrich with their wings do flutter,
But cannot fly or soar above the gutter.
Some quickly fetch, and double Good-Hopes Cape,
Some never can do it, though the same course they shape*
So that poor mortals are so many balls
Tossed some o'r line, some under fortun's walls.
And it is Heavens high pleasure Man should ly
Obnoxious to this partiality,
That by industrious ways he should contend,
Nature's short pittance to improve and men^;
Now, Industry never failed, at last to advance
Her patient sons above the reach of Chance.

Poet. But whither rov'st thou thus --?
Well; since I see thou art so strongly bent,
And of a gracious look so confident,
Go, and throw down thy self at Caesar's f^et,
And in thy best attire thy Sovereign greet.
Go, an auspicious and most blissefully year
W^sh Him, as ever sh n'd o'r this Hemisphear,
Good may the Entrance, better the middle be,
And the Conclusion best of all the three;
Of joy ungrudg'd may each day be a debtor,
And evry morn still usher in a better,
May the soft gliding Nones and every I Would,
With all the Calends still some good betide,
May Cynthia with kind looks and (...) rays,
One clear his nights, the other gild his days.
Free limbs, unp^ysic'd health, due appetite,
Which no sauce else but Hunger may excite,
Sound sleeps, green dreams be his, which represent
Symptoms of health, and the next days content;
Cheerful and vacant thoughts, not always bound
To counsel, or in deep Idea's drowned:
(Though such late traverses, and tumults might
Turn to a lump of care, the airiest wight)
And since while fragile flesh does us array,
The humors still are combating for sway,
(Which were they free of this reluctancie
And counterpois'd, Man would immortal be)
May sanguin o'r the rest predominate
In Him, and their malignant fiux abate.
May his great Queen, in whose Imperious ey
Reigns such a world of winning Majesty,
Like the rich Olive or Falernian Vine
Swell with more gems of Cians masculine;
And as her fruit sprung from the Rose and Luce,
(The best of stems Earth yet did ever produce)
Is tied already by a Sanguin lace
To all the Kings of Europe's highborn race,
So may they shoot their youthful branches o'r
The surging seas, and graff with every Shore.
May home-commerce and trade increase from far,
That both the Indies meet within his bars,
And bring in Mounts of Coin His Mints to feed,
And Banquers (trafics chief suporters) breed,
Which may enrich his Kingdoms, Court and Town,
And ballast still the coffers of the Crown,
For Kingdoms are as ships, the Prince his chests
The ballast, which if empty, when distres't
With storms, their holds are lightly trimmed, the keel
Can run no steedy course, but toss and reel;
May his Imperial chamber always ply
To his desires her wealth to multiply,
That she may prize his Royal favor more
Than all the wares fetched from the great Mogor,
May the The Parliament.
Grand Senate, with the Subjects right
Put in the Counter-scale the Regal might
The flowrs of the Crown, that they may prop each other,
And like the Grecians twin, live, love together.
For the chief glory of a people is,
The power of their King, as theirs is His;
May He be still, within himself at home,
That no just passion make the reason rome,
Yet passions have their turns to rouse the Soul,
And stir her slumbring spirits, not control,
For as the Ocean besides ebb and flood
( Which Hippocrates.
Nature's greatest Clerk never understood)
^s not for sail, if an impregning wind
Fill not the flagging canvas, so a mind
Too calm is not for Action, if desire
Heats not it self at passion's quickening fire,
For Nature is allowed sometimes to muster
Her passions so they only blow, not bluster.
May Justice still in her true scales appear,
And honor fixed in no unworthy sphere,
Unto whose palace all access should have
Through virtues Temple, not through Plutos Cave.
May his true subjects hearts be his chief Fort,
Their purse his tresure and their Love his Port,
Their prayers as sweet Incense, to draw down
Myriads of blessings on his Queen and Crown.
And now that his glad presence, did assuage,
That fearful tempest in the North did rage,
May those frog vapors in the Irish sky,
Be scattered by the beams of Majesty,
That the Hybernian lyre give such a sound,
May on our coasts with joyful Echoes bound.
And when this fatal planet leaves to lowr,
Which too too long on Monarchies does power
His direful influence, may Peace once more
Descend from Heaven on our tottering shore,
And ride in triumph both on land and main,
And with her milk white steeds draw Charles his wain,
That so, for those Saturnian times of old,
An Age of Pearl, may com in lieu of Gold.
Virtu still guide his course, and if there be
A thing as Fortune, Him accompany.
May no ill genius haunt him, but by's side,
The best protecting Angel ever bide.
May He go on to vindicate the right
Of holy things, and make the Temple bright,
To keep that Faith, that sacred Truth entire,
Which he received from King James.
Solomon his Sire.
And since we all must hence, by the Iron Decree
Stamped in the black Records of Destiny,
Late may his life, his Glory never wear out,
Till the great year of Plato wheel about.

So Prays The worst of Poets to The best of Princes, yet The most loyal of
His Votaries and Vassalls JAMES HOVVILL*

FINIS.
Additionall LETTERS Of a fresher Date, Never Published before, And Composed By
the same AUTHOR.

Vt clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus. LONDON, Printed by W. H. for
Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St,
Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of DORSET, etc.
My Lord,
THe two preceding Dedications being the one to a King, the other to a Prince,
I hope this Third (consisting all of new Matter) will be the more excusable
that I make to your Lpp; who, if there were a general Muster of Mankind, and
due regard had to Gallantry and worth, would appear like a King among Princes,
and a Prince among Peers. I humbly pray, that for want of a better thing to
comply with the Season, this may pass for a New Years gift, which I wish may
carry with it as many good Omens, as it does Orizons, that a thousand
benedictions may fall upon you, and your Noble Family this New year, and all
the years of your life, which I pray may be many, many, many, because I have
long since resolved to live and die,

My Lord, Your most humble and obedient faithful Servitr, JAMES HOVVEL.
Calendis Ian. 1650.
Additionall Letters Of a fresher Date.
I. To the R. H. Ed. Earl of Dorset, (Lo. Chamberlain of His Majesty's
Household, etc.) at Knowles.
My Lord,
HAving so advantageous a hand as Doctor S. Turner, I am bold to send your
Lordship a new Tract of French Philosophy, called L'usage de Passions, which is
cried up to be a choice piece; It is a Moral Discourse of the right use of
Passions, the Conduct whereof as it is the principal Employment of Virtu, so
the Conquest of them is the difficultst part of Va^or: To know one's self is
much, but to conquer one's self is more; We need not pick quarrels and seek
enemies without doors, we have too many Inmates at home to exercise our Prowess
upon, and there is no man let him have his humors never so well balanced, and
in subjection unto him, but like Muscovia wives, they will oftentimes insult,
unless they be checked, yet we should make them our Servants, not our Slaves.
Touching the occurrences of the times, since the King was snatched away from
the Parliament, the Army they say, use him with more civility and freedom, but
for the main work of restoring him he is yet, as one may say, but Tantaliz'd,
being brought often within the sight of London and so off again; there are hopes
that something will be don to his advantage speedily, because the Gregarian
Soldiers and gross of the Army is well-affected to him, though some of the
chiefest Commanders be still averss.

For foreign News, they say St. Mark bears up stoutly against Mahomet both by
land and sea: In Dalmatia he has of late shaken him by the Turban
ill-favoredly; I could heartily wish that our Army here were there to help the
Republic, and combat the Common enemy, for then one might be sure to dye in the
bed of Honor. The Commotions in Sicily are quashed, but those of Naples
increase, and it is like to be a more raging and voracious ^ire than Vesuvius,
or any of the sulphurious Mountains about her did ever belch out* The Catalan
and Portuguez bait the Spaniard on both sides, but the first has shrewder
teeth than the other, and the French and Hollander find him work in Flanders.
And now, my Lord, to take all Nations in a lump, I think God Almighty has a
quarrel lately with all Man* kind, and given the reins to the ill Spirit to
compass the whole earth, for within these twelve years there have the strangest
revolutions, and horridst things happened not only in Europe but all the world
over, that have befallen mankind, I dare boldly say, since Adam fell, in so
short a revolution of time: There is a kind of popular Planet reigns every
where: I will begin with the hottest parts, with Afric, where the Emperor of
Ethiopia (with two of his Sons) was encountered and killed in open field by the
Groom of his Camells and Dromedaries, who had leavied an Army our of the dreggs
of the peeple against him, and is like to hold that ancient Empire in Asia. The
Tartar broke over the four hundred mil'd wall, and rushed into the heart of
China, as far as Quinzay, and beleagerd the very Palace of the Emperor, who
rather than to become Captif to the base Tartar burnt his Castle, and did away
himself, his thirty wives and children. The great Turk has been lately
strangled in the Seraglio his own house: The Emperor of Moscovia going in a
solemn Procession upon the Sabbath day, the rabble broke in, knocked down, and
cut in pieces diverse of his chiefest Counselors, Favorits, and Officers before
his face, and dragging their bodies to the Marketplace, their heads were
chopp'd often, thrown into Vessels of hot water, and so set upon Poles to burn
more bright before the Court gate: In Naples a common frute^er has raised such
an Insurrection, that they say above 60M. have bin slain already upon the
streets of that City alone: Catalonia and Portingall have* quite revolted from
Spain. Your Lordship knows what knocks have been 'twixt the Pope and Parma; The
Pole and the Cosacks are hard at it; Venice wrastleth with the Turk, and is
like to lose her Maiden head unto him, unless other Christian Princes look to
it in time: and touching these three Kingdoms there is none more capable than
your Lordship to judge what monstrous things have happend; so that it seems the
whole earth is off the hinges: and (which is the more wonderful) all these
prodigious passages have fallen out in less than the compass of 12 years. But
now that all the world is together by the ears, the States of Holl* would be
quiet, for advice is com that the peace is concluded, and interchangably
ratified 'twixt them and Spain, but they defer the publishing of it yet, till
they have collected all the Contribution money for the Army: The Spaniard hopes
that one day this Peace may tend to his advantage more than all his Wars have
don these fourscore years, relying upon the old Prophecy,

Mart triumphabis Batavia, Pace peribis. The King of Denmark has buried
lately his eldest Son Christian, so that he has now but one living, viz.
Frederic, who is Archbishop of Breme, and is shortly to be King Elect.

My Lord, this Letter runs upon Universalls, because I know your Lordship has
a public great soul, and a spacious understanding, which comprehends the whole
world; so in a due posture of humility I kiss your hands, being,

My Lord, Your most obedient and most faithful Servitor, J. H.
From the Fleet, this 20 of Ian. 1646.
II. To Mr. En. P. at Paris.
SIR,
SInce we are both agred to truck Intelligence, and that you are contented to
barter French for English, I shall be careful to send you hence from time to
time the currentest and most staple stuff I can find, with weight and good
measure to boot; I know in that more subtle air of yours tinsell sometimes
passes for tissue, Venice ^eads for Perl, and Demicastors for Bevers; But I
know you have so discerning a judgment, that you will not suffer your self to
be so cheated, they must rise betimes that can put tricks upon you, and make
you take semblances for realities* probabilities for certainties, or spurious
for true things: To hold this litterall correspondence I desire but the parings
of your time, that you may have something to do, when you have nothing else to
do, while I make a business of it to be punctual in my answers to you: let our
Letters be as Eccho's, let them bound back and make mutual repereussions; I
know you that breath upon the Continent have cleerer echoes there, witness that
in the Twilleries, specially that at Charenton Bridge, which quavers and
renders the voice ten times when it is open weather, and it were a virtuous
curiosity to try it.

For news, the world is here turned upside down, and it has bin long a going
so, you know a good while since we have had leather Caps, and Bever shoos, but
now the Arms are com to be legs, for Bishops Laun-sleeves are worn for
Boot-hose tops; the wast is com to the knee, for the Points that were used to be
about the middle are now dangling there; Boots and Shoos are so long snouted
that one can hardly kneel in Gods House, where all Genuflexion and Postures of
devotion and decency are quite out of use: The Devil may walk freely up and
down the streets of London now, for there is not a Cross to fright him any
where, and it seems he was never so busy in any Country upon earth, for there
have been more witches Arraigned and Executed here lately than ever were in
this Island since the Creation.

I have no more to communicate unto you at this time, and this is too much
unless it were better; God Almighty send us patience, you in your Banishment,
me, in my Captivity, and give us Heaven for our last Country, where Desires
turn to Fruition, Doubts to Certitudes, and dark Thoughts to clear
Contemplations: Truly, my dear Don Antonio, as the times are, I take little
contentment to live among the Elements, and (were it my Makers pleasure) I could
willingly, had I quit scores with the World, make my last account with Nature,
and return this small skinfull of Bones to my common Mother; If I chance to do
so before you, I love you so entirely well that my Spirit shall visit you, to
bring you some tidings from the other World; and if you preceed me, I shall
expect the like from you, which you may do without affrighting me, for I know
your Spirit will be a bonus Genius. So desiringo know what is become of my
Manuscript, I kiss your hands, and rest most passionately

Your faithful Servitor, J. H.
The Fleet, 20 Febr. 1646.
III. To Master W. B.
SIR,
I Had yours of the last week, and by reason of some sudden encombrances I could
not correspond with you by that Carrier: As for your desire to know the
Pedigree and first rise of those we call Presbyterians, I find that your motion
has as much of Piety as Curiosity in it, but I must tell you it is a subject
fitter for a Treatise than a Letter, yet I will endeavor to satisfy you in some
part.

Touching the word (...) it is as ancient as Christianity it self, and every
Churchman completed in holy Orders was called Presbyter, as being the
chiefest name of the Function, and so it is used in all Churches both Eastern
and Occidentall to this day: We by contraction call him Priest, so that all
Bishops and Archbishops are Priests though not vice versa: These holy Titles
of Bishop and Priest are now grown odious among such poor S^iolists who scarce
know the Hoties of things, because they savor of Antiquity: Though their
Minister that officiats in their Church be the same thing as Priest, and their
superintendent the same thing as Bishop; but because they are lovers of
novelties, they change old Greek words for new Latin one's. The first broacher
of the Presbyterian Religion, and made it differ from that of Rome and Luther
was Calvin, who being once banished Geneva, was revoked, at which time he no
less petulantly than profanely applied to himself that Text of the Holy
Prophet which was meant of Christ, The Stone which the Builders refused is made
the head stone of the corner, etc. Thus Geneva Lake swallowed up the Episcopal
See, and Church Lands were made secular, which was the white they levelled at.
This Geneva Bird flew thence to France and hatched the Hugueno^s, which make
about the tenth part of that people; it took wing also to Bohemia and Germany
high and low, as the Palatinate, the land of Hesse, and the Con^ederat
Province^ of the States of Holland, whence it took flight to Scotland and
England; It took first footing in Scotland, when King James was a child in his
Cradle, but when he came to understand himself, and was manumitted from
Buchanan, he grew cold in it, and being com to England he utterly disclaimed
it, terming it in a public Speech of his to the Parliament a Sect rather than a
Religion: To this Sect may be imputed all the scissures that have happened in
Christianity, with most of the Wars that have lace^ated poor Europe ever since,
and it may be c^ll'd the source of the civil distractions that now afflict
this poor Island.

Thus have I endeavored to fulf^l your desires in part, I shall enlarge my
self further when I shall be made happy with your conversation he^r, till when,
and always, I rest

Yours most affectionatly to love and serve you, J. H.
From the Fleet, this 29 of Novem. 1647.
IV. To Sir J. S. Knight, at Rouer.
SIR,
OF all the blessings that ever dropped down from Heaven upon Man, that of his
Redemption may be called the Blessing-paramount; And of all those comforts, and
exercises of devotion which attend that blessing, the Eucharist or holy
Sacrament may claim the prime place; but as there is Devotion, so there is Danger
in it, and that in the highest degree, it is rank poison to some, though a most
sovereign cordial to others ad modum recipientis, as the Schoolmen say,
whether they take panem Dominum, as the Roman Catholic, or panem Domini, as the
Reformed Churches; The Be and the Spider suck honey and poison out of one
Flower: This, Sir, you have divinely expressed in the Poem you pleased to send
me upon this subject; and whereas you seem to woo my Muse to such a task,
something you may see she has don in pure obedience only to your commands.

Upon the Holy Sacrament.
1.
Hail Holy Sacrament,
The Worlds great Wonderment,
Mysterious Banquet, much more rare
Than Manna, or the Angels fare;
Each crumm, though Sinners on Thee feed,
Does Cleopatra's Perl exceed:
Oh how my soul does hunger, thirst, and pine
After these Cates so precious, so divine.
2.
She need not bring her stool
As sone unbidden fool,
The Master of this heavenly Feast
Invites and woos her for his Guest,
Though deaf and lame, forlorn and blind,
Yet welcome here she is sure to find,
So that she bring a Vestment for the day,
And her old tatterd rags throw quite away.
3.
This is Bethsaida's Pool
That can both cleanse and cool
Poor leprous and d^seased souls,
An Angel here keeps and co^trouls,
Descending gently from the Heavens above
To stir the Waters, may He also move
My mind, and rockie heart so strike and rend,
That tears may thence gush out with them to blend.
This Morning Fancy drew on another toward the Evening as follows.

As to the Pole the Lilly bends
In a Sea-compas, and still tends
By a Magnetic Mystery,
Unto the Artic point in sky,
Whereby the wandering Piloteer
His course in gloomy nights does steer*
So the small Needle of my heart
Mov's to her Maker, who does dart
Atoms of love, and so attracks
All my Affections which like Sparks
Fly up, and guide my soul by this
To the true center of her bliss.
As one Taper lightneth another, so were my spirits enlightened and heated by
your late Meditations in this kind, and well fa^e your soul with all her
faculties for them, I find you have a great care of her, and of the main
chance, Prae quo quisquiliae caetera. You shall hear further from me within a
few days, in the interim be pleased to reserve still in your thoughts some
little room for

Your most entirely affectionat Servitor, J. H.
From the Fleet, 10 of December, 1647.
V. To Mr. T. W. at P. Castle.
My precious Tom,
HE is the happy man who can square his mind to his means, and fit his fancy
to his ^ortune; He who has a competency (...) live in the port of a gentleman,
and as he is free from being a (...) Constable, so he cares not for being a
Justice of Peace or (...); He who is before hand with the world, and when he
^oms to London can whet his knife at the Counter gate, and needs ^ot trudg
either to a Lawyers st^dy or Scriveners shop to pay fee (...) squeez was. It Is
conceit chiefly that gives contentment, and (...) is happy who thinks himself
so in any condition though he have (...) enough to keep the Wolf from the door,
Opinion is that great ^ady which sways the world, and according to the
impressions (...) makes in the mind renders one contented or discontented. Now
touching opinion, so various are the intellectualls of human ^reatures, that
one can hardly find out two who jump pat in ^ne: Witness that Monster in
Scotland in James the 4ths reign, ^ith two heads one opposite to the other, and
having but one bulk (...) body throughout, these two heads would often fall
into alter^ations pro and con one with the other, and seldom were they of one
opinion, but they would knock one against the other in eager disputes, which
shows that the judgment is seated in the animal parts, not in the vital
which are lodged in the heart.

We are still in a turbulent sea of distractions, nor as far as I see is there
yet any sight of shore. M. T. M. has had a great loss at sea lately which I
fear will light heavily upon him; when I consider his case, I may say that as
the Philosopher made a question whether the Marine^ be to be ranked among the
number of the living or dead (being but four inches distant from drowning, only
the thicknes of a plank) so it is a doubt whether the Merchant Adventurer be to
be numbered twixt the rich or the poor, his estate being in the mercy of that
devouring element the Sea, which has so good a stomach that he seldom casts up
what he has once swallowed. This City has bred of late years men of monstrous
strange opinions, that, as all other rich places besides, she may be compared
to a fat cheese which is most subject to engender (...) gots. God amend all,
and me first, who am

Fleet, this St. Tho. day, Yours most faithfully to serve you, J. H.

VI. To Mr. W: Blois.
My worthy esteemed Nephew,
I Received th^se rich nuptial favors you appointed me for hands and hat,
which I wear with very much contentment an^ respect, most heartily wishing that
this late double condition m^ multiply new blessings upon you, that it may
usher in fair and go^den days, according to the color and substance of your
brida^ riband, that those days may be perfumed with delight and ple^sure, as
the rich sented gloves I wear for your sake; May suc^ benedictions attend you
both, as the Epithalamiums of Stell^ i^ Statius, and Iulia in Catullus speak
of; I hope also to be marrie^ shortly to a lady whom I have wooed above these
five years, but ^ have found her ^oy and dainty hitherto, yet I am now like
(...) get her good will in part, I mean the lady liberty.

When you see my N. Brownrigg, I pray tell him that I did not think Suffolk
waters had such a lethaean quality in them as to cause such an amnestia in him
of his friends here upon the Thames among whom for reality and seriousnes I may
march among the foremost, but I impute it to some new task that his Muse might
happily impose upon him, which has engrossed all his speculations; I pray
present my cordial kind respects unto him.

So praying that a thousand blisses may attend this confarreation, I rest my
dear Nephew

From the Fleet this 20 of March, 1647. Yours most affectionately to love and
serve you, J. H.

VII. To Henry Hopkins Esquire
^IR,
TO usher in again old Ianus, I send you a parcel of Indian perfume, which the
Spaniard calls the Holy ^erb in regard ^ the various virtues it has, but we
call it Tobacco; I will not ^y it grew under the King of Spains window, but I
am told it ^as gathered near his Gold-mines of Potosi, (where they report that
in some places there is more of that oar than earth) therefore it ^ust needs be
precious stuff: If moderately and seasonably ta^en (as I find you always do)
it is good for many things; it helps dige^ion taken a while after meat, it makes
one void ^heum, break ^ind, and it keeps the body open; A leaf or two being
steept ore-nigh^ ^n a little white wine is a vomit that never fails in its
operation: ^t is a good companion to one that converseth with dead ^en, for ^f
one has bin poring long upon a book, or is toild with the pen, and stupefied
with study, it quickneth him, and dispels those clouds that usually oreset the
brain. The smoke of it is one of the wholesomest sents that is against all
contagious air^, for it oremasters all other smells as King James they say
found true, when being once a hunting a shower of rain drove him into a pigstie
for shelter, where he caused a pipe full to be taken of purpose; It cannot
endure a Spider or a flea with such like vermin, and if your Hawk be troubled
with any such, being blown into his feathers it frees him; It is good to
fortify and preserve the fight, the smoke being let in round about the balls
of the eyes once a week, and frees them from all ^heums, driving them back by
way of repercussion; being taken backward it is excellent good against the
cholique, and taken into the stomach 'twill heac and cleanse it; for I could
instance in a great Lord (my Lord of Sunderland President of York) who told me
that he taking it downward into his stomach, it made him cast up an impostume,
bag and all, which had bin a long time engendring out of a bruise he had
received at football, and so preserved his life for many years. Now to descend
from the substance and the smoke to the ashes, it is well known that the
medicinal virtues thereof are very many, but they are so common that I will
spare the inserting of them here: But if one would try a pretty conclusion how
much smoke there is in a pound of Tobacco, the ashes will tell him* for let a
pound be exactly weighed and the ashes kept charily and weighed afterward,
what wants (...) a pound weight in the ashes cannot be denied to have bin smoke
which evaporated into air; I have bin told that Sir Walter Rawleih won a wager
of Queen Elizabeth upon this nicity.

The Spaniards and Irish take it most in powder or smutchin and it mightily
refreshes the brain, and I believe there is as much taken this way in Ireland,
as there is in pipes in England; one shall commonly see the serving maid upon
the washing block, and the Swain upon the plowshare when they are tired with
labor* take out their boxes of smutchin and draw it into their nostrills with
a quill, and it will beget new spirits in them with a fresh vigou^ to fall to
their work again. In Barbary and other parts of Africa it is wonderful what a
small pill of Tobacco will do; for those who use to ride post through the sandy
deserts, where they meet not with any thing that is potable or edible sometimes
three days together, they use to carry small balls or pills of Tobacco which
being put under the tongue, it affords them a perpetual moisture, and takes off
the edg of the appetit for some days.

If you desire to read with pleasure all the virtues of this modern Herb, you
must read Doctor Thoriu's paetologie, an accurat piece couc^d in a strenuous
^reroic verse full of matter, and continuing its strength from first to last;
Insomuch that for the bigness it may be compared to any piece of antiquity, and
in my opinion is beyond (...), or (...).

So I conclude these rambling notions, presuming you will accept this small
argument of my great respects unto you; If you want paper to light your pipe
this letter may serve the turn, and if it be true what the Poets frequently
sing, that affection is fire, you shall need no other than the clear flames of
the Donor's love to make ignition, which is comprehended in this Distic.

Ignis Amor si sit, Tobaccum accendere nostrum,
Nulla petenda tibi fix nisi Dantis Amor.
If Love be fire, to light this Indian weed,
The Donor's Love of fire may stand in steed.
So I wish you as to my self amost happy new year; may the beginning be good,
the middle better, and the end best of all.

1 January: 1646. Your most faithful and truly affectionat servant, J. H.

VIII. To the right Honble my Lo. of D.
My Lord,
THe subject of this letter may peradventure seem a Paradox to some, but not, I
know, to your Lordship when you have pleased to weigh well the reasons.
Learning is a thing that has bin much tried up, and coveted in all ages,
specially in this last century of years, by peeple of all sorts though never so
mean, and mechanical; every man strains his fortunes to keep his children at
School, the Cobbler will clout it till midnight, the Porter will carry burdens
till his bones crack again, the Ploughman will pinch both back and belly to
give his son learning; and I find that this ambition reigns no where so much as
in this Island. But under favor, this word learning is taken in a narrower
sense among us, than among other nations, we seem to restrain it only to the
Book, whereas, indeed, any artisan whatsoever if he know the secret and mystery
of his trade may be called a learned man; A good Mason, a good Shoemaker that
can manage Saint Crispins lance handsomely, a skillfull Yeoman, a good
Shipwright, etc. may be all called learned men, and indeed the usefullest sort
of learned men, for without the two first, we might go barefoot, and ly abroad
as beasts having no other canopy than the wild air, and without the two last we
might starve for bread, have no commerce with other nations, or ever be able to
tread upon a Continent: these with such like dextrous A^tisans may be termed
learned men, and the more behoovefull for the subsistence of a Country, than
those Polymathists, that stand poring all day in a corner upon a moth-eaten
Author, and converse only with dead men; The Chinese (who are the next
neighbors to the rising sun on this part of the hemisphere, and consequently
the acutest) have a wholesome piece of policy, that the son is always of the
fathers trade, and it is all the learning he aims at, which makes them
admirable artisans, for besides the dextrou^nes and propensity of the child,
being descended lineally from (...) many of the same trade, the father is more
careful to instruct him and to discover unto him all the mystery thereof; this
general^ custom or law, keeps their heads from running at random after book
learning and other vocations: I have read a tale of R^ Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln, that being com to his greatness he had a brother who was a husbandman,
and expected great matters from him in poinc of preferment, but the Bishop told
him, that i^ he wanted money to mend his plow or his Cart, or to buy tacklings
for his horses, with other things belonging to his husbandry, he should not
want what was fitting, but he wished him to aim no higher, for a husbandman he
found him, and a husbandman he would leav^ him.

The extravagant humor of our Country is not to be altogether commended, that
all men should aspire to bocke learning: There is not a simpler animal, and a
more superfluous member of a state, than a mere Scholar, than a only self
pleasing student, he i^ -- Tellur is inutile pondus.

The Goths forbore to destroy the libraries of the Greeks and Italians, because
books should keep them still soft, simple, or too cautious in warlike affairs.
Archymedes though an excellent Engineer when Syracusa was lost, was found at
his book in his study intoxicated with speculations; who would not have thought
another great learned Philosopher to be a fool or frantic, when being in a bath
he leapd out naked among the peeple and cried I have found it, I have found it,
having hit then upon an extraordinary conclusion in Geometry? There is a famous
tale of Thomas Aquinas, the Angelical Doctor, and of Bonadventure the
Seraphicall Doctor, of whom Alex. Hales (our Countreyman and his Master)
reports whether it appeard not in him that Adam had sinned: Both these great
Clerks being invited to dinner by the French King of purpose to observe their
humors, and being brought to the room where the table was laid, the first fell
a eating of bread as hard as he could drive, at last, breaking out of a brown
study he eryed out conclusum est contra Manichaeos; The other fell a gazing
upon the Queen, and the King asking him how he liked her, he answered, on Sir,
if an earthly Queen be so beautiful, what shall we think of the Queen of
Heaven; The later was the better Courtier of the two. Hence we may infer, that
your mere bookmen, your deep Clerks, whom we call the only learned men, are not
always the civillest or the best moral men, nor is too great a number of them
convenient for any state, leading a soft sedentary life, specially those who
feed their own fancies only upon the public ^ocke. Therefore it were to be wishd
that there raignd not among the peeple of this land such a general itching
after book-learning, and I believe so many ^rce Schools do rather hurt than
good: Nor did the Art of Printing much avail the Christian Common wealth, ^t
may be said to be well near as fatal as gunpowder, which came up in the same
age; For, under correction, to this may be part^y ascribd that spiritual
pride, that variety of Dogmatists which (...) among us; Add heerunto that the
excessive number of those which convers only with Books, and whose profession
consists in them, is such, that one cannot live for another, according to the
dignity of the calling; A Physician cannot live for the Physicians, a Lawyer
(civil and common) cannot live for Lawyers, nor a Divine for Divines;
Morcover, the multitudes that profess these three best vocations, specially the
last, make them of far less esteem. There is an odd opinion among us that he who
is a contemplative man, a man who wedds himself to his study and swallows many
books, must needs be a prosound Scholar, and a great learned man, though in
reality he be such a dolt that he has neither a retentive faculty to keep what
he has read, nor wit to make any useful application of it in common discourse,
what he draws in, lies upon dead lees, and never grows ^it to be broachd:
Besides, he may want judgment in the choice of his Authors, and knows not how
to turn his hand either in weighing or winnowing the soundest opinions: There
are diverse who are cried up for great Clerks who want discretion. Others,
though they wade deep into the causes and knowledge of things, yet they are
subject to scrue up their wits, and soar so high, that they lose themselves in
their own speculations, for, thinking to transcend the ordinary pitch of
reason, they com to involve the common principles of Philosophy in a mist,
instead of illustrating things they render them more obscure, instead of a
plainer and shorter way to the palace of knowledge, they lead us through bryery
odd uncouth paths, and ^o fall into the fallacy called notum per ignotius. Some
have the ^ap to be termed learned men, though they have gatherd up but the
scraps of knowledge here and there, though they be but smatterers, and mere
sciolists scarce knowing the Hoties of things, yet like empty casks, if they
can make a sound, and have a gift to vent with confidence what they have suckd
in, they are accounted great Scholars. Amongst all book-learned men, except
the Divine to whom all learned men should be laquays, The Philosopher who has
waded through all the Mathematiques, who has dived into the secrets of the
elementary world, and converseth also with celestial bodies, may be termed a
learned man: The critical Historian and Antiquary may be called also a learned
man, who has conversed with our fore fathers, and observed the carriage, and
contingencies of matters passed, whence he draws instances and cautions for
the benefit of the Times he lives in: The Civilia^ may be called likewise a
learned man if the revolving of huge volums may entitle one so, but touching
the Authors of the Common Law, which is peculiar only to this Meridian, they
may be all carried in a wheelbarrow, as my Countreyman Doctor Gwin told Judge
Finch: The Physician must needs be a learned man, for he knows himself inward
and outward, being well versed in Autology, in that lesson Nosce Teipsum, and
as Adrian the sixth said, he is very necessary to a populous Country, for were
it not for the Physician, men would live so long, and grow so thick, that one
could not live for the other, and he makes the earth cover all his faults.

But what Doctor Guyn said of the common law books, and Pope Adrian of the
Physician, was spoken, I conceive, in meriment; for my part, I honor those two
worthy professions in a high degree: Lastly, a polygot or good linguist may be
also termed a useful learned man, specially it versed in School languages.

My Lord, I know none of this age more capable to sit in the Chair, and censure
what is true learning, and what not, then your self, therefore in speaking of
this subject to your Lordship, I fear to have committed the same error, as
Phormio did in discoursing of War before Hanniball. No more now, but that I am,

My Lord, Your most humble and obedient Servant, J. H.

To Doctor J. D. IX.
SIR,
I Have many sorts of Civilities to thank you for, but among the rest, I thank
you a thousand times (twice told) for that delightful fit of Society, and
conference of Notes we had lately in this little Fleet-Cabin of mine upon
diverse Problems, and upon some which are exploded (and that by those who seem to
sway most in the commonwealth of Learning,) for Paradoxes merely by an
implicit faith without diving at all into the reasons of the Assertors: And
whereas you promised a further expression of your self by way of a Discoursive
Letter what you thought of Copernicus opinion touching the movement of the
earth which has so stirred all our modern wits; And whereof Sir I. Brown
pleased to oblige himself to do the like touching the Philosophers stone, the
powder of Projection, and potable gold, provided that I would do the same
concerning a peepled Country, and a species of moving creatures in the concave
of the Moon, which I willingly undertook upon those conditions, To acquit my
self of this obligation, and to draw on your performances the sooner, I have
adventured to send you this following Discourse such as it is touching the
^nary World.

I believe it is a Principle which no man will offer to controvert, that as
Antiquity cannot privilege an Error, so Novelty cannot prejudice Truth: Now,
Truth has her degrees of growing and expanding her self as all other things
have, and as Time begets her, so he does the obstetritious office of a Midwise
to bring her sorth; Many truths are but Embryos or Problemes, nay some of them
seem to be mere Paradoxes at first; The opinion that there were Antipodes was
exploded when it was first broached, it was held absurd and ridiculous, and the
thing it self to be as impossible as it was for men to go upon their heads with
their heels upwards, nay 'twas adjudged to be so dangerous a Tenet, that you
know well the Bishops name who in the Primitive Church was by sen^ned of
condemnation sent out of this world without a Head to go and dwell amongst his
Antipodes, because he first haten'd and held that opinion; But new our late
Navigators, and East India Mariners, who use to cross the Equator and Tropiques
so often, will tell you, that it is as gross a Paradox to hold there are no
Antipodes, and that the negative is now as absurd as the affirmative seemed at
first: For man to walk upon the Ocean when the Surges were at the highest, and
to make a heavy dull piece of wood to swim, nay fly upon the water was held as
impossible a thing at first, as it is now thought impossible for man to fly in
the air, sails were held then as uncouth, as if one should attempt to make
himself wings to mount up to heaven a la volee: Two hundred and od years ago
he would have been taken for some frantic fool that would undertake to batter
and blow up a Castle with a few barrell^ of a small contemptible black powder.

The great Architect of the world has been observed not to throw down all
gifts and knowledge to mankind consusedly at once, but in a regular
parsimonious method, to disperse them by certain degrees, periods, and progress
of time, leaving man to make industrious researches and investigations after
truth, He left the world to the disputations of men as the wisest of men says,
who in acqui^ition of natural truths went from the Hysope to the Cedar; One
day certifieth another, and one age rectifieth another; The morrow has more
experience than the precedent day, and is oft-times able to be his
Schoolmaster; The Granchild laughs at some things that were don in his
Gransires days: Insomuch that hence it may well be inferred, that natural
humane knowledge is not yet mounted to its Meridian, and highest point of
elevation. I confess it cannot be denied without gross ingratitude, but we are
infinitely obliged to our forefathers for the fundamentalls of Sciences, and
as the Herald has a Rule mallem cum patribus, quam cum fratribus errare, I had
rather err with my Fathers than brothers, so it holds in other kinds of
knowledge. But those times which we term vulgarly the old world, was indeed the
youth or Adolescence of it, and though if respect be had to the particular and
personal acts of generation, and to the relation of father and Son, they who
fore-liv'd and preceded us may be called our Ancestors, yet if you go to the
age of the world in general, and to the true length and longaeui^y of things, We
are more properly the older Cosmopolites: In this respect the Cadet may be
termed more ancient than his elder brother, because the world was older when he
entered into it; Moreover, besides Truth, Time has also another daughter which
is Experience, who holds in her hands the great Looking-glass of Wisdom and
Knowledge.

But now to the intended task, touching an habitable World, and a species of
living Creatures in the Orb of the Moon, which may hear some analogy with those
of this Elementary world; Although it be not my purpose to maintain and
absolutely assert this Problem, yet I will say this, that whosoever cries it
down for a new neotericall opinion, as diverse do, commit a grosser error than
the opinion may be in its own nature: For it is almost as ancient as Philosophy
her self, I am sure, it is as old as Orpheus, who sings of diverse fair Cities
and Castles within the Circle of the Moon; Moreover the profoundest Clerks and
most renowned Philosophers in all ages have affirmed it: Toward the first Age
of learning among others Pythagoras and Plato avouch'd it, the first of whom
was pronounced the wisest of men by the Pagan Oracle, as our Solomen is by holy
Writ. In the middle age of Learning Plutarch speaks of it, and in these modern
times the most speculative and scientificall'st men, both in Germany and Italy
seem to adhere to it; subinnuating that not only the sphere of the Moon is
peepled with Selenites or Lunary men, but that likewise evry Star in Heaven is
a peculiar world of it self, which is Coloniz'd and replenished with Astrean
Inhabitants, as the Earth, Sea and Air are with Elementary, The body of the Sun
not excepted, who has also his Solar Creatures, and they are accounted the
most sublime, the most pure and perfectest of all: The Elementary Creatures are
held the grossest of all, having more matter than form in them; The Solar have
more form than matter, the Selenites with other Astraean Inhabitants are of a
mixed nature, and the nearer they approach the body of the Sun, the more pure
and spiritual they are: Were it so, there were some grounds for his speculation
who thought that humane souls be they never so pious and pure ascend not
immediately after their dissolution from the corrupt Mass of flesh before the
glorious presence of God presently to behold the Beatificall Vision, but first
into the body of the Moon, or some other Star according to their degrees of
goodness, and actuat some Bodies there, of a purer composition; when they are
refind theie they ascend to some higher Star, and so to some higher than that,
till at last by these degrees they be made capable to behold the luster of that
glorious Majesty in whose sight no impurity can stand; This is illustrated by a
comparison, that if one after he has been kept close in a dark Dungeon a long
time, should be taken out, and brought suddenly to look upon the Sun in the
Miridian, it would endanger him to be struck stark blind; so, no humane soul
suddenly fallying out of a dirty prison as the body is, would be possibly able
to appear before the incomprehensible Majesty of God, or be susceptible of the
brightness of his all-glorious countenance, unless he be fitted thereunto before
hand by certain degrees, which might be don by passing from one star to
another, who, we are taught differ one from the other in glory and splendour.

Among our Modern Authors that would furbish this old opinion of lunary
creatures, and plant colonies in the orb of the Moon with the rest of the
celestial bodies, Gasper Galileo Galilei is one, who by artificial
prospectives has brought us to a nearer commerce with Heaven, by drawing it
sixteen times nearer the earth then it was before in ocular appearance by the
advantage of the said optic Instrument.

Among other arguments which the Assertors of Astrean Inhabitants do produce
for proof of this high point, one is, that it is neither repugnant to Reason or
Religion to think, that the Allmighty Fabricator of the Univers, who does
nothing in vain, nor suffers his handmaid Nature to do so, when he created the
Erratic and fixed stars, he did not make those huge immense bodies, whereof most
are bigger than the earth and sea though conglobated, to twinkle only, and be
an ornament to the roose of heaven, but he placed in the unequal of every one of
those vast capacious spheres some living creatures to glorify his name, among
whom there is in evry one of them one supereminent like man upon Earth to be
Lord paramount of all the rest; To this happily may allude the old opinion that
there is a peculiar Intelligence which guides and governs every orb in Heaven.

They that would thus colonize the stars with Inhabitants do place in the body
of the Sun, as was said before the purest, the most immateriall and refined'st
Intellectual creatures, whence the Allmighty calls those he will have to be
immediately about his person, and to be admitted to the Hierarchy of Angels;
This is far dissonant from the opinion of the Turk, who holds that the Sun is a
great burning globe designed for the damned.

They who are transported with this high speculation that there are Mansions and
habitable conveniences for creatures to live within the bodies of the
Celestial Orbs, seem to tax Man of a high presumption, that he should think
all things were created principally for Him, that the Sun and Stars are
serviceable to him in chief, viz. to measure his days, to distinguish his
seasons, to direct him in his navigations, and power wholesome influences upon him.

No doubt they were created to be partly useful and comfortable to him, but to
imagine that they are solely and chiefly for him, is a thought that may be said
to be above the pride of Lucifer: They may be beneficial unto him in the
generation and increase of all Elementary creatures, and yet have peculiar
Inhabitants of their own besides to concur with the rest of the world in the
service of their Creator. It Is a fair prerogative for man to be Lord of all
Torestirall, Aquatic, and airie creatures; that with his harping Iron he oan
draw ashore the great Leviathan, that He can make the Camel and huge Dromedary
to kneel unto him, and take up his burden, That he can make the fierce Bull
though ten times stronger than himself to endure his yoke, that he can fetch
down the Eagle from his nest, with such privileges, but let Him not presume
too far in comparing himself with heavenly bodies, while he is no other thing
than a worm crawling upon the surface of this Earth: Now the Earth is the
basest creature which God has made therefore it is called his footstool, and
though some take it to be the Center, yet it is the very sediment of the
Elementary world, as they say the Moon is of the celestial; it is the very sink
of all corruption and frailty, which made Trismegist say that Terra, non mundus
est nequitiae locus, The Earth, not the World is the seat of wickedness; And
though, it is true, she be susceptible of light, yet the light terminats only on
her superficies, being not able to enlighten any thing else, as the stars can do.

Thus have I proportioned my short discourse upon this spacious problem to the
size of an Epistle, I reserve the fulness of my opinion in this point, till I
receave yours touching Copernicus.

It has bin always my practice in the search and evenulation of natural
verities, to keep to my self a Philosophical freedom, as not to make any ones
opinion so magisteriall and binding, but that I might be at liberty to recede
from it upon more pregnant and powerful reasons: For as in theological tenet
it is a rule, Quicquid non descendit a mont^ Scripturae ta^em authoritate
contemnitur, qua approbatur, Whatsoever descends not from the mount of holy
Scripture, may be by the same authority rejected as well as received: So in the
disquisitions and winn^wing of physical truths, Quicquid non descend^t a monte
Ratio^s, etc. whatsoever descends not from the mount of Reason may be as well
rejected as approved of.

So longing after an opportunity to pursue this point by mixture of oral
discourse, which has more elbow room than a letter, I rest, with all candor and
cordial affection,

Fleet, this 2 of Novem. 1647. Your faithful servant, J. H.

X. To the Right Honble the La. E. D.
Madam,
THose rays of goodness which are diffusedly scatterd in others, are all
concentred in you, which were they divided into equal portions were enough to
complete a whole Jury of Ladies; This, draws upon you a mixture of Love and
envis, or rather an admiration from all who know you, specially from me, and
that in so high a degree, that if you would suffer your self to be ado^d, you
should quickly find me Religious in that kind; Howsoever I am bold to send your
Ladyship this, as a kind of homage or heri^ or tribut or what you please to
term it, in regard I am a true vassal to your virtues; And if you please to
lay any of your commands upon me, your will shall be a law unto me, which I
will observe with as much allegiance as any branch of Magna Charta, they shall
be as binding to me as Lycurgus laws were to the Spartans, and to this I
subscribe

Fleet, this 10 of Aug. 1647. J. H.

XI. To Mr. R. B. Esquire, at Grunsburgh.
SIR,
When I orelook'd the list of my choicest friends to insert your name, I paws'd
a while, and thought it more proper to begin a new collateral file, and put
you in the front thereof, where make account you are placed. If any thing upon
earth, partakes of Angelic happiness (in civil actions) it is friendship, it
perfumes the thoughts with such sweet idaeas, and the heart with such melting
passions; such are the effects of yours to me, which makes me please my self
much in the speculation of it.

I am glad you are so well returned to your own family, and touching the
Wheelwright you write of, who from a cart came to be a Captain, it made me
think of the perpetual rotations of Fortune, which you know Antiquity seated
upon a Wheel in restles though not violent volubility; And truly is was never
more verified than now, that those spokes which were formerly but collateral,
and some of them quite underneath are now coming up apace to the top of the
wheel, I hope there will be no cause to apply to them the old verse I learnt at
school,

Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum. But there is a transcendent
overruling providence who cannot only check the rowlings of this petty wheel,
and strike a nail into it that it shall not stir, but stay also when he
pleases the motions of those vast spheres of Heaven where the stars are always
stirring, as likewise the whirlings of the Primum Mobile itself, which the
Astronomers say draws all the world after it in a rapid revolution. That
divine providence vouchsafe to check the motions of that malevolent planet,
which has so long lowr'd upon poor England, and send us better days. So
sal^ting you with no vulgar respects, I rest my dear Nephew

Yours most affectionatly to serve you, J. H.
Fleet, this 26 of July. 1646.
XII. To Mr. En. P. at Paris.
SIR,
THat which the Plots of the Jesuits in their dark Cell^, and the policy of the
greatest Roman Catholic Princes have driven at these many years, is now don to
their hands, which was to divide and break the strength of these three
kingdoms, because they held it to be too great a glory and power to be in one
Heretical Prince his hands (as they esteemed the King of great Britain)
because he was in a capacity to be umpire, if not Arbiter of this part of the
World, as many of our Kings have bin.

You write thence that in regard of the sad condition of our Queen, their
Countrey-woman, they are sensible of our Calamities, but I believe, it is the
Poqulass only, who see no further than the rind of things, your Cabinet counsel
rather rejoices at it, who, or I am much deceived, contributed much in the
time of the late sanguine Cardinal, to set a foot these distractions,
beginning first with Scotland, who you know has always served that Nation for
a brand to set England a fire for the advancement of their own ends; I am
afraid we have seen our best days, we knew not when we wo^e well, so that the
Italian saying may be well applied to poor England, I was well, I would be
better, I took Physic and dyed.

No more now, but that I rest still

Yours entirely to serve you, J. H.
Fleet, 20 Ian. 1647.
XIII. To John Wroth Esquire. at Petherton Park.
SIR
I Had two of yours lately, one in Italian, the other in French, (which, were
answered in the same Dialect) and as I read them with singular delight, so, I
must tell you, they struck an admiration into me, that in so short a revolution
of time you should com to be so great a Master of those Languages both for the
Pen and (...); I have known diverse, and those of pregnant and ripe capacities,
who had spent more oil and time in those Countries, yet could they not arrive
to that double perfection which you have, for (...) they had got one, they were
commonly defective in the other: Therefore I may say that you have not spartam
nactus which was but ^ petty Republic, sed Italiam and Gelliam nactus es has
orna, you have (...) all Italy and France adorn these.

Nor is it Language that you have only brought home with you, (...) I find that
you have studied the Men and the (...) of those Nations you have conversed
withal; Neither have you counted ^nely all their fair Cities, Castles, Houses
of Pleasure, and other places of curiosity, but you have pryed into the very
mysteries of (...) Government, as I find by those choice Manuscripts and
Observations you have brought with you; ^n all these things you ^are been so
curious, as if the soul of your great Uncle who was (...) Ambassador in the
Imperial Court, and who held cor^espondence with the greatest men of
Christendom in their own ^anguage, had transm^grated into you.

The freshest News here is, that those heart-burnings, and fires of civil
commotion^ which you left behind you in France, covered over with thin ashes
for the time, are broken out again, and I be^ they will be never quite
extinguished till there be a peace or ^uce with Spain, for till then there is no
hope of abatement of taxes; (...) it is feared the Spanish will out-weary the
French at last in (...), for the Earth her self, I mean his Mines of Mexico and
(...) afford him a constant and yearly Tresure to support his Ar^, whereas the
French King digs his Tresure out of the bowels and vital spirits of his own
Subjects.

I pray let me hear from you by the next opportunity, for I shall ^old my time
well employed to correspond with a Gentleman of ^uch choice and gallant parrs;
In which desires I rest

Your most affectionat and faithful S^rvitor, J. H.
^9 Aug 1649*
XIV. To Mr. W. B.
HOw glad was I, my choice and precious Nephew, to receiv^ yours of the 24*
current, wherein I was sorry, though satisfie^ in point of belief to find the ill
fortune of Interception which be fell my last unto you.

Touching the condition of things here, you shall understand that our miseries
lengthen with our days, for though the Sun and the Spring advance nearer us,
yet our times are not grown a wh^ the more comfortable: I am afraid this City
has foold her self in to a slavery, the Army, though forbidden to com within
ten miles of Her by Order of Parliament, quarters now in the Bowels of Her;
they threaten to break her Percullies, Posts and Chains to make her pervious
upon all occasions, they have secured also the Tower, with addition of strength
for themselves, besides a Famine* does insensibly creep upon us, and the Mint
is starved for want of Bullion; Trade which was ever the sinew of this Island
does visibly decay, and the Insurance of Ships is risen from two to ten in the
hundred; Our gold is engrossed in private hands, or gone beyond Sea to travel
without License, and much I believe of it is returned to the earth (whence it
first came) to be buried where our late Nephews may chance to find it a
thousand years hence if the world lasts so long, so that the exchanging of
white earth into red, I mean silver into gold is now above six in the hundred;
and all these with many more are the dismal effects and concomitants of a
civil War. It Is true we have had many such black days in England in former ages,
but those paralleld to the present are as the shadow of a Mountain compared to
the eclipse of the Moon. My prayers early and late are, that God Almighty would
please not to turn away his face quite, but cheer us again with the light of
his countenance, And I am well assured you will join with me in the same Orison
to Heavens gate; in which confidence I rest

Your most affectionatly to serve you, J. H.
From the Fleet, 10 of December, 1647.
XV. To Sir K. D. at Paris.
SIR,
NOw, that you are returned, and fixed a while in France, an old servant of
yours take's leave to kiss your hands, and salute you (...) an intense degree
of heat and height of passion: It Is well you ^ook hands with this infortunat
Isle when you did, and got your ^iberty by such a royal mediation as the Queen
Regents, for had ^ou staid, you would have taken but little comfort in your
life, in regard that ever since there have bin the fearfullest distractions here
that ever happened upon any part of the earth, a Beluin kind of im^nity never
raged so among men, insomuch that the whole Country might have taken its
appellation from the smallest part thereof, and be called the Isle of Dogs; for
all humanity, common honesty, and that Mansuetude with other Moral Civilities
which should distinguish the rational Creature from other Animalls, have been
lost here a good while; Nay, besides this Cinicall, there ^s a kind of Wolvish
humor has seizd upon most of this peeple a ^u lycanthropy, they so worry and
seek to devour one another, so that the wild Arab and fiercest Tartar may be
called civil men in comparison of us, therefore he is happiest who is furthest
off from this woeful Island. The King is straightened of that liberty he
formerly had in the Isle of Wight, and as far as I see may make up the number
of Nebuchadnezzars years before he be restored: The Parliament persists in their
first Propositions, and will go nothing less. This is all I have to send at
this time, only I will adjoyn the true respects of

From the Fleet, this 5 of May, 1647. Your most faithful humble Servitor, J. H.

XVI. To Mr. W: Blois in Suffolk.
SIR,
YOurs of the seventeenth current came safely to hand, and (...) kiss your
hands for it, you mention there two others that cannot, which makes me condole
the loss of such jewels, for I esteem all your Letters so, being the precious
effects of your love, which I value at a high rate, and please my self much in
the contemplation of it, as also in the continuance of this
Letter-correspondence, which is performed on your part with such ingenuous
expressions, and embroder'd still with new florishes of invention* I am still
under hold in this fatal Fleet, and like one in a tempest a^ Sea who has been
often near the shore yet is still tossed back by contrary winds, so I have had
frequent hopes of freedom, but some cross accident or other always intervened,
insomuch that I am now in half despair of an absolut release till a general
Gao^ delivery; yet notwithstanding this outward captivity, I have inward
liberty still I thank God for it.

The greatest News is, that between twenty and thirty thousand well-armed Scots
have been utterly routed, riffed, and all taken prisoners, by less than 8000
English; I must confess 'twas a great exploit whereof I am not sorry, in regard
that the English have regained hereby the honor which they had lost abroad of
late years in the opinion of the world, ever since the Pacification at Berwick,
and diverse traverses of War since. What Hamiltons design was, is a mystery,
most think that he intended no good either to King or Parliament.

So with my daily more and more endeared affections unto you, I rest

Yours ever to love and serve you, J. H.
Fleet, 7 May. 1647.
XVII. To Mr. R. Baron in Paris.
Gentle Sir,
I Received, and presently ran over your Cyprian Academy with much greedines
and no vulgar delight, and, Sir, I hold my self much honored for the Dedication
you have been pleased to make thereof to me, for it deserved a far higher
Patronage; Truly, I must tell you without any Complement, that I have seldom
met with such an ingenuous mixture of Prose and Verse, interwoven with such
varieties of fancy, and charming strains of amorous Passions, which have made
all the Ladies of the land in love with you: If you begin already to court the
Muses so hansomly, and have got such footing on Parnassus, you may in time be
Lord of the whole Hill, and those nice Girls, because Apollo is now grown
unweldy and old, may make choice of you to officiat in his room, and preside
over them.

I much thank you for the punctual narration you pleased to send me of those
commotions in Paris, I believe France will never be in perfect repose while a
Spaniard sits at the Stern, and an Italian steers the Rudder; In my opinion
Mazirini should do wisely now, that he has feathered his nest so well, to
truss up his Baggage and make over the Alps to his own Country, lest the same
Fate betide him as did the Marquis of Ancre his Compatriot. I am glad the
Treaty goes on 'twixt Spain and France, for nothing can port^nd a greater good
to Christendom, than a Conjunction of those two great Luminaries, which if it
please God to bring about, I hope the Stars will change their Aspects, and we
shall see better days.

I send here enclosed a second Bill of Exchange in case the first I sent you in
my last has miscarried: So, my dear Nephew, I embrace you with both my Arms,
and rest

Fleet, this 20 of June, 1647. Yours most entirely to love and serve you while,
Jam. Howell.

XVIII. To Mr. Tho. More at York.
SIR,
I Have often partak'd of that pleasure which Letters use to carry along with
them, but I do not remember to have found a greater proportion of delight than
yours afford me; your last of the fourth current came to safe hand, wherein me
thought each line, each word, each syllable breathed out the Passions o^ a
clear and candid soul, of a virtuous and gentle spirit; Truly Sir, as I might
perceive by your ingenious and patheticall expressions therein, that you were
transported with the heat of true affection toward me in the writing so was I
in the reading, which wrought upon me with such an Energy that a kind of
ecstasy posses^'d me for tho time: I pray Sir go on in this correspondence, and
you shall find that your lines will not be ill bestowed upon me, for I love and
respect you dearly well, nor is this love grounded upon vulgar Principles, but
upon those extraordinary parts of virtu and worth which I have discovered in
you, and such a love is the most permanent as you shall find in

Fleet 1 of Sep. 1647. Your most affectionat Oncle, J. H.

XIX. To Mr. W. B. 3o Maii.
SIR,
YOur last Lines to me were as delightful as the Season, they were as sweet as
Flowers in May, nay they were far more dragrant than those fading Vegetalls,
they did cast a greater suarity than the Arabian Spices use to do in the gran
Cayro, where when the wind is Southward, they say the air is as (...) as a
persum'd Spanish Glove; The air of this City is not so, specially in the heart
of the City, in and about Paul's Church where Horse-dung is a yard deep,
insomuch that to cleanse it would be a^ hard a task, as it was for Hercules to
cleanse the Augean Stable by drawing a great River through it, which was
accounted one of his twelve labors: but it was a bitter taunt of the Italian
who passing by Paul's Church, and seeing it full of Horses, Now I perceive (said
he) that in England Men and Beasts serve God alike* No more now, but that I am

Your most faithful Servant, J. H.

XXI. To Sir Paul Pindar Knight, upon the version of a^ Italian piece into
English, called St. Paul's Progress upon earth, a new and a notable kind of
Satyr.
SIR,
ST. Paul having descended lately to view Italy and other place^ ^s you may
trace him in the following Discourse, he would no^ take Wing back to Heaven
before he had given you a special visit* who have so well deserved of his
Church here, the goodliest pile o^ stones in the Christian world of that kind.

Of all the men of our times, you are one of the greatest examples of Piety,
and constant Integrity, which discovers a noble sou^ to dwell within you, and
that you are very conversant with heaven* so that me thinks I see St. Paul
saluting and solacing you in these black times, assuring you that those pious
works of Charity yo^ have don and daily do (and that in such a manner that the
lif^ hand knows not what the right does) will be as a triumphant Chariot to
carry you one day up to heaven to partake of the same beatitude with him. Sir,
among those that truly honor you, I am one* and have been so since I first knew
you, therefore as a small testimony heerof, I send you this fresh fancy composed
by a Noble Personage in Italian, of which language you are so great a Master.

For the first part of the Discourse which consists of a Dialog* 'twixt the two
first Persons of the Holy Trinity, there are example^ of that kind in some of the
most Ancient Fathers, as Apollinariu^ and Nazianzen, and lately Grotius has
the like in his Tragedy o^ Christ's Passion, which may serve to free it from all
exceptions. So! most affectionatly kiss your hands, and am

Sir, Your very humble and ready Servant, J. H.
Fleet, 25 Martii 1646.
XX. To Sir Paul Neale Knight, upon the same subject.
SIR,
SAint Paul cannot reascend to Heaven before he gives you also a salute, my
Lord, your father having bin a star of the greatest magnitude in the Firmament
of the Church. If you please to observe the manner of his late progress upon
earth, which you may do by the guidance of this discourse, you shall discover
many things which are not vulgar, by a curious mixture of Church and
State-affaires; you shall feel heerin the pulse of Italy, and how it beats at
this time since the beginning of these late Wars 'twixt the Pope and the Duke
of Parma, with the grounds, procedure, and success of the said War, together
with the interest and grievances, the pretenses and quarrels that most princes
there have with Rome.

I must confess, my Genius has often prompted me that I was never cut out for a
Translator, there being a kind of servility therein; For it must needs be somewhat
^dious to one that has any freeborn thoughts within him, and genuin
conceptions of his own (whereof I have some though shallow ones) to enchain
himself to a verbal servitude, and the sense of another. Moreover Translations
are but as turn-coated things at best, specially among languages that have
advantages one of the other, as the Italian has of the English, which may be
said to differ one from the other as silk does from cloth, the common wear of
both Countries where they are spoken: And as cloth is the more substantial* so
the English tongue by reason it is so knotted with consonants is the stronger,
and the more sinewy of the two; But silk is more smo^th and slik, and so is the
Italian tongue compared to the English. Or I may say Translations are like the
wrong side of a Turkey carpet, which uses to be full of thrums and knots, and
nothing so even as the right side: Or one may say (as I spoke elsewhere) that
Translations are like Wines taken off the lees, and powered into other vessels,
that must needs lose somewhat of their first strength and brisknes, which in the
pouring, or passage rather evaporates into air.

Moreover touching Translations, it is to be observed that evry language has
certain Idiomes, proverbs and peculiar expression^ of its own which are not
rendible in any other but paraphrastically, therefore he overacts the office of
an Interpreter who does esslave himself too strictly to words or phrases: I
have heard of an exces among Limmers called too much to the life, which happens
when one aims at similitudes morethan skill; So in version of languages one
may be so over-punctuall in words, that he may mar the matter; The greatest
fidelity that can be expected in a Translator is to keep still a foot and
entire the true genuin sense of the Author, with the main design he drives at;
And this was the principal thing which was observed in this Version.

Furthermore let it not be thought strange that there are some Italian words made
free denizens of England in this discourse, for by such means our language has
grown from time to time to be so copious, and still grows more rich, by
adopting or naturalizing rather the choicest foreign words of other Nations, as
a Nosegay is nothing else but a tuft of flowers gatherd from diverse beds.

Touching this present version of Italian into English, I may say it is a thing
I did, when I had nothing to do; 'Twas to find something whereby to pass away the
slow hours of this sad condition of captivity.

I pray be pleased to take this as a small argument of the great respects I ow
you for the sundry rare and high virtues I have discovered in you, as also for
the obligations I have to your noble Lady whose hands I humbly kiss, wishing
you both, as the season invites me a good New year (for it begins but now in
Law) as also a holy Lent, and a healthful Spring.

Fleet, 25 Martij. Your much obliged and ready Servant, J. H.

XXII. To Dr. W. Turner.
SIR,
I Return you my most thankful acknowledgments, for that collection, or
farrago of prophecies as you call them, (and that very properly in regard there
is a mixture of good and bad) you pleased to send me lately; specially that of
Nosterdamus, which I shall be very chary to preserve for you, I could requite
you with ^ivers predictions more, and of some of the British B^rds, which were
^hey translated to English would transform the world to wonder.

They sing of a Red Parliament and white King, of a race of peeple which should
be called P^ngruns, of the fall of the Church, and diverse other things which
glance upon these times. But I am none of those that afford much faith to
rambling Prophecies, which, (as was said elsewhere) are like so many od grains
sown in the vast field of Time, whereof not one in a thousand comes to grow up
again and appear above ground. But that I may correspond with you in some part
for the like courtesy, I send you these following prophetic verses of
White Hall, which were made above twenty years ago to my knowledge upon a Book
called Balaams Ass, that consisted of some invectives against King James, and
the Court in (...) quo tu^c; It was composed by one Mr Williams a Counselor of
the Temple, but a Roman Catholic, who was hang*d drawn and quartered at Charing
Cross for it, and I believe there be hundreds that have copies of these verses
ever since that time about the Town yet living, They were these.

Some seven years since Christ rid to Court,
And there he left his Ass,
The Courtiers kic'd him out of doors,
Because they had no grass, (grace.)
The Ass went mourning up and down,
And thus I heard him bray,
If that they could not give me grass,
They might have given me hay:
But sixteen hundred forty three,
Who so ere shall see that day,
Will nothing find within that Court,
But only grass and hay, etc.
Which was found to happen true in White Hall, till the soldiers coming to
quarter there trampled it down.

Truly sir I find all things conspire to make strange mutation^ in this
miserable Island, I fear we shall fall from under the Su^ter to be under the
Sword, and since we speak of Prophecies, (...) am afraid among others that
which was made since the reformation will be verified, The Church man was, the
Lawy^r is, the Soldier shall be. Welcome be the will of God, who transvolves
Kingdoms, and tumbles down Monarchies as mole-hills at his pleasure, so I rest
my dear Doctor,

Fleet, 9 Aug. 1648. Your most faithful Servant, J. H.

XXIII. To the Honble Sir Edward Spencer Knight, at his House near* Branceford.
SIR,
WE are not so bare of intelligence between these walls* but we can hear of
your doings in Branceford; That so general applause whereby you were cried up
Knight of the shire for Middlesex, sounded round about us upon London streets,
and echoed in every corner of the Town; nor d^ I mingle speech with any though
half affected to you, bu^ highly approves of and congratulates the election,
being glad that a Gentleman of such extraordinary parts and probity, as also of
such a mature judgment should be chosen to serve the public.

I return you the Manuscript you lent me of Daemonologie, but the Author thereof
and I are two in point of opinion that way, for he seems to be on the negative
part, and truly he writes as much as can be produced for his purpose. But there
are some men that are of a mere negative genius, like Johannes ad oppositum, who
will deny, or at least cross and puzzle any thing though never so clear in
itself, with their but, yet, if, etc. they will flap the lie in Truths teeth
though she visibly stand before their face without any visard, such perverse
cross-graind spirits are not to be dealt withal by argument, but palpable
proofs, as if one should deny that the fire burns, or that he has a nose on
his face, t^er is no way to deal with him, but to pull him by the tip of the
one, and put his finger into the other: I will not say that this Gentleman is
so perverse, but to deny there are any Witches, to deny that there are not ill
spirits which seduce, tamper and convers in diverse shapes with human creatures,
and impell them to actions of malice, I say that he who denies there are such
busy spirits, and such poor passive creatures upon whom they work, which
commonly are called Witches, I say again, that he who denies there are such
spirits, shows that he himself has a Spirit of contradiction in him, opposing
the current and consentient opinion of all Antiquity: we read that both Jews
and Romans with all other nations of Christendom, and our Ancestors here in
England enacted laws against Witches, sure they were not so silly as to wast
their brains in making laws against Chymeras, against non entia, or such as
Plato's Kt^etismata's were: The Judicial law is apparent in the holy Code,
Thou shall not suffer a witch to live; the Roman law which the Decemviri made,
is yet extant in the twelve tables, Qui ^ruges incantassent paenas danto, They
who should inchant the fruit of the Earth let them be punished; The Imperial
law is known by every Civilian, Hi cum ^ostes naturae sint supplicio
afficiantur, These, meaning Witches, because they are enemies to nature let
them be punished; And the Acts of Parliament in England are against those that
invoke ill spirits, that take up any dead man, woman or child, or take the skin
or bone of ay dead body, to employ it to sorcery or charm, whereby any one is
lamed, or made to pine away, etc. such shall be guilty of ^lat ^elony, and not
capable of Clergy or Sanctuary, etc.

What a multitude of examples are there in good authentic Authors of diverse
kinds of fascinations, incantations, prestigiations, of philtres, spells,
charms, sorceries, characters and such like, as also of magic, negromancy, and
divinations; surely the Witch of Endor is no fable, the burning of Joan de' Arc
the Maid of Orleans in Roven, and of the Marchioness d'Ancre of late years in
Paris are no fables: The execution of Nostredamus for a kind of Witch, son^
fourscore years since is but a modern story, who among other things foretold,
Le Senate d^ Londres tuera son Roy, the Senate of Lond^n shall kill their King.
The best Historians have it upon record how Charl^mains Mistress incha^ed him
with a ring, which as long as the had about he* he would not ^uster her dead
carkase (...) be carried out of his chamber to be buried, and a Bishop taking
it out of her mouth, the Emperor grew to be as much bewitched with the Bishop,
but he being cloyed wi^h his excess of favor, threw it into a pond, where the
Emperors chiefest pleasure was to walk till his dying day. The story tells us
how the Wald^nses in France were by a solemn arrest of Parliament accused and
condemned of Witchraft; The Malteses took Saint Paul for a Witch: Saint
Augustine speaks of women who could turn men to horses, and make them carry
their burdens; Danaeus writes of an enchanted staff which the Devil summoner
like, was used to deliver some marketwomen to ride upon. In some of the Northern
Countries it is at ordinary to buy and sell winds, as it is to do wines in other
parts; and hee^ of I could instance in some examples of my own knowledge. Every
one knows what O^aus Magnus writes of Erich's (King of Swethland) cornered cap,
who could make the wind sift to any point of the compass, according as he
turned it about.

Touching Diviners of things to com which is held a species of VVitchcraft, we
may read they were frequent among the Romans, yea they had Colleges for their
Augu^s and Aruspices, who used to make their predictions sometimes by fire,
sometimes by flying of fowl, sometimes by inspection into the entrails of beasts,
or invoking the dead, but most frequently by consulting with the Oracles, to
whom all Nations had recours except the Iew^s. But you will say that since
Christianity displayed her banners, the Cross has scared away the Devil, and
struck the Or^cles dumb, as Plutarch reports a notable passage of Thamus an
Italian Pilot, who a little after the birth of Christ, sailing along the coasts
of Calabria in a still silent night, all his passengers being asleep, an airie
cold voice came to his ears saying Thamus, Thamus, Thamus, The great God Pan
is dead, who was the chiefest Oracle of that Country; yet though the light of
the Gospel chased away those great Owls, there be some Bats and little night
birds that fly still abroad, I mean petty spirits that by secret pactions,
which are made always without witness, enable men and women to do evil. In
such compacts beyond the seas the party must first renounce Christ, and the
extended woman meaning the blessed Virgin, he must contemn the Sacraments,
tread on the cross, spit at the host, etc. There is a famous story of such a
paction which Friar Louis made some half a hundred years ago with the Devil in
Marseilles, who appeared to him in shape of a Goat and promised him the
enjoyment of any woman whom he fancied, with other pleasures for 41. years, but
the Devil being too cunning for him put the figure of I before, and made it 14
years in the contract, (which is to be seen to this day with the Devils claw
to it) at which time the Friar was detected for Witchcraft and burnt, and all
those children whom he had christened during that term of 14 years were
rebaptized, and the Gentlewomen whom he had abused, put themselves into a
Nunnery by themselves. Heerunto may be added the great rich Widow that was
burned in Lions, because 'twas proved the Devil had lain with her; as also the
history of Lieutenant Iaquette which stands upon record with the former, but if
I should insert them here at large it would make this letter swell too much.

But we need not cross the sea for examples of this kind, we have too too many
(God wot) at home: King James a great while was loath to believe there were
Witches, but that which happend to my Lord Francis of Rutlands children
convinced him, who were bewitched by an old woman that was servant at Belvoir
Castle, but being displeased, she contracted with the Devil who conversed with
her in form of a cat, whom she called Rutterken to make away those children,
out of mere malignity, and thirst of revenge.

But since the beginning of these unnatural Wars there may be a clowd of
witnesses produced for the proof of this black tenet, for within the compass of
two years near upon three hundred Witches were arraigned, and the major part
executed in Essex and Suffolk only: Scotland swarms with them now more than
ever, and persons of good quality executed daily.

Thus, sir, have I huddled together a few arguments touching this subject,
because in my last communication with you, me thought I found you somewhat
unsatisfied, and staggering in your opinion touching the affirmative part of
this thesis, the discussing whereof is far fitter for an elaborat large treatise
than a loose letter.

Touching the new Commonwealth you intend to establish, now, that you have
assigned me my part among so many choice legislators, something I shall do to
comply with your desires, which shall be always to me as comands, and your
comands as laws, because I love and hono^r you in a very high degree for those
gallant freeborn thoughts, and sundry parts of virtu which I have dis* cern'd
in you, which makes me entitle my self

Fleet this 20 of Febr. 1647. Your most humble and affectionat faithful
Servant, J. H.

XXIV. To Sir William Boswell, at the Hague.
SIR,
THat black tragedy which was lately acted here, as it has filled most hearts
among us with consternation and horror, so (...) believe it has bin no less
resented abroad; For my own particular the more I ruminat upon it, the more it
astonisheth my imagination, and shakes all the cells of my brain, so that
sometimes I struggle with my faith, and have much ado to believe it yet: I shall
give over wondering at thing any hereafter, nothing shall seem strange unto me,
only I will attend with patience how England will thrive now that she is let
blood in the basilicall vein, and cured, as they say, of the Kings Evil.

I had one of yours by Mr. Jacob B^eue, and I much thank you for the account
you please to give me of what I sent you by his conveyance. Holland may now be
proud, for there is a younger Commonwealth in Christendom than her self* No
more now but that I always rest

Sir, Your most humble Servitor, J. H.
Fleet, 20 of Mar. 1648.
XXV. To Mr. W. B. at Grundsburgh.
SIR,
NEver credit me if Liberty it self be as dear to me as your Letters, they com
so full of choice and learned applications, with such free unforced strains of
ingenuity, insomuch that when I peruse them, me thinks they cast such a kind of
fragrancy, that I cannot more aptly compare them, than to the flowers which are
now in their prime season, viz. to Roses in June: I had two of them lately,
which me thought were like quivers full of barb'd arrows pointed with gold,
that penetrated my breast.

-- Tali quis nollet ab ictu
Ridendo tremulas mortis non ire sub umbras.
Your expressions were like those Mucrones and Melliti globuli which you so
ingenuously apply mine unto; but these arrows of yours though they have hit
me, they have not hurt me, they had no killing quality, but they were rather as
so many cordialls; for you know gold is restorative. I am suddenly surpised by
an inexpected occasion, therefore I must abruply break off with you for this
time, I will only add, my most dear Nephew, that I rest

June the 3. 1648. Yours entirely to love and serve you, J. H.

XXVI. To R. K. Esquire at St. Giles.
SIR,
DIfference in opinion, no more than a differing complexion, can be cause
enough for me to hate any; A differing fancy is no more to me, than a diffring
face; If another has a fair countenance, though mine be black, or if I have a
fair opinion, though another have a hard favored one, yet it shall not break
that common league of humanity which should be betwixt rational creatures,
provided he corresponds with me in the general offices of morality and civil
uprightnes, this may admit him to my acquaintance and conversation, though I
never concur with him in opinion: He bears the Image of Adam, and the Image of
the Allmighty as well as I; He had God for his Father, though he has not the
same Church for his Mother. The omniscient C^cator as He is only Kardiognostic,
so He is the sole Lord of the whole inward man, It is he who reigns ore the
faculties of the soul, and the affections of the heart, It Is He who regulates
the will, and rectifies all obliquities in the understanding by special
illuminations, and oftentimes reconciles men as opposite in opinion, as
Meridians and Parallells are in point of extension, whereof the one draws from
East to West, the other from North to South.

Some of the Pagan Philosophers specially Themistius who was Praetor of
Byzantium, maintained an opinion, that as the pulchritud and preservation of
the world consisted in varieties and dissimilitudes (as also in Eccentric and
contrary motions) that as it was replenished with such numberles sorts of
several species, and that the Individualls of those species differed so much
one from the other specially Mankind, amongst whom one shall hardly find two in
ten thousand that have exactly (though twins) the same tone of voice,
similitude of face, or idaeas of mind, Therefore the God of Nature ordained from
the beginning, that he should be worshipped in various and sundry forms of
adorations, which neretheles like so many lines should tend all to the same
center. But Christian Religion prescribes another Rule, viz. that there is but
(...) via, una veritas, there is but one true way to Heaven, and that ^ta narrow
one, whereas there be huge large roads that lead to ^ell.

God Allmighty guide us in the first, and guard us from the se^d, as also from
all cross and uncouth bypath, which use to ^ead such giddy brains that follow
them to a confused laberinth of ^rors, where being entangled, the Devil as
they stand gaping (...) new lights to lead them out, takes his advantage to
seize on ^em for their spiritual pride, and ins^briety in the search of more
^owledge.

28. July, 1648. Your most faithful Servant, J. H.

Ut clavis portam sic pandit Epistola pectus,
Clauditur Haec cera, clauditur Illa sera.
As Keys do open chests,
So Letters open breasts.
AN Index of the principal matters contained in this Second Tome of FAMILIAR
LETTERS.
ENcouragements to hasten a business. 1 A strange disparity 'twixt a married
couple. 2 The power of the pen. 2 ^dvice against detraction. 2 ^f the general
infirmities of men. 3 ^f natural corruption. 4 ^f the passions of Love, and
the humor of Women. 5 ^f a clash that happened 'twixt Leo the tenth, and the
French King, and their witty answers and replies. 6 ^he saying of Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, touching the Pope. 6 ^dvice to silence. 7 ^ Letter
of thanks, and for forgiving injuries. 8 ^f Religion in general. 9 ^f the
Religion of the Jews, and their sev^* all Sects. 10 Of Christianity and the
difficulties that attend it. 1^ England one of the first Christian Countries.
1^ The cause of the first division 'twixt the Eastern an^ Western Churches. 1^
Of the Eastern Church. 1^ The extent of Christianity. 1^ The lamentable decay
of Christianity in Afric. 1^ Of Mahometism, with the beginning and policy
thereof. 15 The reverend opinion the Turks have of Christ, and the Virgin Mary.
16 The vast extent of Mahometism. 17 The concurrence of the Jew with the
Christian an^ Jew. 1^ Of the Pagans or Heathens Religion and their extent* 19
The best sort of Pagans. 20 The degrees how Philosophy did propagate it self*
2^ A comparison in point of extent 'twixt all Religions. 23 Some advices for a
young traveller. Of vain glory. 2^ Of the Arrogance of the Romans. 2^ Advice
to a young soldier. 26 The fable of fire, water and fame. 26 A letter of advice
to give over a business. 2^ Of Secretary Walsingham, and Secretary Cecill. 2^
A rare comparison of Charles the Emperor. 3^ The Mulberry a pattern of wisdom.
3^ Of the falling off of Catalonia and Portugal from the King of Spain. 3^ Of
extravagant humors. 3^ A letter of reprehension for silence. 33 Of the virtu of
letters. 33 Advice to be careful in epistolizing. 34 An amorous Poem. 35 A
letter of gratitude. 36 An apology for women, and of their virtues and vices.
37 Of the mode of entertainment. 38 An apology for not answering a letter. 39
A facetious tale of a Neapolitan. 39 Of a monstrous new Island sprung up in the
Atlantic sea. 39 Of the fearful earthquakes in Italy. 39 Of Gen^a, Venice,
etc. 40 A letter of love. 41 Of Grunnius Sophista's last will. 42 Of
melancholy. 44 A facetious tale of a Porter. 45 A letter of friendly respects.
46 The difference twixt prosperity and adversity. 47 A letter of recommendation
for a servant. 48 What a supernumerary servant is like to 48 Advice to foreign
travel. 49 Of partiality of news. 50 Of the abuse of a great picture taken at
Arundell. 51 An Epitaph upon the Author. 52 An encouragement to an University
scholar. 53 Of crosses and troubles. 54 Of chymicall knowledge. 55 Of Dunkirk
and the taking of it. 37 The Turks prayer. 57 Of the Peace 'twixt Spain and
Holland. 58 A letter of condolement and mortality. 58 The Authors apology for
himself. 59 A letter of friendly reprehension for neglect. 60 Of Qu. Elizabeth's
virtues and vices. 61 The French Satyr of her. 62 Of the exorbitant liberty of
Printing. 62 For the speeding of a letter. 63 Of post Pigeons. 63 Private
contemplations of the Author upon diverse objects* 64 A remedy against
melancholy. 66 A letter of complement to a Lady. 66 A Hymn to the Trinity. 67
Saint Austins notable wish couched in verse. 68 Of the fear and love of God. 68
Of wines in general. 71 Of Ale, Beer, and all sorts of beverages drunk in the
known world. 70 Of the Wines of Spain, Italy, France, and Germany. 74 Of the
Nile water. 73 Of Metheglin, Mead, and Braggot, Sider and Perry. 74 How the
Germans drink healths. 77 The difference 'twixt the Greek and German in
drinking. 77 A strange tale of some Dutch drunkards. 77 Of toungs in general.
78 Of the British tongue and her dialects. 78 The Irish a dialect of the Welsh.
78 Welsh words found in America. 79 The ground of the appellation of
Englishmen. 79 Fox his gross error at the beginning of the book of Martyrs. 79
When the English tongue took footing in Scotland. 80 Of the German Tongue, and
the extent of it. 80 Some Persian words consignificant with the Dutch. 81 Of the
Slavonic Language, her Dialects, and vast extent of it. 81 Above all other
Languages the Slavonic has two Characters. 81 A Charter of Alexander the
Great, yet extant upon the walls of a Church in Prague. 82 Of the Greek Tongue,
her growth and Progress. 82 The pitiful decay of the Greek Tongue. 83 How
strangely the Greeks are degenerated above all other nations. 84 The ancient
monstrous extent of the Greek Tongue. 84 Of the Latin Tongue and her degrees of
Perfection. 85 The Greek always more esteemed than Latin in the East and West.
86 How the Latin did refine her self. 86 Of the sundry Barbarous peeple that
invaded Italy. 87 Of the Italian, Spanish and French Languages. 88 Of the
Arcadians. 89 Where to find the true ancient Speech of any Country. 89 Of the
mother Tongue of Europe. 91 A Philosophical reason of the diversity of Toungs.
92 Of the vast extent of the Arabian Tongue. 93 Of the Hebrew. 93 Languages
subject to corruption and change as other things. 93 Of Sir Walter Rawleigh's
Voyage to Guiana, and a judgment upon it. 94 Of the Excise. 100 A facetious Tale
of the Earl of Kildare. 100 Of my Lord Carleton. 100 A facetious Tale of a
Spanish Soldier. 101 Friendly wishes. 101 A comparison 'twixt the case of the
King of England with other Kings. 102 A Letter of respects to a Lady. 104 A
caution not to neglect the Latin for any vulgar Language. 105 Of Praises to
God, and how they are the best Oblations. 106 A facetious Tale of Henry the
Fourth of France. 107 America only free from Mahometisme. 18 The Alchoran
brought in by the Alfange. 19 Arabic the sole Language of the Alchoran. 17 Of
the black Bean in Mahomets heart. 3 Of vanity of beauties. 2 The Mendicant
Friars make a kind of amends for the excesses of the Cardinals and Bishops. 6
Of borrowing and buying of Books. 34 Canary the best of Wine. 74 Christianity
more subject to variety of opinions than any other Religion, and the cause
thereof. 12 Advice from attempting a business. 27 Reputation like a Venice glass.
26 A Fable of Fire, Water, and Fame. 26 Advice to a young Soldier. 26 A
facetious Tale of a Soldier. 27 Two famous sayings of Secretary Walsingham and
Cecill. 29 Of delay in business. 29 Of dispatch. 29 The Mulberry an Emblem of
Wisdom 30 The famous saying of Charles the fifth. 30 Of matches 'twixt England
and Spain. 30 Of the falling off of Catalonia and Portugal from the King of
Spain, and a judgment upon it. 31 The virtue of money. 31 A famous saying of
Cap. Talbot. 31 Of a hard intricat business. 32 Of the virtue of Letters. 33 A
Letter of reprehension for careless writing. 34 Some amorous Stanza's. 35 A
Letter of gratitude. 36 An Apology for Women. 37 Of good and bad Women. 37 Of
free courtesies. 38 A courtesy may be marred in the Mode. 38 An Apology for
silence. 39 A Tale of a N^apolitan Confessor. 39 A new Island discovered hard
by the Terreras. 39 Of the Hill Vesuvius. 39 Some rarities of Venice. 40 Of the
Genoways. 40 Of our Indian Mariners. 40 Grunnius Sophista's last Will. 42 The
Authors last Testament. 43 Of Melancholy. 44 A facetious tale of a Porter. 45 A
modest reply of a Letter of praise. 46 A Letter of Patience. 47 Of Chemistry.
47 Of the Diseases of the time. 47 A Letter of Recommendation. 48 Of
superflu^us Servants. 48 An advice to Travel. 49 Of reading of Books. 40 Of
partiality of News. 50 The History of Conanus and the 11000 Virgins mistaken.
51 Of Prisoners. 52 The Authors Epitaph. 52 Advice to a Cambridg Scholar. 53 A
Letter of comfort. 54 The effects of imprisonment. 55 Of Chemistry. 55 Of
Dunkirk. 56 A Letter of State. 56 A Tale of the late Queen of Spain. 57 The
Turks Prayer. 58 Of Nature, Fate, and Time. 58 A Consolatory Letter. 58 A
modest reply to a Letter Encomiastic. 59 A Letter of reprehension for not
writing. 60 Of Q. Eliz. pro and con. 61 How the Spaniards charge her. 61 Of
futilous Writers. 62 Of speeding Letters. 63 A Letter of Meditation. 64 The
advantage of Marriage. 66 A Letter of Complement to a Lady. 66 A Hymn to the
Blessed Trinity. 67 St. Austins wish in a Hymn. 69 Of fearing and loving of
God. 68 A large Discourse of all sorts of Beverages that are used on earth. 70
Of all sorts of Wines. 71 The Riddle of the Vineyard man. 70 Of German and
Greek Drinkers. 70 Of Sir Walter Rawleigh. 95 Of the pitiful condition of
England. 99 A congratulatory Letter from Travel. 105 Of Prayer and Praise. 106
Of the Excise. 107 A Tale of Monsieur de la Chatre. 107 The power of Letters.
109 Some Spanish Epitaphs. 110 Of French Lawyers. 113 A Letter Congratulatory
for marriage. 110 A Lettee Consolatory to a sick body. 113 Stanzas of Mortality.
114 Of the Passion Week. 115 A Caution for imparting secrets. 117 A Letter of
Intelligence. 118 Of Autology. 120 A Letter of Consolation. 121 A large Poem.
122 Self-travell one of the ways that lead us to Heaven. 122
Ut clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus: Clauditur Haec cera, clauditur
Illa sera.

As Keys do open chests,
So Letters open breasts.
AN Index to the last Parcel of EPISTLES.
OF the use of Passions. 1 Passions like Muscovia Wives expect to be checked.
1 The conquest of ones self the greatest point of valor. 1 Of the wars of
Venice. 2 The fearful commotions of Naples. 2 The horrid commotions in
Ethiopia. 2 Strange Revolutions in China. 2 The monstrous Insurrections in
Moscovia. 2 A Prophecy of Holland. 3 A Letter of correspondence. 3 Letters
compared to Echoes. 4 Of Heaven. 4 Endearments of love. 4 Of the Presbyter and
his first rise. 5 Of Calvin his profane appplications. 5 Of Geneva. 5 King
James called Presbytery a Sect. 6 Redemption the blessing paramount. 6 The
Eucharist the prime act of devotion. 6 A Hymn upon the Holy Sacrament. 7 A
Rapture. 8 The happiest condition of life. 9 Opinion the great Lady that rules
the world. 9 Conceit the chiefest thing that makes one happy. 9 Of the strange
monster in Scotland. 9 The uncertain state of a Merchant Adventurer. 9 A
Mariner scarce to be ranked among the living. 9 A rich City like a fatt Cheese,
subject to Maggots. 10 Congratulations to a married couple. 10 Of Tobacco, and
the virtu of it. 11 A strange cure wrought upon my Lord Scroop by a Pipe of
Tobacco. 11 The way to know how much smoke there is in a pound of Tobacco. 22 Of
Doctor Thorius Paetologie. 12 The differing Modes of taking Tobacco. 12 A
Distic of Tobacco. 12 Of Learning in general. 13 Handi-crafts men may well be
termed learned men. 13 A wholesome piece of policy of the Chinese. 13 A Tale of
Bishop Grosthead. 14 A mere Scholar a useless thing. 14 A facetious Tale of
Thomas Aquinas and Bonadventure. 14 A Speech of Alexander Hales. 14 The
general itching after Book-learning hurtful to England. 15 Gunpowder and
Printing about a time, and both hurtful. 15 The true learned men. 16 A jeer
upon the common Lawyer. 16 Of the Physician. 16 Pope Adrian's speech. 16 Of the
lunary world. 17 Antiquity cannot privilege an error. 17 Novelty cannot
prejudice truth. 17 Of the Antipodes. 17 The method how God powers down his
blessings. 18 The following day wiser than the foremost. 18 The Cadet older than
his elder brother. 18 Of experience. 18 The prime Philosophers held there was a
world in the Moon. 19 A notable comparison. 19 What kind of creatures are
thought to be in the body of the Sun. 19 Of Galileo's glass. 20 The Turks
opinion of the Sun. 20 The earth the basest of creatures. 21 Of Trismegistus.
21 The prerogatives of man. 21 A letter of complement to a Lady. 22 Of
friendship. 22 Of Fortunes wheel. 23 The power of God. 23 What use France has
made of Scotland. 24 An Italian saying appliable to England, 24 The old plot of
the Jesuit now don in England. 24 A letter of congratulation from foreign
travel. 25 What a traveller must carry home with him besides language. 25 It Is
probable the Spaniard will be to hard for the French. 25 A Letter complaining
of the hard condition of England. 27 Another of the miseries of the time. 27 A
conjunction 'twixt Spain and France the wholsom'st for Christendom. 29 A letter
of endearment. 30 Of Paul's Church. 31 Of translations. 33 The English and
Italian compared. 33 Translations like wines taken off the lees and powered into
botells. 33 How the English language grows rich. 54 What is chiefly expected
from a faithful Translator. 34 Of Prophecies. 35 The strange prediction of
Nostredamus. 35 Some wonderful Prophecies of the Welsh Bards reflecting upon
these times. 35 A Prophecy of White Hall. 35 A Prophecy for the soldier. 36
Of Witches. 36 How perverse men must be used in disputation. 37 All nations
enacted laws against witchcraft. 37 The Act of Parliament in England against
Witches. 37 The Imperial law against witches. 37 The Judaicall and Roman law
against witches. 37 Nostredamus his notable prediction reflecting upon England.
38 A notable story of Charlemain. 38 Saint Austin and Danaeus his opinion of
Witches. 38 Ola^s Magnus his opinion of King Ericus case that could command the
winds. 38 Of the Oracles. 38 A memorable story out of Plutarch. 38 The oath
that witches use to take. 39 The famous tale of Friar Louis in France. 39 Of
Rutterkin the witch that enchanted my Lord of Rutlands children. 39 A letter of
friendly endearments. 41 England cured of the Kings evil. 40 Of differences in
opinion. 42 Difference in opinion should not dissolve the bonds of human
society. 42 One of the special privileges of God Allmighty. 42 Themistius his
opinion touching the worship of the Creator. 43 Of Spiritual pride the
greatest engine the devil uses to destroy peeple. 43 TEAO^.
There are diverse other private short leters which may be said to be as small
Shallops attending greater Ships, therefore they must not be expected to carry
so much Ballast: And this has bin the usual method of Epistolizing amongst
the Ancients.

FINIS.
To the Intelligent Reader.
AMongst other reasons which make the English Language of so small extent, and
put strangers out of conceit to learn it, one is, That we do not pronounce as
we write, which proceeds from diverse superfluous Letters, that occur in many of
our words, which adds to ^e difficulty of the Language: Therefore the Author
has taken pains to ^trench such redundant, unnecessary Letters in this Work
(though the Printer has not bin so careful as he should have bin) as amongst
mul^itudes of other words may appear in these few, done, some, come; which
though we, to whom the speech is connaturall, pronounce as mo^syllables, yet
when strangers com to read them, they are apt to make ^em dissillabls, as
do-ne, so-me, co-me; therefore such an e is superfluous.

Moreover, those words that have the Latin for their original, the Author
prefers that Orthography, rather then the French, whereby di^ers letters are
spared, as Physic, Logic, Afric, not Physique, Logique, Afrique; favor, honor,
labor, not favor, honor, labor, and very many more, as also he omits the
Dutch k, in most words; here you ^all read peeple not pe-ople, tresure, not
treasure, tongue, not ton-gue, etc. Parliament not Parliament,, business, witness,
sickness, not business, witness, sickness; star, war, far, not star, war,
far, and multitudes of such words, wherein the two last Letters may well be
^ar'd: Here you shall also read pity, piety, witty, not piti-e, pieti-e,
^itti-e, as strangers at first sight pronounce them, and abundance of such
(...) words.

The new Academy of wits called l'Academie de beaux esprits, which ^he late
Cardinal de Richelieu founded in Paris, is now in hand to ^form the French
Language in this particular, and to weed it of all su^erfluous Letters, which
makes the Tongue differ so much from the Pen, (...) they have expo^'d themselves
to this contumelious Proverb, The ^renchman does neither pronounce as he
writes, nor speak as he ^inks, nor sing as he pricks.

Aristotle has a topic Axiom, that Frustra fit per plura, quod fi^ potest per
pauciora, When fewer may serve the turn, more is in ^in. And as this rule holds
in all things else, so it may be very well (...) in Orthography.

FINIS.

