A LETTER to a Member of PARLIAMENT for Settling GUINEAS.
SIR,
I Have Perused the Paper you sent me, Entitled, Guineas at 21 s. 6 d. will
make Money Plenty -- The People will bear it, etc. And I believe it was Writ by
One whose private Interest it is to have them so: He endeavors to answer three
Objections.

1. The People will not bear it. 2. It will be carried all away. 3. Not Lent to
the KING.
TO the 1st. he says, The People will bear it; and so say I: They must, if
compelled, whether Willing or no: If it will not breed Discontentments, and
Heart-Burning, it is Well. For People to lose so Prodigiously by them it is very
Hard. The Gentleman says, Not One in a Thousand will be any great Sufferer,
throughout the Kingdom: And yet (within three or four Lines afterward) he
says, He much pitys the Tradesmen, Farmers, and Tenants, both in City and
Country: Not Considering they make above three Parts of the Whole of the
Kingdom. I know People are for a Settlement what they shall go for, but not for
such a One. This I know, When News came from the House, that it was carried in
the Committee at 25 s. I never saw so much Joy and Satisfaction among all
People, in the City and Suburbs in my Life, before the other News came that it
was thrown out again; and then they were as Dejected. I verily believe, That if
they were settled thereabouts for some time, to the next Sessions of
Parliament, or a Year, etc. the Taxes would be speedily and cheerfully Paid,
and Trading as quick as for Twenty Years last past: It Is not amiss to give the
People as much Satisfaction and Ease as Possible, under Great Taxes and Dead
Trade: And, if the King take them at 25, or 26, and the Deficiency made up by a
Tax next Sessions, or otherwise, I Humbly Conceive, it would Content the People
better than to lose so much now at once.

Secondly, He says, It will not be carried away. I Answer, It will, if Interest
will do it; and it is Cheaper to carry it to Holland in Specie, than to Remit it
thither by Exchange; ^^nd Guineas too is Cheaper to be carried thither at 24,
or 25 s. than to Remit Money.

Thirdly, It will be Lent to the KING. And be better for his Majesty by a fifth
Part of all the Supplies given him; and will go a fifth Part farther, I Answer,
If it be so, then it is 20 per Cent Gain to to the Government, and loss to the
Subject; it is well if People are so Satisfied --

I Submit the Whole to Your Judgment: But it is my Opinion there is a Necessity
they be Settled now, or else declare by a Vote, You will not this Sessions
meddle with them more, then they will go for about 24, or 25 s. but at present
all Trade stands still almost; and will do till one of these two be done.

G. H.


