

LONDINOPOLIS; AN Historical Discourse OR PERLUSTRATION Of the City of LONDON,
THE Imperial Chamber, and chief Emporium OF Great Britain: WHEREUNTO Is added
another of the City of WESTMINSTER, WITH The Courts of Justice, Antiquities,
and new Buildings thereunto belonging.

By Iam Howel Esquire Senesco, non Segnesco.

LONDON, Printed by I. Streater, for Henry Twiford, George Sawbridge, Thomas
Dring, and John Place, and are to be sold at their Shops, 1657.

DE PONTE LONDINENSI Ejusque Stupendo Situ and Structura, Ad instar Celebris
illius Hexastichi poetae Sannazarii de urbe Veneta -- Viderat Hadriacis --
Cum Londinensem Neptunus viderat Urbem,
Vectus ibi propriis atque; revectus aquis,
Dum densam penetrat Syluam, Lucosque; ferentes
Pro ramis funes, pro foliisque; Cruces,
Cum superimpositum Torrenti flumine Pontem
Viderat, et rapido ponere jura freto,
Cum tantos muros, ferrumina, castra, tot Arcus
Vidit, and haec tergo cuncta jacere suo,
Arcus, qui possent totidem formare Rialtos
Metiri si quis summa vel ima cupit;
Haec Deus undarum aspiciens, fluxusque; retrorsum
Tundere, and horrendos inde boar Sonos,
Nunc mihi quanta velis Terrae miracula pandas
Est primus Mundi Pons, ait, Iste Stupor.
The same paraphrased in English.
Of London-Bridg, and the Stupendous Site, and Structure thereof.
When Neptune from his billows London spyde,
Brought proudly thither by a high Spring-Tyde;
As through a floating Wood He steered along,
And dancing Castles clustered in a throng;
When he beheld a mighty Bridge give law
Unto his Surges, and their fury awe;
When such a shelf of Cataracts did roar,
As if the Thames with Nile had changed her shore
When he such massy Walls, such Towrs did eye,
Such Posts, such Irons upon his back to lie,
When such vast Arches he observed, that might
Nineteen The prime Bridge in Venice.
Rialtos make for depth and height,
When the Cerulean God these things survayd,
He shook his Trident, and astonished said,
Let the whole Earth now all Her wonders count
This Bridge of Wonders is the Paramount.
To the Renowned City of London.
To the Right Honorable, Honorable, and all others, Who owe their first Birth
or wellbeing to so Noble a Metropolis.
IT was a notable Character, which Cornelius Tacitus, (that famous Register of
Time, who had lived here many years) did give of London about fifteen hundred
years ago, Londinum copia Negotiatorum, and Comeatu maxim celebre, London a
most renowned Mart for multitude of Merchants, and Commerce. If She deserved
such a Character in those days, what would She merit now? who being compared
to what she was then, may be said, in point of magnitude, to be as a large
Volume in Folio, to a Book in Decimo Sexto: And, in point of Trade, as in an
East Indy Carack, to a Quinbourough Oyster ketch.

I have read of some, who have bin enamored of Cities, as others use to be of
Mistresses: so Charles the Emperor, was struck with the love of Florence, when
among other expressions he said, That she was a fair Lady, fit to be seen only
on Holidayes; So a French Baron was so taken with the City of Paris, (which is
known to be none of the neatest) that he said, Could he live ever in Paris, he
would quit his right to Paradise. And it is storied of Tamberlain, that having
got Constantinople, the first Complement he put upon Her, was, that he had
heard so much of Her rare beauty, that He came from so far off to Court Her;
but answer was made, that it was the Custom of Thrace, to Court fair Ladies,
not with Trumpets and Drums, but with Dulcimers, and other melodious
Instruments.

I may well affirm, that London is not inferior to any of these, as will appear
in a Parallel hereunto annexed: And having breathed Air, and slept in her
bosom, now near upon forty years (except the times that I was abroad upon
foreign Employments,) it is no wonder, if I be habitually in love with Her; nor
have I bin wanting to express it many times by dedicating unto Her the great
French Dictionary refined, and enriched with diverse Additionals; Then in giving
Her some warnings by the sad destiny of Jerusalem, in an Epitome that goes of
Josephus; I showed my self also very sensible of Her case at that time, when I
addressd unto Her Englands Tears, and Mercurius Acheronticus. nor is it long
since, that I made public love to Venice, and Courted Naples also, and I came
off with no ill success; I hope to do the like here.

I know others ^ave treated already of the same Subject, and given a laudible
account of the City of London, but Gold may be often told over without fouling
the fingers. I have read near upon a dozen several Survayes of Rome and Venice,
with other Cities, and I always found new Observations; But it is now above
thirty four years ago, (which are near upon five Ages in the Law) since any
thing was written of London, and Westminster her collateral Sister; which tract
of time, affords variety of accidents, which the Reader shall find in this new
Account: wherein as I have bin careful not to pre^ermit any thing that's
Material, so my special Caution has bin not to thrust in any frivolous
pedantick things, or Superfluities, whereunto my nature has bin always
averse; Moreover, I promise the Reader, that he shall meet with many other
Observations here, which were never yet drawn off the Press, or exposed to
public light until now.

I will conclude my Epistle with this Question, If it was esteemed an honor
among the Greeks, to be born in Athens; If among the Italians, to be a Roman;
If among the Spaniards to be a Toledano: why should it be less honor for an
Englishman to be born in London?

My hearty prayers to Heaven are, for the incolumity, and welfare of this Great
City, for the aversion of all Judgments, and that she may still flourish with
affluence of all Earthly felicity; by which prayer I subscribe my self,

Much Honored Sirs, Your humble, and ready Servant, Iam: Howel.

SOME ADVERTISEMENTS TO THE READER.
THey who make researches into Antiquity, may be said to pass often through
many dark Lobbies, and dusky places, before they come to Aula lucis, the Great
Hall of light; They must repair to old Archives, and peruse many mouldred and
moth-eaten Records, and so bring light as it were out of darkness, to inform
the present World, what the former did, and make us see truth through our
Ancestors eyes. Now, though we commonly term Them that went before us our
Ancestors, yet if we have respect to the extent of Time, and the Age of the
World, we who live now, may be called the more Ancient; For They lived, some of
them in the Nonage, some in the Youth, some in the Adolescence, some in the
virility of the World, And We who now crawl up and down the earth, may be said
to live in the declining and doting old decrepit Age: Therefore if relation be
had to true longaevity, We may be rather called the Older: Insomuch, that a
Child born to day, as he is part of the Universe, and the product of Time, may
be said to be more ancient then Adam, which I conceive to be the meaning of
that common saying among us, The younger Brother is the ancienter Gentleman.

Moreover, it is desired, that the discerning Reader be advertized, that
Historians and Antiquaries, may well be compared to Architects, who in rearing
up a Fabric, although the Idaea, and design of the work, with the site, the
contrivement of rooms, the contignation of parts and Symmetry, be wholly in
themselves; yet in point of Substance, they fetch their Materials from else
where; so the Historian and Antiquary, though the method, the style, and
compilement be his, yet he has his matter from others, either from
Manuscripts, or printed Records, except these modern passages that are
Synchronical with himself. Furthermore, an Historian may be compared to one
walking in a Garden, and making a posie of Flowers, which he culs and plucks
from diverse beds and banks; now, though the Flowers be none of his, yet the
choice of them, and twisting them together, to give the fuller fragnancy, and
not to thrust in any unsavory vegetal, is solely his own work.

The Lord Bacon's Henry the seventh, and my Lord Harbert's Henry the eighth,
though the composition, and digesting be theirs, whereby they denominate the
Books, yet, under favor, touching the main Ingredients, they took them from
others, who had written the life of those Kings before: So, concerning this
present Treatise, although the trace, and form of the Structure be mine own;
yet, I am so much the Child of modesty, as to acknowledge to have fetched most
of my Materials from others, who preceded me in the same Subject; as from Mr.
Stow, and those industrious persons, who have made Additionals unto him: yet,
as I gave a hint before in my Epistle Dedicatory, there be diverse things
inserted here, which are not found there, nor any where else; besides those
modern Occurrences which have happened since, and are contemporary with myself.

THE CHIEFEST MATERIALS THAT Go to the Compilement of this new Piece.
1. A Proeme. 2. The Historical part of London touching her first Rise and
Foundation, with her degrees of growth. 3. Of the Great and glorious Temple of
St. Paul's, with its dimensions, and places annexed; together, with the rest of
the Churches in City, or Suburbs. 4. Of the 26. several Wards, Precincts, or
Aldermanries of London, into which the whole City is divided. 5. Of the
Political, and Civil Government of the City of London, as also of the
spiritual. 6. Of the Walls, Streets, Gates, and Towers of London; with the
Prisons, and places of restraint. 7. Of the Inns of Court and Chancery, of the
Doctors Commons, Gresham, and Sion College, with the public Schools. 8. Of
the Twelve chief Companies, whence the Lord Mayor is extracted, with other
Societies of Merchant Adventurers, and the 61. Corporations. 9. Of their
several Halls or Guilds, dispersed up and down in convenient places. 10. Of the
Great Tower of London, the Royal Exchange, of Guild-Leaden^ and Bassings-Hall,
etc. 11. Of the White, and Black, the Gray, Cruchet, and Austin Friars, with
other Religious Houses, as Nunneries and Hospitalls. 12. Of the famous, and
great Navigable River of Thames, from the first Source, till she discharges
her self into the Ocean. 13. Of London Bridge, and her admired Structure; which
nevertheless, would see better, had she fewer Eyes, and that her Nineteen
Arches were reduced to Nine. 14. Of the Prerogative, and great trust, the Lord
Mayor, and the City, have for the oversight, and repair of the said Bridge,
with the Conservancy of the said River. 15. Of the City of Westminster, and the
Abbey. 16. Of the Strand, the New Exchange, the Savoy, and all the Great Houses
toward the Waterside. 17. Of the Covent Garden, Saint Giles,
Lincolns-Inne-Fields, Saint Martins, and Drury Lane, with all the late New
Buildings. 18. Of Westminster Hall, and all the Tribunals of Justice, there
sedentary, 19. Of the High Court of Parliament, and the Admiralty, etc. 20. A
Parallel 'twixt London, and other Great Cities of the World, whereof diverse are
spoken of in the Corollary.
LONDON London the glory ^f Great Britains I Will Behold her Lands^^ip here, and
true pourfile.



1 St. Paul 2 White Hall 3 Suffolk house 4 York house 5 Savoy 6 Somerset
house 7 Arundell house 8 St Clemens 9 S. Dunstane 10 The Temple 11 S. Brides 12
S. Andrew 13 Baynards Castle 14 Queen Hythe 15 S. Pulche^s 16 Three C^^nes 17
The Waterhouse 18 The Still^^^^ 19 Bow Church 20 Guild Hall 21 S. Michaels 22
S Lorentz Poultney 23 Fishmongers Hall^ 24 The Old Swan 25 The Bridge 26 Gray
Church, 27 S Dunstan in the East, 28 Belinsgate, 29 Cristome house 30 The Tower
31 Tower wharfe, 32 S. Catharins, 33 S. Olaffe, 34 S. Marie Gveris, 35
Winchester house 36 The Globe, 37 B^^r Garden 38 The Swan, 39 Har^vwe on the
Hill. 40 Hamsted, 41 Hygate 42 Hackney 43 Po^^tney, 44 ^ll Ships, 45 Gally
Fuste, 46 Cool harbor,
THE PROEME, OR FIRST ENTRANCE Into the City of LONDON.
MY purpose is to give as exact an account, as my Enquiries can, of the
renowned City of London, with her Suburbs annexed; And, to proceed herein the
more regularly, the foundation of my Discourse shall be laid with that of
Hers, beginning with her first Rise or Original; Then it shall grow up with
Her, according to those Degrees of profection, that she is now arrived unto.

From her Foundation we will bring you to her Walls, and so lead you in at her
Gates; whence you shall walk along her streets, and visit her Churches with
other ancient Religious Houses, and public Edifices; Then we shall bring you
to refresh your self at her Conduits, and Aquaeducts, her brooks, bourns, and
Wells; Afterward, we shall gently lead you along over her Bridges, and so
bring you to solace your self upon the rare, and renowned River of Thames,
which we shall derive from her very source, and accompany her Stream all along,
till she comes to pay tribute to the Ocean; Then we shall make a perambulation
in her several Precincts, Divisions, and Wards. And because nothing displayes
the prudence of a City more, then her political way, and method of Government,
we shall endeavor to satisfy you in that point, and speak of her Magistracy,
her Privileges, her well-moulded Corporations and Companies, whereby we shall
take occasion to revive the memory of those famous Patriots, and Worthies,
which she has produced and bred, with their Munificence, their Merits, and
public Monuments.

We shall go on then to give the nearest conjecture we can make of her
dimensions, in point of length and latitude, and of the number of humane souls,
that usually dwell, and lodge within Her; Nor shall we conceal some Clouds that
have hung over her, and ill-favored clashings she has had with her Sovereign
Princes.

And lastly, There will be a short Discourse by way of parallel, betwixt the
City of London, and other the most populous great Marts of the World.

Of the Foundation, and first Rise of the City of LONDON.
IT is as difficult a task to find out the Original of some Nations and
Cities, as it is to find out the Spring of the mysterious River of Nile;
which tumbling down with a horrid noise of Cataracts through so many huge
Rocks, above two thousand miles, comes punctually every Summer solstice, to
visit the gran Cairo; and then takes her leave of Her, as punctually the
Autumnal Equinox next following, having first impregnated the hot womb of
Egypt, with a wonderful prolificall virtue, for the generation of so many
species of Animalls, and Vegetalls.

But to find out the Original of the City of London, it is not so hard a
matter; yet, there are variety of Opinions hereof, which we will briefly
examine; Ptolomy, Tacitus, and Antonine, call her sometimes Londinium, and
sometimes Longidinium. Ammianus Marsellinus, calls her Lundinum, and sometimes
Augusta, which is, the stately and magnificent City. There are some who call
Her Troia nova, or Troynovant; which appellation, Edward the first, in that
famous long Letter he writ to Pope Boniface, about the Scots Nation, seems to
assert: Others call her Caer Lud, other Dinas Belin; But that Opinion which
quadrats most with truth, is, that her first Founders, and Godfathers, were the
ancient Britains, (whom we now call Welsh) who by confession of all
Antiquaries, both domestic and sorraign, were the Aborigenes, and first
Inhabitants of this Country, being contemporary, and as it were concreated
with the Island her self; There are three denominations, which are derived from
the Britans, viz. Llhogdin; Llhwndian, and Llhandian, which we shall endeavor
to explane; Touching the first, the Britans call a ship Llhong, and Dinan a
Town. Insomuch, that Llongdin is no other then Shipton, or a Town of Ships; And
I have read of many Cities, who derive their names from Ships, as Naupactum,
Nauplia, Naualia Augusti, Nauctathmos; But none of these has more right to
assume the Title of Shipton, or Llhongdin (according to the British) as the
City of London has, in regard that she is situated, upon the gentle ascent, or
flank of a Hill hard by a dainty Navigable River, which swelling at certain set
hours with the Ocean Tides, she is able by her deep, and safe Channel to
entertain the greatest bottoms and Ships, that can ride on Neptunes back, which
makes Her so famous a Mart, those Ships bringing in all the rich Commodities
that the World can afford; whereunto alludes old Robert of Gloucester, in the
Rimes of those days, which I thought worthy to insert here for the Antiquity
of the Dialect. In the Country of Canterbury, most plenty of Fish is;
And most chase of Beasts about Salsbury I wis,
And London Ships most, and Wine at Winchester,
At Hartford Sheep and Ox, and fruit at Worcester,
Soap about Coventry, and Iron at Glocestor,
Metal, Lead, and Tin in the Country of Exceter,
Enorwick of fairest wood, Lincoln of fairest men,
Cambridge and Huntingdon most plenty of deep venne,
Ely of fairest place, of fairest sight Rochester.


Touching the second British appellation Llhwndian, Caesar, and Strabo, do
mention, that the ancient Britans called those Woods or Groves, which they had
barrocadoed and fenced about with Trees cast down, and plash'd, to prevent all
inrodes and assaults, they called such a place I say Llhwn, which is equivalent
to a fenced Town, or dwelling, as the Poet sings of them. -- Their Houses were
the Thicks,
And bushy queaches hollow Caves, and Hardles made of sticks.


And it is more then probable, that in that place, where St. Paul's Church now
stands, there was a Wood or Grove at first, in regard there was a Fane or
Temple erected there to the honor of Diana; for Historians observe, that
whereas Venus, Mars, and Vulcan were used to have their Temples in the Suburbs,
Jupiter and Apollo within the City, the Goddess Diana was used to have her
Temples set up in Woods, which might make the Britains denominate that place
Llhwndian, which is as much as Diana's Grove or Town.

As this derivation carries a great semblance of truth with it, so the third,
viz. Llhandian carries as much, if not a greater verisimilitude, and weighs
most with me; The Britains to this day, call a Church or Temple Llhan, whereof
there be a great number in Wales to this day, as Llhangorse, Llhansawel,
Llhandilo, etc. which signifies the Churches of such places; And whereas by
the Current and consentient opinion of all Antiquaries, there was a Pagan
Temple, or Fane erected to Diana, in that place where now St. Paul's stands,
there being yet there a place called Camera Dianae, where Ox heads and bones
are daily found, which were used to be offered her as victims and sacrifices, I
say, it is more then probable, that the Britains were induced thereby to call
the place Nhandian, which is the Temple of Diana; and so in tract of time, the
word was contracted, and came to be called London.

Now, who was the first Founder of London, is no where precisely found. But
whosoever first founded her, they showed much prudence in the choice of
situation; For the happy and fortunate Estate of the City, has given good
proof, that built she was in a good hour, when some propitious Star was then
the ascendent, and marked for long life and continuance, and that she is for
antiquity very honorable; Ammianus Marcellinus gives us to understand, that
she was called an ancient City in his time, which is above twelve hundred years
ago; Cornelius Tacitus does seem to do the like three hundred years before,
who gives her this Character, Londinum copia Negotiatorum, and commeatu valde
celebre for multitude of Merchants, and commerce, London is very renowned: This
only was wanting to the glory thereof, that she had not the name of Free City,
nor of Colony; Neither indeed had it stood with the Roman interest, if any City
flourishing with Trade, should have enjoyed the right of a Free City; And
therefore it was, as may be well supposed, that they ordained her to be a
Prefecture, for so they termed Towns where Marts were kept, and Justice
administered, yet so that they had no Magistrates of their own, but rulers were
sent every year to govern them, and for to execute Law in public matters,
namely of Tax, Tribute, Tolls, Customs, Warfare, etc. from the Senate of Rome;
Hence it comes, that Tacitus the Panegyrist, and Marcellinus aforesaid, call
her only a Town; But although she was not lostier in name, yet in Wealth,
Riches, and Prosperity, she flourished as much as any other, yea and continued
always the same, under the Dominions of Romans, Saxons, and Normans, seldom or
never afflicted with any great calamities. In the reign of Nero, when the
Britains had conspired to recover, and resume their liberty, under the Conduct
of Baodicia, the Londoncrs could not with all their vveepings hold Suetonius
Paulinus, but that after he had leavied a power of the Citizens to aid him, he
would needs dislodge, and remove from thence, leaving the City naked to the
Enemy, who forthwith surprised and slew some few, whom either weakness of Sex,
feebleness of age, or sweetness of the place had detained there: Neither had
she sustained less loss, and misery, at the hands of the Gauls, if she had
not suddenly, and beyond all expectation by Gods providence bin relieved; For
when C. Alectus had by a deceitful stratagem, made away Cara^sius, who taking
advantage of our rough Seas, and of Dioclesians dangerous Wars in the East,
and withal, presuming of the Gauls, (now French) and most venturous Mariners,
and Servitors at Sea, withheld to himself the Revenues of Britain and Holland,
and born for the space of six years, the Title of Emperor Augustus, as his
Coins here very often do show: When M. Aurelius Asclepiedotus had in a Battle
slain Alectus in the third year now of his Usurpation of the Imperial Purple
and State, those French who remained alive after the Battle hastening to
London, would have sacked the City, had not the Thames, who never fai^'d to
help the Londoners, very opportunely brought in the Roman Legions, who by
reason of a Fog at Sea, were severed from the Navy: For they put the Barbarians
to the Sword, all the City over, and thereby gave the Citizens, not only safety
by the slaughter of their Enemies, but pleasure in beholding such a sight; And
then it was, as our Chronicles record that Lucius Gallus was slain by a Brook
side, which ran almost through the middle of the City, and of him was called by
the British Nantgall, in English Wallbrook; which name remains yet in a Street,
under which there is a ^ewer within the ground, to rid away the filth, and
ordures of the City, Not far from London-stone, which I take to be a Mile-mark
or Milliary, such as was in the Market places at Roms, from which were taken
dimensions of all journies, every way, considering it is near the midst of the
City, as it lies in length. Neither is it probable, she was yet walled about;
But a little after our Stories report, that Constantine the Great, at the
instance of his Mother Helena, did first fence her about with a Wall made of
rough stone, and British Bricks, which took up in compass, above three miles,
so that it enclosed the Model of the City almost apiece, but not equal on
every side, considering, that from East to West, she is far longer then from
South to North. That part of this Wall which stood on the Thames side, is by
the continual flowing, and washings of the River fallen down and decayed; yet
there appeared certain remains thereof in Henry the seconds time, as
Fitzstephen, who then lived does testify. The rest now standing, is stronger
toward the North, which not many years since, was reedified by the means of
Ioceline, Lord Mayor of London; But toward East and West, although the Barons
in old time, during their Wars, repaired and renewed it with the ruynes of
the Jews houses then demolished, yet it grew quickly, all through, out of
decay; For Londoners like to those old Lacedaemonians, laughed at strong walled
Towns, as Cot-houses for Women, thinking their own Cities sufficiently fenced,
when they are fortified with bones, and not with stones.

This Wall gives entrance at seven principal double Gates; for I willingly
omit the smaller, which as they have bin lately repaired, so they have also new
names given them;

On the West side there be two, to wit, Ludgate of King Lud a Britain; or
Flud-gate, as Leland is of opinion, of a little flud running beneath it, like
as the Gate Fluentana in Rome, built again from the foundation; This Gate was
made a free Prison, Anno 1378, Bremer being Major, which was confirmed 1382. by
a Common Council in the Guild Hall, where 'twas ordained, that all Freemen of
London should for debts, trespasses, accounts, and contempts, be imprisoned in
Ludgate, where at first for lodging and water, they did not pay any thing. We
go next to Newgate, the fairest of all the Gates so called from the newness
thereof, whereas before it was called Chamberlane Gate, which now is the
public Gaol or Prison for Criminalls; and also for civil actions, for the
County of Middlesex. And it has bin so many Ages, as appears by Records in
King John's time; as also in King Henry the third, who (as an old Author
testifies) sent a Command to the Sheriffs of London, to repair the Gaol of
Newgate.

On the North side are four Gates, viz. Aldersgate, or Oldersgate from the
antiquity thereof, or as others would have it from Aldrich a Saxon; the second
is Cripplegate of a Spitle of Cripples sometimes adjoining thereunto; The third
is Mooregate, called so of a Moory ground hard by, which is now draind up, and
made fair and firm, and turned into a field and delightful walks. Which Gate
was first built by Fal^oner Lord Mayor, in the year of our Lord 1414. Then
Bishopsgate of a Bishop the Benefactor; which Gate the Dutch Merchants, or Hans
of the Styliard were bound by Covenant both to repair, and defend at all times
of danger and extremity.

On the East side there is Aldgate, so named from the oldnesse, or Elbegate as
others term it, which has bin often re-edified; It is thought, that two Gates
more stood, besides the Bridge gate, by the Thames side, namely Belmsgate, now
a Wharfe or a Key for the Scots Trade; and Donregate or the Watergate, commonly
called Dowgate.

There be some Posterns besides that may go for Gates, as that of Christ's
Hospital, which was made in the Reign of Edward the sixth; Another was made out
of the wall lately into Moorfields. But the Postern by the Tower shows that it
has bin very ancient, and an arched Gate of much trust; for in times past
there was always a person of quality who was Custos of that Posterne. Toward
the Rivers side, there are also many water gates for the better security of the
City.

Where the wall ends toward the River, there were two strong Forts or
Bastions, of which the one Eastward remains yet, usually called the Tower of
London, called in the old British Bringwin, or Tourgwin, which in English is,
the White Tower; a most famous and goodly Citadel encompassed about with thick
and strong Walls, full of lofty, and stately Turrets, fenced about with a broad
and a deep ditch, furnished also with an Armory or Magazine of Warlick
munition, with other buildings besides, so that it resembles a Town of it
self; and one may well suppose, that those two Castles which Fitz-stephens
records to have bin on the East side of this City, went both to the making of
this one: The other Fort was on the West side of this City, where Fleet a
little riveret ran, whence Fleetstreet took its name, and in time, it was able
to bear Vessels, as appears in some Parliament Rolls, which Riveret discharges
it self into the Thames. Fitz Stephen calls this the Palatin Tower or Castle;
And they write, that in the Reign of William the Conqueror, it was consumed by
fire, out of the ruins whereof a great part of Saint Paul's Church, was newly
built; And also on the very plot of ground where it stood, Robert Kilwarby
ArchBishop of Canterbury founded a Religious House for the Dominican Friars,
whence we call the place Black-fryars; whereby a man may easily guess of what
bigness it was; howbeit, in that place, stood in the days of Henry the second
(Gervase of Tilbury in his Book called Otia Imperialia is my Author) two Forts
or Ramparts, the one whereof belonged to Bainard, the other to the Baron of
Monfichet by right of succession, but nothing remains of them to this day;
yet some think that Pembroke House was a piece of them, which we term Bainards
Castle, of Bainard a noble man of Dunmow, whose possession sometimes it was,
and whose Successors the Fitz Waters were in right of inheritance, who were
Ensign-bearers of the City of London, (as shall be told hereafter) and among
them Robert Fitz water, had license of K. Edward the first, to sell the Site of
Bainards Castle to the forenamed ArchBishop Kilwarby. Neither was this City at
that time walled only, but also when the Flamins or Pagan Priests were taken
away, and Christian Religion established under that good Emperor Constantine,
a Bishop was installed in their room* for it appears at the Council of Arles,
which in the year of grace 314 was held under the said Constantine the great,
the Bishop of London was present; for he subscribed, as it is to be seen in the
first Tome of the Council in this manner. Restitutus, Bishop in the City of
London out of the Province of great Britain; Which Restitutus and his
Successors, had their Seat and residence as some affirm, as Saint Peter's in
Cornhil.

From that time, London flourished in such honor, that she began to be called
Augusta, and by that name was famous under the Emperor Valentinian; For
Ammianus Marcellinus in his 27 Book writes thus, And going forward to London
an ancient Town which posterity called Augusta: and in the 28 Book, He went
from Augusta, which men of old time called London; Whence it came that after
Constantine's time, there was a Mint appointed therein; For we read in those
Pieces of Money, which he caused to be stamped in honor of his Father
Constantius, and in others; this was the Inscription, P. Lon. S. that is
Pecunia Londino signata, Money stamped in London. He who had the charge and
overseeing thereof under the Comes of Sacrarum largitionum, is in the Book of
Notice termed, Praepositus the saurorum Augustensium in Britannia, that is,
Provost of the Treasury of Augusta or London, in Britany. For this name Augusta
was a name full of Dignity and Majesty; And both Founders and Repairers of
Cities, when they hoped or wished, that such Cities would become flourishing
and powerful, gave them significant names of good fortune; But among the most
auspicious names that be, none is more magnificent, none more auspicate and
glorious than Augusta. For, this of Augustus, the most gracious and mighty
Emperor Octavianus took unto himself, not without the judgment of the best
learned. Surnamed he was, says Dio, Augustus as one of great Majesty above the
nature of man: for what things be most honorable and sacred, are called
Augusta: Neither had London this name for so high an honor, without the
License of the Roman Emperors; In regard that names could not be imposed upon
Cities without authority, as Virgil notes in that verse of his; Urbem
appellabant, permisso nomine, Acestam.
The City, by permission, Acesta they did name.
But as continuance of time has outworne this so honorable a name of Augusta:
to it has confirmed that other most ancient name Londinum. Whiles it enjoyed
the foresaid name Augusta, it escaped fair from destruction by a rebellious rout
of Ransakers; But Theodosius the father of Theodosius the Emperor did cut them
in pieces whiles they were encombred with their spoils, and entered, as
Mareianus says, with exceeding great joy in triumphant manner into the City
distressed before, and overwhelmed with grievous calamities; And marching with
his Army from thence, he by his valor and prowess, so freed Britain from
those intolerable calamities and dangers wherewith she was beset, that the
Romans, as witnesses Symmachus, honored him among other ancient Worthies, and
men of high renown with the Statue of a man of Arms. Not long after, when the
Romans Empire in Britain was come to an end, in that public destiny, and fatal
defection of the whole State, it fell unto the English Saxons, but in what
sort, it is not well agreed on among Authors; It is most probable that
Vortigern to redeem himself, being taken prisoner, delivered it for his ransom
unto Hengist the Saxon, considering that it did belong unto the East Saxons,
whose Country also, as Writers do record, Vortigern upon that condition made
over unto Hengist.

At which time the state of the Church went also to wrack, and endured sore
affliction; the Pastors were either slain, or forced to fly, their flocks
worried, and havoc made of all, as well Church goods as others. Theon the last
Bishop of London of the British blood, was fain to hide the holy Relic of
Saints for a memorial, as my Author says, and not for any superstition. But
although those days of the English Saxons were such, that a man might truly
say, Mars then brandished and shook his weapons, yet was London nevertheless,
as Bede testifies, a Town of Trade, and traffic, frequented by many Nations
resorting thither by Sea and Land; But afterward when a more gracious gale of
peace breathed favorably upon this wearied Island, and the English Saxon began
to profess Christianity, it also began to flourish afresh; for Ethelbert King
of Kent, under whom Sebert reigned in this tract, as it (...) his Vassal, and
by courtesy, founded here a Church, and did consecrate it to Saint Paul, which
being soon reedified and repaired, became at last most stately and magnificent,
it was endowed by degrees with fair revenues, and livings, wherewith were
maintained a Bishop, a Dean, a Chanter, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, fire
Archdeacons, thirty Prebendaries, and diverse other Incumbents and Officers, who
might have a hansome subsistence thereby.

The East part of this Church seems to be the newer, and more curiously
wrought, having under it a very fair large arched Vault, which also is Saint
Faiths Church; It was built out of the ruins of that Castle Palatine (spoken
of before) by Mauritius the Bishop, about the year of our Lord 1086, whereas it
had been formerly consumed by a woeful accidental fire, whereof William of
Mamesbury writes thus; The beauty whereof is so magnificent, that it deserves
to be numbered in the rank of the most excellent Edifices, so large as that
arck'd Vault underneath, and the Church above it of such capacity that it may
seem sufficient to receive any multitudes of people whatsoever. Because
therefore Bishop Maurice carried a mind beyond all measure in this project, he
transmitted the cost and charge of so laborious a piece of work unto those that
came after: In the end, when B. Richard his Successor had made over all the
Revenues belonging unto the B^shoprick to the building of this Cathedral
Church; sustaining himself and his family otherwise in the mean while, he
seemed in a manner to have done just nothing, notwithstanding that he spent his
whole substance thereabout, and yet small effects came thereof.

The West part, as also the Cross Isle are very spacious, high built, and
goodly to be seen by reason of such huge Columns, and are marvellously
beautified with an arched roo^ of stone. Where these four parts cross one
another and meet in one, there arises up a mighty large and lofty Tower, upon
which stood a spire Steeple, covered with lead, mounting up to a wonderful
altitude; for it was no less than five hundred, and five and thirty foot high
from the ground, which in the year 1087, was set on fire by lightning, and
burnt with a great part of the City, but being rebuilt, was afterward fi'rd
again with lightening about an hundred and fifty years ago, and was not
perfectly repaired ever since.

The measure and proportion of this stately structure, shall be here set down
out of an old authentic Writer, who says, that Saint Paul's Church contains
in length 690 foot, the breadth thereof is 130 foot, the height of the West
arched roof from the ground carries 102 foot, and the new fabrique from the
ground is 88 foot high, etc.

The ground belonging to this great Temple, in nature of a Coemitery or Church
yard was of vast expansion, for, it reached North, as far as St. Nicholas
market place; West, almost as far as Ludgate; and South, near to Baynards
Castle: Now, as they say, that Rome was not built in a day, no more was this
great and glorious Sanctuary, but a long tract of time, and some Ages passed
before it came to be entirely completed, and made a perfect Cross, which is
the exact shape of it. Nor did there want many advantages, according to the
Genius of those times, to advance the work* for persons of good rank, besides
pecuniary Contributions, did labor themselves therein, in their own persons,
thinking to do God Almighty good service, to have a hand in rearing up his
Temple; Besides, It was an ordinary thing, for the ghostly Father to lay
penances upon some penitentiaries, as Masons, Carpenters, Bricklayers,
Playsterers, and others to work so many days gratis in the building, before
they could get an absolution; Insomuch, that it may be said, that as Paul's
Church was partly ^ailt by the sins of the people, so it is now destroyed by
the sins of the people.

That there stood in old time, a Fane or Pagan Temple to Diana, in this place,
(as before was hinted) some have more than only conjectured, for there are
Arguments to make this conjecture good; Certain old houses adjoining are in the
ancient Records of the Church called Diana's Chamber; and in the Churchyard,
while Edward the first reigned, an incredible number of Ox-heads were found, as
we find in our Annals, which the common sort at that time wondered at, as the
sacrifices of the Gentiles: and the learned know, that Taurapolia were
celebrated to the honor of Diana.

But ever since this Temple was erected, it has been the Sea of the Bishops of
London: and the first Bishop it had under the English, some hundred years after
Theon the Br^t^sh Bishop, was Melitus a Roman, consecrated by Austin Archbishop
of Canterbury, in honor of which Austin, (though flat against the Decree of
Pope Gregory the great) the Ensigns of the Archbishopric, and the Metropolitan
See were translated from London to Canterbury.

Within this grand Cathedral, there lies Saint Erkenwald, as also Sebba King
of the East Saxons, who gave over his Kingdom to serve Christ: King Etheldred,
who was an oppresser rather than a Ruler of this Kingdom, cruel in the
beginning, wretched in the middle, and shameful in his end; so outrageous he
was in connivency to parricides, so infamous in his flight and effeminacy, and
so disastrrous in his death; Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, Sir Simon de Burly, a right noble Knight of the Garter, executed by
encroch'd authority without the Kings assent, Sir John de Beauchamp Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, John Lord Latimer, Sir John Mason Knight, William
Harbert Earl of Pembrook, Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England, a man of a deep reach, and exquisite judgment; Sir Philip Sid^ey, Sir
Francis Walsingham, two famous Knights; Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor
of England; and a great many Worthies more, lodge there until the Resurrection.

Besides this Church, there is not any other work of the English Saxons extant
in London; for why, they continued not long in perfect peace, considering that
the West Saxons subdued the East Saxons, and London began to be tributary to
the Mercians; Scarcely were these civil Wars hushed, when a new tempest brake
out of the North, I mean the Danes, who pitiously tore in pieces this whole
Country, and shook this City very sore; for the Danes brought her under
subjection, but Alfred recovered her out of their hands; and after he had
repaired her, he gave her unto Ethelred Earl of the Mercians, who had married
his daughter; yet those wastful depopulators, did what they could afterward to
win her by siege: but Canutus, who specially by digging a new Channel,
attempted to turn away the Thames from her, though the labor was lost, the
Citizens did still manfully repel the force of the enemy; yet were they alarmed
and terrified ever and anon by them, until they lovingly received and admitted
as their King William Duke of Normandy, whom God designed to be born for the
good of England against those so many spoilers; presently whereupon, the winds
were laid, the clouds dispelled, and golden days shone upon her: since which
time she never sustained any signal calamity, but through the special favor,
and indulgence of Heaven, and bounty of Princes, obtained very large and great
immunities: for she began to be called the Kings Chamber, and so flourished
anew with fresh Trade, and concourse of Merchants, that William of Malmsbury
who lived nere those times termed it A noble and wealthy City, replenished with
rich Citizens, and frequented with the Commerce of Occupiers, and Factors
coming from all parts; Fitz-Stephen living also in those days has left in
writing, that London at that time counted 122 Parish Churches, and thirteen
Convents or Monasteries of Religious Orders; Moreover, he relates, that when a
Muster was made of able men to bear Arms, they brought into the field under
diverse Colors 40000 Foot, and 20000 Horsemen.

London about this time began to display her wings, and spread her train very
wide; Buildings did much increase, and the Suburbs strerch'd forth from the
Gates a great way on every side, but Westward especially, which may be said to
be best peopled, and the civillest part. For there, all the twelve Inns of
Court are situate for the Students of the Law; whereof four being very fait
and large belong to the Judicial Courts, the rest to the Chancery: Besides two
Inns more for the Servientes ad legem, or the Sargeants at Law; ^ere such a
number of young Gentlemen do so ply their Studies in all kind of Sciences, and
other civilities, besides the Law; that for a choice way of Education and
Gallantry, Sir John Fortescue, in his Treatise of the Laws of England, does
affirm, It is not inferior to any place of Christendom: The said four principal
Houses are the Inner Temple, the middle Temple, Graies Inn, and Lincolns June;
The two former stand in the very same place, where in times passed, during the
Reign of King Henry the second, Heraclius Patriark of Jerusalem, consecrated a
Church for the Knight-Templers, which they had newly built, according to the
form of the Temple, near unto the Sepulcher of our Savior at Jerusalem, for at
their first Institution, about the year of our Lord 1113. they dwelt in part of
the Temple, hard by the Holy Sepulcher, whereof they were so named, and vowed
to defend Christian Religion, the Holy Land, and Pilgrims going to visit the
holy Sepulcher, against all Mahumetans and Infidels, professing to live in
chastity and obedience; whereupon, all men voluntarily, and with candid
Christian hearts embraced and honored them: so that through the royal
munificence of Princes, and other devout people, having got very fair
possessions, and exceeding great wealth they flourished in a high reputation
for piety and devotion; yea, out of an opinion of the holiness of the men, and
of the Place, King Henry the third, and many Noblemen desired much to be buried
in their Church among them, where some of their Statues are to be seen
crosse-legd to this day; for so they were used to be buried in that Age, having
taken upon them the Cross to serve in the holy Wars, and vowed the same
accordingly: among whom, was William Marshall the elder, a powerful man in his
time; William and Gilbert his Sons Marshals of England, and Earls of
Pembroke. Upon William the Elder, there were in the upper part engraven these
words, Comes Pembrochiae; and upon one side this Verse. Miles eram Martis, Mars
multos vicerat armis.

But in process of time, when with insatiable greediness, they had hoarded up
much wealth, by withdrawing Tithes from many Churches, and appropriating
spiritual Livings unto themselves; and by other means, their riches turn^d to
their ruin; which may be one day the fortune of the Jesuits, as I heard Count
Gondamar once say. For thereby, their former innocence and piety began to be
stifled, they sell a clashing with other Religious Orders, their professed
obedience to the Patriark of Jerusalem was rejected; they dr^w daily more envy
upon themselves, and an ill repute; insomuch-that in the year 1312. this Order
was condemned of impiety and other heinous crimes, and all this by the Popes
Authority; but specially, by the instigation of the French King, they were
utte^ly abolished. Nevertheless, their possessions here, were by Authority of
Parliament, assigned unto the Knights Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem,
lest that such Lands given to Religious and good uses, should be alienated
against the pious Donors Wills. Yet it appears in ancient writings, that this
place, after the expulsion of the Templers, was the Seat and Habitation of
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and Sir Hugh Spencer, King Edward the seconds Minion,
afterward of Sir Aimer de Valence, Earl of Pembrook, and in the end turned to
two Colleges or Inns of Court for the study of the Laws; The other two great
Inns, were also the mansions of Noble men, Grayes Inn of the Lord Gray of
Wilton, and the other of the Earls of Lincoln.

Near unto this, Henry the third erected between the two Temples, a House for
Converts, as they called it, for the maintenance of those that were con^erted
from Iudaisme to Christianity, which Edward the third afterward made an
Archive, to keep Rolls and Records in, and therefore it is called to this day,
The Rolls.

In the year 1381. the Rebels of Essex and Kent, among other places destroyed
and pulled down the Lodgings and Houses of this Temple, took out of the Church
the Books and Records, that were in hutches of the Apprentices of the Law,
carried them out into the street, and burnt them. The House they spoiled, and
burnt also, out of an hatred they bore to Sir Robert Hales, Lord Prior of St.
John of Jerusalem, which was a place of so high a Dignity, that the Prior of
St. John's, was accounted the first Parliamentary Peer of England; But the said
House at sundry times, was repaired again, and touching the Gate House of the
middle Temple, Sir Amias Paulet did build it up, while he remained Prisoner,
having incurred the indignation of Cardinal Wolsey, for an old grudge. The great
Hall in the middle Temple was built about the year 1572. in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. The Temple-Church had of old a Master, and four stipendary Priests,
with a Clerk for the ministration of divine service, who had allowance given
them out of the Revenues of St. John of Jerusalem, and that Hospital: but now
by the revolution of time, and Ecclesiastical alterations, they have but one
Minister to serve them.

Of fresh water Rivers, Aqueducts, Conduits, and Fountains that belong to the
City of LONDON.
AS, the principal thing that conduces to the health of humane bodies, is the
blood that runs through their Veins, so the chiefest thing that tends to the
welfare of a City, is to have Springs and Conduits of fresh water run within
her: therefore we will proceed now; to give an account of those ancient and
present Rivers, Brooks, Boorns, Pools, Wells, Conduits, and Aqueducts, which
serve to refresh the City of London.

In former Ages, until the Conquerors time, and long after; the City of London
was watered (besides the River of Thames on the South part) with the River of
Wells, as it was then called, and on the West with water called Wallbrook,
running through the midst of the City, to pay Tribute unto the Thames. There
was another water or boorn, which run within the City through Langborn Ward,
watring the East part; In the West Suburbs was also another great Water called
Oldborn, which had its fall into the River of Wells. Then were there 3.
principal Fountains or Wells in the other Suburbs, to wit, Holy Well, Clements
Well, and Clarks Well; Near unto this last named Fountain, were diverse other
Wells, viz. Fags well, Skinners well, Tode well, Loders well, and Rad well. All
which Wells having the fall of their over-flowings into the said River, much
increased the stream, and in that place, gave it the name of Well: In
West-Smithfield, there was a Pool in Records, called Horse pool, and another in
the Parish of St. Giles without Cripplegate; Besides which, they had in every
street, and lane of the City, diverse fair Wells, and fresh Springs, after which
manner, the City was then served with sweet and fresh waters, which being since
decayed, other means have bin found to supply the want: But the prime and
principal device was found out by that worthy Briton, and Citizen of London,
Sir Hugh Middleton, by whose wit, care, and cost, the new River of Ware was
brought from Chadwel, and Amwel, to water and refresh the heart, and bowels of
the City; The business was long in suspense, and under weighty deliberation, it
received heat and cold a long time, being exposed to so many difficulties, and
vast expense, able to terrify the stoutest man. At last, courage and
resolution, with a love to the public good met in the breast of the
Adventurer, and spurred him on to so glorious an enterprise, which has proved
so happily commodious, and of such infinite utility to the whole City, that had
he lived under some other Meridians, that I know, he should have had his Statue
erected in the eminentest place of the City, to eternize his name and transmit
his memory, and keep it fresh (like his waters) to all future Ages; Now as Mr.
Stow speaks very ingeniously, if those enemies to all good actions, Danger,
difficulty detraction, contempt, scorn, and envy, could have prevailed by their
malevolent interposition, either before, at the beginning, and in the very
birth of the attempt, and a good while after; this work had never bin
accomplished.

It Is true, Queen Elizabeth gave way, by act of Parliament, to her Citizens of
London, and power for cutting and conveying of a River from any part of
Middlesex or Hartfordshire into the City of London, with a limitation of ten
years time for the performance thereof; but that Enterprise expired with her
life: King James her immediate successor, did grant the like, but without-date
of time for the same effect; And when the courage of others were quite quail'd
and utterly refused the business, Sir Hugh Middleton did undertake it, and ^o
with infinite pains, and no less expense, he finished the work, by bringing a
River of wholesome fine cheerful water from Chadwel and Amwel, to the North side
of London, near Islington, where he built a large Cistern to receive it, The
work began the 28. day of February, Anno Dom. 1608. and in the compa^s of five
years was fully completed. Touching the Aquaeduct, or the conveyance thereof
to London, it hardly can be imagined, what difficulties and rubs there were in
the way, by reason of the various qualities of grounds, through which the water
was to pass; some being ozie, ^oft, and muddy; others again as stiff, and
craggy; The depth of the Trench in some places descended full thirty foot and
more, whereas in other places, it required as much artifice, to mount it over a
valley in troughs betwixt Hills, and those troughs to be supported by wooden
Arches, some of them fixed in the Earth very deep, and rising in height above
23. foot. Being brought to the foresaid great Cestern, the water was not yet
let in, till on Michaelmas day, Anno 1613. being the day that Sir Thomas
Middleton, Brother to the said Sir Hugh, was elected Lord Mayor of London for
the year ensuing. In the afternoon of the same day, Sir John Swinerton, then
Lord Mayor, accompanied with the said Sir Thomas, Sir Henry Mountague, Recorder
of London, and many of the worthy Aldermen, rode in a solemn manner, to see the
great Cestern, and first issuing of the strange River thereunto, which then was
made free Denizon of London, and the Solemnity was thus. A Troop of Laborers
to the number of threescore, or more, well apparelled, and wearing green
Monmouth Caps, after the British manner, all alike, carried Spades, Shovels,
Pickaxes, and such like Instruments of laborious Employment, and marching after
Drums, twice or thrice about the Cistern, presented themselves before the
Mount, where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen were, where after a handsome
speech, the Flud-gates flew open, the stream ran cheerfully into the Cistern,
the Drums and Trumpets sounding in triumphant manner, and a gallant peal of
Chambers gave a Period to the entertainment. A noble achievement it was, as
this reracted to Sir Hugh Middleton, does partly set forth, which never saw
public light until now. Ad Hugonem Middleton equite^s Auratum
de stupenda hac aquarum opera.
Compita qui fluvium per Londinensia du^xti,
Ut jam quisque suis vicus abundet aquis,
Non Aganippe tuas satis est depromere lauds,
Haec scaturigo nova quam tibi fundit aquae.


Of the famous, great Navigable River of Thames.
WE will go now from the New River to the Old, the Famous and Ancient River
of Thames, and find out her source, bed, and streams. She has her head or
spring out of the flank of a hill in Catswold Downs, about a mile from Tetbury,
near unto the Fosse, a high road, so called in ancient times, where it was
heretofore called Isis or the Ouse, from hence it runs toward the East, not
without some Meanders and windings, and meets with the Cirne or Chiurne, a
Brook whereof Cirncester town by which it runs takes the name; From hence it
hasteneth to Creekelade, otherwise called Crekanford, Lechlade, Ratcotebridg,
Newbridg, and Ev^sham, receiving in her passage many other small Rivelets,
Brooks, Becks, and Rundels; And on this side the Town, divides her self into
two streams, whereof one goes straight to Hincksey and Botley, the other
passes by Godstow; This latter spreads it self for a while into diverse small
streams, which run not far before they meet again, and then embracing sundry
fruitful Meadows, she passes at length by Oxenford, who some imagine should
rather be called Ouseford of this River, where she joins with the Charwell, a
little from whence the original branches do join, and keep company to Abbandune
or Abington, called by some Senshum, although at first no part of her did
approach so near the Town as now she does, till a branch thereof was led
thither by the main stream, through the industry of the Monks, as (...) by the
decay of Caerdoure, now called Dorchester, sometimes the high road from Wales,
and the West Country to London; From hence she goes to Dorchester and so into
Tame, where contracting friendship with a River of the like name, she loses
the name of Isis or Ouse, whereof Ousenny or Osney at Oxford is derived; and
from thence she assumes the name of Thamesis all along as she glides; From Tame
she passes to Wallingford, and so to Rending, which in ages passed was called
Pontium in regard of the number of Bridges; There she receives the Kenet which
comes from the hills that lie about Marleborough Westward, and then the Thetis,
commonly called the Tide, that comes from Thetisford. She hasteneth thence to
Sudlington otherwise called Maydenhead, and so to Windlestore or Winsore, Eton,
and then to Chertsey, where Erkenwald Bishop of London did erect a Religious
house or Cell. From Chertsey she directs her course to Stanes; and receiving
another stream by the way called the Cole (whereupon Colebrook stands) she goes
by Kingstone, Richmond, Sheene, Sion, and Brentford or Bregentford, where she
meets with the Brane or the Bren^, another (...) descending from Edgworth. From
Brentford she visits Morlach, (...) Cheisoy, Lambeth, Westminster, and so to
London.

Having accompanied our gentle, and smooth-gliding Ri^^r now to London, she now
makes great haste to meet with Neptune her lovely husband; the first water she
greets is the Brom, on Kent side, West of Greenwich; whose spring is Bromis in
Bromley Parish, and so goes thence to Lewshant taking (...) from the East: The
next water she meets withal, is on Essex side, almost against Woolwich, and
that is the Lee; And being passed that, the Darwent also discharges her self
into the Thames on Kent side, two miles and more beneath Erith having its
rising at Tunbridge, or Tanridge.

The next River that disgorgeth her self into the Thames, is West of the Wam
Isles, a rill of no great note, or long course; for rising about Coringham it
rune not many miles East and by South, till it falls into the mouth of this
River; Last of all the Thames takes acquaintance, and mingleth with Medway a
con^derable River watering all the South parts of Kent.

This noble navigable River flows, and fills all her Channels twice every
natural day, by the flux and reflux of the Sea, which holds on for the space
of 70 miles within the main Land; the stream or tide being highest at London*
when the Moon does exactly touch the Norh-east, and South or West points or the
Heavens, whereof one is visible, the other underneath us: These rydes do also
differ in their times, each one coming later than the other by so many m^nutes
as pass; yet the revolution and natural course of the Heavens, do reduce and
bring about the said Planet to these her former places, whereby the common
difference 'twixt one tide and another, is sound to consist of 24 minutes*
which wants but twelve of a whole hour in 24 as experience does confirm; In
like manner we daily find that each tide is not of equal height and fullness;
For at the (...) and the Change of the Moon, we have the highest ^^ouds, and
such is their extraordinary course that as they diminish from their Changes and
Fulls, unto their first and last Quarters, so afterward, they increase again
until they come to the Fall and Change; sometimes they rise also ^o high,
e^pecially if the wind be at the North or North-east, which brings in the water
with more vehemence, because the tide which fills the Channel comes Northward,
that the Thames often inounds the banks about London, which happens most
frequently in January and February, which makes the grounds, afterward more
ferti^e. Neither do the tides after a whit, unless some impetuous winds from
the West or South-west, do keep back and check the stream, as the East and
North-East do hasten the coming in thereof or else some other extraordinary
occasion put by the course of the German Seas, which do fill the River by their
n^tural (...), and flowings; And the probabiest reason why three or four tides
do chop in in one day is, because the winds blowing more strong than ordinarily
North or North-east, make the Sea to rush in with more speed, and abundance or
water.

The Land streams or white waters, do oftentimes thicken the finenesse of the
River, in so much that after a Land flood, it is usual to take up Haddocks with
ones h^nd beneath the Bridge, as they float aloft on the water, their eyes
being so blinded with the thickness of the water, that they cannot see whither
they swim; and how to make shift for themselves before the poor crea^^re be
surpised, otherwise the Thames water uses to be as clear and (...), as any
such great River in the world.

Having gone along so fat with this great goodly River, even from her source
until she di^^mboques, and pays Tribute to Nepume, and cast her self into his
embraces, It will be now expedient to go on further, and acquaint the Reader
with the jurisdiction, and Prerogatives of the Th^mes, with the extent thereof,
Which begins at a place called Colnie ditch, a little above St^nes-bridge,
We^^ward as far as London Bridge, and from thence to a place called Yendil,
(...) and the waters or Medmay, all which extent is under the jurisdiction and
conservancy of the Lord Mayor, the Comminalty, and Citizens of London.

True it is, that there have been some Contests betwixt the Lord Mayor, and the
Lord high Admiral of England, concerning the said Jurisdiction and power, but
after a fair and judicial Trial in open Court, the controversy was decided in
favor of the City; and the Lord Mayor adjudged to be Conservator of the Thames.

There were also some other controversial points about the Rivers, of Thames
and Medway, but all differences were absolutely concluded Anno 1613, Sir John
Swinerton being then Lord Mayor, and Mr. Sparry being then his Deputy, or
respective Bailiff for the execution of such a great trust reposed in him. Ever
since, is well as in former times, the Lord Mayor of London has been styled
the Conservator of the said River, within the forenamed limits and bounds,
having plenary power to inflict punishments upon all transgressors relating to
the said Rivers; the Water-Bayly of London being his substitute. And whereas
there are a company of Fishermen called Tinckermen, frequenting the River of
Thames Eastward, who in times passed have been reported, and found out to make
an infinite destruction of the young brood or fry of fish, by using unlawful
Nets, and other Engines feeding their Hoggs with them; by the singular care and
cost of the Lord Mayor, and vigilance of the City, those prohibited Engines and
Nets, are now quite suppressed, and a true, and orderly manner of fishing
brought into use, that such a havoc may not be made of the young fry.

Moreover, there are a great number of other kind of Fishermen, beside
Tinckermen belonging to the Thames, called Hebbermen, Petermen, and Trawlermen,
that had lived in former times, by unlawful fishing on the said River, to the
destruction of the young fish, as aforesaid; but now they are restrained, and
regulated to a more orderly way of fishing.

There have bin other kind of abuses reformed herein, as upon complaint made to
the Lord Mayor, concerning certain Timbers standing in Tilbury Hope; a matter
not only dangerous to the Passengers, but a cause also to destroy the young
brood of fish, by the damage those Timbers did to the Fishermens Nets, in
regard of their continual standing in the main course, and cur^ent of the
River: that great grievance was speedily redressed, by the providence and
prudence of the Lord Mayor, and the Water-Bayly.

Furthermore, there has been care taken, to clear and cleanse the said noble
River Westward of seventy nine stops or hatches consisting of sundry great
stakes and piles, purposely erected by Fishermen for their private lucre, and
standing illfavouredly for passengers near unto the Fair deep; but none of them
remain now, but such as stand out of the passable high stream, and can be no
prejudice to passers by; yet some are permitted to be planted at the waters
bottom, and so they serve as a great succor to the young brood of fish, being
placed so remote on the River. Nor is this provident care for security of
passengers, and conservation of the young fry or fish, a new thing, for it
appears that the like course was kept in the Reign of Henry the fourth, and
after in Henry the eighth, as Records and Chronicles do show. Moreover, there
is a watchful eye, that no carren, or dead carcasses be thrown into the River
to pollute, or infect the stream.

To all these intents and purposes, the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen his
Brethren with the under Officers, do use to meet eight times yearly, in the
four Counties of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, and have a judicial
sitting for maintenance of the Rivers Rights, and Privileges, where they have
power to empanel Juries, to make Inquisition after all offenses committed upon
the River within their extent; And as the Verdict given up by the Jury make it
appear, so they proceed to the punishment of the transgressors, according to
the quality of the offense: and it is worthy the observation, to know the
manner of their so solemn proceedings, whereof this instance shall be produced,
extracted out of authentic Records.

Sir John Iolles Knight and Lord Mayor of the City of London, and Conservator
of the River of Thames, and waters of Medway, assisted and accompanied by the
Aldermen* and two Sheriffs then contemporary, and attended by the Recorder; and
the Sub-conservator, or Water-bayly, with fifty Officers and servants, took
their Barges at Belmsgate the third of July 1616, and within few hours arrived
at Gravesend in Kent, where a Session for the conservancy of the said River was
kept before the said Lord Mayor, and his forenamed Assistants; At which time
and place, a Jury of the Freeholders of the said County, being sworn to enquire
of all offenses committed in any part of the River whatsoever, within the said
County, the Common Sergeant of the City (the Recorder being then absent upon
extraordinary occasions) delivered them a charge to this effect; That,
forasmuch as there had not been any Session of Conservancy in many years
passed, kept by any Lord Mayor of London in that place, it was probable and
evident they could not be well informed, neither of the Lord Mayors
jurisdiction and power to reform annoyances and offenses there, and to inflict
due punishments upon the Offenders; nor of the nature of the service to be by
them performed in the course of their enquiry; therefore he thought it
convenient to make it known unto them, both the one and the other. Hereupon he
showed them, The Jurisdiction of the Court of London in the River of Thames,
from Stanes-bridge Westward unto the points of the River next the Sea Eastward,
appeared to belong to the City in manner and form following.

First, In point of right by Praescription, as it appears by an ancient Book
called Dunthorne, that, Civitatis fundationis, aedificationis, and
constructionis causa erat Thamesis Fluvius, quorum vero Civitatis and Fluminis
gubernationem tam Duces, Majores, Custodes, Vicecomites, Aldr. and magnates
Civitatis memoratae hucusque obtinuerunt and habuerunt; Whence he inferred,
that the government of the River has belonged to the City, time out of mind.
In 21. Hen. 3. Jorden Coventry one of the Sheriffs of the City, was sent by the
Mayor and Aldermen, to remove certain Kiddles that annoyed the Rivers of Thames
and Medway, who ultra Yenland versus Mare, did take diverse persons that were
Offenders, and imprisoned them; Whereupon, complaint being made to the King, he
took the matter ill at the first, and sent for the Lord Mayor and Citizens to
Kennington; where, upon hearing of the matter before the said King* the Cities
Jurisdiction over the said River, was set forth and allowed, and the
Complainants convinced, and every one of them amerc'd at 10 l. and the
amercements adjudged to the City; And afterward, their Nets were burnt by
judgment given by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in the Hustings, Moreover, 1.
Richardi secundi, Writs were directed to the Sheriffs of Essex and Kent
reciting the Cities Title, with command, not to suffer the Citizens of London
to be molested contrary to the Liberties formerly granted, and allowed unto
them.

Secondly, in point of right by allowance in Eire, the conservation of the
Thames belongs to the City: for it was produced that 1. Rich. ^. before Hugh
Bigot being Justice Itinerant, the Sheriffs and Citizens of London were called
in question for their Jurisdiction exercised on the Thames, before whom it was
found by a Jury in Southwark, Quod nullus habeat aliquid juris in Thamisia
usque ad novum gurgitem nisi Cives Londonens. In the 14. of Ed. 2. the
Constable of the Tower, was indicted by diverse Wards of London, before the
Justices in Eire at the Tower, De muneris et recep. cove. pro kidellis in
Thamisiis, et Constabularius ad Kidellas respondet quod Justice. non habent
jurisdictionem extra London plitum, inde cognoscere cum predict. kidelli sunt
in aliis comitatibus, et Justic. dixerunt, Aqua Thamisiae pertinet ad Civitatem
London usque mart, and si velit respondeat, who then pleaded, Not guilty.

3. He went further, that this Jurisdiction belonged to the City by ancient
Charters, 8. R. 1. Dominus Ricardus Rex, filius Regis Henrici secundi
concessit, and firmiter praecepit, ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia
amoveantur ubicunque fuerint in Thamisia; 1. Ioh. Rex. concessit, and firmiter
praecepit, ut omnes kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia vel in Medway amoveantur, and
ne caeteri kidelli alicubi ponantur in Thamisia vel in Medway super sort: X.
li. sterlingorum. Then he urged the famous Charter of King Henry the third,
which ran thus. Henry by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland,
Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and Earl of Anjou unto all Archbishops, Bishops
Abbots, Priors Earls, Barons, Justices Sheriffs, Stewards, Ministers, and to
all Bailiffs, and to all his true Men, Greeting: Woreth well, that We for the
health of our soul, and the health of the soul of King John our Fader, and the
souls of all our Ancestors; and also for common profit of our City of London,
and of all our Realms, have granted, and steadfastly commanded; That all the
Wears that be in Thames, or in Medway be done away; And that from henceforth
no Wears be set in Thames or Medway, upon the forfeiture of 10. l. Also we
claim quit to our Citizens of London all that, that our Constable of our Tower
of London, was wont to take of the said Wears. Wherefore we will, and
steadfastly command that no Constable of the aforesaid Tower, at any time from
henceforth forward any thing ask, nor any grievance do, to any of the same
City, by enchesen of the same Wears; It is to us known enough, and by true
men, do us to understand, that most privacy, and most profit might fall into
the same City, and to the whole Realm by enchesen of the same wears; which we
make for ever firm and stable unto the same City, as the Charter of our Lord
King John, our Fader, which our Barons of London, thereof have reasonably
witnessed. Witnesses, Eustace of London, Peter of Winchester, etc. At
Westminster the 18. of February, the year of our Reign eleven. Besides these,
he produced diverse others in this Kings Reign.

4. This Jurisdiction belongs to the City of London, by Acts of Parliament. W.
2. ca. 47. An. 13. No Salmons to be taken, from the Nativity of our Lady, unto
St. Martins day in all points; Nor none to be taken in Mill-pools, from the
midst of April, until Midsummer, 1. Offense, burning of Nets, and Engines. 2.
Offense, imprisonment for a quarter of a year. 3. A whole year, 13. R. 2.
confirms the restraint of taking Salmons in many waters, from the midst of
April, until Midsommer, upon the same pain; nor within that time to use any
Nets called Stalkers, nor any other Engine, whereby the fry may be destroyed.

1^. Eliz, None shall with any manner of Net, We Will, Butcaining, Kepper,
limecreele, rawfagnet, trolnet, trimnet, scalboat, weblister, sturlamet, or
with any other device or Engine, made of cheer, woolbine or Canvas, or shall
by any heeling Nets, or Trimbleboat, or any other device, Engines, Caut^lles,
ways or means soever, heretofore made or devised, or hereafter to be made or
devised, take, or kill any young brood, spawn, or fry of Eeles, Salmon, Pike,
or Pickrel, or of any other Fish or Flud-gate, Pipe, or tail of any Mill,
Wear, or in any streights, streams, brooks, Rivers, salt or fresh. 2. None
shall take or kill any Salmon and Trouts, not being in season, being Kepper
Salmons, or Kepper Trouts, or Shedder Salmons, or Shedder Trouts, etc. The
Mayor of London, inter alia, shall have full power and Authority by this Act,
to enquire of all offenses committed contrary thereunto, by the Oaths of 12 men
or more, and to hear and determine all and every the same, and inflict
punishments, and impose fines, accordingly.

5. Then he proceeds to assert the Cities Right, to the conservation of the
Thames, and waters of Medway, by way of Inquisition, whereof there were two:
the one taken at Raynam in Essex, the other at Gravesend in Kent, 9. Hen. 5.
before William Grocer, then Lord Mayor of London* where it was presented, That
whereas by the ancient Ordinances of London, the Mesches of Nets should be two
Inches in the forepart, and one inch in the hinder part; and it being found,
that the offenses according to the said Inquisitions are contra libertates and
consuetudines Civitatis, it was adjudged, that the Nets should be burnt,
according to the ancient custom in that behalf provided.

6. He goes on after, to prove that this Right belongs to the City by Decrees.
In 8. Hen. 4. The Mayor and Aldermen did exhibit their humble Petition to the
Kings Council reciting; That, time out of mind, they have had the conservation
and correction of the River of Thames, of all trinks, nets, and other Engines
whatsoever in the River of Thames, and Medway placed, and have used to make a
sub-Conservator under them; and complaining, that Alexander Bonner, then
sub-Conservator, having discharged his duty, in removing Kiddels, he was ill
entreated by the owners, the same owners dwelling in Erith, Putriferry,
Barking, Woolwich, and other places in the Counties of Kent, and Essex: and
upon hearing of the matter in Camera stellata, they were sound guilty, and
constrained to submit themselves to the Lord Mayor, and ordered to bring
always their Nets unto him, before they should use them. And that the Kiddles
then taken, should be at the disposition of the Lord Mayor; so the Offenders
made their submission accordingly.

7. He proceeds; This right appertains to the City of London, by Letters
Patents, which he proved by a grant made by Edward the 4th, to the Earl of
Pembroke, for setting up a Wear in the River of Thames: which grant was
revoked and annul'd, at the instance of the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, upon
showing their right: therefore alleged, It was contrary to their ancient
Customs. At which time, the Cities Title to the conservacy of the Thames, and
Medway, was at large set forth, and recited to have bin shown to the Lord
Chancellor, and to the said Earl and his Council, which accordingly was
allowed.

8. He reinforceth the right of the City by Proclamations, whereof one was made
by Hen. 8. in 34. of his Reign, wherein it is affirmed, that the Lord Mayor and
his Predecessors, have had by diverse grants of the Kings of England, and, by
Acts of Parliament, enjoyed always the conservacy of the Thames, without
impediments, or interruption; By which Proclamation, it was commanded that none
should resist, deny, or impugn the Lord Mayor, or his Deputy, in doing or
executing any thing that might conduce to the conservacy of the River, and of
the fish and fry within the same.

9. He produces Report; for in a controversy 'twixt the Lord Admiral, and the
Lord Mayor, for the measuring of Coals, and other things upon the Thames, it
then fell into debate, to whom the Conservacy of the River appertained* which
cause was referred by Queen Elizabeth's Council of State, 1597. to the Attorney
General, and Solicitor, who jointly certified among other things, that the
Conservacy and care of the River did, and ought to belong to the City of London,

10. By quo Warranto, 'twas proved, that the Conservacy of the Thames belongs
to the City, for 3. Jacob^* a quo warranto, was brought against the City in the
Exchequer, to know by what Title she claimed the Conservacy of the River of
Thames, and the waters of Medway: whereupon the City made her Title good
thereunto, by ancient prescription, and otherwise; so judgment was given in
her favor.

11. He goes on afterward to confirm the right of the City, by proof of usage;
in regard the Lord Mayor and Aldermen have time out of mind, made Ordinances
concerning the good Government of the River of Thames, as well for the seasons
and manner of fishing beneath London Bridge Eastward, upon pain of penalties,
as it appears from time to time, from the Reign of Hen. 3. and so downward: the
Lord Mayor has removed Kiddels, Wears, Trinks, and other unlawful Engines,
and has reformed the disorders of such as have offended besides, in the River
of Thames, and inflicted punishment, upon Offenders accordingly.

The right of the City appears also by the Writs and Precepts under the test
of the Lord Mayor, to the Sheriffs of Kent and Essex, for the returning of
Juries before him, to enquire of Offenses done in the River. The same right of
the City, appears also by Commissions, whereof diverse have bin directed to the
Lord Mayor, to put in execution the Acts of Parliament, made for the
Conservancie of the Thames and Medway, and to enquire of all offenses, made or
done in the said waters, and to punish the Delinquents accordingly.

Lastly, He makes good the Right and Title of the City, by the continual claim
she made thereunto, as appears in those various contests she had with the Lord
Admiral of England, wherein after diverse debates and bandings, she kept still
above water, and made her Title good; which moved King James, Anno the 3d of
his Reign, to put a final determination to the business by the Letters Patents,
he passed unto the City, wherein he says, that ad omnem controversiam in hac
part temporibus tam presentibus quam futuris tollendam, and omne dubium
amovendum, that to cut off all controversies, as well of the present times, as
of future, and to remove all doubts, he did confirm and ratify the said right
unto the City of London.

Thus was the Title, Prerogative, and right of the City of London stoutly, and
strongly asserted by eleven pregnant, and convincing proofs, to the
conservation of her dearly beloved Minion, the River of Thames, both by
prescription; by allowance in Eire; by ancient Charters; by Acts of Parliament;
by Inquisitions; by Decrees coram ipso Rege; By Letters Patents; by
Proclamations; by Report of the learned Council; by a quo Warranto; And lastly,
by ancient usage, custom, and continual claim.

Mr. Stow in his survey of the City of London, has more about this business,
then here is inserted, which made the last King Charles the first, to command
Sir John Coke his Secretary, to write to Sir Henry Martin, Judge of the
Admiralty, to this effect,

That His Majesty understanding, that a second Edition of Stowes Survey of the
City of London, was put new to sale, wherein there are some passages
prejudicial to His Majesty's Right in his Admiralty, and derogatory to the just
power belonging thereunto, his Majesty did therefore require him, his Judge in
that high Court, to examine the said Bo^k, and to cause the said passages
inserted in prejudice of the Admirals Jurisdiction, and in support of any other
pretense against the same, to be left out, or else to prohibit the publishing,
and sale of the said Book, etc.

Sir Henry Martin having received this Letter, after the Book was printed, and
publicly sold, all that he could do, was to have Sir John Cokes Letter
inserted in the last Folio of Stow, to stand there for a Cautionary Reserve,
and Record for the future.

Now, there be many things that concern the incumbency of the Conservator of so
Noble a River, it being an Office of no small extent.

His first duty is to preserve the currency of the stream, and the banks on
both sides.

Secondly, He must preserve the Fish and Fry within the same, He must prevent
all Encroachments upon the River, and the banks thereof; as also he must
enquire of all Flud-gates, Mill-dams, and such like annoyances; and whether any
do hurl in any soil, dust, or rubbish, or other filth whatsoever to choke her.
But for the strength, and safety of the River, against the invasion of an
enemy, by Block-houses, Forts, Bastions or Castles, and the securing of the
Merchant, and Navigation to and fro, that charge belongs to the Sovereign
Prince, and not to the City.

But indeed, touching the former charge, circumspection and care of the River
of Thames, it is most proper for the City of London, who lies perpetually by
her Beds side, and therefore in a fit posture to be watchful of her: for which
vigilance the Thames rewards her abundantly, by bringing her in the Spices of
the South, the Jewels of the East, and Treasure of the West; Insomuch, that it
may be well said* this Office of Conservatorship, or superintendency of so
Noble and useful a River, is as a fair flower, or rich Jewel, in the Cap of
maintenance. This famous River, taking all her advantages together, surpassing
all other whatsoever, that pay tribute to the Ocean, if you regard the
streightness of her course, the stilness of her stream, for her proportionable
latitude; as also her length, for she comes sporting along from her first
source, above ninescore miles before she embosomes her self in the Arms of
Neptune. Add hereunto, the great store, and variety of Fish she abounds
withal; the most delectable, and fertile soiles, on both sides; And lastly the
convenience of her situation being toward the Center of England.

And then in her entrance to the Sea, she opens upon France and Flanders,
having them both in her eye; Besides, she has another advantageous property,
that to the knowing Native, the entrance into the River is safe and easy, but
difficult and hazardous to strangers, either to come in, or go out; Insomuch,
that the Thames may be said to be Londons best friend, which puts me in mind
of a passage of drollery, that happened in the time of King James who being
displeased with the City, because she would not lend him such a sum of money,
and the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen attending him one day, being somewhat
transported, he said, that he would remove his own Court, with all the Records
of the Tower, and the Courts of Westminster Hall, to another place, with
further expressions of his indignation. The Lord Mayor calmly heard all and at
last answered, Your Majesty has power to do what you please, and your City of
London will obey accordingly; but she humbly desires, that when your Majesty
shall remove your Courts, you would please to leave the Thames behind you.

Of the great and admirable BRIDGE In the City of LONDON over the Thames.
HAving bin thus long upon water, and accompanied the Thames to Thetis lap,
it is time now to land, and take a view of her greatest Bridge, which, if the
stupendous Site, and structure thereof be well considered, may be said to be
one of the Wonders of the World: though, as some think, it has too many
Arches; so that it may be said, If London Bridge had fewer eyes, it would see
far better.

Now as we ferch'd the Thames from her Spring, so we will fetch her Bridge from
its first foundation. At first there was but a Ferry kept in the place where
now the Bridge is built, at length the Ferriman and his Wife deceasing, left
the said Ferry to their only Daughter a Maiden, who with other goods, left her
by her Parents, together with the profits arising from the said Ferry, did
build a holy House for Nuns; in place whereof, the East part of St. Mary
Overies stands now above the Quire, where she was buried: and unto that House
of Nuns, she bequeathed the oversight and benefit of the Ferry; But
afterward, that House of Nuns being converted into a House of Priests, the
Priests did build a Bridge of Timber, and from time to time, kept the same in
good reparation, till at length, considering the great charges which were
bestowed in the frequent repair of the wooden Bridge, there was at last, by
the Contributions of the Citizens, and others, a Bridge built of Stone.

The Timber Bridge had stood some Ages before; for the Story says, that when
Sweyn, King of Denmark, had besieged the City of London, both by Water and Land
in the year 994. the Citizens manfully defended themselves under their King
Ethelred; so that a great number of the Enemies was slain in Battle, and part
of them were drowned in the River of Thames, because they could not recover the
Bridge: Add hereunto, that in the year 1016. Can^tus the Dane, with a great
Navy came up to London, and on the South of the Thames caused a Trench to be
cast, through the which his Ships were towed toward the West side of the
Bridge, and then with a deep Trench, and straight siege, he encompassed the
City about.

Moreover, 1052. the Earl Godwin, with the like Navy, taking his course up the
River, and finding no resistance on the Bridge, he sailed up the South side.
Further, 1067. William the Conqueror in his Charter to the Church of St. Peter
in Westminster, confirmed to the Monks serving God there, a Gate in London
called Buttolphs Gate then, with a Wharf which was at the head of London Bridge.

We read likewise, that Anno 1114. in the reign of Henry 1. the River of Thames
was so dried up, and the water grew so shallow, that between the Tower of
London and the Bridge, not only with Horse, but people might have passed over a
foot.

In the year 1122, Thomas Arden gave to the Monks at Bermondsey the Church of
St. George in Southwark, and five shillings yearly rent out of the Land
pertaining to London- Bridge. There is also a remarkable Charter of Hen. 1.
upon Record, to this tenor. Henry King of England, to Ralph Chichester, and all
the Ministers of Sussex, sends greeting; Know ye, I command by my Kingly
authority, that the Manor called Alceston, which my Father gave with other
Lands to the Abbey of Battle, be free, and quiet from Shiers and Hundreds, and
all other Customs of earthly servitude, as my Father held the same most freely
and quietly, and namely from the work of London Bridge, the work of the Castle
at Pevensey: And this I command upon my forfaiture. Witness William de
Pontdelarche at Berry.

The first year of King Stephen, a fire began in the house of one A^lwards near
unto London-stone, which consumed East unto Ludgate, and West to St.
Erkenswald's shrine in St. Paul's Church. The Bridge of Timber upon the River of
Thames was also burnt, but afterward repaired. Besides in the Reign of the
said King Stephen, and of Hen. 2. men stood in great numbers upon the Bridge to
see pastimes that were upon the River. In the year 1163, that Bridge was not
only repaired, but built all of new Timber as before, by Peter Colechurch
Priest, and Chaplain.

This serves to show, that there was a Timber Bridge a long tract of time over
the Thames, which was maintained partly by the proper Lands thereof, partly by
the Legacies and liberality of diverse persons, and partly by taxations in
diverse Sheirs, at least 215 years before the Bridge of stone was erected.

Now, about the year 1176 the Stone Bridge had its first foundation by the
foresaid Peter of Cole-Church, near unto the place of the Timber Bridge, but
somewhat more West, for the Chronicle says, that Buttolphes WharF was at the
end of London Bridge; The King not only countenanced, but assisted the great
work, a Cardinal being then here Legate, and Richard Archbishop of Canterbuty,
gave 1000 Marks toward the Foundation. The course of the River for a time was
turned another way about, by a trench cast up for that purpose, beginning East
about Radriff, and ending in the West about Patricksey, now called Battersay.
This work to wit, the Arches, Chapel, and the Stone Bridge over the Thames at
London, having been 33 years in building, was in the year 1209 finished, by the
worthy Citizens of London, viz. Serle Mercer, William Almane, and Benedict
Botewrite, being principal Masters of that Fabrique: for Peter Colechurch was
dead four years before, and was as the principal Benefactor buried in the
Chapel on the Bridge.

Certain void places were given by King John to build upon about London, the
profits whereof were assigned to maintain the Bridge.

A Mason, being Master Workman of the Bridge, builded from the foundation the
large Chapel on that Bridge upon his own charges, which Chapel was then
endowed with two Priests and four Clerks, etc. besides Chanteries; After the
finishing of this Chapel, which the first building upon those Arches, sundry
Mansion Houses in tract of time were erected; whereunto many charitable men
gave Lands, Tenements, and sums of money toward the maintenance thereof; All
which was sometimes registered, and fairly written in a Table for posterity,
which was put up in the said Chapel, till at last the said Chapel was turned
to a dwelling House, and then removed to the Bridgehouse: Now, in Hen. 7. time
it stands upon Record, that all the payments and allowances belonging to
London Bridge, amounted to above 815 l. by which account made then, may be
partly guessed the great Revenues, and incomes of the said Bridge, and to what
improvement, and increase it may be come unto by this time.

But this noble Bridge, as other earthly things, has suffered many disasters
since: for four years after the finishing thereof, in the year 1212, on the
10th, of July at night, the Borough of Southwark on the South side of Thames,
as also the Church of our Lady of the Canons there, being on fire, and an
exceeding great multitude of people passing the Bridge, either to extinguish
and quench it, or to behold and gaze upon it, suddenly the North part by
blowing of the South wind, was also set on fire, and the people which were then
passing the Bridge percei^ing the same, would have returned, but were stopped
by the fury of the fire: and it came to pass as they stayed all in a
consternation, and protracted the time; the other South end of the Bridge, was
also set on fire; so that the people thronging themselves betwixt two raging
fires, did nothing else but expect present death; Whereupon, there came to save
them many ships and vessels into which the multitude so inadvisedly rushed in,
that the ships being thereby ^unk they all perished; And it was found that
above three thousand souls perished by this disastrous accident at that time,
whose bodies were found half burnt, besides those who were turned to ashes.

Furthermore, in the year 1282, through a great frost and deep snow, five
Arches of London Bridge were born down, and destroyed: A little after, Anno
1289, the Bridge was ^o sore decayed for want of reparations, that people were
afrai^ to pass thereon and a subsidy was granted toward the amendment thereof;
Afterward, Sir John Britain, being then Custos of London Anno 1381, a great
Collection was made by all the Clergy for the repair of London Bridge.

In the year 1381, on St. Georges day was a great solemnity of Justs and
Tournements upon London Bridge, between David Earl of Crawford of Scotland, and
the Lord Wells of England; whereby one may infer, that the houses were not
there so thick, at that time.

The Tower on London Bridge, at the North end of the Drawbridge (which was
then in a posture to be drawn up) was built Anno 1426, in the Majoralty of John
Rainwell. Anno 1471, a house called the Common siege on London Bridge, tumbled
down into the Thames by death of diyers persons a little after.

But in the year sixteen hundred thirty three, there happened a most raging
dismal fire upon the North side of London Bridge, which by computation consumed
above the third part of the Buildings thereof; But by the commendable care of
the City, there are other goodly structures raised up in some of their rooms,
of a stronger and more stately way of building, and pity it is, that the work
were not completed there being no object (after the Church of St. Paul's) that
can conduce more to the glory and Ornament of this renowned City.

Besides, this Bridge that may be called, the Bridge of the world, there are
other inferior Bridges, which have still the names of Bridges that belong to
the City of London, the first is Fleet-bridge in the West, fenced with iron
Pikes, on which toward the South there be certain Lanthorns of Stones, for
lights to be placed in Winter Evenings, for commodity of passengers; Under this
Bridge runs a water sometimes called, the River Wells, but since Turn-hill
brook, and now Fleet Dike, because it runs by the Fleet under ground to the
River of Thames; this Bridge has been far greater in times passed, but
lessened as the water course has been narrowed.

Over the said River of Wells northerly stands Oldenbridge, now Holbornbridge,
so called of a boorn that sometimes ran down Holborn hill into the River; this
Bridge like Fleet-bridge-serves for passage only.

Then comes Cow-bridge more Northerly over the same water near unto Cowlane,
but this Bridge being decayed, another of Timber is made more North toward
Chicklane.

There are some other small Bridges over the Town-ditch, viz. without
Eald-gate, without Bishopsgat^, Mooregate, the Postern of Cripplegate, as also
without Aldersgate, the Postern of Christ's Hospital, Newgate, and Ludgate,
which are now paved eaven with the streets; only there remains one of Timber
over the River of Wels or Fleet Dike. There have (...) informer ages diverse
Bridges in sundry places over the course of Wallbrook; but (...) they are made
level with the pa^ements of the Streets, so that the watercourse can now be
hardly discovered, being vaulted over with Brick.

Of the chief Fortress or Tower of LONDON.
ANd now that we are come so near the famous and great Tower Palatine, or
Cit^adel of London; we will try whether we can get in thither, without paying
fees, and take a view thereof as briefly as we can, it being an ill-favored,
and tedious thing to stay there long.

I know it is the current vulgar opinion, that Julius Caesar, the first
Conqueror, or rather indeed Discoverer of Britain, was the Original Founder
thereof, but there is ^ery little probability of truth in that for two Reasons;
The first is, the little stay he made here, during which he had other things to
think on. The second is, that he himself who is so exact in his relations,
specially if they conduce to his honor; nor any other Roman Author, makes any
mention of of such a work, or Fabrique; Therefore, that opinion which
approaches truth the nearest, is, that William of Normandy the Conqueror, was
the first tracer and erector of the Tower of London, as Edmond de Hadenham, an
old English Antiquary affirms; The first part that was built, was the great
square and White Tower, (though black to some) which was about the year 1078,
whereof Gundulph Bishop of Rochester was principal Superviser and Surveyer, who
was log'd then in the house of Edmere a Burgess of London, as it stands upon
Latin Record in the forenamed Author.

Now it is to be considered, that at first the wall of the City was in many
places furnished with sundry Bastions and Turrets in due distance one from the
other, and diverse stood on the waters side, where some of the said Wall
extended at first, but the Thames with her ebbings and flowings, did as it were
corrode, and subver^ those Buildings on the South side; Wherefore the Conqueror
(for then the Art of fortification was come to a greater perfection) for
defense of the City and River, pitched upon that place as most convenient, to
erect a Bu^wark in the East part of the Wall. The White square Tower (as was
formerly said) was first erected, and finished in the Conquerors time, but
stood naked and single without other Buildings a good while: and the story
^aith, that in William Rufus time, it was by the injury of the Heavens, and
violence of tempest sore shaken, and some part tumbled down, which was repaired
by the said Rufus and Henry the first, who also caused a Castle to be built
under the said White Tower, on the South side toward the Thames, and he
surrounded that also with a strong Wall; Now, Henry of Huntindon relates, that
Will. Rufus challenged the inve^^iture of Prelates, and pill'd the people
pitifully, to spend the treasure about the Tower of London, and the great Hall
at Westminster, whereof he was Founder. The first Keeper of the Tower of
London was called Constable, Ostowerus. Acolinillus, Otho, and Geoffrey
Magnaville, were the first four Constables of the Tower of London by
succession, all which held a portion of Land that appertained to the Priory of
the Holy Trinity near Algate, viz. East Smithfield, as belonging to that
Office, making thereof a Vineyard; and would would not part with it till the
second year of King Stephen, when by judgment of the Court, it was restored to
the Church. The foresaid Geoffery Magnaville, was at one time Constable of the
Tower, Sherif of London, Middlesex, Essex* and Hartfordshire, as the Chronicles
relate; He also fortified the Tower of London against King Stephen, but the
King took him at last at St. Albanes, and would not free him till he had
surrendered the Tower of London, with the Castles of Walden and Plashey in
Essex. Richard de Lucie was Anno 1155 Constable of the Tower of London, and
also of Cas^le the of VVinsore.

About the beginning of the Reign of Richard the first, William Longshank
Bishop of Ely, and Chancellor of England, for some dissentions 'twixt him, and
John the Kings Brother, who was in Rebellion, enclosed the Tower of London with
an outward Wall of stone embattail'd, and also caused a deep ditch to be cast
about the same, and thought to have environed it with the River of Thames.

The Lion Tower was built by Edward the fourth and Frederick the Emperor,
having sent for a present three Leopards: they were first kept at Woodstock
(which was the first Park of England seven miles about; to the destruction of
some Churches, and Chapels adjacent by Henry the third) but afterward, all
such wild Beasts, as Lions (which are called the Beasts of the Royal
Prerogative) together with Leopards, Linxes, and Propentines, have been kept in
that part of the Tower, which is called Lions Tower; And we read, that Edward
the 2d. commanded the Sheriff of London, to pay 6d. per diem, to the Keeper o^
the Lions and Leopards, for their sustenance; and three half pence a day for
the Keeper's diet, out of the Fee-farm of the City. In former times, there were
persons of high quality that kept these Beasts (whereof the Earl of Oxford was
one) and they had a Pension from the Crown belonging to the Office. Mr. Robert
Gill a very worthy Gentleman has the place now, and has had it many years,
No^ was the Tower ever better furnished with Lions than it is now, there being
six in all, young and old. Edward the fourth fortified the Tower of London, and
enclosed with Brick a certain enclosure of ground taken from Tower Hill
Westward, now called the Bullwark. His Officers also set up upon the said Hill
a Gallows, and a Scaffold, for the execution of offenders, whereupon the Lord
Mayor complaining to the King, all the answer he had, was, that it was not done
to the derogation of the City.

In the year 1216, the Tower of London was delivered to Lewis of France, by the
Barons of England, who banded against the King; Anno 1222. the Citizens of
London, having made an uprore against the Abbot of Westminster, Huber^ de Burgh
chief Justice of England came to the Tower of London, and summoned before him
the Mayor and Aldermen: of whom he enquired, and demanded the principal Authors
of that Insurrection. Among whom one Constantine Fitzaeluphe confessed that he
was the man, saying undauntedly that he was the man, and that he had done much
less than he had thought to have done; Whereupon the Justice passed him over
to Fulke de Brent, who with a band of armed men, brought him to the Gallows
where he was executed. Anno 1244. Griffeth the eldest Son to Luellin Prince of
Wales, being kept prisoner in the Tower, devised means to escape, and having
made a Line of the Sheets and Hangings, he put himself down from the top of the
Tower, but in the sliding, the weight of his Body, he being a corpulent man,
brake the rope with his neck together.

King Hen. the 3d. imprisoned the Sheriffs of London, Anno 1253. for the escape
of a prisoner out of Newgate. The same Henry with his Queen, to secure himself
from rebelling Barons, kept his Court at the Tower, and sent for the Lords to
hold a Parliament; and the next year his Queen passing through London Bridge,
the Londoners did outrage her as she passed hurling stones and dirt at her, in
so much that she was forced to return; hereupon the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs, were sent to diverse Prisons, and a Custos was set over the City for
the time' viz. Othon Constable of the Tower, until submission had bin made, and
other satisfaction given.

It is upon Record, that Edw. 2. allowed a Knight 2d. per diem, and a Squire a
penny, for their Diet, as long as they were prisoners in the Tower upon his
Command: Roger Mortimer being prisoner in the Tower, gave his Watchmen a
sleeping potion, and so escaped; but afterward, he was arraigned and condemned
by his Peers, without personal appearance, and so executed at the Elmes, where
he hung two days.

The Londoners in the year 13^6. seized upon the Tower, wresting the keys out
of the Constables hands, they freed all the Prisoners, and kept it in their
hands for the use of Queen Isabel, and her Son Edward, both Tower and City.

The first gold that was coined in the Tower, was in the reign of Edward the
third, and the pieces were called Florences, of the value of 6s. 8d; Perceval
de post being Master of the Mint at that time. All great sums before, were used
to be paid by the weight, as so many pounds or marks of silver, or so many
pounds or marks of gold; but they bore no stamp, the lesser payments were in
Starlings, which was the only coin then current, and stamped, which were pence
so called. And they had their antiquity no further, then from the reign of King
Henry the second. Nevertheless, the Saxon coins before the Conquest, were
pence of fine silver, somewhat weightier, and better then the latter starlings,
and the probablest Reason that is given, why it was starling money, was,
because in the ring or border of the penny, there was a Star stamped.

But to return to the Tower of London: In the year 1360. John the French King
being Prisoner in the Tower, King Edward the third, being newly returned
victoriously from France, the first thing he did, was to visit his Prisoner
whose ransom was assessed afterward at three millions of Florences or Nobles;
whereupon he was brought honorably to the Sea side: Anno 1387. King Richard
kept his Christmas in the Tower, and the year after was clapped up Prisoner there.

In the year 1458. there were Justs and Tournements in the Tower, wherein the
chief Actor was the Duke of Somerset; Anno 1465, Henry the sixth, was brought
Prisoner to the Tower, where he remained many years, of whom was given this
Character, that he was a good King, but born in an ill time: The Mayor of
London Sir Richard Lee, and the Aldermen, freed the said King Henry once from
his imprisonment; but being sent thither again, he was pitifully murdered.
Anno 1478. The Duke of Clarence was drowned in a But of Malmsey within the
Tower: and 5. years after young Edward the fifth, with his Brother, were by the
practices of Richard the third, sti^^ed there betwixt two Fetherbeds, as the
current story goes.

John Earl of Oxford, Anno 1485. was made Constable of the Tower, and he had
also the keeping of the Lions, and Leopards, as the story makes mention.

Queen Elizabeth, Wife to Henry the 7th, died in the Tower, Anno 1502. in
Childbirth, and the year before there was running at tilt, and tourney there;
The Chapel in the high white Tower was burnt Anno 1512. Queen Anno Bullein,
was beheaded in the Tower 1541. and a little after, the Lady Katherine Howard,
both Wifes to Henry the eighth: Anno 1546. a strange accident happened in the
Tower: for one Foxley, who was Pot-maker for the Mint, being fallen asleep, he
could not be awakened by pinching, cramping, or burning for fourteen days, at
which time he awaked as fresh as at the first day he began to sleep.

In Henry the eighths time, the Tower was ever and anon full of prisoners,
among others Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancellor of England, was clapped there
close Prisoner: and at last they took away from him all his Books, so he did
shut up all his windows, and lived afterward in obscurity, and being asked
Why, he answered, It Is time to shut up shop, when the Ware is all gone: At his
first entrance to the Tower, the Gentleman Porter, asked for his fee, which is
the upper Garment, whereupon Sir Thomas pulled off his Cap to give him, but
that not suff^^ing, he pulled out a handful of Angels, end gave him a good
many, a Knight that was in his Company telling him, that he was glad to see him
so full of Angels; yes, answered he, I love to carry my friends always about
me.

The young Lady Jane, was beheaded there not long after, and upon the Scaffold
she made a most ingenious Speech, and full of pity, That she came thither, to
serve for an example to posterity, that innocence cannot be any protection
against greatness; And that she was come thither, not for aspiring to a Crown,
but for not refusing one, when it was offered Her.

Queen Elizabeth was brought up many years in that School of affliction, but
afterward she may be said to have gone from the Scaffold to the Throne; For
the truth is, that the Scaffold had made an end of her, had not King Philip her
Brother in Law, strongly interceded for her. In her days, Robert Earl of Essex
lost his head in the Tower, which he might have kept on many years longer, had
he not bin betrayed by the Lady Walsingham; to whom after the sentence of
condemnation, he sent a Ring, which the Queen had given him as a token that she
would stick to him in any danger: the Lady delivered not this Ring, and being a
little after upon her Deathbed she desired to speak with the Queen, and having
disburthened a great weight which lay upon her Conscience for that act, the
Queen flung away in a fury, and never enjoyed her self perfectly after that
time, but she would break out often into passion, and wring her hands, crying*
O Essex-Essex. And this Earl was the last, who was executed within the walls of
the Tower.

In King James's time, for 22 years, there was no blood spilt, in the Tower, or
upon Tower Hill, only Sir Gervase Elwayes was hanged there, when he was
Lieutenant: and one remarkable passage there was in his Speech upon the Ladder,
that being in the low Countries, and much addicted to gaming, he made a vow,
that if ever he played more above such a value, he might be hanged; but he did
violate the Oath, and so the just Judgment of Heaven did fall upon him,
accordingly as he said.

The Earl of Castlehaven was brought from the Tower to be executed for horrid
kinds of incontinencies in Charles the first time; Afterward, in the reign of
the long Parliament, and ever since, the Tower of London has had more number
of Prisoners, then it had in the compass of a hundred years before.

This stately Tower of London, serves not only for a Gaol to detain prisoners,
but for many other uses, It is a strong Fort, or Citadel, which secures both
City and River, It serves not only to defend, but to command either, upon
occasion; It serves as a royal Randezvouz for Assemblies and Treaties; It is
the Treasury for the Jewels and Ornaments of the Crown; The great Archive which
conserves all the old Records of the Courts of Justice at Westminster; It is
the place for the Royal Mint, and Coynage of Gold and Silver; It is the chief
Magazin and Armory, or Ar^enal of the whole Land, for Martial Engines, and
Provision. There only, is the Brake or Rack, usually called the Duke of
Exceters Daughter because he was the first Inventer of it.

And lastly, It is a great Ornament, by the situation of it, both to the River
and City.

The City of London has diverse other inferior Towers, as that on the North of
the great Bridge. At the South end over the Gate, there is also another Tower
over London Bridge, which has suffered many accidents of firing, and
otherwise, and was still made up by the care and charge of the City, specially
one time when it was under bastard Fawconbridge, burnt by the Mariners, and
Sailors of Kent.

The Antiquaries speak of two Castles that were in the West part of London, one
called the Castle of Monfiquet, which was built by a Baron of that name, who
came over with the Conqueror, which was afterward demolished, and the Black
Friars risen up out of the ruins of it; The second Castle is Baynards Castle,
by Paul's Wharf, built also by one Baynard, who came over with the Conqueror:
who being ennobled, the honor of Baynards Castle succeeded from Father to Son,
a long time, till it came to Sir Robert Fitzwater, a valiant Cavalier: who
being fallen into the displeasure of King John, in the Barons Wars, was
banished, and Baynards Castle destroyed; But afterward, being rest^red to the
Kings favor, by an exployt he did in France, he was re-invested in all his
Livings, and so repaired Baynards Castle again: Moreover, he was made chief
Banner-bearer of the City of London* whereof he had a Charter, which ran to
this sense, That he said, Robert Fitzwater, and his Heirs, ought to be, and are
chief Bannerers of London, in fee for the Chastilary, which he and his
Ancestors had from Baynards Castle, and the said City. In time of War the said
Robert and his Heirs, ought to serve the City as follows. The said Robert
(he being the twentieth man of Arms himself) ought to come on Horseback,
covered with Cloth or Armor, under the great West door of St. Paul, with his
Banner displayed before him; and when he is come mounted to that door, and
apparreld, as before is said, The Mayor (with the Aldermen and Sheriffs) in
their Arms, shall come out of the Church of St. Paul, unto the said West door,
the Mayor bearing a Banner in his hand, all on foot, which Banner shall be
Gules, the Image of St. Paul Gold, the face, hands, feet, and Sword Argent; And
as soon as the said Robert shall see the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs, come on
foot out of the Church, armed with such a Banner, he shall alight off his
Horse, and salute the Mayor, and say to him, Sir Mayor, I am come to do my
service which I owe to the City: whereunto the Mayor, and Aldermen shall
answer, We give to you, as to our Bannerer of fee in this City, the Banner of
this City, to bear, and govern to the honor and profit of this City to your
power: And the said Robert and his Heirs, shall receive the said Banner in his
hands, and shall go on foot out of the Gate, with the Banner in his hands, and
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, shall follow to the door, and shall bring a
Horse to the said Bannerer, worth twenty pounds, which Horse shall be sadled
with a saddle of the Arms of the said Bannerer, and shall be covered with
^indalls of the said Arms.

Moreover, they shall present unto him, twenty pounds Starling money, and
deliver it to the Chamberlain of the said Bannerer, for his expenses that day.
Then the said Bannerer shall mount on Horseback, with the Banner in his hand,
and as soon as he is up, he shall say to the Lord Mayor, that he cause a
Marshal to be chosen for the Host, one of the City; which Marshal being named,
the said Bannerer shall command the Mayor and Burgesses of the City, to warn
the Commons to assemble, and they shall all go under the Banner of St. Paul;
and the said Bannerer shall bear it himself unto Ealdgate; and there the said
Bannerer and the Mayor, shall deliver the said Banner from thence, to whom they
shall assent and think good; And in case they make any issue out of the City,
then the said Bannerer ought to choose two out of every Ward, the most sage
Personages, to foresee and look to the safe keeping of the City, after they be
gone forth; And this Council shall be taken in the priory of the holy Trinity,
near unto Aldgate; And also before every Town or Castle, they shall besiege, if
the siege continue a whole year, the said Bannerer shall have for every siege
one hundred shillings, and no more of the Comminalty of London.

These be the Rights that the said Bannerer shall have in time of War; But the
Rights that belong unto the said Bannerer Sir Rob* Fitzwater in time of peace
are these, that is to say, The said Robert has a Soke or Ward in the City,
that is to say, a Wall of the Canonry of St. Paul unto the Thames, and so to
the side of the Mill, which is in the water that comes from Fleet bridge, and
so goes by London walls betwixt the Friars Preachers and Ludgate, and so
returns back by the house of the said Fryrs, unto the said Walls, of the said
Canonry of St. Paul's, viz. all the Parish of St. Andrews, which is in the gift
of his Ancestors by the said Signority; And so the said Robert has appendant
unto the said Soke, all these things underwritten, and if any of the Sokemanry
be impleaded in Guildhall, of any thing that touches not the Body of the Lord
Mayor, or the Sheriffs for the time being, it is not lawful for the Sokeman of
the Sokmanry of the said Robert to demand a Court of the said Robert; And the
Mayor and the Citizens of London ought to grant him a Court, and in his Court
he ought to bring his Judgments as it is assented and agreed upon in the
Guildhall, that shall be given him. If any therefore be taken in his Sokemanry,
he ought to have his stocks and imprisonment in his Soke, and he shall be
brought thence to the Guild Hall before the Mayor, and there they shall provide
him his judgment that ought to be given of him; but his judgment shall not be
published till he come unto the Court of the said Robert, and in his Liberty.
And the Judgment shall be such, that if he have deserved death for Treason, he
is to be tied to a Post in the Thames at a good Wharf, where Boats are
fastened, two ebbings and two flowings of the water. And if he be condemned for
a common thief, he ought to be led to the Elmes, and there suffer his judgment
as other thieves; So the said Robert and his Heirs has the honor, that he
holds a great Franchise within the City, that the Mayor of the City, and the
Citizens are bound to do him of Right, viz. that when the Mayor will hold a
great Council, he ought to call the said Robert and his Heir to be with him in
the Council of the said City; and the said Robert ought to be sworn of the
Council of the said City, against all people; saving the King, and his Heirs.
And when the said Robert comes to the Hustings in the Guild Hall of the said
City, the Mayor or his Livetenant, ought to rise and set him down to sit near
him; and so long as he is in the Guild Hall, all the judgments ought to be
given by his mouth, according to the Records of the Recorders of the said
Guildhall; And so many Waifes as come while he he is there, he ought to give
them to the Bailiffs of the said Town, or to whom he will by the Council of the
City.

These are the ancient Franchises that belong to the Bannerer of London, as
they stand upon ancient authentic Records; But when this honor fell from the
Fitzwaters, and from Baynards Castle, it is uncertain; Now, that Castle fell
afterward to the Earl of March, who was Crowned there by the Title of Edward
the fourth, to whom this City stuck very close; But in the seventh year of King
Edward's Reign, many of the greatest men of London were attached for Treason,
with diverse Aldermen, whereof though they were acquitted, yet they did forfeit
their goods to the value of 40000 marks; among whom Sir Thomas Coke, Sir John
Plummer, and Humfrey Howard, were of the number; And the said Coke Lord Mayor a
little before was committed to the Tower, with one Hawkins; nor could Coke be
acquitted until he had paid 8000 Marks to the King.

Henry the seventh rode in Majesty through the City with all the Knights of St.
George, from the Tower to St. Paul's Church, where they heard Vespers, and so
the King lodged that night at Baynards Castle, which he had newly repaired
before. Queen Mary was also proclaimed there, notwithstanding that the Lady
Jane had been proclaimed a little before. There was also another Tower or
Castle, near adjoining unto Baynards Castle, which was called Legates Inn, but
now there is no trace of it le^t.

There was also another Castle called the Tower of Monfiquet (spoken of a
little before) upon the River of Thames more Westward, where afterward a
Monastery of Friars was erected, called to this day the Black friars; first
built by Kelwarby, Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom the Mayor of London, gave
two Lanes or ways adjoining to Baynards Castle; There was also another Tower
stood there, above 300 years, which was demolished by John Sha Lord Mayor of
London Anno 1502, the King giving leave to do it.

There was another Tower or Castle, that stood in the same place that
Bride-well now stands; which being demolished, yet notwithstanding, there was a
Royal Palace stood still where the Kings of England kept their Courts, and
called Parliaments: and among others, it stands upon good Record, that King
John summoned a Parliament thither, where he exacted of the Clergy in a
Parliament held at Saint Brides in London 100000 Marks; and besides this, the
white Monks were compelled to cancel their Privileges, and pay the King 40000
Marks; This House of Saint Brides of later time being left, and not used or
inhabited, fell to ruin, yet the Platform still remained among the filth and
rubbish, together with a fair Well. A great part of the House on the West side,
was given to the Bishop of Salisbury, whence Salisbury Court derives its name
to this day; The other part toward the East remained wast, until Henry the
8th, did build a stately Palace there in a very short time, and called it
Bridewel, which he did for the entertainment of his Nephew Charles the fifth
Emperor and King of Spain, who came hither Anno 1522, and was there
entertained in a Princely and Magnificent manner.

There was another Tower called the Tower Royal in the Parish of Saint Michael
de Pater noster, where King Stephen was used to keep his Court, which was
called afterward the Queens Wardrobe; Barbican was also another Tower,
Besides, there was an ancient Tower, in Bucklersbury, called Sernes Tower, and
the story says, that Edward the third kept his Court there, appointing his
exchange of moneys to be also there kept, which he gave afterward to his free
Chapel of St. Stephen in Westminster, now called Henry the sevenths Chapel,
who spent 14000 ls. in the building of it, and about the same time a great ship
was built which cost just as much.

Of the public places of Sciences and Literature which London has.
IT is observed, that the English Nation has bin always extraordinarily
addicted to Literature, and to the love of Knowledge: which among other
instances appears; in that, of old times, there were three principal Churches
in London which had famous Schools, wherein there were professors and Doctors,
which were famous for their know^edge in Philosophy and the Mathematics; The
three Churches which had these Schools by Privileges, were the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul, for by General Council held in the year 1176 at Rome in
the Patriarchy of Saint Lateran, it was decreed, that every Cathedral Church
should have a Schoolmaster to teach poor Scholars, and others. The second,
was St. Peter's in Westminster, whereof Ingulphus Abbot of Crowland in the Reign
of William the Conqueror writes thus; I Ingulphus an humble servant of God,
born of English Parents in the most beautiful City of London, for to attain to
Learning, was first put to Westminster, and after to study a^ Oxford, etc. The
third School, seems to have bin in the Monastery of St. Savlour in Bermondsey
at Southwark.

There were other Schools built afterward, as that of St John by Smithfield,
and that of Saint Bartholmew, that of Saint Mary Overies, and that of the holy
Trinity by Ealdgate, with diverse others; But touching Philosophy and other
Sciences, in regard that the Colleges in Oxford and Cambridge did so much
increase; the former meetings in London, and di putes in Philosophy, that were
used to be, did discontinue; Only of late years, that noble Maecenas and
Patriot, Sir Thomas Gresham, did erect to his eternal honor a College for all
the Sciences, in Bishopsgate-street, as an attendant to his Royal Exchange.

The Chronicles teach us, that Henry the fifth having suppressed the Priori^s
Aliens, whereof there were some about London, namely, our Lady of Rounc^val by
Charing cross, one other Hospital in Oldborn, now Holborn, another without
Cripplegate, and the fourth without Aldersgate, besides others that are worn
long since out of memory, only that of Rouncival continued till the Reign of
Henry the eighth, being converted to a brotherhood; But Edward the sixth
appointed by Patent, that there should be in London more Grammar Schools
erected, to wit, one in St Andrews in Holborn, another in Alhallows the great,
another in St Peter's on Cornhil, and another in the Hospital of St. Thomas of
Acon in West cheap* The Free School of Paul's was built of an old ruined house
in ample manner, and richly endowed Anno 1512, by Doctor Colet Dean of Paul's,
for 153 poor men's children: for which there was a chief Master, an Usher, and
Chaplain ordained.

Moreover, in the year 1553, after the erection of Christ's Hospital, which
risse out of the ruins of the Gray Friars that stood there, a great number of
poor children were taken in, and a fair School appointed at the charge of the
City, though Edward the sixth beat the name of Patron.

Anno 1561 the Merchant Tailors of London, founded one notable School, in the
Parish of St. Lawrence Poultney. The house was sometimes the Duke of
Buckinghams called, the Manor of the Rose, which Mr. Richard Hills Master of
the company, did purchase for 500 l. and bestowed it for a free School.

There was an old Custom in London, that the Schoolmasters should meet on
festival days, and their Scholars should dispute in Logic, as well as
Grammar Questions, and Principles, and the most common randezvouz, was Saint
Bartholmews in Smithfield, being a priory, where upon a bank boorded under a
tree, they used to meet, and the best Scholars were rewarded with Bows and
Arrows of silver, which they carried away as prizes: but that laudable custom
is grown obsole^e, and quite discontinued.

A great emulation there was 'twixt Paul's Scholars, and those of St.
Anthonies; the Scholars of Paul's would taunt, and term them, St. Anthonies
Piggs; and they would call St. Paul's Scholars, Pigeons of Paul's, and many
feuds happened amongst them in the open streets: but St. Anthonies School
decaying, the quarrel also ceased.

Anno 1582, a public Lecture of Surgery was founded, to be read in the
College of Physicians in Knight-rider-street twice every week; The Founder
thereof was, the honorable Baron the Lord Lumley, and Richard Chadwel Doctor
of Physic; and Doctor Foster was the first Reader thereof.

A Mathematical Lecture was also founded about the same time, to be read in a
fair ancient Chapel, built by Simon Air within Leaden Hall; But this Chapel,
being employed afterward for stowage of goods taken out of a Spanish Carack,
the said Lecture ceased there, and was used to be read in Mr. Tho. Smiths house
in Grass-street, 1184.

Anno 1579 Sir Thomas Gresham (Queen Elizabeth's Royal Merchant or Agent, spoken
of before) gave the Royal Exchange, with all the buildings thereunto
appertaining, viz. the one moity to the Mayor and Comminalty of London, and
their Successors, upon trust that they perform as shall be declared; and the
other moity to the Mercers on the same confidence; The Mayor and Aldermen are
to find four to read Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Music, and Geometry
within that dwelling in Bishopsgate-street, and to bestow the sum of 200l. viz.
50l. per annum to every Reader. The Mercers also are to find three Readers in
the same place, that is, The Civil Law, Physic and Rhetoric, and every Reader
was to have 50 l. a year stipen'd, which great gift was confirmed afterward by
Act of Parliament, and so to continue for ever.

These Lectures are to be read every day in the week in Term time (Sundays
excepted) in the Latin Tongue in the morning, and the same in English in the
same days afternoon, only the Music Lecture, whereof Doctor Bull was the
first Lecturers was to be read only in English.

Moreover, there is in and about the City of London, a whole University, as it
were of Students, Practisers, or Pleaders, and Judges of the Laws of England,
not living of common Salaries, as is used in other Academies; but of their
private maintenance, as being supported, by their own means or practice, or
exhibition from their friends; In so much that most of them are Sons and
younger Brothers to wealthy Parents, where, besides the knowledge of the Laws,
they learn all other civilities and exercises besides.

Of these Nurseries or Societies there are fourteen, whereof nine do stand
within the Liberties of the City, and five without; Those that stand within the
Liberties are, Sargeants Inn in Fleet Street, Sargeants Inn in Chancery Lane,
the two Temples, which are called, Inns of Court; The other are, Cliffords
Inn, Thavies Inn in Holborn, Furnevals Inn, Barnards Inn, and Staples Inn,
which are termd Inns of Chancery.

Without the Liberties, there is Grayes Inn in Holburn, Lincolns Inn, (which
are Inns of Court) Clements Inn, New Inn, and Lions Inn, which are houses of
Chancery. In former time, there was in Scroops Court in Holborn an Inn of
Sargeants also; There was likewise where Somerset House now stands Chesters
Inn or Strand Inn, in the liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster, which was
pulled down with many other Buildings, to make room for Somerset House, who had
also his materials from St. John of Jerusalem, which some held to be no better
than Sacr^^edge; and therefore that fatal death, to be beheaded, befell the
Duke of Somerset, who with his Council were, it seems, so infatuated, that they
forgot to call for his Clergy, whereby, by the Laws of England, he might have
bin saved. Justice Fortescue makes mention also of a tenth house of Chancery,
but he names not the place. The choicest, gentliest and most ingenious wi^s of
the Land, are founds among these Students of the Inns of Court* having commonly
bin graduates before, in one of the Universities; But the Inns of Chancery
being as it were Provinces subjected severally to the Inns of Court be chiefly
made up of Attorneys, Sollicitors, and Clerks that follow the Courts of
Westminster Hall; yet many of them remove to one of the great Inns of Court,
where continuing seven years, and frequenting Readings, Mootings, Boltings, and
other learned Exercises, they improve themselves in the knowledge of the Laws:
they are then by the consent of the Benchers, who are most commonly of the
grave and learned sort selected, and called to the degree of Utter Barristers,
and so enabled to be Practitioners in the Law, both in their Chamber, and at
the Bar in open Court* Of these after they be called to a further step of
preferment, 2. were used to be chosen every year to be Readers, who make two
Readings every year out of some choice hard points in the Law, one in Lent, the
other in August. Out of these Benchers and Readers, Sergeants at Law are made,
and of them the Judges, unless it be that some by special favor of the Prince
are chosen otherwise; But being made Sergeants, they leave the Inns of Court
and remove to one of the Sergeants Inns; where they only, and the reverend
Judges are admitted. Touching the two Temples, they are discoursed of here in
another place; But concerning Grayes Inn and Lincolns Inn, they took their
denominations from two noble Lords, who had formerly Palaces in those places
where those two Innes now stand; The one is singular, for a curious Chapel it
has; the other for choice delicate Walks, high and low, with a large
delightful prospect that carries the optiques very far, where the choicest
beauties both of City and Suburbs use to resort in the Summer, to solace
themselves, and breath fresh air.

Thus have we rambled through the City of London, and waded hitherto through
universals (wherein there is not always plain-dealing) we will now hunt dry
foot after particulars, and find out the Primitive mode, and method of
Government which London had, with the Titles of her chief Magistrates; We will
then Muster her twelve prime Companies, with all the rest of her Corporations;
Then, a Perambulation shall be made through all her Precincts, Aldermanries and
Wards, as far as the point of the Lord Mayors Sword does reach; Then shall
there be a Parallel 'twixt London, and other the greatest Cities in the world;
wherein it will appear to the impartial discerning Reader, that, if
consideration be had to the Prerogatives and power of her chiefest Magistrates,
to their plenty, magnificence and hospitality, to the security of Passengers up
and down her streets at midnight, as well as at noon days, The City of London
admits no Parallel.

Of the Political Government, and Civil Sway of the City of London.
IT is no incongruous allusion, that some Politicians make, when they compare a
City to a great Ship, whereof Government is the Healm and Rudder, which
regulate, and guide her course; Good Laws and Constitutions, are the Cables
and Ligaments; The Mainmast is Religion, and the Standard, of the Cross; the
Foremast is Honor and Renown; the Mise^ Mast is Trade and Wealth; Judgment
and Prudence is the Ballast; Authority and strength the Artillery. This
Comparison may quadrat with London, as much as with any other City, on the
surface of the Earth. The Lord Mayor is as the Pilot and Master; the Aldermen,
his Mates; the Recorder and Sheriffs the chief Gunners; the Scavengers, the
Swabbers; other inferior Officers are the Mariners, to weigh Anchors, to hoise
and furle the Sails, etc.

Touching the primitive Government of London in the time of the Britains,
Antiquity scarce affords us any light, whereby to discern what it was, Caesar
gives us most, when he writes, that Mandrubacius was King of the Londoners, or
the Trinobants, which last word extends also to some of the Counties adjacent;
But it may be wondered, that Julius Caesar should know so much, in regard that
He never took firm footing in Great Britain, but, by way of exploration, did
only d'scover Her; Augustus and Tiberius may be said to conceal Her. Caligula
intending an Invasion, was diverted by his Wars with the Germans. Claudi^s
Caesar (from whom Gloucester takes her name, being no other then Castrum
Claud^^, the Castle of Claudius) was the first that fixed here, and he sent over
Publius Agriola for his Lieutenant, who took great pains to civilize the
Nation: and as he was about the work, he sent notice to Rome, that he preferred
the British wits before the Gallic. Then was London made a Praefectura, and the
Magistrate in chief, was called Prefect (as he of Rome is called to this day)
this Title continued all the time that the Romans had dominion here, which was
above 300 years. Afterward, the Romans having so many great Irons in the fire
by Wars they had against diverse Nations, who had revolted from them, they
drained this Island not only of great numbers of the British Youth, to serve
them in their Wars abroad, but drew away at last their own Legions;
whereupon, the Island being thus grown weak, much depopulated, and to a long
de^uetude of Arms, the Saxons, who are now the English (yet keep still their
first denomination of Saxons, both in the British and Irish Tongues to this
day) came over with a considerable strength, and having in a Parley on Salsbury
Plains, musiered most of the British Nobility by a stratagem, and taken
Vortiger the King Prisoner, He for his ransom was forced to give, not only
London, but most part of the Island to the Saxons. And the chief Magistrate of
London, they called Portreve, which is a Guardian or Governor of a Port, and
that name is yet used in England, in some places. The Saxons then changed their
names into Englishmen, yet they continued Pagans a long time after, but at
last, the Britains converted them to Christianity, and then the City of London
flourished exceedingly for many Ages, till there came over a swarm of Danes,
who proved more fatal to London, then any other Nation; for by fire and sword,
they had almost utterly destroyed Her, had not the Londoners at last rowz'd up
their spirits, who making virtue of necessity, did fall upon King Swein the
insulting Enemy, with such a resolution, that by a mighty slaughter, and
extraordinary prowess, they utterly repel'd him; The City having recovered her
former luster (though 'twas a good while first) she continued under the English
Government, and the Magistracy of a Portreve, till the Norman rushed in; yet
the Title was not altered a good while after, when at last he came to be called
Bayliffe, and sometimes Provost: Richard the first, for supporting the Croy
sada, and his Wars in the Holy Land, got great Contributions of moneys, from
the Londoners; in lieu whereof, he gave them leave to choose two Bailiffs
annually. King John after him changed their Bailiffs into a Mayor, and two
Sheriffs: To these Henry the third adds some Aldermen, who though yearly
Elegible at first, grew afterward Perpetual; Now, this Word Alderman, is
consonant to Senator, being both derived from old Age and Gravity.

The first Alderman we read of in England, was in the time of King Edgar, about
800 years ago, whose name was Ailwine, and was descended of the blood Royal,
as appears by his Epitaph in that goodly Monastery, in the I Will of Ely, whereof
he was founder himself, which Epitaph runs thus. Hic requiescit Dom. Ailwinus
inclyti Regis Edgari Cognatus, totius Angliae
Aldermannus, and hujus Sacri coenobii miraculosus Fundator.


Here rests the Lord Ailwine (Cousin to Noble King Edgar) Alderman of all
England, which some interpret chief Justice, and miraculous Founder of this
holy Abbey, Hence it may be inferred, that the appellation of Alderman, is not
only venerable, but ancient, and honorable. And from this Lord Ailwine, it
seems the first Mayor of London descended, who was Henry Fitz-Alwin, Anno
1191. who continued many years in the Office, and lies buried in St. Mary
Bothaw, near London-stone; and the next Mayor to him was Roger Fitz-Alwin,
after whom he Office grew annual.

The City being thus, in tract of time, come to a fixed and settled Government,
she began to flourish exceedingly. And as she increased in Men, Manufactures,
and Merchandising, so the Kings did enlarge their royal favors unto Her, Anno
1226. Henry the third confirmed unto the Citizens of London, free Warren, or
liberty to hunt about the City, and in the Warren of Stanes;

Moreover, that the Citizens of London, should pass Toll-free, throughout all
England, and that the Keddles and Weres in the Rivers of Thames and Medway,
should be plucked up and destroyed for ever, because Navigation to London might
be more free. Roger Renger was Mayor, when these Patents were granted. A few
years after the liberties, and franchises of London, were ratified by the same
King, who granted, that either Sheriff should have two Clarks, and two
Sargeants, and that the Citizens should have a Common Seal: A little after the
same King granted that the Mayor Elect, should be presented to the Barons of
the Exchequer, and they should admit him. Moreover, he gave way, that the City
should be fortified with Pos^s, and Iron Chains, drawn athwart over the streets.

Anno 1326. Edward the third much increased the Immunities of the City, and the
Authority of the Mayor; for he granted, that the Mayor should be Justice for
the Gaol delivery at Newgate, and have power to reprieve Prisoners. That the
Citizens of London should not be constrained to go out of the City of London,
to any War; He granted also, that the liberties and franchises of the City,
should not after that time be taken into the Kings hands, as it had bin often
before, when a Custos was put in. Moreover, He granted by Letters Patents, that
there should be no other Eschetor in the City, but the Mayor.

Anno 1338. He granted, that the Sargeants attending the Mayor and the
Sheriffs, should bear Maces silver and gilt, with the Royal Arms engraven.

Anno 1356. The same King ordained, that whereas the Aldermen were used to be
changed yearly, they should not be removed without special cause for the
future. Then for the higher honor, and Authority of the Office, the Sword was
added with the Cap of Maintenance.

Thus in proce^s of time, the Government of London, grew to be more and more
established.

Anno 1415. Sir Henry Barton being Mayor, ordained Lanthorns and Lights to be
hanged out on the Winter Evenings, betwixt Alhollontide and Candlemas: Sir John
Norman, being Mayor, was the first who went upon the River to Westminster,
having made a stately Barge to that purpose, Anno 1453. And the rest of the
Companies followed that laudable Example, with their Barges also.

Anno 1473. Sir John Tate being Mayor, the Sheriffs of London were appointed
each of them, to have sixteen Sergeants, and every Sergeant to have his Yeoman;
Moreover, they were to have six Clerks, a Secondary, a Clark of the Papers,
with four other Clarks, besides the Under Sheriffs Clark.

Anno 1484. It happened, that there was successively one after the other, three
Mayors, and three Sheriffs of London, in the compass of one year; by reason of
the sweating sickness, which raged so extremely.

Anno 1501. Sir John Sha being Mayor, added some state to the Office; for it
was ordered, that the Aldermen his Brethren should attend him on Horseback,
from Guild Hall to the Rivers side, when he took Barge for Westminster;
Besides, he was the first who kept Court in his own House, for redressing of
such matters that came before him; Sir William Capel being Mayor of London,
caused Cages to be set up in every Ward, for the punishments of Vagabends, and
Rogues. Anno 1556. Sir Thomas Ossley being Mayor, the Night Bel-man was first
ordained.

Queen Elizabeth did much favor the City of London; and for the better
Government, thereof, gave way for a Provost Marshal to be appointed.

Thus have we observed, that the Governors in chief of the City of London,
have had from time to time, differing appellations. Under the Britains, they
were called Kings; The Romans styled them, Praefects. The Saxons, Portreves.
The Norman Kings at their first coming, Bailiffs, and sometimes Provosts, Then
came the Office to be established in the Title of Mayor, which has continued
any time these 467. years, though it was interrupted sometimes by a Custos;
which some of the Kings, as Henry the third, and Edward the first, upon a
displeasure against the City, were used to appoint.

This great Urban Magistrate, the Mayor of London, uses to be chosen upon the
feast of St. Michael the Archangel, every year out of the six and twenty
Aldermen, who are his Brethren; but he takes not his place, until the 28. of
October next following.

Touching the State and Authority of the Lord Mayor of London, there is no
Oppidan Magistrate in Christendom, all things well considered, lives in a
greater; Let us examine the particulars, and first go to his domestical
attendance, and the Officers thereunto belonging, which are, 1. A Sword Bearer.
2. Common Hunt. 3. Common Crier. And 4. Water Bailiffs, all Esquires by their
places. Then is there the Coroner of London, three Sergeant Carvers, 3.
Sargeants of the Chamber; Sargeant of the Channel, 4 Yeomen of the Water side.
The Under Water-Bayliffe; two Yeomen of the Chamber, three Meal-weighets; two
Yeomen of the Wood-Wharfs; and most of these have their Servants allowed them;
but the common Huntsman and Water-Bayliffe have two a piece; some of them have
Liveries from the Lord Mayor, and the rest from the Chamber of London.

There be diverse other great public Officers belong to the Government of the
City of London, as the two Sherif^s, which, like the Lord Mayor, are but
annual; The Recorder, the Chamberlain, the Common Sergeant, the Town-Clark, or
common Clark, the Remembrancer, all Esquires.

The Sheriffs are chosen upon Midsummer day: they formerly were used to be
elected out of the Commonalty; and sometimes they came to be Aldermen, as many
Aldermen were made Majors, though not having bin Sheriffs; But of latter years,
the Sheriffs have bin Aldermen before, or presently after their Election; And
it is remarkable, that Nicolas Faringdon was 4 times Mayor of London, and yet
never Sheriff.

Now touching the Election of these Officers, we shall give a brief account,
the prime Magistrate, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, met at Guildhall at 8.
in the morning, in their Scarlet Gowns, and their Cloaks fur'd riding on
Horseback, and having bin a while in the Council Chamber, they come forth into
the Orphans Court, whence they go in their Cloaks to the Chapel, to hear
Service and Sermon, where the Lord Mayor, with some of the Aldermen, take the
Communion, which being ended, and Offerings delivered, they return to the
Council Chamber, and thence to the Hustings, the highest Court; where the
Recorder makes a Speech, touching the business in hand: then they go back to
the Lord Majors Court, where they remain, the doors shut until the Election be
brought unto them; Then the common Sargeant having the Sheriffs on either side,
and the Sheriffs other Officers about them, makes another Speech, touching the
Custom of the City in this kind; whereupon, they choose two, whose names are
brought up to the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, who by scrutiny, elect one of
those two, whom the Commons had nominated before. Then the Lord Mayor returns
to the Hustings, and he who is chosen, goes upon his left hand, and sits
next him; Then the Recorder speaks again to the Commons, nominating the person
whom the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen had admitted, and demands whether it be
their free choice; the commons affirming it the Sword Bearer goes to the Lord
Mayor, Elect, and takes off his Tipper (which he takes for his fee) and puts
on his Chain; whereupon, he making a short Speech of gratitude, the Lord Mayor,
and the new Elect, go to the Eldest Sheriffs House to dinner.

After dinner, the Lord Elect taking the Common Hunt, and other Officers to
attend him, besides a Company of Aldermen, goes to the Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England, where five or six Aldermen present him, wearing their
Violet Gowns.

The morrow after Michaelmas day, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen go with the
two new Sheriffs to the Exchequer-chamber in Westminster, where they are
presented and sworn, and the old Sheriffs are sworn also to their account.

On Simon and Iudes day, the Aldermen and Sheriffs attend the old Lord Mayor at
his House, whence they come in their formalities to the Hustings, where being
sat, the common Crier commands silence: then the Town-Clark exhibites an Oath
to the Lord Mayor Elect, which being done, the former Lord Mayor gives place
to the New; which being done, the Chamberlain delivers him the Scepter, next
the Keys of the Common Seal; and lastly, the Seal of the Majoralty; Then the
Sword Bearer delivers him the Sword.

On the morrow after, all the Aldermen and Sheriffs solemnly meet at the new
Lord Majors House, by 8. in the morning, whence they go to the Guild Hall, and
thence to the Vine-Tree, where they take Barge, and are rowed in state to
Westminster Hall, the rest of the chief Companies attending in their several
Barges, with their Arms, Colors, and Streamers, in a very gay manner; Being
come to the Hall, they go round about, and salute all the Tribunals of justice:
then they ascend to the Exchequer Chamber to the Barons, where after the
Recorder has made a Speech, the Oath is administered. Then they come down to
the Hall, and go first to the Kings Bench, then to the Common Pleas, and so to
Westminster Abbey, where having walked about the Kings Tombs, they return to
their Barge, and so to London again; where, being landed, they go to the
Guild Hall, where a most plentiful dinner is prepared, which lasts many hours,
being called, the Lord Mayors feast; The Lords of the privy Council, the
Judges, with other Lords and Ladies of the best quality, are thither invited;
After dinner, the Lord Mayor with all the Companies attending, ride solemnly to
Saint Paul's, to do their devotions; and so the Ceremony of that great day is
concluded.

Touching the Election of the Sheriffs, the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen meet at
8 in the morning at Guild Hall in their violet-colour'd Gowns, and their Cloaks
of Scarlet lined but without horses; where from the Counsel-Chamber, they go to
the Orphans Court, and so to the Hustings, where the Recorder having made a
speech touching the present meeting, the Mayor and Aldermen go to the Mayors
Court, the doors shut upon them, then the Commons fall to the Election of
Sheriffs, as also a Chamberlain, two Bridg-masters, the Auditors of the City
and Bridg-house Accounts, and the Surveyors for Beer and Ale: which being done,
the Sheriffs with the other Officers, the Common Crier going before them with
his Mace, go up to the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, to carry up the report of
what is done at the Hustings, whither the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen descend
again, and confirm the Elections; Then the Recorder making them a Speech of
thanks, the meeting ends.

Now touching the Hustings, which we have mentioned so often, it is the
ancient'st and highest Court of the City of London; Touching the Etymology of
it, it is a pure Saxon word, and is derived of House and dhing or thing, which
among the Saxons signified a Cause or Plea; in so much that Hustings is no
other then the House of Causes, or Pleading; and Thingere was the ancient word
for a Lawyer or Pleader; This Court preserves the Laws, Rights, Franchises,
Customs and Dignities of the City; There be handled also there the intricat'st
accounts, and Pleas of the Crowns, and of the whole Kingdom; which Court has
for many Ages, conserved inviolably its own Prerogatives and Customs. This
Court was anciently held every Monday, but it was changed of late years into
Tuesday, because of the Sheriffs intending the Market, which being kept upon
Monday would hinder their sitting in the Hustings.

Edward the Confessors Laws refer much to this Hustings Court; Moreover, the
Cities o^ York, Winchester, Lincoln, the Isle of Shepey, and other places, have
had their Hustings.

There is also another Court peculiar to London, which discovers as much of
Charity, as of Policy: It is called the Court of Requests, or the Court of
Conscience. It was first erected by an act of Common Counsel Anno 9. Henry 8.
viz. That the Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time being should monthly assign
two Aldermen, and four discreet Commoners, to sit twice a week to hear, and
determine all matters brought before them (betwixt Freemen) where the due
debt, or damage did not exceed 40S. Afterward the said number of
Commissioners was increased to the number of twelve, which continued till the
end of Q. Elizabeth's Reign; But, primo Iacobi, it was confirmed by Act of
Parliament, That the said Commissioners should have power to exhibit an Oath,
and to commit to prison such as did not obey their Summons, or perform the
Orders they made, betwixt Plaintiff and Defendant, Debtor or Creditor,
touching any debt, not amounting to forty shillings; but such has been the
unconscionablenesse and malice of some men of late times, that they have
endeavored to overthrow the the said Court, by cavilling at some doubtful
words therein, and wresting them to a perver^e sense, the rich might have power
thereby to oppress the poorer sort, by bringing them to Westminster Hall to a
further expense of time and trouble,

There is then the Court of the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, which is a Court
of Record; the Recorder and the two Sheriffs (being Aldermen not else) are
members of this Court, whose office it is, to redress and correct the errors,
defaults and misprisions which happen in the Government of the City; This Court
is kept Tuesdays and Thursdays throughout the year.

Then are the two Courts of the Sheriffs, one for every Counter, whereof there
are two Lawyers as Judges, well read in the Customs of the City, as well as the
common Laws; but if an erroneous judgment be given before the Sheriffs, the
party grieved may sue a Writ of error, and remove it to the Hustings.

Then is the Court of Orphans; For the Mayor and Aldermen, by Custom, have the
custody of the Orphans within the City, and if they commit the Custody of the
Orphans to another man, he shall have a ravishment of ward if the Orphan be
taken away; it being enacted that the Mayor and Chamberlain of London for the
time being, shall have the keeping of all the Lands and Goods of such Orphans,
as happen within the City; saving to the King, and other Lords, their Rights of
such as hold of them out of the same Liberty; Now the Chamberlain is a sole
Corporation to himself, and his Successors for Orphans; and a Recognizance made
to him and his Successors touching Orphans, shall by custom go to his
Successor; Moreover, the Government of Orphans, is so invested in the Mayor,
that it any Orphans sue in the Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere for a
Legacy, or duty due to them, by the Custom, a Prohibition does lie.

Then is there the Court of Common Council, which has some resemblance of the
high Court of Parliament: for it consists of two Houses, viz. the one of the
Mayor and Aldermen* and the other of the Commoners of the City; Here they make
Constitutions and Laws for advancement of Trade, and regulation of other things
which bind the whole City.

There is then the Court of the Chamberlain for Apprentices; Now, one may be
free of London three manner of ways, first, by Service; secondly, by
Birthright, being son of a Freeman; And thirdly, by Redemption by Order of
the Court of Aldermen.

The Chamberlain of London, is an Officer very considerable in point of power:
for without him no man can set up shop, or occupy his Trade without being sworn
before him; No man can set-over an Apprentice to another, but by his License;
He may imprison any that disobeys his Summons, or any Apprenrice that
mildemeans himself, or punish him otherwise.

There are the Courts of the Coroner, and the Escheator, which both belong to
the Lord Mayor; he being Coroner, and Escheator by virtue of his authority, and
Office.

Then is there a Court for the conservation of the water and River of Thames,
which belongs to the Lord Mayor, from Stanes-bridge unto the water of Yendal
and Medway, as is amply spoken of before.

Then is there the Court of the Tower of London; and this Court is held within
the Verge of the City before the Steward by prescription of debt, trespass,
and other actions; now, part of the Tower is within the City, and part in
Middlesex, viz. the East part, but the West in London, whereof there was a
notable example in the person of Sir Thomas Overbury, who being poisoned in a
Chamber on the West part, the principal murderers were tried before
Commissioners of Oyer and Termin^r in London, and so was Sir Gervase Elwayes
the Live^enant of the Tower at that time.

There is also a peculiar Court, called the Court of Policies, and of
Assurances in London, to Merchants that venture and traffic on the Seas,
where ships and goods are insur'd at so much in the hundred, where there is an
Officer of good quality who Registers these Assurances.

Then is the Court of Halmote, or Hall Court, for every Company of London
having a particular Hall. They use to meet there to deliberate of matters
belonging to the Company.

Then is the Court of the Wardmote, or of the Wardmote Inquest, For the whole
City being divided to 26 Wards, every Ward has such an Inquest consisting of
twelve or more, who inquire after abuses and disorders, and present them to be
redressed.

There is also a kind of Court called the College of the President, Censors,
and Commonalty or Physicians, who have peculiar Laws of their own: and among
other one is remarkable, that if one who is not of the mystery of a Physician
or Surgeon, take upon him the Cure of a sick Body, and he dies of the
Potion or Medicament, this is, as Britton the great Lawyer says, Covert Felony.

Then is the^e the Court of Sessions, or monthly Jail-delivery at the
Old-Bayly, both for the City and Middlesex for trial of Felons, whereof the
Lord Mayor is the chief Judge, and has power of reprieving.

Touching the Ecclesiastical Government OF THE City of LONDON.
HAving thus in a cursory way run over, and taken in gross as it were, a view
of the Civil Government of the City of London; we will now make some
inspections into her spiritual way of Government, which was always Episcopal
from the beginning; for there be Records that may we I induce us to believe,
that in the time of the Britains there were Bishops of London, whereof they ^ay
Thean was the first; and in the Reign of Constantine, we read that Restitutus,
Bishop of London, had his Session in a Council he summoned at Arles; After
that, (...) Saxons making twice an irruption into this Island, and at last
possessing the better part of it, and being not reduced a good while after, to
Christianity, there was a long interruption, and no Bishop of London (...)
Austin the Monk came over, who was called the Apost^e of the Saxons or English,
for he absolutely converted them; He consecra^ed Melitus Bishop of London, from
whom to Doctor Iuxon yet living, there are upon good Record the names of 97
Bishops of London, who succeeded one another. In so much that the City of
London was not without a Bishop any time these thousand years till now: The
Prior of the holy T^inity at Aldgate was a great man also in the ^^vernment of
the City, for he used to ride with the Mayor and the Aldermen in (...) but the
chief administration of all Ecclesiastical affairs was in the Bishop (...) the
(...) of London has oftentimes fared the better for her Bishops, who have done
her many signal good services, upon some discomposures; and stood as a skreen
'twixt the fury of the Prince and Her. When the Norman came over, and was much
incensed against the City, William her Bishop then, took off the edg of his
fury, and introducing her to the Conquerors favor, got ^er that famous Charter
which is worthy to be here inserted.

William King greit William Bishop, and Godfregis Posteron, and ^all the
Bourough, waren bynden London, Franchiste, and Engliste, and ickhyd eth that
Ick yill that great be ealbra yearalaga die yegret, etc.

Which in intelligible English runs thus.

William King, greets William Bishop, and Good froy Portreve, and all the
Burgesses within London, French or English, And I grant you, that I will that
ye be all your Law worth that ye were in Edward is his days the King; And I
will, that ich Child be his Faders eyer, And I (...) suffer that any man you
any wrongys beed, and God you keep.

The said Bishop William, procured this Charter, from the insulting Conqueror,
as appears by his Epitaph; And this Saxon Charter, was not only confirmed, but
enlarged by Henry the first in Latin; Now as far Soils are subject to produce
rank Weeds, so rich populous Cities are always subject to bring forth
turbulent spirits, whereof there is a world of examples in all stories; nor
does London want good store of them, who used to bandy against their Sovereign
Prince, and we well know, how often she forfeited her Charter that way.

It stands upon Record, how Henry the third, Edward the second, Richard the 2d,
with other Kings, had Her their fore enemies; It is well known, how often she
smarted for it, how often her Posts and Chains were taken away, how her Mayor
and Sheriffs wereclap'd in Prison, and a Custos appointed over her in the
interim; How Rich. the first trounced her for murdering the Jews how she
suffered for the barbarous fray 'twixt the Goldsmiths and Tailors Servants; For
the blood, shed 'twixt her and the men of Westminster on St. James's day; For
the brawl about the Bakers loaf in Salsbury Court; For the outrages done to St.
Martins Sanctuary men; for the Ill May day; and a little of late years for the
murder of Doctor Lamb. But now that we are giving a touch of her Church
Government, It is observable in History, how her Bishops proved her best
friends at a pinch, to pull her out of such plunges, and rectify her again in
the opinion of her Sovereign, Nay it stands upon good Record, that she was no
City, till she had a Bishop; for we well know, that a City must have of
necessity, a Cathedral Church, with the Seat and See of a Bishop.

Of the several COMPANIES, AND CORPORATIONS Of the City of LONDON.
With their Originals, and Arms.
HAving made a short transcursion through the Government of the City of LONDON,
in general; we will now visit their several Companies, Corporations, and
Societies, whereof the main part of the City may be said to be composed: who
for their Industry and Arts, their Inventions, and sundry ways of
Manufactures, may be compared to so many Hives of Bees, the Emblems of sedulity
and diligence, And first,

Of the Twelve chief Companies, out of which the Lord Mayor is to be annually
chosen.
1. THe Mercers have bin always allowed the first place, who were incorporated
into a Society, and enabled to purchase Lands, 17th Richardi Secundi, Anno
1393. For their Arms they bear gules, a Mayden-head proper crowned, or Wascot
Purple, issuing out of Clouds proper, within a bordure nebulee, or,

2. The Grocers, who at first were called Pepperers, were incorporated, Anno
1345. in the twentieth year of Edward the third. The Arms a cheuron between
nine Cloves, sable with this Motto, God grant Grace; Supporters Helm and Crest
granted by Clarenceux, King of Arms in the Reign of Hen. 8.

3. The Drapers were incorporated in the 17 year of Henry the 6th, Anno 1430.
The Arms first granted by Garter, Crest, and Helm by Clarenceux; the Coat Gules
three triple Crowns, or Capt Gules issuing out of Clouds, resting upon
Sunbeams* their Motto, Unto God only, be Honor and Glory.

4. The Fishmongers were at first two Companies, to wit, Stock-Fishmongers, and
Salt-Fishmongers; but 28. of Hen. 8. they were imbodied into one Company; Their
Arms azure, three Dolphins in pale proper crowned, or. betwixt 4 lives,
Salterwayes argent, all crowned, or on a chief Gules, 3 Crosse-Keyes,
Salterwayes, argent, the Motto, All Worship be to God only.

5. The Goldsmiths were incorporated in the 16. year of Richard the second,
their Arms quarterly Gules and Azure, two Leopards Heads, or four Golden Cups,
covered 'twixt two Buckles, or, the Motto, To God only be all Glory.

6. The Skinners are more ancient, having bin incorporated in the first year of
Edward the third, but made a perfect fraternity in the 18. of Rich. the 2d,
their Arms, Ermyn on a chief Gules 3. ducal Crowns, or, lind of the first,
their Motto the same with the Goldsmiths, To God only be all Glory.

7. The Merchantaylors were completely incorporated by Hen. 7th, Anno 1501.
their Arms, Argent a Tent 3. Robes Gules, on a chief azure, a Lion passant
regardant, or, with this Motto, Concordi^ parvae res crescunt.

8. The Haberdashers (called of old Hurrers) were incorporated a Society of St.
Katherine 26 Hen. 6. Anno 1447. And they were confirmed 17. Hen. 7. and named
Marchant-Haberdashers: their Coat Nebulee argent, and azure, on a bend gules, a
Lion passant, regardant, or, the Crest and Supporters, granted Anno 1571. with
this Motto, Serve and obey.

9. The Salters had the Arms of a Society given them the 22. of Hen. 8. Anno
1530, the Crest, and Supporters by Queen Elizabeth. The Coat party per cheuron
azure and gules, 3. Salts covered overflowing argent with this motto, Sals^pit
omnia.

10. The Ironmongers were incorporated in the 3, year of Edw. 4. Anno 1462.
their Coat Argent, on a cheuron gules, 3 lockets capted, or between 3 steel
gads a zure.

11. The Vintners are more ancient, being incorporated by Edw. 3. by the name
of Winetonners, and confirmed by Hen. 6. their Coat Sable a cheuron, between
three Tuns argent.

12. The Cloathworkers grew to be a Company, 22 of Hen. 8. at which time, they
had Arms first granted them, which are, Sable a cheuron Ermyne in chief, two
crabets argent in base a beazel, or, with Supporters and Crest; and this Motto*
My trust is in God alone.

Next to the twelve chief Companies, the Merchants by whole Sale, may well
claim room in point of Dignity.
1. AMong Merchants, those of the Staple, may challenge the precedence, who
were incorporated by Edw. 3. in whose Reign they had their Staple of Wool at
Callis: They have a fair Coat of Arms, with this Motto* God be our Friend.

2. The Marchant-Adventurers were incorporated in the Reign of Edw. 4. but
their privileges were much enlarged by Queen Elizabeth, they have also a fair
Coat, with the same Motto as they of the Staple, God be our Friend.

3. The Merchants of Russia, were incorporated by Edw. 6. and confirmed by
Queen Elizabeth, they have also a fair Coat with this Motto, God be our good
Guide.

4. The Merchants of Elbing became incorporated by Queen Elizabeth.

5. The Society of Levant Merchants, commonly called the Turkey Merchants, being
first incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, had their Charter enlarged by King James.

6. The Company of Spanish Merchants were incorporated by Queen Elizabeth.

7. The Company of East India Merchants, were also first incorporated by Queen
Elizabeth, 1600.

8. A new Company of French Merchant-Adventurers, had a Coat and Crest of Arms
granted them by Garter, and Clarencieux, Kings of Arms in the 14th of King
James, with this Motto, Reddite cuique suum.

9. The Merchants of Virginia, the Bermudus, and Summer Islands, began also in
Queen Eliz. Reign; but ^ince, they are mightily increased, and planted in the
Charibbi Islands.

Having put this Parenthesis between, viz. the Noble Company of
Marchant-adventurers, or Traffiquers, we will now return to the rest of the
home-Corporations, and first of the Dyers.

1. The Dyers were first incorporated by a special Charter of Hen. 6. Their
Coat a cheuron, engrail'd between three Wooll-sacks argents.

2. The Brewers had a charter of Incorporation of Hen. 6. and confirmed 2 Eliz.
Their coat Gules, on a cheuron engrail^d, argent three Tuns Sable, 'twixt 6
Garbes Salterwayes, or.

3. The Company of Lethersellers is ancient, for they were first incorporated
in the 6th year of Rich. 2. and for their Arms, they have 3. Bucks trippant
regardant gules.

4. The Pewterers were a Society in the Reign of Edw. 4th, their Arms azure, on
a Cheuron, or 3. Roses gules between.

5. The Barber-Chirurgions were first incorporated by Edw. the 4th. but
confirmed by every King and Queen ever since, their Arms a cross quartered
gules, a Lion passant gardant, or, in the first quarter, a cheuron between 3.
in the ^econd party, per pale argent and vert, a Rose gules crowned with an
Imperial Crown, the first as the 4th, the second as the third.

6. The Company of Armorers, were incorporated at the beginning of Hen. 6th,
and the King himself made himself one of the Society, their Arms Argent on a
Cheuron gules, a Gantlet between three Swords in Saltire, on a chief Sable, a
Buckler Argent, charged with cross gules, 'twixt two Helmets of the first.

7. The Company of White Bakers are of great antiquity, as appears by many
Monuments in their Hall. They were a Company in the first year of Edw. 2. Their
Arms gules, 3. Garbs, or, on a chief, an Arm issuing out of the Clouds proper
holding a pair of scales, or, between 3. Anchors of the first.

8. The Company of Wax-Chandlers are also of an ancient standing, and of great
doings in the time of the Roman Religion: their Arms azure, on a cheuron
between 3. Lamps argent, as Roses gules.

The Brotherhood of Tallow-Chandlers, is also of much antiquity; yet they were
first formally incorporated in 2 Edw. 4th: their Arms a pale counter-changed
argent, and azure between 3. Doves argent volant, with Olive branches verd.

10. The Company of Cutlers, were incorporated at the beginning of the Reign of
Hen. 5th, their Arms 6 Swords Salterwayes, proper.

11. The Girdlers are not inferior for antiquity to either of these, yet came
they not to be incorporated, till the twentieth year of Hen. 6th, their Arms
azure, or and a pale between 3. Grid-irons azure.

12. The Butchers came not to be incorporated, till the 3d year of King James;
at which time, they were incorporated by the names of Master, Wardens, and
Comminalty of the Art of Mystery of Butchers, yet the fraternity is ancient;
their Arms azure, two Axes Salterwayes argent, between two Roses argent, as
many Bulls Heads cowped of the second attired, or a Bores Head gules 'twixt two
Garbs vert.

13. The Society of Sadlers must needs be of long antiquity, from the time of
Edw. the first; their arms, a cheuron, between 3. Saddles, or.

14. The Company of Carpenters were incorporated by Letters Patents of Edw.
4th, by the name of Master, Warden, and Comminalty of the Mystery of Freemen of
the Carpentry of the City of London; their arms, azure, a cheuron engraild
between 3. Compasses argent.

15. The Company of Shoomakers, called Cordwainners of old, were first
incorporated 17. of Hen. the 6th. and confirmed since by all Kings; their arms,
azure a cheuron, or between 3. Goats heads, drafed argent attired, or.

16. The Company of Painters having the addition of Painters Stainers, are of
high antiquity; yet were they not incorporated till 1580. by Queen Eliz. their
arms quarterly in the first azure, a cheuron between 3. heads, erected, or, in
the second argent 3. Escuchins azure, the third as the second, the fourth as
the first.

17. The Company of Curriers, are also ancient, yet they were not reduced to a
Company, till the third of King James, their arms azure, a Cross engrail'd, or
between 4. Sawes, Salterwayes argent.

18. The Company of Masons, otherwise called Free Masons, were used to be a
loving Brotherhood for many ages; yet were they not regulated to a Society,
till Hen. 4. their arms sable, on a cheuron between 3. Castles argent, a pair
of Compasses of the first.

19. The Company of Plumbers were erected to a Corporation 9th Jacobi.

20. The Company of Inholders came to be reduced to a Corporation 6. Hen. 8.
their arms azure a cheuron quarterly or and gules counterchang'd between 3.
garbs, or.

21. The Company of Founders were incorporated on the 18th of September. in the
12th year of King James; their Coat, gules, a Spoonpot betwixt two
Candlesticks, or.

22. The Company of Embroiderers came to be a Corporation 4th Eliz. their arms
barry of 8. argent, and azure on a fesse or, a Cup argent, between as many
Lions passant regardant.

23. The Company of Poulters became a Corporation in the 19th of Hen. 7th;
their arms are three Swans of the first, as many Herons of the second.

24. The Company of Cooks became a Corporation in the 12th year of Edw. 4th;
their arms are a cheuron Sable, between three burray branches proper.

25. The Company of Coopers was reduced to a Corporation, the 16th of the Reign
of Hen. 7th, by the name of Master, Wardens, or keepers of the Comminalty of
the Freemen of the mystery of Coopers, and the Suburbs thereof. Their arms
party per pale gules, and or, a cheuron between three hoops in a chief azure.

26. The Company of Tylers and Brick-layers, though very ancient, yet were they
not made a Corporation, till the 10th of Queen Eliz. Their Arms, azure a
cheuron, ^r between a Flower-de-lice, or in chief, 'twixt two gads of Steel of
the second.

27. The Company of Bowyers, though of much antiquity, and honor to the English
Nation; yet their Incorporation was but in the 21. of King James: their arms,
Sable on a chief, 3. Mallets of the first, between 3. Sawes of the first.

28. The Company of Fletchers are also a Corporation, their arms Sable a
cheuron, or between 3. Arrows argent.

29. The Company of Smiths, or Black-smiths, a very ancient Fraternity; were
first incorporated by Queen Eliz. 20th of her Reign, their arms, Sable, a
cheuron between three Hammers crowned, or.

30. The Company of Joyners, or Seelers, were incorporated by Queen Eliz. 13th
of her Reign, their Arms, gules a Cheuron, 'twixt two Compasses and a Globe
argent, on a chief pale gules, charged with an escalop, or, between two Roses
of the first.

31. The Company of Playsterers were incorporated into one fraternity in the
Reign of Hen. 7th. Their arms, azure an Escucheon, or, a Rose between two
Flower-de-luces gules, two Hammers, and a Brush argent.

32. The Company of Weavers, were of very ancient note indeed, as having three
several Societies of themselves, viz. the Woollen Weavers, the Arras Weavers
and the Linen Weavers; their arms azure, three Leopards heads, with three
Shuttles in their mouths, argent on a cheuron gules or between.

33. The Company of the Fruterers were incorporated 3d Iacobi, their arms
argent, the Tree of Paradise between Adam and Eve proper.

34. The Company of Scriveners became a Corporation, 14th Jacobi; their arms,
an Eagle volant, holding in his mouth a penner, and an Inkhorn.

34. As for Bottle-makers and Horners, though they may plead antiquity, yet are
they no Incorporation.

35. The Company of Stationers of great antiquity before Printing was invented:
their old dwelling was in Paternoster Row, and the adjoining parts; yet were
they not incorporated till the third of Philip and Mary; their arms, argent on
a cheuron between 3. Bibles, or a Faulcon volant between two Roses, the Holy
Ghost in chief.

36. The Company called the Marblers, or Sculpters, are in one fraternity with
the Masons, yet have they a differing Coat, viz. a cheuron between two and a
Mallet argent.

37. There was a Company of Wooll-packers, in the time of the Haunce, when the
staple of Wool flourished, their Coat, azure a Wool-sack argent.

38. The Company of Farriers had their rise from Henry de Ferraris, a Norman
born, who was Master of the Horse to the Conqueror, and had given him the
honor of Tutbury, which was the first preferment of the Ferrars, their arms
three Horshooes azure.

39. The Company of Paviours are ancient, their Coat argent, a cheuron between
three rummers Sable.

40. The Company of Lorinors, or Loriners, have for their arms, gules on a
cheuron argent, three Horscombs 'twixt three Roses argent.

41. The Company of Brown-Bakers were incorporated 19th Jacobi, their arms,
gules, a hand issuing out of the Clouds, a chief barry wavie, or, and azure on
a cheuron gules.

41. The Company of Wood-mongers came to be incorporated 3d Jacobi, their Coat,
argent a cheuron 'twixt 3. Faggots Sable.

42. The Company of the Upholsters, or Upholders, give for their arms, Sable
three tents gules, on a cheuron, or 3. tents of the second.

43. The Company of Turners came to be incorporated 2d Jacobi, their Coat
azure, a Katherine Wheel argent.

44. The Company of Glasiers give for their arms two Crosiers Salterwayes
Sable, 4 sprigs on a chief gules, a Lion passant, gardant or.

45. The Company of the Clarks, commonly called Parish-Clarks, is ancient,
having bin incorporated 17th Hen. 3d, their arms azure, a Flower-de-lice, or,
on a chief gules, a Leopards head, 'twixt two Books, or.

46. The Company of Watermen have for their arms barry waive of six azure and
argent, a Lighter proper on a chief gules, a pair of Oars Salterwayes, 'twixt
two Cushions, or.

47. The Company of Silk-throwers were made a Fellowship of this City, 19th
Jacobi, they were incorporated by the name of the Master, Wardens, Assistants,
and Comminalty of the Trade, Art, or Mystery of Silkthrowers, of the City of
London.

48. The Company of the Apothecaries having separated themselves from the
ancient Society of the Grocers, grew so much in favor with King James, that he
used to call them his Company; and therefore gave them a Charter of
Incorporation, the 15th of his Reign.

Thus have we visited all the public Societies, and Corporations of this rich
and renowned City, who may be called her best sorts of Children, for increasing
of her Wealth, and advancement of Trade. Now every of these Companies has a
handsome and well-furnish'd stately Hall, with a Clark, and other Ministerial
Officers thereunto belonging, to attend them, when they meet there to consult,
and inorder what may conduce to the better regulation of the Society, and
promoting of the public good; They also use to meet there frequently to
rejoice, and make plentiful Feasts, for the increase of love and good
Neighborhood among themselves; And though there be some, who hold such
Corporations, and little Body politiques, of this kind, to be prejudicial to
Monarchy; yet they may be said to be one of the Glories of London, and wherein
she surpasses all other Cities.

The Perambulation of LONDON, OR, A Progress made through the six and twenty
particular Wards, Precincts, or Aldermanries, whereinto the whole City is
divided.
GReat Cities have commonly their Divisions: And I could heartily wish, that
the Noble City of London, had not so many in one sense, I mean so many Rents,
factions, and feuds in the practice of Holy Duties, proceeding from such
extravagant, heterodoxal, and fanatical opinions, or rather Chymeras of
unsettled brains; But these are not the Divisions that are here meant. Those
which I intend in this place, are only topical distributions, or Districts,
showing the several position of parts, and differences of their locality,
whereby the Reader may have a kind of Anatomy presented unto him, of all the
members of this great populous City thus dissected.

This general Division consists of six and twenty parts, or precincts, which in
the English Dia^ect, are called Wards, and are these that follow.

The names of all the Wards of the City of LONDON.
Ward.
1. Tower-street. 2. Port-soken. 3. Algate. 4. Limestreet. 5. Bishops-gate. 6.
Broad-street. 7. Cornhill. 8. Langhorn. 9. Billingsgate. 10. Bridge-ward
within. 11. Candlewick. 12. Wallbrook. 13. Dowgate. 14. Vintry. 15. Cordwainer.
16. Cheap. 17. Colemanstreet. 18. Basings Hall. 19. Cripplegate. 20.
Aldersgate. 21. Faringdon intra. 22. Faringdon extra. 23. Breadstreet. 24.
Queen Hith. 25. Castle Bainard. 26. Bridgewater without viz. the Borough of
Southwark.
Whereof the greatest is the last, and Bassings-Hall the least.

Of the first Ward or, Aldermanry, called Tower-street Ward.
OUt of an honor which is due to the Tower of London, it being the prime
Fortress and propugnacle of the City, both by water and Land, the chief Armory
and Archive of the whole Island, etc. we will begin with Tower-street Ward, it
being the first Ward Eastward within the Wall, extending it self along the
River from the Tower almost to Billinsgate; One half of the Tower, the ditch on
the West side, and Bulwarks adjoining, do stand within that part where the wall
of the City of old time went straight from the Postern gate South to the River
of Thames, before that the Tower was perfectly built. Then was Tower hill
sometimes a clear large plot of ground, but now pestered with encroachments of
houses, built upon the banks of the ditch, much to the prejudice, and choking
up of the said ditch.

This Hill has always a Scaffold, and Gallows erected for execution of
Traitors and others, which the City opposed at first.

Many clashings have been also 'twixt the Lord Mayor and the Lieutenant of the
Tower about the extent of their Liberties, and some Privileges touching
prisoners the Lieutenant claimed, which were reconciled 1585; in Queen
Elizabeth's time at Nonsuch.

On the Northside of Tower Hill, there is Lumly house; then is Tower-street,
stretching from Tower Hill to Saint Margaret Pattens. At the end of this is the
Parish Church called Alhallows Barking; on the North side whereof was sometimes
a fair Chapel, built by Richard the first; and some say, that his Heart (which
is called Coeur de lion) was buried there under the high Altar; it became
afterward a little College of Priests, and stood till Edward the sixth. Henry
Howard Earl of Surrey, being beheaded, was buried in Barking Church; John
Fisher Bishop of Rochester, having layen naked upon the Scaffold a long time,
was at last carried thither, and buried in the Churchyard; There were diverse
other men of note buried there: and lately Doctor Land Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was beheaded by the long Parliament.

By the West side of Barking Church lies Sydon Lane, commonly called Sithing
Lane, wherein among other large Buildings, there is Walsingham House.

Then is there the Parish Church of Saint Olave, hard by Hart-street, where
there are some Monuments of the noble Family of the Radcliffs Earls of Sussex.

Then is there Mart-lane, part whereof lies in Algate Ward, where there are
many fair Houses, and rich Merchants. Then is there Mincheon Lane, so called,
because of Tenements there, sometimes pertaining to the Minchuns, or Nuns of
St. Helens in Bishopsgate-street; There dwelt in this Lane diverse strangers in
times passed, and they were commonly called Gallimen, because they brought up
Wines, and other commodities in Galleys, which they landed in the Thames
street, in a place called Galley Key; They brought also a Coin with them called
Gally half pence, which was a Ligurian Coin; But in the Reign of Henry the
fourth, and Henry the fifth, it was inordred, that whosoever should import that
Coin with Suskins or Dodkins, should be punished as a Felon; The Clothwork^rs
Hall is in this Lane.

Then have you the Parish Church of St. Mary Pattens, and Bear Lane hard by,
reaching to Thames street; The next is Spurrier lane, called so in times
passed, but now named Water lane; then is there Heart lane, called at first
Harp-lane, which likewise reaches to Thames street. In this Lane is the Bakers
Hall.

In Tower street 'twixt Hart-lane and Church-lane, was in times passed a
quadrant called Galley-row, because Galley men dwelt there: whence may be
inferred; that Galleys was a kind of shipping, not unknown to England in times
passed.

Then have you two Lanes out of Tower street, both called Church lanes, then
hard by, is there another called Fowl-lane.

Afterward you come to the Parish Church of S. Dunstans in the East: it is a
fair large Church of an ancient building, with a spacious Churchyard; the
chiefest Salters and Ironmongers were used to be thick there. There are many
Monuments of Knights, and other persons of rank in this Church; among others,
that of Sir John Hawkins the great Seaman.

There are many Keys in this Parish, among others Wool Key, where was used to
be the Trouage of Woolls; Then Custom House Key, which part of the Town was
used to be called in times passd Petty Wales. And some are of opinion, that
the Princes of Wales, when they repaired to the City, had a Palace there, the
ruins whereof remain to this day of firm stone.

There was in former times an Hospital in the Parish of Barking, for the
sustentation of poor Priests, with other both men and women that were Lunatic.
And so much in brief for what concerns Tower-street Ward.

Of the second Ward of London called Portsoken Ward.
WE will now make a salley out of Algate, and visit Portsoken Ward; This
Portsoken signifies Franchise, where there was sometimes a very ancient Guild
or particular Society, which had its beginning in the Reign of King Edgar;
There were then 13 Knights, who desired to have a portion of Land on the East
part of the City, which for some signal services done in the wars, was granted
them with the Liberty of a Guild; The King condescended hereunto, pro^ided that
each of them should victoriously perform three combats, one above ground, and
another under ground, and the third in the water. They were to run in East
Smithfield with Spears against all comers, which was used to be gloriously
performed; So that the King namd that place Knighten Guild, and so prescribed
its bound^, which extended from Algate to the place where now the Bars are
Eastward, on both sides of the street, and Northward as far as Bishopsgate; and
Southward as far as the Thames, and so far into the River that a horieman might
ride at low water, and throw his Spear; These Knights continued their Ch^rter
in the days of Edgar, Ethelred, and Canutus, which Edward the Confessor did
not only ratify but enlarge, which deed remained a long time fairly written in
the Saxon Letter and Tongue, in the Book of the late House of the holy Trinity;
after that William Rufus confirmed the said Charter unto the Heirs of those
Knights, as follows;

William King of England, to Maurice Bishop, and Godefroy de Magun, and Richard
de Parre, and to his faithful people of London, Greeting. Know ye me to have
granted to the men of Knighten Guild, that belonged to them, and the Land that
belonged thereunto, with all Customs as they were used to have the same in the
time of my Predecessors, etc.

Henry the first after him confirmed the same; But afterward the Church of the
Holy Trinity, being founded by Queen Matilda within Aldgate, such was the piety
of those times, that this Knighten Guild, which was of such large extent that
it reached unto the Thames, was voluntarily given to the Canons of that Church;
And for better ratification of the Grant they offered upon the Altar, Saint
Edwards Charter with the rest which they had, and put the Prior of the Holy
Trinity, in possession and saisin thereof; by the Church of Saint Butolph,
which was built thereon, being the head of the Land; All which, King Henry
confirmed by that famous Charter which runs thus.

Henry King of England to R. Bishop of London, to the Sheriffs, and Provost,
and all his Barons, and faithful people, French and English of London and
Middlesex, Greeting; Know ye me to have granted and confirmed to the Church and
Canons of the holy Church of the Trinity of London the Soke of the English
Knighten Guild, and the Land which pertains thereunto; and to the Church of
Saint Buttolph, as the men of the same Guild have given, and granted unto them;
And I will and straightly command, that they hold the same well, and honorably
and freely with Sack and Soke, Toll and Thea, Infangthefe, and all Customs
belonging to it as the men of the same Guild in the best sort had it in the
time of King Edward; and as King William my Father and Brother did grant it to
them by their Writs, Witness A. the Queen, etc.

The Prior and Canons of the Holy Trinity beind thus seized of the said Land,
and Soke of Knighten Guild, being not only a part of the Suburb without the
Wall, but also within the City, the Prior was for him and his Successors
admitted as one of the Aldermen of London; And according to the Customs of the
City, he did sit in Court, and rode^ with the Mayor and his brethren the
Aldermen, as one of them, in Scarlet, or other Livery as they then used: until
the year 1531, at which time, the said Priory was surrendered to Henry the
eighth by Act of Parliament, who gave it to Sir Thomas Audley Lord Chancelour
of England, and he pulled down the Church, and dissolved the Priory; since
which dissolution, the said Ward of Portsoken has been governed by Temporal
men, one of the Aldermen of London. Thus much for the outbound Portsoken Ward,
or Knighten Guild, touching the antiquity and Government thereof.

Now touching the Parts thereof, it is to be observed, that the East part of
the Tower stands therein, then an Hospital of Saint Katherine founded by the
foresaid Queen Matilda, wife to King Stephen, by License of the Prior, and
Convent of the Holy Trinity in London, on whose ground she built it; Queen
Elianor Wife to Edward the first, was a second Foundresse there, and appointed
one Master, three Brethren Chaplains, and three Sisters, ten poor women, with
six poor Clerks; for the maintenance of whom, she gave the Manor of Clarton in
VViltshiere, and Upchurch in Kent, etc.

Queen Philippa Wife to Edward the third, founded a Chantry there, and
contributed to that Hospital ten pounds Land a year; The Quiere there, was not
much inferior to that of Paul's, which by one Doctor Wilson being Master there,
was afterward dissolved.

On the East and by North of the Tower lies East Smithfield and Tower hill,
two Plots of ground so called without the Walls of the City, where sometimes
flood a Monastery called New Abbey, founded by Edward the 3d. upon the occasion
following; That having escaped a great danger in a tempest at Sea, he made a
vow to build a Monastery, in sign of gratitude to heaven, to the honor of God
and our Lady of Grace, which he performed accordingly. But the said Monastery,
being afterward pulled down by Sir Arthur Darcy of late time, in place thereof
is built a large storehouse for victual, with convenient Ovens, for baking of
Biscuit to serve the Navy Royal; the rest of the ground is become into small
Tenements.

The Company of Marchant-Taylors, have built thereabouts, hard by Hogstreet,
diverse fair Almshouses for 14 poor women, and endowed it with maintenance
accordingly.

Westward hence from Tower hill toward Algate, there was a Monastery of Nunns
of the Order of Santa Clara, called the Minories, founded by Edmund Earl of
Lancaster, brother to Edward the first, Anno 1293, which was demolished in
Henry the eighths time, Dame Elizabeth Savage being then Abbess: In the room
of this Nunnery, there are now storehouses for Armor, and habillaments for
war, with diverse Workhouses to that purpose; and hard by, there is is a small
Church, called Saint Trinity for the Inhabitants thereabouts.

We come now to the Church of Saint B^ttolph, which the Priors of the Holy
Trinity did build, being Patrons thereof; In this Church among others there
lies buried, Thomas Lord Darcy of the North, Knight of the Garter, who was
beheaded Anno 1537. And also Sir Nicholas Carew, of Beddington in Surrey,
beheaded also Anno 1538.

East from this Parish Church is Hog-lane, that stretches toward St. Mary
Spittle, which within these sixty years, had fair rows of Elm-trees all along,
which are turned now to Houses on both sides, from Houndsditch to
VVhite-Chappel.

Of the Third Ward, or Aldermanry, called Aldgate Ward.
WE will still look Eastward yet a good while, and go to the third Ward within
the Walls, which is called Ealdgate Ward, or Aldgate, as taking name of the
same gate; The principal street of this Ward begins at Ealdgate stretching
West to sometime a fair Well, where now a Pump is placed; From thence (the way
being divided into twain) the first and principal street, (called Aldgate)
runs on the South side to Lime-street corner, and half that street down on
the left hand is also of that Ward.

In the mid way on that South side, betwixt Ealdgate and Lime-street, is
Harthorn Alley, a way that goes through into Fen-Church street, over against
Northumberland house; Then have ye Bricklayers H^ll, and another Alley called
Sprinkle Alley, now named Suger-loaf-alley, of the like Si^n.

Then is there a fair House with diverse Tenements near adjoining, sometimes
belonging to a late dissol^ed Priory, but since possessed by Mr. Cornwallies
widow, and her Heirs by the gift of King Henry the eighth, in reward of fine
puddings (as it was commonly said) by her made, wherewith she had presented
him; such was the Princely liberality of those times. Of later time, Sir
Nicholas Throgmorton Knight, was log'd there.

Then somewhat more West is Belzetters Lane, so called of the first Builder and
owner thereof: now corruptly called B^lliter lane; betwixt this Belzetters lane
and Lime-street, was (of later time) a frame of three fair Houses, set up in
the year 1590, in place where before was a large Garden-plot, enclosed from the
High Street with a Brick Wall, which Wall being taken down, and the ground
dug deep for cellerage, there was found right under the said Brick Wall,
another Wall of stone with a Gate arched of stone, and Gates of Timber, closed
in the midst toward the street; the Timber of the Gates was consumed, but
the Hinges of Iron still remained on, and their Staples on both the sides.

Moreover, in that Wall were square Windows, with Bars of Iron on either side
the Gate; this Wall was under ground above two fathoms deep, as it was
esteemed, and seemed to be the ruins of some House burned in the Reign of King
Steven, when the fire began in the House of one Aleward, near Londonstone, and
consumed East to Ealdgate, whereby it appears, how greatly the ground of this
City has been in that place raised.

On the North side, this principal street stretches to the West corner of
Saint Andrews Church, and then the Ward turns toward the North, by S. Mary
street; on the East side, to St. Augustines Church in the Wall, and so by
Burryes Marks again, or about by the Wall to Ealdgate.

The second way from Ealdgate, more toward the South from the Pump aforesaid,
is called Fen-Church-street, and is of Ealdgate Ward, till ye come to Cullver
Alley, on the West side of Ironmongers Hall; where sometimes was a Lane, which
went out of F^n-Church-street, to the midst of Lime-street, but this Lane was
stopped up, for suspicion of Thieves that lurked there by night.

Again, to Aldgate, (out of the principal street, even by the Gate and Wall of
the City,) runs a Lane South to Crossed or Crouched-Fryers, and then
Woodroof Lane, to the Tower Hill; and out of this Lane West, a street called
Hart-street, which of that Ward stretches to Sydon-lane, by St. Olaves Church;
one other Lane more West from Algate, goes by Northumberland-House toward the
Crossed-Fryars; then have you on the same side, the North end of Mart-lane, and
Blanch-axelton or Chappleton, where that Ward ends.

Thus much for bounds. Now for Monuments, or places most anci^nt and notable; I
am first to begin with the late dissolved Priory of the holy Trinity, called
Christs-Church, on the right hand within Aldgate; This Priory was founded by
Matilda, Queen and Wife to Henry the first, in the same place where Siredus
sometime began to erect a Church in honor of that Cross, and of Saint Mary
Magdalen, of which the Dean and Chapter of Waltham, were wont to receive thirty
shillings, the Queen was to acquit her Church thereof; and in exchange gave
unto them a Mi^^, King Henry her husband confirmed her gift; This Church was
given to Norman, the first Canon regular in all England.

The said Queen gave also unto the same Church, and those that served God
therein, the plot of Aldgate, and the Soke or Tenements thereunto belonging,
with all Customs, so free as she had held the same, and 25 l. Blanks, which she
had of the City of Exeter, as appears by her Deed, wherein she names the
House of Christs-Church, and reports Aldgate to be of her Demains, which she
grants, with two parts of the rent of the City of Excester. Norman took on
him to be Prior of Christs-Church, in the year of Christ 1108, in the Parishes
of St. Mary Magdalen, St. Michael, St. Katherine, and the blessed Trinity, and
was (in old time) of the holy Cross, or holy R^^d Parish.

The Priory was builded on a piece of ground in the Parish of St. Katherine,
toward Aldgate, which lies in length, betwixt the Kings-street, by the which
men go toward Algate near to the Chapel of St. Michael toward the North, and
contains in ^ength eighty three else, half quarter, and half quartern of the
Kings Iron eln, and lies in breadth, etc. The Soke and Ward of Aldgate was
then bounded, as I have before shown. The Queen was a men also, that the Land
and English Knighten-Gu^ld was given unto the Prior Norman, and the honorable
man Geffrey de Clinton, was a great helper therein, and obtained, that the
Canons might enclose the way betwixt their Church and the Wall of the City,
etc. This Priory in process of time, became a very fair and large Church, rich
in Lands and Ornaments, and passed all the Priories in the City of London, or
Shire of Middlesex. The Prior whereof was an Alderman of London, to wit, of
Portsoken Ward.

It is Recorded, that Eustacius the eighth Prior, about the year 1264, because
he would not deal with temporal Matters, instituted Theobald Fitz Ivon^s
Alderman of the said Portsoken Ward under him; and that William Rising Prior
of Christ's Church, was sworn Alderman of the said Portsoken Ward, in the first
of Richard the second. These Priors have sitten and ridden amongst the Aldermen
of London, in Livery like unto them, faring that his habit was in shape of a
spiritual person, at which time the Prior kept a most bountiful house of meat
and drink, both for rich and poor, as well within the House as at the Gates, to
all comers according to their estates and qualities.

But to take leave of this Priory: King Henry the eighth minding to reward Sir
Thomas Audley Speaker of the Parliament against Cardinal Woolsey, as ye may
read in the Chronicle, sent for the Prior, commending him for his Hospitality,
promised him preferment as a man worthy of a far greater dignity, (which
promise surely he performed) and compounded with him, though in what sort I
never heard; so that the Priory, with the appurtenances, was surrendered to the
King, in the month of July 1531, the 23 of the said Kings Reign, the Canons
were sent to other houses of the same Order: and the Priory with the
appurtenances, King Henry gave to Sir Tho. Audley newly knighted, and
afterward made Lord Chancelour.

Sir Thomas Audley offered the great Church of this Priory, with a ring of nine
Bells well tuned (whereof four of the greatest were since sold to the Parish of
Stebunbith, and the five lesser to the Parish of St. Katherine Christs-Church,
in exchange for their small Parish Church, minding to have pulled it down, and
to have builded there toward the steeet; But the Parishioners, having doubts
in their heads of after-claps, refused the offer.

Then was the Priory Church and Steeple, proffered to whomsoever would take it
down, and carry it from the ground, but no man would undertake the offer;
whereupon, Sir, Thomas Audley was fain to be at more charges than could be made
of the Stones, Timber, Lead, Iron, etc. For the Workmen, with great labor,
beginning at the top, loosed stone from stone, and threw them down, whereby the
most part of them were broken, and few remained whole, and those were sold very
cheap; for all the buildings then made about the City, were of Brick and
Timber; At that time any man in the City might have a Cart-load of stone for
paving brought to his door for 6d. or 7d. with the carriage.

The said Thomas, Lord Audley, builded and dwelt on this Priory during his
life, and dyed there in the year 1544, since which time, the said Priory came
(by Marriage of the Lord Audley's Daughter and Heir) unto Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, and was then called the Dukes-place. At this time the Inhabitants
dwelling and abiding in the said Dukes-place became utterly destitute of any
Parish Church, for resorting to Gods Divine service, and the administration of
the blessed Sacraments; which in the time of their former zeal, the demolished
Priory, not only served their use, but infinite numbers besides, resorted
thither. In which respect, the Parish Church of St. Katherine being so near,
and standing in the Coemitery or Churchyard of the late dissolved Priory of
the Holy Trinity, whereby it was called Saint Katherine Christs-Church, they
resorted thither at the hours of Divine Service, and for the benefit of the
blessed Sacraments, whereby they became a burden to the said Parish, yet well
enough borne withal, in regard of the benefit ensuing by them, so that they
carried the respect of equal parishioners, exercising and accomplishing all
duties there, even as if it had been their own proper Parish.

The long continuance of them in this kind, although some much misliked, and
gladly would have compassed means for remedy thereof; yet their power not
stretching so far, nor the way (as yet) fitting for their purpose, they
remained contented against their Wills, till time would fit them with more
convenient opportunity; Ground they wanted not, for raising a sufficient Parish
Church to themselves, neither did any good will fail in them for the effecting
their purpose; but only were curbed by the lack of strength, how and which way
to bring it about. At length perceiving their ground (intended for so good a
use to themselves) aimed at for buildings to private men's benefits, that so
they might be frustrate of any such help, when occasion should in better manner
shine on them, some of the best advised among them, by Petition solicited the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to make their desire and intention known to the
King, which he did. And the King, finding the case so truly honest and
religious, for new erecting a Church where such necessity required, and where
Superstition had so long time formerly been harbored, not only gave the Lord
Archbishop and the Suitors, both thanks and commendation, but also under his
Hand and broad Seal, authorizable Warrant for their proceeding. The Lord Mayor
and Senate of Aldermen, having intelligence in the case, and perceiving what an
honor would redound thereby, first to God who inspired them thereto; next to
the King, for so Royally granting the suite; and then to the City, for
furthering it to Effect, notwithstanding that diverse oppositions were made by
them, who would have things still continue, as formerly they did without
benefit of a Parish Church of their own. It proceeded on with good and
prosperous success, to the no mean Honor, and commendation of the Lord Mayor
then being, Sir Ed. Barkham by name, the Court of Aldermen, and state of this
famous City by whose good means it is made a very beautiful and comely Parish
Church, it being called in the time of re-edifying, Trinity Christ's Church,
raised out of the long decayed ruins, of Trinity Priory in the Dukes place.

By this time, the work is grown to such fullness and perfection, as now nothing
wants, but the windows glazing, which was performed in this manner,

The main and great East light in the Chancel, Sir Edward Barkham himself
undertook, and effected it at his own Charge, as the expression testifies in
the same Window. The other sideling by it; but inclining more Southerly. Mr.
George Whitmore, and Mr. Nicholas Rainton, performed. And the third, standing
Northerly in the same Chancel, Mr. Walter Leigh, who had bin a Sergeant at
Arms, to the Kings Majesty, and then Sword Bearer of London, did likewise at
his own Charge perform, The two Western lights in the bottom of the Church,
being (indeed) very fair lights; the Company of Drapers effected the one, and
the Wood-mongers Society finished the other. Beside, the two Southerly Windows,
the one done at the charge of Mr. Cornelius Fish, Chamberlain of London; and
the other by Mr. Waldron, then Marshal: so now ye have the Church of St. James
complete.

The Parish Church of St. Katherine, stands in the Caemitery of the dissolved
Priory of the holy Trinity, and is therefore called St. Katherine Christ's
Church. The Church seems to be very old, since the building whereof, the High
street has bin so often raised by Pavements, that now men are sain to descend
into the said Church, by diverse steps, seven in number; but the Steeple, or
Bell Tower thereof, has bin lately builded, to wit, about the year 1504.

For Sir John Perceival Marchant-Tailor, then deceasing, gave money toward the
building thereof.

Now concerning this Parish Church of St. Katherine Christ's Church, commonly
Cree-Church, as formerly has bin said, it had a descent down into it by seven
steps or stayers; but being now newly built, and made a very fair Ch^^ch: the
ascent into the Church, is by four or five degrees.

At the North-West corner of this Ward, in the said High street, stands the
fair and beautiful Parish Church of St. Andrew the Apostle, with an Addition,
to be known from other Churches of that Name, of the Knape, or Undershaft and
so called St. Andrew Undershaft: because that of old time, every year (on
May Day in the morning) it was used, that an high or long shaft, or May Pole,
was set up there, in the midst of the street, before the South door of the said
Church, which Shaft or Pole, when it was set on end, and fixed in the ground,
was higher then the Church Steeple. Jeffrey Chawcer, writing of a vain boaster,
has these words, meaning of the said Shaft. Right well aloft, and high ye bear
your head,
The Weathercock, with flying, as ye would kill,
When ye be stuffed, bet of Wine, than bread,
Then look ye, when your womb does fill,
As ye would bear the great Shaft of Cornhill.
Lord so merrily, crowdeth then your Croke,
That all the Street may bear your Body Cloak.


This Shaft was not raised any time since evil May Day (so called of an
insurrection made by Prentices, and other young persons against Aliens, in the
year 1517.) but the said Shaft was laid along over the doors, and under the
Pentises of one row of Houses, and Alley-gate, called of the Shaft,
Shaft-Alley, (being of the possessions of Rochester-bridge) in the Ward of
Limestreet.

It was there I say, hanged on Iron hooks many years, till the third of King
Edward the sixth That one Sir Steven, Curate of St. Katherine Christ's Church,
preaching at Paul's Cross, said there, that this Shaft was made an Idol, by
naming the Church of St. Andrew, with the addition of Under-shaft; he persuaded
therefore, that the names of Churches might be altered: Also, that the names of
the days in the week, might be changed, the Fish days to be kept any days,
except Friday and Saturday; and the Lent any time, save only betwixt Shrovetide
and Easter: This man forsaking the Pulpit of his said Parish Church, would
preach out of an high Elm Tree, in the midst of the Churchyard, And then
entering the Church, forsaking the Altar, to have sung his High Mass in
English* upon a Tomb of the Dead, toward the North; But his Sermon at Paul's
Cross, took such effect, that in the Afternoon of that present Sunday, the
Neighbors and Tenants to the said Bridge, over whose doors, the said Shaft had
lain, after they had dined (to make themselves strong) gathered more help, and
with great labor, raising the Shaft from the Hooks (whereon it had rested two
and thirty years) they sawed it in pieces, every man taking for his share, so
much as had lain over his door and stall, the length of his house; and they of
the Alley divided amongst them, so much as had lain over their Alley gate. Thus
was his Idol (as he termed it) mangled, and after burned.

Soon after, was there a commotion of the Commons in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex,
and other Shires, by means whereof, straight Orders being taken for the
suppression of rumors, diverse persons were apprehended, and executed by Marshal
Law; amongst the which, the Bayliffe of Rumford in Essex, was one, a man very
well beloved: he was early in the morning of Mary Magdalens day (then kept
Holy Day) brought by the Sheriffs of London, and the Knight-Marshall, to the
Well within Aldgate, there to be executed upon a Gibbit, set up that morning,
where being on the Ladder, he had words to this effect;

^ood People, I am come hither to die, but know not for what offense, except
for words by me spoken yester night to Sir Stephen, Curate and Preacher of this
Parish, which were these, He asked me what news in the Country, I answered,
Hea^y news; why quoth he? It is said, quoth I, that many men be up in Essex;
But thanks be to God, all is in good quiet about us; and this was all, as God
be my Judge, etc. Thus much, by the By.

Now again, to the Parish Church of St. Andrew Under Shaft, for it still
retains the name, which has bin new builded by the Parishioners, since the
year 1520. every man putting to his helping hand, some with their purses,
others with their Bodies. Stephen Iennings Marchant-Taylor, sometimes Mayor of
London, caused (at his charges) to be builded the whole North side of the great
middle I Will, both of the Body and Quire, as appears by his Arms, over every
Pillar graven; and also the North I Will, which he roofed with Timber, and seeled.
Also the whole South side of the Church, was glazed, and the Pewes in the South
Chapel made of his Costs, as appears in every Window, and upon the said
Pewes. He deceased in the year 1524. and was buried in the Gray Friars Church.
John Kirby Marchant-Taylor, sometimes one of the Sheriffs, John Garland
Marchant-Taylor, and Nicholas Levison Mercer, Executor to Garland, were great
Benefactors to this work, which was finished (to the glazing) in the year 1529.
and fully finished 1532.

Now in the second way from Aldgate, more toward the South, from the Well or
Pump aforesaid, sieth Fenne-Church street; on the right hand whereof, somewhat
West from the South end of Belzetters lane, is Ironmongers-Hall, which Company
was incorporated in the third of Edward the fourth, Richard Flemming was their
first Master, Nicholas Marshall, and Richard Cox, were Custodes or Wardens. And
on the left hand, or South side, (even by the Gate and Wall of the City)
runs down a Lane to the Tower Hill: the South part whereof, is called
Woodroof-Lane; and out of this Lane toward the West, a street called
Hart-street. In this street, at the South-East Corner thereof; sometime stood
one house of Crowched or (Crossed) Friars, founded by Ralph Hosier, and William
Sabernes, about the year 1298. Stephen the tenth Prior of the Holy Trinity in
London, granted three Tenements for 13 s. 8 d. by the year, unto the said Ralph
Hosiar, and William Saburnes, who afterward became Friars of S. Cross. Adam
was the first Prior of that house: These Friars founded their house in the
place of certain Tenements, purchased of Rich. Wimblush, the 12th Prior of the
Holy Trinity, in the year 1319. which was confirmed by Edward the third, the
seventeenth of his Reign, valued at 52 l. 13 s. 4 d. surrendered the 12th of
November, the 30. of Henry the 8th.

In place of this Church, is now a Carpenters yard, a Tennis-Court, and such
like: the Friars Hall was made a Glasse-house, or house, wherein was made
Glass of diverse sorts to drink in: which house, in the year 1575. on the
fourth of September, burst out into a terrible fire, where all means possible
being practiced to quench it, notwithstanding, as the same house in a small
time before, had consumed a great quantity of Wood, by making of Glasses; Now
it self, having within it about 40000 Billets of Wood, was also consumed to the
stone walls, which nevertheless, greatly, hindered the fire from spreading any
further.

Adjoining unto this Friars Church, by the East end thereof in Woodroffe Lane,
toward the Tower Hill, are certain Almes-houses, 14. in number, builded of
Brick and Timber, founded by Sir John Milburn, Draper, sometime Mayor, 1521.
wherein be placed 13. aged poor men, and their Wives: these have their
dwellings rent-free, and 2 s. 4 d. a piece, the first day of every Month for
ever.

Next to these Almshouses is the Lord Lumleys house, builded in the time of
King Henry the 8th, by Sir Thomas Wiat the Father, upon one plot of ground, of
late pertaining to the aforesaid Crossed Friars, where part of their house
stood. And this is the farthest of Aldgate Ward toward the South, and joyneth
to the Tower Hill; the other side of that Lane, over against the Lord Lumleys
house, on the wall side of the City, is now for the most part (or altogether)
builded, even to Aldgate.

Then have ye on the South side of Fenne-Church-street, over against the wall
or Pump, amongst other fair and large builded houses, one that sometime
belonged to the Prior of Monte Joves, or Monastarie Cornute, a Cell to Monte
Joves beyond the Seas; in Essex it was the Priors Inn, when he repaired to
this City; Then a Lane that leads down by Northumberland House, toward the
Crossed Friars, as is before showed.

This Northumberland House in the Parish of St. Katherine Coleman, belonging to
Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, in the 33. of Henry the sixth; but of
late being left by the Earls, the Gardens thereof were made into Bowling
Alleys, and other parts into Dicing-houses, common to all comers, for their
money, there to bowl and recreate themselves. But now of late, so many Bowling
Alleys, and other houses for unlawful gaming, have been raised in other parts
of the City and Subburbs, that this which was used to be the ancientest, and
only Rendezvous of sport, is left and forsaken of the Gamesters, and therefore
turned into a number of great Rents, small Cottages, for strangers and others.

At the East end of this Lane, in the way from Aldgate, toward the Crossed
Friars, of old time, were certain Tenements, called the Poor Jurie, of Jews
dwelling there.

Next unto this Northumberland house, is the Parish Church of St. Katherine,
called Coleman; which addition of Coleman, was taken of a great Haw-yard, or
Garden, of old time called Coleman Haw, in the Parish of the Trinity, now
called Christ's Church. And in the Parish of St. Katherine, and All Saints,
called Coleman Church. There are some handsome Tombs in this Church, and
particularly of Sir Henry Billingley Knight, and Lord Mayor of London, who was
a Benefactor thereunto.

Then have ye Blanch Appleton, whereof we read in the 13th of Edw. the first,
that a Lane behind the same Blanch Appleton, was granted by the King to be
enclosed, and shut up; This Blanch Appleton was a Manor belonging to Sir
Thomas R^^os of Hamelake, Knight, the 7th of Rich: the 2d, standing at the
North-East corner of Mart Lane, so called, of a privilege sometime enjoyed to
keep a Mart there, long since discontinued, and therefore forgotten: so as
nothing remains for memory, but the name of Mart Lane, and now corruptly
termed Mark Lane.

Of the fourth Ward, or Aldermanry of London, called Limestreet Ward.
WE will now give a visit to Limestreet Ward, which takes its denomination from
the street, and the street from making Lime there, in times passed.

In Limestreet are diverse fair Houses; for Merchants and others, there was
sometime a Mansion house of the Kings, called the Kings Artirce, as it stands
upon Record, in the 14th of Edward the first; but now grown out of knowledge:
We read also of another great House, in the West side of Limestreet, having a
Chapel on the South, and a Garden on the West, belonging to the Lord Nevill,
which Garden is now called Green Yard, of the Leaden Hall.

This House in the 9th of Rich. 2. pertained to Sir Simon Burley, and Sir John
Burley his Brother: and of late, the said House was taken down, and the
forefront thereof new builded of Timber, by Hugh Offley, Alderman.

At the North-west Corner of Limestreet, was (of old time) one great Mesuage,
called Benbridges Inn; Raph Holland, Draper, about the year 1452. gave it to
John Gill, Master, and to the Wardens and Fraternity of Tailors, and Linen
Armourers of St. John Baptist in London, and to their successors for ever. They
did set up in places thereof, a fair large frame of Timber, containing in the
high street, one great house; and before it, to the corner of Limestreet three
other Tenements, the corner house being the largest; and then down Limestreet,
diverse handsome Tenements: All which, the Marchant-Taylors, in the Reign of
Edw. 6. sold to Stephen Kirton, Marchant-Taylor, and Alderman, who gave with
his Daughter Grisild, to Nicholas Woodroffe, the said great House, with two
Tenements before it, in lieu of an hundred pounds, and made it up in money,
three hundred sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings four pence: This worthy man,
and the Gentlewoman his Widow, after him, kept those houses down Limestreet, in
good reparations, never put out but one Tenant, took no fines, nor raised rents
for them, which was ten shillings the piece yearly; But whether that favor did
over-live her Funeral, the Tenants now can best declare the contrary.

The next is Leaden Hall, of which we read, that in the year 1309. it belonged
to Sir Hugh Nevil, Knight, and that the Lady Alice his Wife, made a Feoffment
thereof, by the name of Leaden Hall, with the Advousions of S. Peter on
Cornhill, and other Churches, to Richard Earl of Arrundel, and Surrey, 1362.

Moreover, in the year 1380. Alice Nevil, Widow to Sir John Nevil, Knight of
Essex, confirmed to Thomas Cogshall, and others, the said Manor of
Leaden Hall, and the advousions, etc.

In the year 1384. Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, had the said Manor,
And in the year 1408. Robert Rikeden of Essex, and Margaret his Wife, confirmed
to Richard Whittington, and other Citizens of London, the said Manor of Leaden
Hall, with the Appurtenances, the Advousion of St. Peter's Church, S. Margaret
Pattens, etc.

And in the year 141^. the said Whitington, and other, confirmed the same to
the Mayor, and Comminalty of London, whereby it came to the possession of the
City.

Then in the year 1443. the one and twenty of Henry the sixth, John Hatheyrley,
Mayor, purchased License of the said King, to take up 200. fodder of Lead, for
the building of Water Conduits, a common Granary, and the Cross in West
Cheap, more richly, for the honor of the City.

In the year next following, the Parson and Parish of St. Dunstane, in the East
of London, seeing the Noble and mighty Man (for the words be in the Grant; Cum
Nobilis and Potens vir.) Simon Air, Citizen of London, among other his works
of piety, effectually determined to erect and build a certain Granary, upon the
soil of the same City at Leaden Hall, of his own charges, for the common
utility of the said City, to the amplifying and enlarging of the said Granary,
granted to Henry Frowick, then Mayor, the Aldermen and Commonalty, and their
Successors for ever, all their Tenements, with the appurtenances, sometime
called the Horse Mill in Grasse-street, for the annual Rent of four pounds, etc.

Also, certain evidences of an Alley, and Tenements pertaining to the Horse
Mill, adjoining to the said Leaden Hall in Grasse-street, given by William
Kingstone, Fishmonger, unto the Parish Church of St. Peter upon Cornhill, do
specify the said Granary, to be builded by the said Honorable and famous
Merchant, Simon Air, sometime an Upholster, and ^hen a Draper, in the year
1419. He builded it of squared stone, in form as now it shows, with a fair
and large Chapel in the East side of the Quadrant; over the Porch of which, he
caused to be written, Dextra Domini exaltavit me, The Lords right hand exalted
me.

Within the said Church, on the North wall, was written, Honorandus famosus
Mercator Simon Air, hujus operis, etc. In English thus, The honorable and
famous Merchant Simon Air, founder of this work, once Mayor of this City,
Citizen and Draper of the same, departed out of this life, the 18th day of
September. the year from the Incarnation of Christ, 1459. and the 38. year of the
Reign of King Henry the sixth: he was buried in the Parish Church of St. Mary
Wolnoth, in Lumbard street; he gave by his Testament, to be distributed to all
Prisons in London, or within a mile of that City, somewhat, to relieve them.

More, he gave 2000 Marks upon a condition, which not performed, was then to be
distributed to Maids Marriages, and other deeds of Charity: he also gave 3000
Marks to the Drapers, upon condition, that they should within one year after
his decease, establish perpetually a Master or Warden, five secular Priests,
six Clerks, and two Queristers, to sing daily Divine Service, by note for ever,
in this Chapel of the Leaden Hall; Also, one Master with an Usher for Grammar,
one Master for Writing, and the third for Song, with Houses there newly builded
for them for ever; the Master to have for his salary, ten pounds, and every
other Priest, eight pounds; every other Clarke, five pounds six shillings eight
pence; and every other Chorister, five Marks; and if the Drapers refused this
to do, within one year after his decease, then the three thousand Marks to
remain to the Prior and Covent of Christs-Church in London, with condition to
establish things as aforesaid, within two years after his decease; And if they
refused, then the three thousand Marks to be disposed by his Executors, as they
best could devise in works of Charity.

Thus much for his Testament, not performed by establishing of Divine Service
in his Chapel or Free School, and Scholars; neither was it known how the stock
of three thousand Marks (or rather five thousand Marks) was employed by his
Executors, he left issue Thomas, who had issue Thomas, etc. True it is, that in
the year 1464, the third of Edward the fourth, it was agreed by the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commonalty of London, that notwithstanding the Kings Letters
Pattents, lately before granted unto them, touching the Trouage or weighing of
Wares, to be held at Leaden Hall; yet Suite should be made to the King, for new
Letters Pattents, to be granted to the Mayor of the Staple, for the Trouage of
Wools, to be holden there, and order to be taken by the discretion of Thomas
Cook, then Mayor; The Council of the City, Geffrey filding, then Mayor of the
Staple at Westminster, and of the Kings Council what should be paid to the
Mayor, and Aldermen of the City, for the laying and housing of the Wools there,
that so they might be brought forth and weighed, etc.

Touching the Chapel there, we find that in the year 1466, by License obtained
of King Edward the fourth, in the sixth of his Reign, a Fraternity of the
Trinity of 60 Priests (besides other brethren and sisters) in the same Chapel,
was founded by Rouse, John Risby, and Thomas Ashby Priests: some of the which
sixty Priests, every Market Day, in the fore-noon, did celebrate Divine service
there, to such Market people as repaired to prayer, and once every year, they
met altogether, and had solemn Service, with procession of all the Brethren,
and Sisters; this foundation was in the year 1512, by a Common Counsel
confirmed to the sixty Trinity Priests, and to their Successors, at the will of
the Mayor and Commonalty.

In the year 1484 a great fire happened upon Leaden Hall, by what casualty it
was not known, but much housing was there destroyed, with all the Stocks for
Guns, and other provision belonging to the City, which was a great loss, and
no less charge to be repaired by them.

In the year 1503. the eighteenth of Henry the seventh, a request was made by
the Commons of the City, concerning the usage of the said Leaden Hall, in form
as follows;

Please it the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel, to enact, that all
Frenchmen bringing Canvas, Linen cloth, and other Wares to be sold, and all
Forreins bringing Woolsteads, Says, Stamins, Kiverings, Nails, Iron work, or
any other Wares, and also all Forreins, bringing Lead to the City to be sold,
shall bring all such their Wares aforesaid, to the open Market of the
Leaden Hall, and no where else to be showed, sold and uttered, like as of old
time it has been used, upon pain of forfeiture of all the said Wares, showed
or sold in any other place than aforesaid; And the show of the said Wares to be
made three days in a week, that is to lay Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday; It
is also thought reasonable, that the common Beam be kept from henceforth in the
Leaden Hall, and the Farmer to pay therefore reasonable rent to the Chamber,
for better it is, that the Chamber have advantage thereby, than a Foreign
person; And also the said Leaden Hall, which is more chargeable now by half
than profitable, shall better bear out the charges thereof; Also the common
Beam for Wool at Leaden Hall may pay yearly a rent to the Chamber of London,
toward the supportation and charges of the same place: for reason it is, that a
common Office occupied upon a common ground, bear a charge to the use of the
Communalty; Also that Forrains bringing Wools, Felts, or any other Marchandizes
or Wares to Leaden Hall, to be kept there for the sale and market, may pay more
largely for keeping of their goods, than Freemen. Thus much for the request of
the Commons at that time.

Now to set down some proof, that the said Hall has been employed and used as
a Granary for Corn and grain (as the same was first appointed) leaving all
former examples, this one may suffice, Roger Achley Mayor of London in the year
1512, the third of Henry the eighth, when the said Mayor entered the Majoralty,
there was not found one hundred quarters of Wheat in all the Garners of this
City, either within the Liberties or near adjoining, through the which
scarcity, when the Carts of Stratford came laden with Bread to the City (as
they had been accustomed) there was such press about them, that one man was
ready to destroy another, in striving to be served for their money; but this
scarcity lasted not long, for the Mayor (in short time) made such provision for
Wheat that the Bakers, both of London, and of Stratford, were weary of taking
it up, and were forced to take much more than they would, and for the rest the
Mayor laid out the money, and stored it up in Leaden Hall, and other Garners of
the City; This Mayor also kept the Market so well, that he would be at the
Leaden Hall, by four a clock in the Summer mornings, and from thence he went to
other Markets to the great comfort of the Citizens.

We read also, that in the year 1528, the twentieth of Henry the eighth,
Surveyers were appointed to view the Garners of the City, namely, the
Bridge-house and the Leaden Hall, how they were stored of Grain for the service
of the City; And because we have here before spoken of the Bread-carts coming
from Stratford at the Bow, ye shall understand, that of old time the Bakers of
Bread at Stratford, were allowed to bring daily (except the Sabbath and
principal Feasts) diverse long Carts laden with bread, the same being two ounces
in the penny wheaten loaf heavier than the penny wheaten loaf baked in the
City, the same to be sold in Cheap, three or four Carts standing there 'tween
G^therans Lane, and Fausters Lane end, one Cart on Cornhil by the Conduit, and
one other in Grasse-street; And we may read, that in the fourth year of Edward
the second, Richard Reffeham, being Mayor, a Baker named John of Stratford, for
making Bread lesser than the Assize, was with a fools hood on his Head, and
loaves of Bread about his Neck, drawn on a hurdle through the streets of the
City* Moreover, in the four and fortieth of Edward the third, John Chichester
being Mayor of London, as we may read in the visions of Pierce Plowman, a Book
so called as follows;

There was a careful commune, when no Cart came to Town with Basket Bread from
Stratford tho began beggars weep, and workmen were aghast, a little this will be
thought long in the date of our dirte, in a dry Averel, a thousand and three
hundred, twice thirty and ten, etc.

We read also in the twentieth of Henry the eighth, Sir James Spencer being
Mayor, six Bakers of Stratford, were amerced in the Guild Hall of London, for
baking under the size appointed; But these Bakers of Stratford left serving
this City, I know not upon what occasion, above forty years since.

In the year 1519 a Petition was exhibited by the Commons to the
Common Counsel, and was by them allowed, concerning the Leaden Hall, how they
would have it used, viz.

Meekly beseeching, shows unto your good Lordship, and Masterships, diverse
Citizens of this City, which (under correction) think, that the great place
called the Leaden Hall, should, nor ought not to be letten out to Farm, to any
person or persons and in special, to any fellowship or Company incorporate, to
have and hold the same Hall for term of years; for such conveniences as thereby
may ensue, and come to the hurt of the Commonweal of the said City in time to
come, as somewhat more largely may appear in the Articles following.

First, if any assembly or hasty gathering of the Commons of the said City, for
suppressing or subduing of mi^ruled people within the said City, hereafter
shall happen to be called or commanded by the Mayor, Aldermen, and other
Governors and Counselors of the said City for the time being; there is none
so convenient, meet and necessary a place to assemble them in, within the said
City, as the said Leaden Hall, both for largeness of room, and for their sure
defense in time of their counselling together about the premises. Also, in that
place has been used the Artillery, Guns, and other Armors of the said City, to
be safely kept in a readiness, for the safeguard, wealth, and defense of the
said City to be had and occupied at times when need required. As also the store
of Timber, for the necessary reparations of the Tenements belonging to the
Chamber of the said City, there commonly has been kept.

Item, If any Triumph or Nobleness were to be done, or showed by the
Commonalty of the City, for the honor of our Sovereign Lord the King and
Realm, and for the worship of the said City, the said Leaden Hall is the most
meet and convenient place, to prepare and order the said Triumph therein, and
from thence to issue forth to the places thereof appointed.

Item, at any Largess or dole of any money, made unto the poor people of this
City; it has been used to be done and given in the said Leaden Hall, for that
the said place is most meet therefore.

Item, the honorable Father, that was maker of the said Hall, had a special
will, intent, and mind, that (as it is commonly said) the Market men and women,
that came to the City with victuals and other things, should have their free
standing within the said Leaden Hall in wet weather, to keep themselves and
their Wares dry, and thereby to encourage them, and all other, to have the
better will and desire, the more plentiously to resort to the said City, to
victual the same; And if the said Hall should be letten to Farm, the will of
the said honorable Father, should never be fullfilled, nor take effect.

Item, if the said place, which is the chief Fortress, and most necessary
place within all the City, for the tuition and safeguard of the same, should be
letten out to Farm, out of the hands of the chief Heads of the same City, and
especially to any other Body politic, it might at length (by likelihood) be an
occasion of discord and debate, between the said Bodies politic, which God
defend.

For these, and many other great and reasonable causes, which hereafter shall
be showed to this honorable Court, your said Beseechers think it much
necessary, that the said Hall be still in the hands of this City; and to be
surely kept by sad and discreet Officers in such wise, that it might always be
ready to be used and occupied, for the Commonweal of the said City, when need
shall require, and in no wise to be letten to any Body politic. Thus much for
the Petition.

About the year one thousand five hundred thirty four, great means was made
about the Leaden Hall, to have the same made a Burse for the Assembly of
Merchants, as they had been accustomed in Lumbard-street; many Common-Councels
were called to that end, but in the year 1535, John Champneys being Mayor, it
was fully concluded, that the Burse should remain in Lumbard-street, as before,
and Leaden Hall no more to be spoken of concerning that matter.

The use of Leaden Hall was used to be thus; In a part of the North Quadrant,
on the East side of the North Gate, were the common Beams, for weighing of
Wool and other Wares, as had been accustomed; On the West side of* the Gate
was the Scales to weigh Meal: the other three sides were reserved (for the most
part) to the making and resting of the Pageants showed at Mid-Summer in the
watch: the remnant of the sides and Quadrants, were employed for the stowage of
Wool-sacks, but not closed up: the lofts above were partly used by the
Painters, in working for the decking of Pageants and other devices, for
beautifying of the Watch and Watchmen: the residue of the Lofts were letten
out to Merchants, the Wooll-winders and Packers therein, to wind and pack
their Wools. And thus much for Leaden Hall may suffice.

Now on the North of Limestreet Ward, in the Highstreet are diverse fair houses
for Merchants, and proper Tenements for Artificers, with an Alley also called
Shall Alley, of the Shaft or May Pole, sometime resting over the Gate thereof,
as I have declared in Aldgate Ward.

In the year 1576. partly at the charges of the Parish of St. Andrew, and
partly at the charges of the Chamber of London, a water-pump, was raised in the
high street of Lime-street Ward, near unto Lime-street corner, for the placing
of the which Pump, having broken up the ground, they were forced to dig more
than two fadome deep, before they came to any main ground, where they found a
Hearth made of Britain, or rather Roman Tyle, every Tyle half yard square,
and about two inches thick, they found coal lying there also (for that lying
whole will never consume) then digging one fadome in the main, they found water
sufficient, made their Prall, and set up the Pump, which Pump, with often
repairing and great charges to the Parish, continued not four and twenty years,
but being rotted, was taken up, and a new one set in the place, in the year
1600. Thus much for the High Street.

In Saint Mary street had ye (of old time) a Parish Church of Saint Mary a
Virgin, Saint Ursula, and the 11000 Virgins, which Church was commonly called
Saint Mary at the Axe, of the Sign of an Axe, over against the East end
thereof, or Saint Mary Pellipar, of a plot of ground lying on the North side
thereof pertaining to the Skinners in London; This Parish about the year 1565.
was united to the Parish Church of Saint Andrew Under Shaft, and so was Saint
Mary at the Axe suppressed, and letten out to be a Warehouse for a Merchant;
Against the East end of this Church, was sometime a fair Well, now turned to a
Pump; Also against the North end of this Saint Mary street, was, sometime one
other Parish Church of Saint Augustine, called Saint Augustine in the Wall, for
that it stood adjoining to the Wall of the City, and otherwise called Saint
Augustines Papey, or the poor, as I have read, in the Reign of Edward the
third. About the year 1430, in the Reign of Henry the sixth, the same Church
was allowed to the Brethren of the Papey, the House of poor Priests, whereof I
have spoken in Aldgate Ward, the Parishioners of this Church were appointed to
the Parish Church of Alhallowes in the Wall, which is in Broad street Ward, and
this Brotherhood called Papey, being suppressed, the Church of Saint Augustine
was pulled down, and in place thereof one Gray Apothecary, builded a Stable, a
Hay-lost, etc. It is now a dwelling house, those two Parish Churches, both
lying in the Ward of Lime-street; being thus suppressed, there is not any one
Parish Church or place for Divine Service in that Ward, but the Inhabitants
thereof repair to Saint Peter's in Cornhill Ward, Saint Andrew in Aldgate Ward,
Alhallows in the Wall in Broad-street Ward, and some to Saint Denis in
Langbourne Ward.

Now, because there has been some question, to what Ward this Church of Saint
Augustine Papey should of right belong, for the same has been challenged by
them of Aldgate Ward, and (without reason) taken into Bishops-gate Ward, from
Lime-street Ward, I am somewhat to touch it.

About 70 years since, the Chamber of London, granted a Lease of ground lying
near London Wall, in the Ward of Lime-street, from the West of the said Church
or Chapel of Saint Augustine Papey, toward Bishops-gate etc. on the which
plot of ground, the Leasee builded three fair Tenements, and placed Tenants
there, these were charged to bear Scot and Lot, and some of them to bea^ Office
in Lime street Ward, all which they did willingly without grudging; And when
any suspected or disordered persons were by the Landlord placed there, the
Officers of Lime street Ward, fetched them out of their Houses, committed them
to Ward, procured their due punishments, and banished them from thence; whereby
in short time that place was reformed, and brought into good order, which thing
being noted by them of Aldgate Ward, they moved their Alderman, Sir Thomas
Offley, to call in those Houses to be of his Ward; But Mr. Stow producing a
fair Ledgier Book, sometime pertaining to the late dissolved Priory of the Holy
Trinity within Aldgate, wherein were set down the just bounds of Aldgate Ward,
before Sir Thomas Offley, Sir Rowland Hayward, the Common Counsel, and
Ward-Mote Inquest, of the said Lime street Ward, Sir Thomas Offley gave over
his Challenge, and so that matter rested in good quiet, until the year 1579.
that Sir Richard Pype (being Mayor, and Alderman of Bishops-gate Ward)
challenged those Houses to be of his Ward, whereunto (without reason showed)
Sir Rowland Hayward yielded; and thus is that side of the street from the North
corner of Saint Mary street, almost to Bishopsgate, (wherein is one plot of
ground, letten by the Chamberlain of London, to the Parish of Saint Martins
Oteswich, to be a Churchyard, or burying-place for the dead of that Parish,
etc.) unjustly drawn and withheld from the Ward of Lime-street, as Master
Stow avoncheth.

Of the Fifth Ward, or Aldermanry of London, called Bishopsgate-Ward.
THe Ward next in order is Bishopsgate-Ward, whereof a part is without the
Gate; and of the Subburbs, from the Bars by St. Mary Spittle, to Bishopsgate,
and a part of Hounds-ditch, almost half thereof; also without the Wall of the
same Ward.

Then within the Gate is Bishopsgate-street, so called, of the Gate, to a Pump,
were sometime was a fair Well, with two Buckets, by the East end of the Parish
Church of St. Martin Oteswich, and then winding by the West corner of
Leaden Hall, down Grasse-street, to the corner over against Grasse-Church; and
these are the bounds of that Ward.

Monuments most to be noted, are these, The Parish Church of St. Buttolph
without Bishopsgate, in a fair Churchyard adjoining to the Town-Ditch, upon
the very Bank thereof; but of old time, enclosed with a comely Wall of Brick,
lately repaired by Sir William Allen, Mayor, in the year 1571, because he was
born in that Parish, where also he was buried.

An Anchoresse (by Bishopsgate) received forty shillings the year, of the
Sheriffs of London.

Next unto the Parish Church of St. Buttolph, was a fair Inn, for receipt of
Travelers, then an Hospital of St. Mary of Bethlem, founded by Simon Fitz
Mary, one of the Sheriffs of London, in the year 1246. He founded it to have
been a Priory of Canons, with Brethren and Sisters; and King Edward the 3d,
granted a Protection, for the Brethren called Milites beatae Mariae de Bethlem;
within the City of London, the 14th year of his Reign. It was an Hospital for
distracted people.

Stephen Gennings, Marchant-Taylor, gave forty pounds toward purchase of the
Patronage, by his Testament, 1523. The Mayor and Commonalty purchased the
Patronage thereof, with all the Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, in the
year 1546.

Now it shall not be amiss, to insert here that memorable ancient deed of
gift, given to Bethelem, or Bedlam, by the foresaid Simon, the Son of Mary, as
follows.

To all the Children of our Mother holy Church, to whom this present writing
shall come, Simon the Son of Mary, sends greeting in our Lord, where among
other things, and before other Lands, the high Altitude of the Heavenly
Councels, marvellously wrought by some readier devotion, it ought to be more
worshipped; of which things the mortal sickness (after the fall of our first
Father Adam) has taken the beginning of this new repairing: therefore
forsooth, it beseems worthy, that the place, in which the Son of God is
become Man, and has proceeded from the Virgins Womb, which is increaser, and
beginning of Man's Redemption; namely, ought to be with Reverence worshipped,
and with beneficial Portions to be increased: therefore it is, that the said
Simon, Son of Mary, having special and singular Devotion to the Church, of the
glorious Virgin at Bethelem, where the same Virgin of Her, brought forth our
Savior incarnate, and lying in the Cratch, and with her own milk nourished;
and where the same Child to us there born, the Chivalry of the heavenly
Company, sang the new Hymn, Gloria in Excelsis Deo. The same time, the
increaser of our health, (as a King, and his Mother a Queen) willed to be
worshipped of Kings, a new Star going before them, as the Honor and
Reverence of the same Child, and his most meek Mother: And to the exaltation of
my most Noble Lord, Henry King of England, whose Wife and Child the foresaid
Mother of God, and her only Son, have in their keeping, and protection; And to
the manifold increase of this City of London, in which I was born. And also for
the health of my soul, and the souls of my Predecessors, and Successors, my
Father, Mother, and my Friends. And specially for the souls of Guy of Marlow,
John Durant, Ralph Ashwye, Maud, Margaret, and Dennis, Women: Have given,
granted, and by this my present Charter, here, have confirmed to God, and to
the Church of St. Mary of Bethelem, all my Lands which I have in the Parish of
St. Buttolph, without Bishopsgate of London, that is to say, whatsoever I there
now have, or had, or in time to come may have, in Houses, Gardens, Pools,
Ponds, Ditches and Pits, and all their appurtenances, as they be closed in by
their bounds; which now extend in length, from the Kings high street, East, to
the great Ditch in the West; the which is called deep Ditch; and in breadth, to
the Lands of Ralph Downing, in the North; and to the Land of the Church of St.
Buttolph in the South; To have and to hold the aforesaid Church of Bethelem, in
fre^ and perpetual Alms; And also to make there a Priory, and to ordain a
Prior, and Canons; Brothers, and also Sisters, when Jesus Christ shall enlarge
his grace upon it. And in the same place, the Rule and order of the said Church
of Bethelem solemnly professing, which shall bear the Token of a Star openly
in their Coapes and Mantles of profession; and for to say Divine Service there,
for the souls aforesaid, and all Christian souls; and specially to receive
there, the Bishop of Bethelem, Canons, Brothers, and Messengers of the Church
of Bethelem for evermore, as often as they shall come thither. And that a
Church or Oratory there shall be builded, as soon as our Lord shall enlarge his
grace, under such form, that the Order, Institution of Priors, Canons,
Brothers, Sisters, of the visitation, correction, and reformation of the said
place, to the Bishop of Bethelem, and his Successors, and to the Charter of his
Church, and of his Messengers, as often as they shall come thither, as shall
seem them expedient; no man's contradiction notwithstanding; shall pertain for
evermore: saving always the Services of the chief Lords, as much as pertains
to the said Land. And to the more surety of this thing, I have put my self out
of this Land, and all mine. And Lord Godfrey, then chosen of the Nobles of the
City of Rome, Bishop of Bethelem, and of the Pope, confirmed then by his name
in England, in his name, and of his Successors, and of his Chapter of his
Church of Bethelem, into bodily possession, I have indented and given to his
possession all the foresaid Lands; which possession he has received, and
entered in form abovesaid.

And in token of subjection, and reverence, the said place in London, without
Bishopsgate, shall pay yearly in the said City, a mark sterling at Easter, to
the Bishop of Bethelem, his Successors, or his Messengers, in the name of a
Pension; and if the faculties or goods of the said place (our Lord granting)
happen to grow more, the said place shall pay more, in the name of Pension, at
the said term, to the Mother Church of Bethelem. This (forsooth) gift and
confirmation of my Deed, and the putting to of my Seal for me, and mine Heirs,
I have steadfastly made strong, the year of our Lord God, A thousand, two
hundred, forty seven, the Wednesday after the Feast of St. Luke the
Evangelist, etc.

King Henry the 8th, gave this Hospital unto the City, The Church and Chapel
were taken down in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and houses builded there, by
the Governors of Christ's Hospital in London. In this place, people that be
distraught in their wits, are now (by the suit of their friends) received and
kept as before, but not without charges to their bringers in.

Then is there a fair House of late, builded by John Powlet. Next to that, a
far more large and beautiful House, with Gardens of pleasure, Bowling Allies,
and such like, builded by Jasper Fisher, free of the Goldsmiths, late one of
the six-Clarks of the Chancery, and a Justice of Peace. It has since (for a
time) been the Earl of Oxfords place. The late Queen Elizabeth has lodged
there, it now belongs to the Earl of Devonshire. This House being so large,
and sumptuously builded, by a man of no great Calling, Possessions, or Wealth;
(for he was indebted to many) was mockingly called Fishers folly, and a Rithme
was made of it, and other the like, in this manner. Kirbyes Castle, and Fishers
Folly,
Spinilas pleasure, and Megses glory.


And so of other like Buildings about the City, by Citizens, men have not
forborne to speak their pleasure.

From Fishers Folly, up to the West end of Berwards Lane, of old time so
called; but now Hogge-Lane, because it meets with Hogge-Lane, which comes
from the Bars without Ealdgate, as is before showed, is a continual bnilding
of Tenements, with Allies of Cottages, pestered, etc. Then is there a large
close, called Fazel Close, sometime, for that there were Zazels planted for the
use of Cloth-workers, since letten to the Crosse-bow Makers, wherein they used
to shoot for Games at the Popingey. Now the same being enclosed with a
Brick-wall, serves to be an Artillery-yard, or Garden, whereunto the Gunners
of the Tower, weekly do repair; namely, every Thursday, and their levelling
certain B^asse-Pieces of great Artillery against a But of Earth, made for that
purpose; they discharged them for their exercise, present use is made thereof
by diverse worthy Citizens, Gentlemen, and Captains, using Marshal Discipline,
and where they meet (well-neere) weekly, to their great commendation, in so
worthy an Exercise, whereof hereafter, I will speak more at large.

Then have ye the late dissolved Priory and Hospital, commonly called, Saint
Mary Spittle, founded by Walter Brune, and Rosia his Wife, for Canons regular,
Walter, Arch Deacon of London, laid the first stone in the year 1197. William
of St. Mary Church, then Bishop of London, dedicated it to the honor of Jesus
Christ, and his Mother, the perpetual Virgin Mary, by the name of Domus De^,
and Beatae Mariae, Extra Bishopsgate, in the Parish of St. Buttolph, the bounds
whereof, as appears by composition between the Parson, and Prior of the said
Hospital; concerning Tithes, beginning at Berwards Line, toward the South, and
extends in breadth to the Parish of St. Leonard of Sores-ditch, toward the
North; and in length, from the Kings street on the West, to the Bishops of
Londons field, called Lollesworth on the East.

The Prior of this St. Mary Spittle, for the immortising and propriation of the
Priory of Bikenacar in Essex, to his said house of St. Mary Spittle, gave to
Henry the 7th, four hundred pounds, in the two and twentieth of his Reign.

This Hospital surrendered to Henry the 8th, was valued to dispend four hundred
seventy eight pounds per annu^s, wherein was found, besides Ornaments of the
Church, and other goods pertaining to the Hospital, one hundred eighty beds
well furnished, for receipt of the poor; for it was an Hospital of great
relief. Sir Henry Plesington Knight, was buried there, one thousand four
hundred fifty and two.

And here is to be noted, that time out of mind, it has been a laudable
Custom, that on good Friday in the Afternoon, some especial learned man, by
appointment of the Prelates, should preach a Sermon at Paul's Cross, treating
of Christ's passion* and upon the three next Easter Holidays, Monday, Tuesday,
and Wednesday, the like learned men, by the like appointment, have used to
preach on the forenoons at the said Spittle, to persuade the Article of Christ's
Resurrection; and then on Low Sunday, one other learned man at Paul's Cross, to
make rehearsal of those four former Sermons, either commending, or reproving
them, as to him (by judgment of the learned Divines) was thought convenient;
And that done, he was to make a studied Sermon of his own, which in all, were
five Sermons in one; At these Sermons so severally preached, the Mayor with his
Brethren the Aldermen, were accustomed to be present in their Violets at Paul's,
on good Friday, and in their Scarlets at the Spittle, in the Holidays (except
Wednesday, in Violet) and the Mayor with his Brethren on Low Sunday in
Scarlet, at Paul's Cross.

Touching the Antiquity of this Custom, I find, that in the year one thousand
three hundred ninety eight, King Richard having procured from Rome,
confirmation of such Statutes, and Ordinances, as were made in the Parliament
begun at Westminster, and ended at Shrewsbury; he caused the same confirmation
to be read, and pronounced at Paul's Cross, and at St. Mary Spittle, in a
Sermon before all the People.

Philip Malpas, one of the Sheriffs, in the year, one thousand four hundred
thirty nine, gave twenty shillings by the year, to the three Preachers at the
Spittle.

Stephen Foster Mayor, in the year, 1594. gave 40 l. to the Preachers of Paul's
Cross and Spittle. We find also, that the aforesaid House, wherein the Mayor,
and Aldermen do sit at the Spittle, was builded (for that purpose) of the
goods, and by the Executors of Richard Rawson, Alderman, and Isabel his Wife,
in the year 1488.

In the year 1594. this Pulpit being old, was taken down, and a new one set up:
the Preachers face turned toward the South, which was before toward the West.
Also a large House (on the East side of the said Pulpit) was then builded, for
the Governors and Children of Christ's Hospital to sit in; and this was done of
the goods of William Elkin, Alderman before deceased; But within the first
year, the same House decaying, and like to have fallen, was again (with great
cost) repaired at the Cities Charge.

On the East side of this Churchyard, lies a large field, of old time called
Lolesworth, now Spittle-field, which about the year, 1576. was broken up, for
Clay to make Brick: in the digging thereof, many Earthen Pots called Urnae,
were found full of Ashes, with burnt bones of men, to wit, of the Romans that
inhabited here; for it was the Custom of the Romans, to burn their dead, to put
their Ashes in an Urn, and then bury the same with certain Ceremonies, in some
field appointed for that purpose near unto their City; and commonly, there was
another Urn of fresh water, laid by the other, denoting the tears of their
friends.

Every of these Pots had in them (with the Ashes of the Dead) one piece of
Copper money, with the Inscription of the Emperor then reigning, some of them
were of Claudius, some of Vespasian, some of Nero, of Antoninus Pius, of
Trajanus, and others; Besides those Urns, many other Pots were found in the
same place, made of a white Earth, with long necks, and handles, like to our
stone Jugs: these were empty, but seemed to be buried full of some liquid
matter, long since consumed, and soked through; For there were found diverse
Vials, and other fashioned Glasses; some most cunningly wrought, and some of
Crystal, all which had water in them (which it seems were the teare-Bottles)
nothing differing in clearness, taste, or savor from common Spring water,
whatsoever it was at the first; Some of these Glasses had Oil in them very
thick, and earthy in savor; some were supposed to have balm in them, but had
lost the virtue; many of these Pots and Glasses were broken in cutting of the
Clay, so that few were taken up whole.

There were also found diverse Dishes and Cups, of a fine red colored Earth,
which showed outwardly such a shining smoothness, as if they had been of
Curtal; Those had (in the bottoms) Roman letters printed: There were also Lamps
of white Earth and red, artificially wrought with diverse Antiques about them,
some three or four Images, made of white Earth, about a span long each of them;
one was of Pallas. Amongst diverse of those Antiquities, there was sound one
Urn, with Ashes and Bones, and one pot of white Earth, very small, not
exceeding the quantity of a quartern of a Wine pint, made in shape of a Hare
squatted upon her legs, and between her Ears is the mouth of the Pot.

There has also bin found (in the same field) diverse Coffins of stone,
containing the bones of men; these I suppose to be the Burials of some special
persons, in time of the Britons, or Saxons, after that the Romans had left to
govern here.

Morever, there were also found the sculls and bones of men, without Coffins;
or rather, whose Coffins (being of Timber) were consumed; diverse great Nails of
Iron were there sound, such as are used in the Wheels of shod Carts; being each
of them as big as a man's finger, and a quarter of a yard long; the heads two
inches over: Those nails were more wondered at, then the rest of the things
there found; and many Opinions of men were there passed upon them; namely, that
the men there buried, were murdered by driving those nails into their heads.

But to set down what was observed, concerning this matter; there were there,
the bones of a man lying, the head North, the feet South, and round about him
(athwart his head) along both his sides, and thwart his feet such nails were
found; wherefore it may be conjectured, they were the nayls of his Coffin,
which had bin a trough cut out of some great Tree; and the same covered with a
Plank of that thickness, fastened with such nayls, and found under the broad
heads of some of those nayls, the old Wood was found scant turned into Earth;
but still retaining both the grain and proper color. And thus much for that
part of Bishopsgate-Ward; now we will proceed to that part which lies within
the Gate.

And first, to begin on the left hand of Bishopsgate; from the Gate ye have
certain Tenements of old time, pertaining to a Brotherhood of St. Nicholas,
granted to the Parish Clarks of London, for two Chaplains to be kept in the
Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, near unto the Guild Hall of London, in the 27. of
Henry the sixth. The first of these Houses toward the North, and against the
Wall of the City, was sometime a large Inn or Court, called the Wrastlers of
such a sign; And the last in the high street, toward the South, was sometime
also a fair Inn, called the Angel, of such a sign. Amongst these said
Tenements was (on the same street side) a fair Entry or Court, to the common
Hall of the said Parish-Clarks, with proper Almshouses, seven in number
adjoining; for Parish-Clarks, and their Wives, and their Widows, such as were
in great years, not able to labor; one of these by the said Brotherhood of
Parish-Clarks, was allowed sixteen pence the week: the other six had each of
them nine pence the week, according to the Patent granted to that effect.

This Brotherhood (amongst other) being suppressed, in the Reign of Edward the
sixth: the said Hall, with the other Buildings there, was given to Sir Robert
Chester, a Knight of Cambridge-shire, against whom the Parish-Clarks commencing
suit, in the Reign of Queen Mary; and being like to have prevailed, the said
Sir Robert Chester pulled down the Hall, sold the Timber, stone, and Lead; and
thereupon the sui^ was ended. The Almshouses remained in the Queens hands, and
people were there placed, such as could make best friends, some of them taking
the pension appointed, and letting forth their houses at great Rent, have given
occasion to the Person of the Parish, to challenge Tithes of them, etc.

Next unto this is the small Parish Church of Saint Ethelburgh, Virgin; and
from thence, some small distance is a large Court, called Little St. Helens,
because it pertained to the Nuns of St. Helens, and was their House: there were
there seven Alms-Rooms, or Houses for the poor, belonging to the Company of
Leathersellers; Then somewhat more West, is another Court, with a winding Lane,
which comes out against the West end of St. Andrew Undershafts Church. In
this Court stands the fair Church of St. Helen, sometime a Priory of black
Nuns; and in the same the Parish Church of St. Helen.

This Priory was founded before the Reign of Henry the third; William Ba^ing
Dean of Paul's, was the first founder, and was there buried; and William Basing,
one of the Sheriffs of London, in the second year of Edward the second, was
holden also to be a Founder, or rather an helper thereof: This Priory being
valued at 1314 l. 2 s. 6 d. was surrendered the five and twentieth of November,
the thirtieth of Henry the eighth: the whole Church, the partition betwixt the
Nuns Church; and the Parish Church being taken down, remains now to the
Parish, and is a fair Church, but wants such a Steeple, as Sir Thomas Gresham
promised to have builded, in recompense of ground in that Church, filled up
with his Monument.

The Nuns Hall, and other Housing thereto pertaining, was since purchased by
the Company of Leather-sellers, and is their common Hall; which Company, was
incorporate, the one and twentieth year of Richard the second.

A young newborn Child was taken up, between the great Warehouse, and Sir
John Spencers back-gate, being (by a most unnatural Mother) there buried in a
great Dunghill of Sea-coal Ashes, with the face upward; yet found alive by
Richard Atkinson, who used to make clean the passage there of the soil,
carrying it thence with his Wheel-Barrow. The Child had not any ragg, or Cloth
about it, but was all bloodied, by reason that the Navil string was untyed, and
the Body merely crusted over with the Seacoal-dust; yet being made clean by the
poor man's Wife, it was found to be a most goodly Man-Child, strong and
well-featured, without any blemish or harm upon it; but strangled inwardly, by
sucking in the noisome filth and Ashes.

He was Christened, and named Job cinere extractus, Job taken out of the Ashes,
He lived three days, and lies buried in the Churchyard, the fifth of
September, 1612.

Of the Sixth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Broad-street
Ward.
WE will now proceed to make a Perambulation in Broad street Ward, whereof part
lies, contig^ous to Bishopsgate Ward: for it begins from the water Conduit,
Westward on both sides of the street, by Alhallows Church, to an Iron Grate on
the Channel, which runs into the watercourse of Wallbrook, before ye come
to the Postern called Moregate, and this is the farthest West part of that
Ward; Then have ye Broad street, where of the Ward takes name, which
stretches out of the former street, from the East Corner of Alhallowes
Churchyard, somewhat South, to the Parish Church of Saint Peter the poor on
both sides, and then by the South Gate of the Augustine Friars, West, down
Throgmorton street by the Drapers Hall, into Loathbury, to another Grate of
Iron on the Channel there, whence the water runs into the course of
Wallbrook, under the East end of St. Margarets Church; certain posts of Timber
are there set up; and this is also the furthest* West part of this Ward, in the
said street, out of the which street it runs up Bartholomew Lane, South, to
the North side of the Exchange, then more East out of the former street; From
over against the Friars Augustines Church South gate, runs up another part
of Broad street, South, to a Pump, over against St. Bennets Church.

Then have ye one other street, called Threed-needle street, beginning at the
Well with two Buckets, by St. Martins Oteswich Church Wall; This street runs
down on both sides to Finkes-Lane, now called Finch Lane, and half way up that
Lane, to a Gate of a Merchants house on the West side, but not so far on the
East; Then the aforesaid street, from this Finkes Lane now Finch Lane, runs
down by the Royal Exchange to the Stocks, and to a place commonly called, the
Scalding-house, or Scalding wicke, but now Scalding Alley, by the West side
whereof, under the Parish Church of St. Mildred, runs the course of
VVallbrooke, and these be the bounds of this Ward.

Here stands the Parish Church of Alhallowes in the Wall, so called of standing
close to the Wall of the City near Moorfields, and over against Winchester
house, which was so vast and spacious a Mansion, that it has been many years
since cut, into diverse habitations; For the Glasse-house stood in part of it,
the Spanish Ambassador had another part; And now of late, the Excise Office
has bin kept in another part.

On the other side of the street, among many proper Houses (possessed for the
most part by Curriers) is the Carpenters Hall, which Company was Incorporated
in the seventeenth year of Edward the fourth.

Then East from the Curriers row, is a long and high Wall of stone in the
foresaid Winchester house, enclosing the North side of a large Garden,
adjoining to as large an house, builded in the Reigns of King Henry the eighth,
and of Edward the sixth, by Sir William Powlet, Lord Treasurer of England,
through his Garden, which (of old time) consisted of diverse parts, now united,
was sometimes a fair foot way, leading by the West end of the Augustine Friars
Church straight North, and opened somewhat West from Alhallowes Church against
London Wall, toward Mooregate, which foot-way had Gates at either end, locked
up every night, but now the same way (being taken into those Gardens) the Gates
are closed up with Stone, whereby the people are enforced to go about by Saint
Peter's Church, and the East end of the said Friars Church, and all the said
great place and Garden of Sir William Pawlet, to London Wall, and so to
Moorgate.

This great House adjoining to the Garden aforesaid, stretches, to the North
corner of Broad-street, and then turns up Broad-street all that side, to and
beyond the East end of the said Friars Church; It was builded by the said Lord
Treasurer, in place of Augustine Friars House, Cloister, and Gardens, etc. The
Friars Church he pulled not down, but the West end thereof, enclosed from the
Steeple and Quire, was in the year 1550, granted to the Dutch Nation in London,
to be their preaching place; The other part, namely, the Steeple, Quire, and
side Isles to the Quire adjoining, he reserved to household uses, as for Stowage
of Corn, Coal, and other things: his Son and Heir, Marquess of Winchester,
sold the Monuments of Noble men (there buried) in great number, Paving stone,
and whatsoever, (which cost many thousand pounds) for one hundred pounds; and
in place thereof; made fair s^abling for horses; He caused the Lead to be taken
from the roofs, and laid Tyle in place, which exchange proved not so profitable
as he looked for, but rather to his disadvantage, for there have been some
remarkable judgments upon that Family since.

On the East side of this Broad street amongst other buildings, on the back
part of Gresham House, which is in Bishopsgate street, there are placed eight
Almshouses, builded of Brick and Timber, by Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, for
eight Almes-men, which be now there placed rent-free, and receive each of them
by his gift, six pound thirteen shillings four pence yearly for ever.

Next unto Pawlet House, is the Parish Church of Saint Peter the poor, so
called for a difference from other of that name, sometime (peradventure) a poor
Parish, but at this present there be many fair Houses, possessed by rich
Merchants, and others. In this little Church there be some fair Monuments, one
of Sir Thomas Low, and another of Sir William Garaway, with John Lucas
Esquire of Colchester.

Then next have ye the Augustine Friars Church, and Churchyard, the entering
thereunto by a South gate to the West Porch, a large Church having a most fine
spired Steeple, small, high, and straight, that there are few the like, founded
by Humphrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, in the year one thousand two
hundred fifty three. R^egnald Cobham gave this Message in London, to the
enlarging thereof, in the year one thousand three hundred forty four. Humphrey
Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, re-edified this Church in the year 1354,
whose Body was there buried in the Quire.

The small spired Steeple of this Church was overthrown by tempest of wind, in
the year one thousand three hundred sixty two, but was raised of new, as still
it might have stood, had not private benefit (the only devourer of Antiquity)
pulled it down.

Both that goodly Steeple, and all that East part of the Church, has lately
been taken down, and Houses (for one man's commodity) raised in the place,
whereby London has lost so goodly an ornament, and times hereafter may more
talk of it.

This House was valued at fifty seven pounds, and was surrendered the twelfth of
November, the 13 of Henry the 8. There were many great Monuments in this Friars
Church, one of Edmond first son to Joan mother to Richard the second, Guy de
Meryke Earl of Saint Paul, Lucie Countess of Kent, Richard the great Earl of
Arundel, Surrey, and Warren, Sir Francis Atcourt Earl of Pembrooke, John Vere
Earl of Oxford, with Aubery de Vere his son, the Lady of Bedford, with Edward
Duke of Buckingham, and very many more persons of quality.

On the South side, and at West end of this Church, many fair houses are
builded; namely in Throgmorton street, one very large and spacious, builded in
the place of old and small Tenements, by Thomas Cromwell, Master of the Kings
Jewel-house, after that, Master of the Rolls, then Lord Cromwell Knight, Lord
Privy Seal, Vicar General, Earl of Essex, high Chamberlain of England, etc.
This house being finished, and having some reasonable plot of ground left for a
Garden, he caused the pales of the Gardens adjoining to the North part thereof,
on a sudden to be taken down, two and twenty foot to be measured forth-right
into the North of every man's ground, a Line there to be drawn, a Trench to be
cast, a foundation laid and an high Brick Wall to be builded; and this was
suddenly and no warning given, nor other answer, but (when any spoke to the
Surveyers of that work) they said their Master Sir Thomas commanded them so to
do; so that no man durst go to argue the matter, but each man lost his Land;
Thus the sudden rising of some men, causes them to forget themselves.

The Company of Drapers in London bought this House, and now the same is their
Common Hall. This Company obtained of King Henry the sixth, in the seventeenth
of his Reign, to be incorporate. John Gedney was chosen to be their first
Master, and the four Wardens were, John Wotton, I. Darby, Robert Breton, and
T. Cook; The Arms granted to the said Company by Sir William Bridges Knight,
first Garter King at Arms, in Blazon are thus. Three Sun Beams, issuing out of
three Clouds of flame, crowned with three Crowns, Imperials of Gold, upon a
Shield Azure.

From this Hall, on the same side, down to the Grates and course of
VVallbrooke, have ye diverse fair houses for Merchants and other, from the which
Grates back again on the other side in Lotisbury (so called in Record of Edward
the third, the thirty eighth year, and now corruptly called Lothbury) are
Candlestick founders placed, till ye come to Bartholmew Lane, so called of
Saint Bartholmew's Church, at the South-east corner thereof. In this Lane also
are diverse fair builded Houses on both sides, and so likewise have ye in the
other street, which stretches from the Friars Augustines South gate, to the
corner over against Saint Bennets Church. In this street, amongst other fair
buildings the most ancient was (of old time) an house pertaining to the Abbot
of Saint Albans; John Catcher Alderman (after) dwelled there; Then is the free
School, pertaining to the late dissolved Hospital of Saint Anthony, whereof
more shall be showed in another place, and so up to Thred-needle-street.

On the South part of which street, beginning at the East, by the Well with two
Buckets, now turned to a Pump, is the Parish Church of Saint Martin called
Oteswitch, of Martin de Oteswitch, Nicholas de Oteswich, William Oteswich, and
John Oteswich Founders thereof, and all buried there, as appears by their
Monuments.

There is also there a fair engraven Stone, with a Latin Epitaph upon the Lord
James Fulkes Treasurer of Holland and Ambassador for the States of the united
Provinces here in England. Sir Thomas Row gave 5 l. to perpetuity to this
Parish, to buy Bread and Coals for the poor.

Some small distance from thence is the Merchant-Taylors Hall, pertaining to
the Guild and Fraternity of Saint John Baptist, time out of mind called of
Tailors and Linen Armorers of London; For we find that King Edward the first,
in the eight and twentieth of his Reign, confirmed this Guild by the name of
Tailors and Linen Armorers, and also gave to the Brethren thereof, authority
every year at Mid-summer to hold a feast and to choose unto them a Governor or
Master, with Wardens; whereupon, the same year, one thousand three hundred, on
the Feast day of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, they chose Henry de Ryall
to be their P^lgrim; For the Master of this Mystery (as one that traveled for
the whole Company) was then so called, until the eleventh year of Richard the
second, and the four Wardens were then called Purveyers of Alms, (now called
Quartredge) of the said Fraternity.

This Merchant-Taylors Hall, sometime perteining to a worthy Gentleman, named
Edmund Crepin, Dominus Creep^ng after some Record; he, in the year of Christ
1331, the sixth of Edward the third, for a certain sum of money to him paid,
made this grant thereof, by the name of his principal Message, in the Wards of
Cornhill and Broad-street, which Sir Oliver Ingham Knight, did then hold, to
John of Yakeley the Kings Pavilion-maker; This was called the New Hall, or
Tailors Inn, for a difference from their old Hall, which was about the back
side of the Red Lion in Basing Lane, and in the Ward of Cordwayner street.

The one and twentieth of Edward the fourth, Thomas Holm, alias Clarentiaux
King of Arms for the South part of England, granted by his Pa^ents to the said
Fraternity and Guild of Saint John Baptist of Tailors and Linen Armorers, to
beat in a field Silver, a Pavilion between two Mantles Imperial, Purple,
garnished with Gold, in a chief Azure, a holy Lamb, set within a Sun, the Crest
upon the Helm; a Pavilion purp^e, garnished with Gold, etc.

After this King Henry the seventh, was himself a Brother of this Fraternity,
or Guild of S. John Baptist, of Tailors or Linen Armorers, (as diverse others
of his Predecessors Kings had been) to wit R^ohard the third, Edward the
fourth, Henry the sixth, Henry the fifth, Henry the fourth, and Richard the
second. And for that diverse of that Fraternity had (time out of mi^e) been
great Merchants, and had frequented all sorts of Merchandises into most parts
of the world, to the honor of the Kings Realm, and to the great profit of his
Subjects, and of his Progenitors, and the men of the said Mystery, (during the
time aforesaid) had exercised the buying and selling of all Wares and
Merchandises, especially, of Woollen Cloth, as well in gross, as by retaile,
throughout all this Realm of England, and chiefly within the said City;
therefore ^e of his especial grace, did change, transfer, and translate, the
Guild aforesaid, and did incorporate them into the name of the Master and
Wardens of the Merchant-Taylors, of the Fraternity of S. John Baptist in the
City of London.

Some distance West from this Merchant-Taylors Hall, is Finkes Lane, so called
of Robert Finke, and Robert Finke his son, James Finke and Rosamond Finke;
Robert Finke the elder new builded the Parish Church of Saint Bennet commonly
called Finke of the Founder; his Tenements were both of St. Benuets parish, and
Saint Martins Oteswich Parish, the one half of this Finke Lane is of
Broad-street ward, to wit, on the West side, up to the great and principal
house, wherein the said Finke dwelled; But on the other side, namely the East,
not so much toward Cornhil.

Then without this Lane, in the aforesaid Threed-Needle street, is the said
Parish Church of Saint Bennet a handsome Church in which are sundry old
Monuments.

There happened lately a great fire in Threed-Needle street, over against
Merchant-Taylors Hall, which rag^d as far as Saint Bennets Church Walls, and
there the fury was s^opped, otherwi^e it might have destroyed all this City.
The French Reformers have their Sermons in this Church, and the exercise of
Calv^n^ Religion.

On the North side of this street, from over against the East corner, of St.
Martins Osteswich Church, have ye diverse fair and large houses, till you come
to the Hospital of St. Anthony, sometime a Cell of St. Anthonies of Vienna; For
we read, that King Henry the third, granted to the Brotherhood of St. Anthony
of Vienna, a place amongst the Jews, which was sometime their Synagogue, and
had been builded by them, about the year 1231. But the Christians obtained of
the King, that it should be dedicated to our blessed Lady; and since, an
Hospital being there builded, was called St. Anthonies in London. It was
founded in the Parish of St. Bennet Finke, for a Master, two Priests, one
Schoolmaster, and twelve poor men; after which foundation, amongst other
things, was given to this Hospital, one Message and Garden, whereon was
builded the fair large Free School, and one other parcel of ground, containing
thirty seven foot in length, and eighteen foot in breadth, whereon were builded
the Almshouses of hard Stone and Timber, in the Reign of Henry the sixth.
Which said Henry the sixth, in the twentieth of his Reign, gave unto John
Carpenter, Dr. of Divinity, and Master of St. Anthonies Hospital, and to his
Brethren, and their Successors for ever, his Manor of Poinington, with the
appurtenances, with certain Pensions, and Portions of Milburn, Burneworth,
Charleton, and Up-Wimburn, in the County of Southhamton, toward the
maintenance of five Scholars in the University of Oxford, to be brought up in
the faculty of Arts, after the rate of ten pence the week for every Scholar; so
that the said Scholars be first instructed in the rudiments of Grammar, at the
College of Eaton, founded by the said King.

In the year 1474. Edward the 4th granted to William Say, Bachelor of
Divinity, Master of the said Hospital, to have Priests, Clerks, Scholars, poor
men, and Brethren of the same, Clerks, or Laymen, Queristers, Procters,
Messengers, Servants in Household, and other things whatsoever, like as the
Prior, and Covent of St. Anthonies of Vienna, etc. He also annexed, united, and
appropriated the said Hospital, unto the Collegiate of St. George in Windsor.

The Protectors of this House, were to collect the benevolence of charitable
Persons, toward the building and supporting thereof.

In the year 1499. Sir John Tate, sometime Alebrewer, then a Mercer, caused his
Brewhouse, called the Swan, near adjoining to the said Free Chapel, College,
or Hospital of St. Anthony, to be taken for the enlarging of the Church, which
was then newly builded; toward the building whereof, the said Tate gave great
sums of money, and finished it in the year 1501, Sir John Tate, deceased 1514.
and was there buried, under a fair Monument by him prepared, Dr. Tailor Master
of the Rolls, and other.

Walter Champion, Draper, one of the Sheriffs of London, 1529. was buried
there, and gave to the Beadmen twenty pounds, The Lands by year of this
Hospital, were valued in the 37. of King Henry the eighth, to be 55l. 6 s. and
8. pence.

One Johnson (a Schoolmaster of the famous Free School there) became a prebend
of Windsor, and then (by little and little) followed the spoil of this
Hospital: he first dissolved the Quire, conveyed away the Plate and Ornaments,
then the Bells; and lastly, put out the Alms men from their houses, appointing
them portions of twelve pence the week to each; but now I hear of no such
matter performed; for their houses, with other, be letten out for rent, and the
Church is a preaching place for the French Nation, as was touched before.

This School was commended in the Reign of Henry the sixth, and sithence
commended above other; but now decayed, and come to nothing, by taking that
from it, which thereunto belonged.

Next is the Parish Church of St. Bartholmew, at the end of Bartholmew Lane,
Thomas Pike Alderman, with the assistance of Nicholas Yoo, one of the Shetiffs
of London, about the year 1438. new builded this Church.

West from this Church, have ye Scalding Alley, of old time called Scalding
House, or Scalding wick, because that ground (for the most part) was then
employed by Poulterers, that dwelled in the high street, from the Stocks
Market, to the great Conduit. Their Poultry which they sold at their stalls,
were scalded there: the street does yet bear the name of the Poultry, and the
Poulterers are but lately departed from thence, into other streets, as into
Grasse-street, and the ends of St. Nicholas Flesh-shambles.

This Scalding wick, is the farthest part of Broadstreet-Ward, and is (by the
water called Wallbrook) parted from Cheap-Ward.

Of the Seventh Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Cornhill
Ward.
NOw Cornhil Ward comes to consideration, corruptly called Cornwel by the
vulgar; It was called Cornhill of a Corn-Market, time out of mind there
holden, and is a part of the principal high street, beginning at the West end
of Leaden Hall, stretching down West, on both the sides, by the South end of
Finkes Lane, on the right hand, and by the North end of Birchoven Lane, on the
left part: of which Lanes, to wit, to the middle of them, is of this Ward, and
so down to the Stocks Market; and this is the bounds. The upper or East part of
this Ward, and also a part of Limestreet Ward, has been (as I said) a
Marketplace, especially for Corn, and since for all kind of Victuals, as is
partly showed in Limestreet Ward.

It appears by Record, that in the year 1522. the Rippiers of Rye and other
places, sold their fresh Fish in Leaden Hall Market upon Cornhill; but foreign
Butchers were not admitted there to sell Flesh, till the year 1533.

And it was enacted, that Butchers should sell their Bief, not above a half
penny the pound; and Mutton, half penny, half farthing: which Act being devised,
for the great Commodity of the Realm, (as it was then thought) has since
proved far otherwise; for, before that time, a fat Ox was sold at London, for
six and twenty shillings eight pence, at the most; a far Weather, for three
shillings four pence; a fat Calf at the same price; a fat Lamb for twelve
pence; pieces of Bief weighing, 2. pounds and a half at the least, yea, 3.
pound or better for a penny, on every Butchers Stall in this City; and of those
pieces of Bief, 13, or fourteen for twelve pence; fat Mutton for eight pence
the quarter; and one hundred weight of Bief, for four shillings eight pence, at
the dearest.

What the price is now, I need not set down; many men thought the same Act to
raise the price, by reason that Grasier knew, or supposed what weight every
their Beasts contained: and so raising their price thereafter, the Butcher
could be no gainer, but by likewise raising his price: the number of Butchers
then in the City and Suburbs, was accounted sixscore, of which every one killed
six Oxen a piece weekly, which is in forty six weeks, 33120. Oxen, or seven
hundred and twenty Oxen weekly.

The foreign Butchers (for a long time) stood in the high street of
Limestreet-Ward, on the North side, twice every week, viz, Wednesdayes and
Saturdayes, and were some gain to the Tenants, before whose doors they stood,
and into who^e houses they set their blocks and stalls; but that advantage
being e^pied, they were taken into Leaden Hall, there to pay for their standing
to the Chamber of London.

Thus much for the Market upon Cornhill.

The chief Ornaments in Cornhill-VVard, are these;

First, at the East end thereof, in the middle of the high street, and at the
parting of four ways, have ye a Water-Standard, placed in the year 1582. in
manner following; A certain German, named Peter Morris, having made an
artificial Forcier for that purpose, conveyed Thames-water in Pipes of Lead,
over the Steeple of St. Magnus Church, at the North end of London Bridge; and
from thence into diverse men's Houses in Thames Street, New Fish-street, and
Grasse-street, (now Gracious-street) up to the North West corner of
Leaden Hall, the highest ground of all the City; where the waste of the main
Pipe rising into this Standard (provided at the charges of the City) with four
spouts, did at every Tide run (according to Covenant) four ways, plentifully
serving to the Commodity of the Inhabitants, near adjoining in their houses;
and also cleansed the Channels of the street, toward Bishops-gate, Aldgate, the
Bridge, and the Stocks Market; but now no such matter, by what default I know
not.

Then have ye a fair Conduit, of sweet water, castellated in the midst of that
Ward; This Conduit was first builded of stone, in the year 1282. by Henry
Wallis, Mayor of London, to be a Prison for Night-walkers, and other
suspicious persons, and was called the Tun upon Cornhill; because the same
was builded somewhat in fashion of a Tun, standing on the one end.

To this Prison, the Night-watchers to this City, committed not only
Night-walkers, but also other persons, as well spiritual as temporal, whom they
suspected of incontinency, and punished them according to the customs of this
City; but complaint therefore being made, about the year of Christ, 1297. King
Edward the first, writes to the Citizens thus.

Edward by the Grace of God, etc. Whereas Richard Gravesend* Bishop of London,
has showed unto us, that by the great Charter of England, the Church has a
privilede, that no Clark should be imprisoned by a Layman, without our
Commandment, and breach of peace: Which notwithstanding, some Citizens of
London, upon mere spite, do enter in their watches, into Clarks Chambers, and
then (^ike Felons) carry them to the Tun, which Henry le Wallis, sometime
Mayor, built for Night-walkers; wherefore we will, that this our Commandment,
be proclaimed in a full Hustings, and that no vvatch hereafter enter into any
Clarks Chamber, under the forfeit of thirty pounds. Dated at Carlisle, the 18th
of March, the 25. of our Reign.

More we read, that about the year of Christ 1299. the seven and twentieth of
Edward the first, certain principal Citizens of London, to wit, T. Roman,
Rich: Gloucester, Nicholas Faringdon, Adam Helingbury, T. Saly, John Dunstable,
Richard Ashwy, John Wade, and William Stortforde, brake up this Prison, called
the Tun, and took out certain Prisoners; for the which they were sharply
punished, by long Imprisonment, and great fines; It cost the Citizens (as some
have written) more than 20000 Marks, which they were amerced in, before William
de March, Treasurer of the Kings Exchequer, to purchase the Kings favor, and
the confirmation of their Liberties.

By the West side of the aforesaid Prison, then called the Tun, was a fair
Well of Spring water, curbed round with hard stone, but in the year 1401. the
said Prison house called the Tun, was made a Cestern for sweet water,
conveyed by Pipes of Lead, from Tyburne, and was from thenceforth called the
Conduit upon Cornhil; Then was the Well planked over, and a strong Prison made
of Timber, called a Cage, with a pair of Stocks therein, set upon it; and this
was for Night-walkers: on the top of which Cage, was placed a Pillory, for the
punishment of Bakers, offending in the assize of Bread, for Millers stealing of
Corn at the Mill; for Bawds, Scholds, and other offenders.

As in the year 1468. the seventh of Edward, the fourth, diverse persons, being
common Jurors, such as at Assizes, were forsworn for rewards, or favor of
parties, were judged to ride from Newgate, to the Pillory in Cornhill, with
Miters of Paper on their heads, there to stand, and from thence again to
Newgate, and this judgment was given by the Mayor of London.

On the North side of this street, from the East unto the West, have ye diverse
fair houses, for Merchants and others; amongst the which, one large House is
called the Wey-house, where Marchandizes brought from beyond the Seas, are to
be weighed at the Kings Beam: this House has a Master, and under him four
Master-Porters, with Porters under them, they have a strong Cart, and four
great Horses, to draw and carry the Wates from the Merchants Houses to the
Beam, and back again; Sir Thomas Lovel, Knight, builded this House, with a fair
front of Tenements, toward the street, all which he gave to the Grocers of
London, himself being free of the City, and a Brother of that Company.

Then have ye the said Finks Lane, the South end of which Lane, on both sides,
is in Cornhill Ward.

Then next is the Royal Exchange, erected in the year 1566. after this Order,
viz. certain Houses upon Cornhill, and the like upon the part thereof, in the
Ward of Broadstreet, with three Allies; the first called Swan Alley, opening
into Cornhill; the second, New Alley, passing through out of Cornhill, into
Broadstreet Ward, over against St. Bartholomew-Lane; the third, St.
Christophers Alley, opening into Broadstreet-Ward, and into St. Christophers
Parish, containing many thick Households, were first purchased by the Citizens
of London, for more than 3532. pounds, and were sold for 478. pounds, to such
persons as should take them down, and carry them thence; Also the ground, or
plot was made plain, at the Charges of the City, and then possession thereof
was by certain Aldermen (in name of the whole Citizens) given to Sir Thomas
Gresham Knight, sometimes Agent to the Queens Higheness, thereupon to build a
Burse, or place for Merchants to assemble in, at his own proper charges; And
he, on the seventh of June, laying the first stone of the Foundation, being
Brick, accompanied with some Aldermen, every of them laid a piece of Gold,
which the Workmen took up; and forthwith followed upon the same, such
diligence, that by the Month of November, in the year 1567. the same was
covered with slate, and shortly after fully finished.

In the year 1570. on the 23. of January, the Queens Majesty, attended with her
Nobility, came from her House at the Strand, called Sommerset-House, and entered
the City by Temple-Barre, through Fleet Street, Cheap, and so by the North
side of the Burse, through Thredneedle-street, to Sir, Thomas Greshams House in
Bishopgate-street, where she dined: After dinner, her Majesty returning through
Cornhill, entered the Burse on the South side; and after she had viewed every
part thereof above the ground, especially the Pawn, which was richly furnished
with all sorts of the finest Wares in the City, she caused the same Burse, by
an Haura^d and a Trumpet, to be proclaimed at the Royal Exchange, and so to to
be called from thenceforth, and not otherwise.

Next adjoining to this Royal Exchange, remains one part of a large stone
House, and is now called the Castle, of such a sign at a Tavern door; there is
a passage thorough out of Cornhill, into Threed-needle street; the other part
of the said stone House was taken down, for enlarging the Royal Exchange; This
stone House was said of some to have been a Church, whereof it had no
proportion; of others, a Jews House, as though none but Jews had dwelt in
stone houses, but that opinion is without warrant.

For beside the strong building of stone houses, against (...) of thieves in
the night when no watches were kept, In the first year of Richard the first,
(to prevent casualties of fire, which often had happened in the City, when the
H^uses were builded of Timber, and covered with Reed and Straw, Henry Fitz
Allwine being Mayor) it was Decreed, That from thenceforth, no man should build
within the City but of some unto a certain height, and to cover the same
building with Slate, or burnt Tyle; This was the very cause of such stone
Buildings, whereof many have rem^ined until out time that for gaining of
ground, they have been taken down, and in place of some of them being low, (as
but two Stories above the ground) many Houses of four or five Stories high are
placed.

From this Stone House down to the Stocks, are diverse large Houses, especially
for height, ^or Merchants and Artificers.

On the South side of this High Street, is the Parish Church of Saint Peter
upon Cornhill, which seems to be of an ancient building, but not so an^ient
as fame reports; for it has been lately repaired, if not all new builded,
except the Steeple which is ancient.

The Roo^ of this Church and Glazing, was finished in the Reign of King Edward
the fourth, as appears by Arms of Noble men, and Aldermen of London then
living. There remains in this Church a Table, wherein it is written I know
not by what Authority, but of no late hand, that King Lucius founded the same
Church, to be an Archbishops See, Metropolitan^, and chief Church of his
Kingdom, and that it so continued the space of four hundred years, unto the
coming of Augustine the Monk.

Now, because many may be curious to be further acquainted therewith, I have
here inserted the same Verbatim, as it is there recorded in the Table.

BE it known unto all men, that the year of our Lord God 179, Lucius the first
Christian King of this Land, then called Britain, sounded the first Church in
London, that is to say, the Church of St. Peter upon Cornhill; and he founded
there an Archbishops See, and made that Church the Metropolitan and chief
Church of this Kingdom, and so endured the space of four hundred years, unto
the coming of St. Austin, the Apostle of the English, the which was sent into
this Land by St. Gregory the Doctor of the Church, in the time of King
Ethilbert; And then was the Archbishops See, and Pall, removed from the
foresaid Church of St. Peter upon Cornhill, unto Doreburniam that now is called
Canterbury, and there remains to this day. And Millet the Monk, which came
into the Land with S. Austin, was made this first Bishop of London, and his See
was made in Paul's Church, And this King Lucius was the first Founder of St.
Peter's Church upon Cornhill; and he reigned in this Land after Brute, a
thousand two hundred forty five years, and the year of our Lord God, a hundred
twenty four, Lucius was Crowned King: and the years of his Reign were seventy
seven years, and he was (after some Chronicle) buried at London; and (after
some Chronicle) he was buried at Gloucester, in that place where the Order of
St. Francis stands now.

Joceline of Furn^is writes, that Thean or Theon, the first Arch bishop of
London in the Reign of Lucius builded the said Church, by the aid of C^ran
chief Butler to King Lucius: and also that Etv^nus the second Archbishop
builded a Library to the same adjoining, and con^erted many of the Druydes
learned men in the Pagan Law, to Christianity.

William Harrison, discoursing hereon more at large, has these very words,

There is a Controversy (says he) moved among our Historiographers, whether
the Church that (...) built at London, stood at Westminster, or in Cornhill,
For, there is some cause, why the Metropolitan Church should be thought to
stand where St. Peter's now does, by the space of four hundred and od years,
before it was removed to Canterbury by Austin the Monk, if a man would lean to
one side without any conference of the asseverations of the other; But herein
there may lurk some scruple; for, besides that St. Peter's Church stood in the
East end of the City, and that of Apollo in the West; the word Cornhil, a
denomination given of late (so speak of) to one street, may easily be mistaken
for Thorney.

For as the word Thorney, proceeds from the Saxons; who called the West end
of the City by that ^ame where Westminster now stands, because of the
wilderness and bushine^^e of the soil, so we do not read of any street in
London, called Cornhill, before the Conquest of the Normans: wherefore, I hold
with them, which make Westminster to be the place, where Lucius builded his
Church, upon the ruins of that Fane, 264 years (as Malmsbury says) before the
coming of the Saxons, and four hundred and eleven before the arrival of
Augustine.

Read also his Appendix in Lib. fourth Pontif. where he notes the time of the
Saxons, in the 444 of Grace, and of Augustine in 596 of Christ, which is a
manifest account, though some Copies have 499 for the one, but not
without-manifest corruption and error.

And now to return where we left; True it is, that a Library there was,
pertaining to this Parish Church, of old time builded of Stone, and of late
repaired with Brick, by the Executors of Sir John Crosby Alderman, as his Arms
on the South end do witness.

This Library has been (of late time) to wit within this seventy years, well
furnished of Books, John Leyland viewed and commended them: but now those Books
are gone, and this place is occupied by a Schoolmaster, and his Usher, for a
number of Scholars learning their Grammar Rules, etc. Notwithstanding before
that time, a Grammar School had been kept in this Parish, as appears in the
year a thousand four hundred twenty five.

We read, that John Whitby was Rector, and John Steward Schoolmaster there;
and in the five and twentieth of Henry the sixth, it was Enacted by Parliament,
that four Grammar Schools in London, should be maintained, viz In the Parishes
of Alhallowes in Thames street, Saint Andrew in Oldburn, Saint Peter's upon
Cornhill, and Saint Thomas of Acres.

Then have ye the Parish Church of St. Michael the Archangel: for the antiquity
thereof, we find that Alnothus the Priest, gave it to the Abbot and Covent of
Covesham; Raynold the Abbot and the Covent there, did grant the same to
Sparling the Priest, in all measures, as he and his Predecessors before had
held it: to the which Sparling also, they granted all their Lands which they
there had, except certain Lands which Orgar le proud held of them, and paid two
shillings yearly; For the which grant, the said Sparling should yearly pay one
mark of Rent to the said Abbot of Covesham, and find him his lodging, Salt,
Water, and Fire, when he came to London; This was granted, a thousand one
hundred thirty three, about the thirty four of Henry the first.

The fair new Steeple or Bell-Tower of this Church, was begun to be builded in
the year 1421, which being finished, and a fair ^ing of five Bells therein
placed, a sixth Bell was added, and given by John VVhitwell, Isabel his Wife,
and William Rus, or Rous Alderman; and Goldsmith, about the year 1430, which
Bell named Rus, (nightly at eight of the clock, and otherwise for Knels, and in
Peals, rung by one man by the space of 160 years) of late over-haled by four or
five at once, has been thrice broken, and new cast, within the space of ten
years, to the charges of that Parish more than 100 marks.

And here note of this Steeple: Upon St. James night, certain men in the loft
next under the Bell^, ringing of a peal, a tempest of Lightning and Thunder did
arise, and an ugly-shapen sight appeared to them, coming in at the South
Window, and lighted on the North, for fear whereof, they all fell down, and lay
as dead for the time, letting the Bells ring and cease of their own accord;
When the Ringers came to themselves, they found certain stones o the North
Window to be raised, and scratched, as if they had been so much Butter printed
with a Lions claw. The same stones were fastened there again, and so remain till
this day; they may be seen to this day, together with the holes where the claws
had entered, three or four inches deep.

At the same time, certain main Timber posts at Queen-Hith, were scratched and
cleft from top to the bottom; and the Pulpit-crosse in Paul's Churchyard, was
likewise scratcht, cleft, and overturned; One of the Ringers lived in Queen
Elizabeth's time, who would verify the same to be true to his knowledge.

Robert Fabian Alderman, and Chronicler of England, lies buried in this
Church, with diverse others persons of note.

This Parish Church has on the South side thereof a handsome Cloister, and a
fair Churchyard, with a Pulpit-cross, not much unlike to that in Paul's
Churchyard; Sir John Rudstone Mayor, caused the same Pulpit-crosse in his life
time to be builded, the Churchyard to be enlarged, by ground purchased of the
next Parish; and also hansome Houses to be raised, for lodging of Quire men,
such as at that time were assitants to Divine Service, then daily sung by note
in that Church.

Then have ye Burchover Lane, so called of Burchover the first builder, and
owner thereof, now corruptly called Birchin Lane; the North half whereof, is
the said Cornhill Ward, the other half is of Langborn Ward.

This Lane and the High Street near adjoining, has been of old inhabited (for
the most part) with wealthy Drapers, in whose room now Mercers and Silkmen are
come; from Birchover Lane, on that side the street down to the Stocks, in the
Reign of Henry the sixth, had ye (for the most part) dwelling there, Frippers
or Upholders, that sold Apparel and old household stuff.

The Pope's Head Tavern, with other Houses adjoining, strongly builded of
Stone, has of old time been all in one, appertaining to some great Estate, or
rather to the King of this Realm, as may be supposed, both by largeness
thereof, and by the Arms, to wit, three Leopards passant gardant, which was
the whole Arms of England, before the Reign of Edward the Third, that quartered
them with the Arms of France, the three Flower de Luces.

Of the Eighth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Langborn Ward.
WE are now by discourse, and degrees of observation, come to Langbourn Ward,
so called of a long Bourn of sweet water, which (of old time) breaking out into
Fenne Church-street, ran down the same street, and Lom^ard street to the West
end of St. Mary Woolnoths Church, where turning South, and breaking into small
floares, rills, or streams, it gave the name of Share-borne Lane, or
South-borne Lane, (as we read) because it ran South to the River of of Thames;
This Ward begins at the West end of Ealdgate Ward in Fen-Church street, by
the Ironmongers Hall, which is on the North side of that street, at a place
called Culver Alley, where sometime was a Lane, through which men went into
Lime-street, but that being long since stopped up, for suspicion of Thieves
that lurked there by night, as is showed in Lime-street Ward; there is now in
this said Alley a Tennis-Court, etc.

Fen-Church-street, took that name of Fenny or Moorish ground, so made by means
of this Bourne, which passed through it; And therefore (until this day) in the
Guild Hall of this City, that Ward is called by the name of Langbourne, and
Fenny about, and not otherwise; yet others be of opinion, that it took that
name of Faenum, that is, Hay sold there, as Grass-street took the name of
Grass or Herbs there sold.

In the midst of this street stands a small Parish Church called, S. Gabriel
Fen-Church, corruptly Fan-Church.

Helming Legget Esquire, by License of Edward the third, in the forty ninth of
his Reign, gave one Tenement, with a cur^elarge thereto belonging, and a Garden
with an entrey thereto leading, unto Sir John Hariot, Parson of Fen-Church, and
to his Successors for ever, the House to be a Parsonage House, the Garden to be
a Churchyard or burying place for the Parish.

Then have ye Lombard street, so called of the Longobards, and other Merchants
strangers of diverse Nations, assembling there twice every day: of what
original, or continuance it has been, there is no Record, more than that Edward
the second, in the twelfth of his Reign, confirmed a Message sometime
belonging to Robert Turk abutting on Lombard street toward the South, and
toward Cornhill on the North, for the Merchants of Florence, which proves that
street to have had the name of of Lombard street before the Reign of Edward the
second; The meeting of which Merchants, and others there, continued until the
22th of December in the year 1568, on the which day, the said Merchants began
to make their Meetings at the Burse, a place then new builded for that purpose,
in the Ward of Cornhill; and was since by her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, named
the Royal Exchange.

On the North side of this Ward, is Lime street, one half whereof (on both
sides) is of this Langbourne Ward, and therein on the West side, is the
Pewterers Hall, which Company were admitted to be a Brotherhood in the
thirteenth of Edward the fourth.

At the South West corner of Limestreet, stands a fair Parish Church of St.
Dionys, called Back-Church, new builded in the Reign of Henry the sixth. John
Bugge Esquire, was a great Benefactor to that work, as appears by his Arms,
three water-Budgets, and his Crest a Morions head, graven in the stone-work of
the Quire, at the upper and end on the North side, where he was buried.

Also John Darby, Alderman, added thereunto, a fair I Will or Chapel on the South
side, and was there buried, about the year 1466. He gave (besides sundry
Ornaments) his dwelling House, and others unto the said Church; The Lady Which,
Sir Edward Osborn, Sir James Harvey, with diverse other persons, and Benefactors
to that Church, lie interred there.

Then by the four Corners (so called of Fen-Church-street in the East,
Bridge-street on the South, Grasse-street on the North, and Lumbard-street on
the West) in Lumbard-street is one fair Parish Church, called Alhallowes
Grasse-Church in Lumbard-street; for so it is read in Evidences of Record; for
that the Grasse-Market, went down that way, when that street was far broader
then now it is, being straightned by encroachments now.

This Church was new builded: John Warner, Armorer, and then Grocer, Sheriff
1494. builded the South I Will, his Son Robert Warner, Esquire, finished it, in
the year 1516. The Pewterers were benefactors toward the North I Will, etc. The
Steeple, or Bel-Tower thereof, was finished in the year 1554. about the 36. of
Henry the 8th, The fair Stone-Porch of this Church, was brought from the late
dissolved Priory of St. John of Jerusalem, by Smithfield, so was the frame of
their Bells; but the Bells being bought, were never brought thither, by reason
that one old Warner, Draper of that Parish deceasing, his Son Mark Warner,
would not perform what his Father had begun and appointed, so that fair Steeple
has but one Bell, as Friars were wont to use, etc.

Next is a common Ostery for Travelers, called the George, of such a sign.
This is said to have pertained to the Earl Ferrers, and was his London Lodging
in Lumbardstreet. And that in the year 1175. a Brother of the said Earl, being
there privily slain in the night, was there thrown down into the dirty street.

Next is the Parish Church of St. Edmond, the King and Martyr, in
Lumbard-street, by the South corner of Birchover Lane.

This Church is also called St. Edmond Grasse-Church, because the said
Grasse-Market came down so low; Sir John M^lburn, and Sir William Chester,
both Lord Majors, with others, have Monuments in this Church.

From this Church down Lombard Street, by Birchovers Lane, (the one half of
which Lane is of this Ward) and so down, be diverse fair Houses; namely, one
with a fair forefront toward the street, builded by Sir Martin Bows,
Goldsmith, since Mayor of London. And then one other, sometime belonging to
William de la pole, Earl of Suffolk in the 24. of Richard the second, and was
his Merchants House, and so down toward the Stocks Market, lacking but some
three houses thereof.

The South side of this Ward begins in the East, at the Chain to be drawn
thwart Mart-Lane, up into Fenchurch-street, and so West, by the North end of
Mincheon-Lane, to St. Margaret Pattens street, or Rood Lane, and down that
street to the midway, toward St. Margarets Church, then by Philpot-Lane, (so
called of Sir John Philpot that dwelled there, and was owner thereof) and* down
that Lane, some six or eight houses, on each side, is all of this Ward.

Then by Grasse-Church corner, into Lumbard-street, to St. Clements L^ne, and
down the same to St. Clements Church, then down St. Nicholas Lane, and down the
same to St. Nicholas Church, and the same Church is of this Ward.

Then to Abchurch Lane, and down some small portion thereof; then down
Sherborn-Lane, a part thereof, and a part of Bearbinder-Lane, be of this Ward,
and then down Lumbard-street, to the sign of the Angel, almost to the corner
over against the Stocks Market.

On the South side of this Ward, somewhat within Mart-lane, have ye the Parish
Church of Alhallowes, commonly called Stane-Church, (as may be supposed) for a
difference from other Churches of that name in this City, which (of old time)
were builded of Timber, and since were builded of stone; Sir John Test, Knight
of the holy Sepulcher, has here a Monument with others.

Then is the Parish Church of St. Nicholas Acon, or Hacon (for so it is read in
the Records) in Lombardstreet. Sir John Bridges Draper, Mayor 1520. newly
repaired this Church, and imbattelled it, and was there buried.

Then is there (in the high street) a comely Parish Church of St. Mary Wolnoth,
of the Nativity; the reason of which name, the Annals make no mention; This
Church is lately new builded, Sir Hugh Price Goldsmith, Mayor in the first year
of Henry the 7th, Keeper of the Kings Exchange at London, and one of the
Governors of the Kings Mint in the Tower of London, under William Lord
Hastings, the fifth of Edward the fourth deceased, 1496. He builded in this
Church a Chapel, called the Charnel; as also part of the Body of the Church,
and of the Steeple, and gave money toward the finishing thereof, besides the
stone that he had prepared; he was buried in the Body of the Church, and Guy
Brice or Boys, was also buried there, with some other of note.

Simon Air, 1459. He gave the Tavern, called the Cardinals Hat in
Lumbard-street, with a Tenement annexed on the East part of the Tavern, and a
Mansion behind the East Tenement; together, with an Ally from Lumbard-street to
Cornhill, with the appurrenances; all which were by him new builded, toward a
Brotherhood of our Lady in St. Mary Wolnoths Church: Among others, Sir Martin
Bows has a Monument there, who Anno 1569. gave certain Lands for discharging
Langborn Ward, of all fifteens granted by Parliament.

Of the Ninth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Billingsgate
Ward.
WE will now go South-East, and take a Survey of Billingsgate-Ward, which
begins at the West end of Tower-street Ward in Thames Street, about Smarts
Key, and runs down along that street, on the South side, to St. Magnus
Church, at the Bridge foot, and on the North side of the said Thames Street,
from over against Smarts Key, till over against the North-West Corner of St.
Magnus Church aforesaid.

On this North side of Thames Street, is St. Mary Hill Lane, up to St.
Margarets Church, and then part of St. Margarets Pattens street, at the end of
St. Mary Hills Lane; next out of Thames Street, is Lucas Lane; and then
Buttolph Lane; and at the North end thereof Philpot Lane, Then is there Rother
Lane, of old time so called; and thwart the same Lane is little East-Cheape,
And these be the bounds of Billingsgate Ward.

Touching the principal Ornaments within this Ward, on the South side of
Thamesstreet, beginning at the East end thereof; there is first the said Smarts
Key, so called, of one Smart, sometime owner thereof.

The next is Billinsgate, whereof the whole Ward takes name, the which
(leaving out of the Roman's faining it to be builded by King Bel^nus, a
Britain, ^ong before the Incarnation of Christ) is at this present, a large
Watergate, Port, or Harbor for Ships and Boats, commonly arriving there with
Fish, both fresh and salt, Shell-fishes, Salt, Oranges, Onions, and other
Fruits and Roo^s, Wheat, Rye, and Grain of diverse sorts, for service of the
City, and the parts of this Realm adjoining. This Gate is now more frequented,
then of old time, when the Queens Hith was used, as being appointed by the
Kings of this Realm, to be the special or only Port, for taking up of all such
kind of Matchandizes, brought to this City by strangers and Forraigners,
because the Drawbridge of Timbe^ at London Bridge, was then to be raised, and
drawn up for passage of Ships, with tops to the said Queen Hith.

Touching the ancient Customs of Billingsgate, in the Reign of Edward the
third; every great Ship landing there, paid for standage, two pence, every
little Ship with orelocks, a penny: the lesser Boat, called a Battle, a
halfpenny; of two quarters of Corn measured, the King was to have one farthing;
of a Comb of Corn, a penny, of every weight going out of the City, a half penny,
of two quarters of Sea-Coals measured, a farthing; and of every Tun of Ale,
going out of England, beyond the Seas, by Merchants strangers, four pence; of
every thousand Herrings, a farthing, except the Franchises, etc.

Next to this is, Summers Key, which likewise took that name, of one Summer,
dwelling there, as did Lion Key, of one Lion, owner thereof, and since of the
Sign of the Lion.

Then is there a fair Wharf or Key, called Buttolphs-gate, by that name so
called, in the time of William the Conqueror, and before him, of Edward the
Confessor.

Next is the Parish of St. Buttolph, a comely Church, and has had many fair
Monuments therein, now much defaced and gone; Among others, there is William
Rainwel and his Son, who gave a Stone-House to be a Vestry to that Church;
with Lands and Tenements to discharge Billingsgate, Dowgate, and Algate, of
fifteens granted to the King, and other Tolls: this was about the year 1426.

This Parish of St. Buttolph, is no great thing; notwithstanding, diverse
strangers are there harbored, as may appear by a presentment, not many years
since made, of strangers Inhabitants in the Ward of Billingsgate, in these
words.

In Billingsgate Ward, were one and fifty Households of strangers, whereof
thirty of the^e Householders, inhabited in the Parish of St. Buttolph, in the
chief and principal Houses, where they give twenty pounds a year, for an house
letten, used to be let before for four marks: the nearer they dwell to the
Water side* the more they give for Houses; and within 30. years before, there
was not in the whole Ward above three Nether landers; at which time, there was
within the said Parish, levied for the help of the poor, seven and twenty
pounds by the year; but since they came so plentifully thither, there cannot be
gathered above eleven pounds; the strangers being exempted, to contribute to
such charges as other Citizens do, in regard they much advance the Trade of the
City.

On the North side is Bosse Alley, so called of a Bosse of Spring Water,
continually running, which stands by Billingsgate, against this Alley; and
was sometimes made by the Executors of Richard Whittington.

Then is St. Mary Hill ane which runs up North from Billingsgate, to the end
of St. Margaret Patte^ns, commonly called Rood-lane; and the greatest half of
that Lane, is also of Billingsgate Ward. In this St. Mary Hill lane, is the
(...) Parish Church of St. Mary on the Hill, called so, because of the ascent
from Billingsgate.

In the year 1497. in the Month of April, as laborers dug for the
foundation of a Wall, within the Church of St. Mary Hill, near unto
Billingsgate, they found a Coffin of rotten Timber, and therein the Corpse of a
Woman, whole of skin, and of bones undissevered, with the joints of her Arms,
pliable, without breaking of the skin, upon whose Sepulcher this was engraven.

Here lie the Bodies of Richard Hackney, Fishmonger, and Alice his Wife; The
which Richard, was Sheriff, in the fifteenth of Edward the second.

Her Body was kept above ground three or four days, without noyance; but then
it waxed unsavory, and was again buried.

This Lane on both sides, is furnished with fair Houses for Merchants, and has
at the North end thereof, one other Lane, called St. Margaret Pattens, because
of old time, Pattens were usually there made and sold; but of latter time, this
is called Rood Lane, of a Rood there placed, in the Churchyard of St.
Margaret, whilst the old Church was taken down, and again new builded; during
which time, the oblations made to this Rood, were employed toward building of
the Church; But in the year 1538. about the 23. of May in the morning, the said
Rood was found to have been in the night preceding (by people unknown) broken
all to pieces; together, with the Tabernacle, wherein it had bin placed.

Then have ye another Lane, called Rother Lane, or Red Rose Lane, of such a
sign there, now commonly called Pudding Lane, because the Butchers of
East-Cheape, have their Scalding-house for Hoggs there, and their Puddings,
with other fi^th of Beasts, are voided down that way to their Dung-boats on the
Thames: In this Church you have the Sepulchers of sundry worthy men, among
other of Mr. Vandepute, a very worthy Merchant, whose Son Mr. Giles Vandepute,
was lately buried also there.

Then on the West side of St. Mary Hill Church, is a Lane called Rope-lane of
old, and after Lucas-lane, but now Love-lane; Then have you the Parish of St.
Andrew Hubbart in East-Cheape; Then is there But^olph-lane, and afterward the
Church of St. George Buttolph-lane, which though small, has diverse Monuments.

Of the Tenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Bridg-Ward
within.
WE will direct our^ pace downward now, and take a Survey of Bridge Ward
within, so called of London Bridge, which Bridge is a principal part of that
Ward, and beginning at the Stulps on the South end by Southwark, runs along
the Bridge, and North up Bridge-street, commonly called (of the Fish Market)
New Fish-street, from Fish-street Hill up Grass-street, to the North corner of
Grass-Church. All the Bridge is replenished on both the sides, with large,
fait, and beautiful buildings, Inhabitants for the most part Rich Merchants,
and other wealthy Citizens, Mercers, and Haberdasher^*

In New Fish-street, be Fishmongers and fair Taverns; on Fish-street ^^ill, and
Grasse-street, men of diverse Trades, Grocers, and Haberdashers.

In Grass-street, have ye one fair Conduit of sweet water, castellated with
crest and vent, made by the appointment of Thomas Hill Mayor, 1484, who gave by
his Testament a hundred Marks toward the conveyance of water to this place; it
was begun by his Executors in the year 1491, and finished of his goods,
whatsoever it cost.

On the East side of this Bridge Ward, have ye the fair Parish Church of Saint
Magnus, in the which Church have been buried many men of good repute, whose
Monuments are now for the most part defaced. Among others Sir Richard Morgan
chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Morris Griffith, Bishop of Rochester,
both born in Wales about the year 1556.

Then is the Parish Church of St. Margarets Fish-shreet Hill; a proper Church,
but Monument it has none of any note.

Up higher on this Hill, is the Parish Church of St. Leonard Milk-Church, so
termed of one William Melker, an especial builder thereof, but commonly called
Saint Leonards East-cheap, because it stands at East-cheap co^ner.

This Church, and from thence into little East-cheap, to the East end of the
said Church, is of the Bridge Ward.

Then higher in Grasse-street, is the Parish Church of St. Bennet called
Grass-Church, of the Herb Market there kept; this Church also is of the Bridge
Ward, and the farthest North end thereof.

The Customs of Grasse-Church Market, in the Reign of Edward the third, as
appears in a Book of Customs, were these: every foreign Cart laden with Corn,
or Malt, coming thither to be sold, was to pay one half penny; every Foreign
Cart bringing Chee^e, two pence; every Cart of Corn and Chee^e together, (if
the Cheese be more worth than the Corn) two pence; and if the Corn be more
worth than the Cheese, it was to pay a halfpenny; of two Horses laden with
Corn o^ Malt, the Bailiff had one farthing; The Carts of the Franchi^e of the
Temple, and of Saint Mary Le Grand, paid afarching; the Carr of the Hospital
of St. John of Jerusalem, paid nothing of their proper goods, and if the Corn
were brought by Merchants to sell again, the load paid a half penny, etc.

On the West side of this Ward, at the North end of London Bridge, is a part of
Thames street, which is also of this Ward, to wit, so much as of old time was
called Stock-Fishmonger Row, of the Stock-Fish-mongers dwelling t^ere, down
West to a Wa^er-gate, of old time called Ebgate, since Ebgate Lane, and now the
Old Swan, which is a common stair on the Thames, but the passage is very
^arrow, by means of encroachments.

On the South side of Thames street, about the Midway betwixt the Bridge foot
and Ebgate Lane, stands the Fishmongers Hall, and diverse other fair Houses
for Merchants.

These Fishmongers were sometimes of two several Companies, to wit,
Stock-Fishmongers and Salt-Fishmongers. Of who^e antiquity we read that by the
name of Fishmongers of London, they were for fore-stalling, etc. contrary to
the Laws and constitutions of the City, fined to the King at 500 Marks, the
eighteenth of King Edward the first; Moreover, that the said Fishmongers
hearing of the great victory obtained by the same King against the Scots, in
the six and twentieth of his Reign, made a Triumphant and solemn Show through
the City, with diverse Pageants, and more than a thousand Horsemen, etc.

These two Companies of Stock-Fishmongers and Salt-Fishmongers, of old time had
their several Halls, to wit, in Thames street twain, in New Fish-street twai^,
in Old Fish-street twain, in each place one for either Company, in all six
several Halls; the Company was so great, that it lies upon Records, that these
Fishmongers have been jolly Citizens, and six Mayors have been of their Company
in the space of four and twenty years, to wit, Walter Turk 1350, John Lofkin
1359, John Wreth, 1361, John Pechie 1362, Simon Morden 1369, and William
Wallworth 1374.

It followed, that in the year 1382, through the Counsel of John North hampton
Draper, then being Mayor, William Essex, John More Mercer, and Richard
Northbury the said Fishmongers were greatly troubled, hindered of their
Liberties, and almost destroyed by combinations made against them, so that in a
Parliament at London, the controversy depending between the Mayor and Aldermen
of London, and the Fishmongers, Nic. Exton Speaker for the Fishmongers, prays
the King to receive him and his Company into his protection for fear of
corporal hurt, whereupon it was commanded, either part to keep the peace, upon
pain of losing all they had; Hereupon, a Fishmonger starting up, replied, that
the complain brought against them by the movers, etc. was but matter of malice,
for that the Fishmongers, in the Reign of Edward the 3d. being chief Officers
of the City, had for their misdemeanors then done, committed the chief
exhibitors of those Petitions to prison. In this Parliament the Fishmongers (by
the Kings Charter Patents) were restored to their Liberties; Notwithstanding,
in the year next following 1383, John Cavendish Fishmong^r, craveth the peace
against the Chancellor of England, which was granted, and he put in Sureties,
the Earls of Stafford and Salisbury, and challenges the Chancellor for taking
a bribe of ten pounds, for favor of Cavendish Case, which the Chancellor by
Oath upon the Sacrament avoideth. In further trial, it was found, that the
Chancellours man (without his Masters privity) had taken it; whereupon
Cavendish was Judged to prison, and to pay the Chancellor 1000 Marks for
slandering him.

After this, many of the Nobles assembled at Reading, to supprese the seditious
Sheirs of the said John Northampion, or Combarton, late Mayor, that had
attempted great and heinous enterprises, of the which he was convict; and when
he stood mute nor would utter one word, it was Decreed, that he should be
committed to perpetual prison, his goods confiscate to the Kings use, and that
he should not come within a hundred miles of London, during his life; He was
therefore sent to the Castle of Fintegall in the Confines of Cornwall; and in
the mean space the Kings Servants spoiled his goods: John Moore, Richard
Northbury, and others were likewise there Convict, and condemned to perpetual
prison, and their good^ confiscate, for certain Congregations by them made
against the Fishmongers in the City of London, as is aforesaid, but they^
obtained and had the Kings pardon in the fourteenth of his Reign, as appears
upon Record and thus were all these troubles appealed.

Those Stock-Fishmongers and Salt-Fishmongers were united in the year 1536, the
eight and twentieth of Henry the eighth, their Hall to be but one, in the House
given unto them by Sir John Cornwall, Lord Fanhope, and of Ampthull, in the
Parish of Saint Michael in Crooked Lane, in the Reign of Henry the sixth.

Thus much was thought remarkable to be spoken of the Fishmongers, men ignorant
of their Antiquities, and not able to show a reason why, or when they were in
amity with the Goldsmiths, do give part of their Arms, etc. Neither to say
ought of Sir William Walworth (the Glory of their Company) more than that he
slew Jack Straw, which some do question: for the said Straw was after the
overthrow of the Rebels, taken, and by judgment of the Mayor beheaded, whose
confession at the Gallows is extant in Mr. Stows Annals, where also is set
down the most valiant and praiseworthy act of Sir William Walworth, against
the principal Rebel Wat Tyler.

On that South side of Thames street, have ye Drink-water Wharf, and Fish
Wharf, in the Parish of Saint Magnus.

On the North side of Thames street is Saint Martins Lane, a part of which Lane
is also of this Ward, to wit, on the one side to a Well of water, and on the
other side as far up as against the said Well. Then is St. Michaels Lane part
whereof is also of this Ward, up to a Well there etc.

Then at the upper end of New Fish-street, is a Lane turning toward St.
Michaels Lane, and is called Crooked-Lane, of the crooked windings thereof;
Above this Lanes end, upon Fish-street Hill, is one great House for the most
p^rt builded with stone, which pertained sometime to Edward the black Prince,
son to Edward the third, who was in his life time lodged there; and 'twas
called the Prince of Wales his Court, which was afterward for a long time a
common Hostry, having the sign of the Black Bell.

Of the Eleventh Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Candle-wick
Ward.
WE will now see what light Antiquity can give us of Candle-wick street, or
Candle-wright street Ward. It begins at the East end of great East-cheap, it
passes West through East-cheap to Candle-wright street, and thorough the same
down to the North end of Suffolk Lane: on the South side, and down that Lane by
the West end of St. Lawrence Churchyard, which is the farthest West part of
that Ward; the street of Great East-cheap, is so called of the Market there
kept, in the East part of the City, as VVest-cheap is a Market so called, being
in the West.

This East-Cheap is now a Flesh-market of Butchers, there dwelling on both
sides of the street: it had sometime also Cooks mixed amongst the B^tchers, and
such other as sold Victuals ready dressed of all sorts; For of old time, when
friends did meet, and were disposed to be merry, they never went to dine and
Sup in Taverns, but to the Cooks, where they called for meat what them liked,
(...) they always sound ready dressed, and at a reasonable rate; for Vintners
(...) ^old on^y Wine.

In the year 1410. the eleventh of Henry the fourth, upon the Even of Saint
John Baptist* the Kings Sons, Thomas and John, being in East-Cheape at
Supper, (or rather at breakfast; for it was after the Watch was broken up,
betwixt two and three a Clock after midnight) a great debate happened between
their men, and other of the Court, which lasted one hour, till the Mayor and
Sheriffs, with other Citizens appea^^d the same; For the which, afterward, the
said Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs, were called to answer before the King, his
Sons, and diverse Lords, being highly moved against the City; At which time,
William Gascoign^, chief Justice, required the Mayor and Aldermen, for the
Citizens, to put them in the Kings Grace; whereunto they answered, that they
had not offended, but (according to the Law) had done their best, in stinting
debate and maintaining of the peace; upon which answer, the King remitted all
his Ire, and dismissed them.

And to prove this East-Cheape to be a place replenished with Cooks, it may
appear by a Song called London lick-penny, made by Lidgate, a Monk of Bury, in
the Reign of Henry the fifth, in the person of a Countryman, coming to
London, and traveling thorough the same. In West-Cheape (says the Song) he
was called on to buy fine Lawn, Paris Thread, Cotton Umble, and other linen
Clothes, and such like, (he speaks of no silk.) In Cornhill, to buy old
Apparel, and Household Stuff, where he was forced to buy his own Hood, which he
had lost in Westminster Hall. In Candlewright-street, Drapers pro^cred him
Cheap Cloth. In East-Cheape, the Cooks cried hot Ribs of Beef roasted, Pies well
baked, and other Victuals. There was clattering of Pewter-Pots, Harp, Pipe and
Sawtry; yea by cock, nay by cock, for greater Oaths were spared, some sang of
Ienkin, and Julian, etc. All which Melody liked well the Passenger, but he
wanted money to abide by it; and therefore gat him into Gravesend-Barge, and
home into Kent.

Candlewright (so called in old Records, of the Guild Hall of St. Mary Overies,
and other) or Candlewick-street, took that name (as may be supposed) either of
Chaundlers, or Makers of Candles, both of Wax and Tallow, for Candle-wright is
a Maker of Candles, and of Wick, which is the Cotton, or yarn thereof, or
otherwise which is the place where they used to work them, as scalding wick by
the Stocks-Market, was called of the Poulterers dressing and scalding their
Poultry there. And in diverse Countries, Dairy-houses, or Cottages, wherein they
make Butter and Cheese, are usually called Wickes. There dwelled also of old
time, diverse Weavers of Woollen Clothes, brought in by Edward the 3d; for I
read that in the four and twentieth of his Reign, the Weavers, brought out of
Flanders, were appointed their meetings to be in the Churchyard of St.
Lawrence Poultney; and the Weavers of Brabant, in the Churchyard of St. Mary
Sommerset: There were then in this City, Weavers of diverse sorts, to wit, of
Drapery or Tapery, and Nappery: these Weavers of Candlewicke street, being in
short time worn out, their place is now possessed by rich Drapers, Sellers of
Woollen Cloth, etc.

On the Northside of this Ward, at the West end of East-Cheape, have ye St.
Clements Lane; a part whereof, (on both sides) is of Candlewicke street Ward,
to wit, somewhat North, beyond the Parish Church of St. Clement in East-cheape.
Though this Church be small, yet there are some comely Monuments in it, among
others of William Chartney, and William Overy, who founded a Chantry there.

Next is St. Nicholas Lane, for the most part on both sides, of this Ward,
almost to St. Nicholas Church.

Then is Abchurch Lane, which is on both sides, almost wholly of this Ward: the
Parish Church there (called of St. Mary Abchurch, Apechurch, or Upchurch, as I
have read it) stands somewhat near unto the South end thereof, on a rising
ground. It is a fair Church, Simon de Winchcombe, sounded a Chauntery there,
the 19th of Richard the 2d, John Littleton ^ounded another, and Thomas Hondon
another.

Here are likewise some remarkable Monuments, particularly of Sir James, and
Sir John Branch, both Lord Mayors of London, about the year 1570.

On the South side of this Ward, beginning again at the East, is St. Michaels
lane; which lane is almost wholly of this Ward, on both sides down toward
Thames street; to a Well or Pump there; on the East side of this Lane is
Crooked Lane aforesaid, by St. Michaels Church, toward New Fishstreet. One of
the most ancient Houses in this Lane, is called the Leaden Porch, and belonged
sometime to Sir John Merston, Knight, the first of Edward the 4th; It is now
called the Swan in Crooked Lane, possessed of strangers, and retailing of
Rhenish Wine. The Parish Church of this St. Michaels, was sometime but a small
and homely thing, standing upon part of that ground, wherein now stands the
Parsonage House, and the ground thereabout was a filthy plot, by reason of the
Butchers in East-Cheape, who made the same their Laystall.

VV. de Burgo, gave two Messuages to that Church in Candlewick street, 1317.
John Loveken, Stock Fish monger, fout times Mayor, builded (in the same ground)
this fair Church of St. Michael, and was there buried in the Quire, under a
fair Tomb, with the Images of him and his Wise in Alabaster: the said Church
has bin since increased, with a new Quire, and side Chapels by Sir W.
Walworth, Stock-fishmonger, Mayor, sometime Servant to the said John Loveken;
Also the Tomb of Loveken was removed, and a flat stone of gray marble,
garnished with Plates of Copper, laid on him, as it yet remains in the Body
of the Church.

This William Walworth is reported by some, to have slain Jack Straw; but Jack
Straw being afterward taken, was first adjudged by the said Mayor, and then
executed by the loss of his head in Smithfield: True it is, that this William
Walworth, being a man wise, learned, and of an incomparable Manhood, arrested
Wat Tyler, a presumptuous Rebel, upon whom no man durst lay hand, whereby he
delivered the King and Kingdom, from most wicked Tyranny of Traitors: the Mayor
arrested him on the head with a sound blow; whereupon, Wat Tylar furiously
stroke the Mayor with his Dagger, but hurt him not, by reason he was well
armed, The Mayor having received his stroke drew his Bas^^liard, and grievously
wounded Wat in the Neck; and withal, gave him a great blow on the Head; in the
which Conflict, an Esquire of the Kings House, called John Cavendish, drew his
Sword, and wounded Wat twice or thrice, even to the death, and Wat spurring his
Horse, cried to the Commons to revenge him: the Horse beats him about eighty
foot from the place, and there he fell down half dead, and by and by, they
which attended on the King, environed him about, so as he was not seen of his
Company; many of them thrust him in, in diverse places of his Body, and drew him
into the Hospital of St. Bartholomew; from whence again the Mayor caused him to
be drawn into Smithfield, and there to be beheaded: In reward of his Service,
(the people being dispersed) the King commanded the Mayor to put a Basenet on
his Head; and the Mayor requesting why he should so do, the King answered, he
being much bound unto him, would make him Knight; The Mayor answered, that he
was neither worthy, nor able to take such an Estate upon him; for he was but a
Merchant, and had to live by his Merchandise only: Notwithstanding, the King
made him to put on his Basenet, and then with a Sword in both his hands, he
strongly struck him on the Neck, as the manner was then, and the same day he
made three other Citizens Knights (for his sake) to wit, John Philpot, Nicholas
Brember, and Robert Launde, Aldermen. The King gave to the Mayor, a hundred
pound Land by year, and to each of the other forty pound Land, yearly, to them
and their-Heires for ever.

After this, in the same year, the said Sir William Walworth, founded in the
said Parish Church of St. Michael, a College, of a Master and nine Priests, or
Chaplains, and deceasing 1385. was there buried in the North Chapel by the
Quire; but his Monument being (amongst other by bad people) defaced in the
Reign of Edward the sixth; and again, since renewed by the Fishmongers, for
lack of knowledge, whatsoever before had been written in this Epitaph, they
followed a fabulous Book, and wrote Jack Straw, instead of Wat Tylar.

It has also been, and is now grown to a common opinion, that in reward of
this service done by the said William Wallworth, against the Rebel, that King
Richard added to the Arms of this City (which was Argent, a plane Cross Gules)
a Sword, or Dagger, (for so they term it) whereof Mr. John Stow makes a doubt;
but to the contrary, he alleges, that in the fourth year of Richard the
second, in a full Assembly made in the upper Chamber of the Guild Hall,
summoned by this William Walworth, then Mayor, as well of Aldermen, as of the
Common Council, in every Ward, for certain affairs concerning the King, it was
there by common consent agreed and ordained, that the old Seal of the Office of
the Majoralty of the City, being very small, old, unapt, and un^omely for the
Honor of the City, should be broken, and one other new should be had, which
the said Mayor commanded to be made artificially, and honorably for the
exercise of the said Office thereafter, in place of the other. In which new
Seal, besides the Images of Peter and Paul, which of old were rudely engraven,
there should be under the feet of the said Images, a Shield of the Arms of the
said City, perfectly graven with two Lions supporting the same, and two
Sergeants of Arms; in the other part, one, and two Tabernacles; in which,
above, should stand two Angels, between whom (above the said Images of Peter
and Paul) should be set the Glorious Virgin. This being done, the old Seal of
the Office was delivered to Richard Odiham, Chamberlain, who brake it, and in
placethereof, was delivered the new Seal to the said Mayor, to use in his
Office of Majoralty, as occasion should require.

This new Seal seems to be made before William Walworth was Knighted; for he
is not there entitled Sir, as afterward he was; and certain it is, that the
same new Seal then made, is now in use, and none other in that Office of the
Majoralty, which may suffice to answer the former supposition, without showing
of any evidence sealed with the old Seal, which was the Cross, and Sword of
St. Paul, and not the Dagger of William Walworth. In this Church are sundry
ancient Monuments, of Mayors and Sheriffs of London.

West from this St. Michaels Lane, is St. Martins Orgar Lane, by
Candlewick-street, which lane is, on both sides down to a Well, replenished
with fair and large Houses for Merchants; and it is of this Ward. One of which
Houses was sometime called Beauchamps Inn, as pertaining unto them of that
Family. Thomas Arundel, Arch Bishop of Canterbury commonly, for his time was
lodged there.

The Parish Church of St. Martin Orgar, is a small thing. William Crowmer,
Mayor, builded a proper Chapel on the South side thereof, and was buried there
in an ancient Tomb 1533. where are some others, of Majors and Aldermen.

Then is there one other Lane, called St. Lawrence, of the Parish Church there.
This Lane, down to the South side of the Churchyard, is of Candlewick street
Ward.

The Parish Church of St. Laurence, was increased with a Chapel of Jesus, by
Thomas Cole, for a Master and Chaplain; the which Chapel and Parish Church,
was made a College of Jesus, and of Corpus Christi, for a Master and seven
Chaplains, by John Poultney Mayor, and was confirmed by Edward the third, the
twentieth of his Reign; of him was this Church called St. Laurence Poultney in
Candlewick street; which College was valued at seventy nine pounds, seventeen
shillings eleven pence, and was surrendered in the Reign of Edward the sixth.

In this Church, Robert and Henry Radcliffe, Earls of Sussex, lie buried.

Of the Twelfth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Wallbrook
Ward.
WE will now proceed, and make a Perambulation of Walbrook Ward, which
begins at the west end of Candlewick Street Ward, It runs down
Candlewick street, west toward Budge Row; It has on the North side thereof,
St. Swithens Lane, so called of St. Swithens, a Parish Church by London-stone;
This Lane is replenished (on both the sides) with fair builded Houses, and is
wholy of VVallbrook Ward. The said Parish Church of St. Sw^then, stands at
the South west corner of this Lane; License was procured, to new build and
increase the said Church and Steeple, in the year 1420. Sir John Hend Draper,
and Mayor, was an especial Benefactor thereunto, as appears by his Arms in
the Glass windows, even in the tops of them, which is in a Field Argent, a
Chief Azure, a Lion passant Argent, a Cheueron Azure, three Escalops Argent;
Ralph Ioceline, Mayor of London, among others, has a Monument in this Church,
having bin a benefactor to it.

On the South side of this high street, near unto the Channel, is pitched
upright a great stone, called London stone, fixed in the ground very deep,
fastened with Bars of Iron, and otherwise so strongly set, that if Carts do
run against it, through negligence, the Wheels be broken, and the Stone it
self unshaken. The cause why this Stone was there set, the time when, or other
memory thereof is none, but that the same has long continued there, is
manifest, namely since (or rather before) the Conquest; for in the end of a
fair written Gospel Book, given to Christ's Church in Canterbury, by Ethelstane,
King of the west Saxons, mention is made of Lands and Rents in London,
belonging to the said Church, whereof one parcel is described to lie near unto
London Stone. Of latter time we read, that in the year of Christ 1135. the
first of King Stephen, a fire, which began in the house of one Ailward, near
unto London, stone, consumed all East to Ealdgate, in which fire the Priory of
the Holy Trinity was burnt, and west to St. Erkenwalds shrine in Paul's Church,
and these be the Eldest Notes that I read thereof.

Some have said, this stone to be set there, as a Mark in the middle of the
City within the Wall, but in truth it stands far nearer to the River of
Thames, than to the Wall of the City.

Some others have said, the same to be set, for the tendering and making of
payment by Debtors to their Creditors, at their appointed days and times, till
of latter time, payments were more usually made at the Font in Ponts Church,
and now most commonly at the Royal Exchange; Some again have imagined, the same
to be set up by John or Thomas London-stone dwelling there against it; but more
likely it is, that such men have taken name of the Stone, than the Stone of
them: as did John at Noke, and Thomas at Style, William at Wall or at Well etc.
But the most probable opinion, is, that it was placed there by the Romans for a
Milliare, as was observed elsewhere in this Discourse.

Down West from this Parish Church, and from London-stone, have ye Wallbroke
corner, from whence runs up a street North to the Stocks called Walbrook;
because it stands on the East side of the same Brook by the Bank thereof, and
the whole Ward takes name of that street. On the East side of this street, and
at the North corner thereof, is the Stocks Market, which had this beginning.
About the year of Christ 1282, Henry Wallis Mayor, caused diverse houses in this
City to be builded toward the maintenance of London Bridge, namely, in one
void place near unto the Parish Church called Wooll-Church; On the North side
thereof, where sometime (the way being very large and broad) had stood a pair
of Stocks for punishment of offenders; This building took name of those Stooks,
and was appointed (by him) to be a Marketplace for Fish and Flesh, in the
midst of the City: other Houses be builded in other places, by Patent of Edward
the first it does appear, dated the tenth of his Reign.

After this, in the year 1322, the seventeenth of Edward the second, a Decree
was made by Hamond Chickwell Mayor, that none should sell fish or flesh, out of
the Markets appointed, to wit, Bridge-street, East-cheap, Old Fish-street, St.
Nicholas Shambles, and the said Stocks, on pain to forfeit such fish or flesh
as were there sold, for the first time; and the second time to lose their
Freedom: Which Act was made by commandment of the King, under his Letters
Patents, dated at the Tower the 17th of his Reign, and then was this Stocks let
to Farm for forty six pounds thirteen shillings four pence by year: this Stocks
Market was again begun to be builded, in the year 1410, in the eleaventh of
Henry the fourth, and was finished in the year next following. In the year
1507, the same was rented fifty six pounds nineteen shillings ten pence; And in
the year 1543, John Cotes being Mayor, there was in this Stocks Market, for
Fishmongers five and twenty Boards or Stalls, rented yearly to 34 pounds, 13
shillings. 4 pence. There was for Butchers 18 Boards or stalls rented at 41
pounds, 16 shillings 4 pence, and there were also Chambers above sixteen,
rented at five pounds, thirteen shillings four pence, in all, eighty two pounds
three shillings.

Next unto this Stocks is the Parish Church of St. Mary VVool-Church, so called
of a Beam placed in the Churchyard, which was thereof called Wool-Church Haw,
of the Tronage or weighing of Wool there used, and to verify this, we find
amongst the Customs of London written in French, in the Reign of Edward the
second, a Chapter entitled, Les Customs de VVooll-Church Haw, wherein is set
down, what was there to be paid for every parcel of Wool weighed; this
Tronage, or weighing of Wool, till the sixth of Richard the second, was there
continued: John Churchman then builded the Custom House upon Wool Key, to
serve for the said Tonnage as is before showed in Tower-street Ward.

This Church is reasonable fair and large, and was afterward new builded, by
License granted in the twentieth of Henry the sixth, with condition to be
builded fifteen foot from the Stocks Market, for sparing of light to the said
Stocks, the Parson of this Parish is to have four Marks the year, for Tyth of
the said Stocks, paid him by the Masters of the Bridge-house, by a special
Decree, made the second of Henry the seventh. In the year about 1500, John
VVingar Lord Mayor, gave two Basins of silver to this Church; And Richard Shore
Sheriff of London made the Porch at the West end: they lie both there entombed.

From the Stocks Market, and this Parish Church East, up into Lombardstreet,
some four or five houses on a side, and also on the South side of VVooll-Church
have ye Bear-Binder Lane, a part whereof is of this VVallbrook Ward.

Then down sower in the street called Wallbrook, is one other fair Church of
St. Stephen, builded new on the East side thereof; for the old Church stood on
the West side, in place where now stands the Parsonage House, and therefore
so much nearer to the Brook, even on the Bank.

This Church was finished in the year 1439. The breadth thereof is sixty seven
foot, and length one hundred twenty five foot, the Churchyard ninty foot in
length, and thirty seven in breadth, and more, Robert VVhittingham (made Knight
of the Bath) in the year 1432, purchased the Patronage of this Church, from
John Duke of Bedford, Uncle to Henry the sixth; and Edward the fourth, in the
second of his Reign, gave it to Sir Richard Lee then Mayor, who ileth there
hansomely entombed, having bin twice Lord Mayor, with diverse others.

Lower down from this Parish Church, be ^ivers fair houses, namely one, wherein
of late Sir Richard Baker, a Knight of Kent was lodged; and wherein also
dwelled Mr. Thomas Gore, a Merchant famous for Hospitality.

On the West side of this VValbrook street, over against the Stocks Market, is
a part of the High street, called the Poultry; On the South side West, till
over against Saint Mildreds Church, and the Scalding wike, is of this Ward.

Then down again Wallbrook street, some small distance, in Buckles Bury, a
street so called of Buckle, that sometime was owner thereof; part of which
street on both sides, three or four Houses, to the course of the Brook, is of
this Ward, and so down VValbrook street, to the South corner, from whence West,
down Budge row, some small distance, to an Alley, and through that Al^ey South,
by the West end of St. John's Church upon VValbrook, by the South side and East
end of the same, again to VValbrook corner. This Parish Church is called, St
John upon VValbrook, because the West end thereof is on the very bank of
Walbrook by Horshooe Bridge, in Horshooe-Bridge street.

This Church was also lately new builded: for about the year 1412, License was
granted by the Mayor and Communalty, to the Parson and Parish, for the
enlarging thereof, with a piece of ground on the North part of the Quire, one
and twenty foot in length, seventeen foot in breadth, and three inches; and on
the South side of the Quite, one foot of the common soil.

On the South side of Walbrook Ward, from Candle-wick street, in the midway
between London-stone and Walbrook corner, is a little Lane with a Turn-Pike in
the midst thereof, and in the same a hansome Parish Church, called S. Mary
Bothaw, or Boat-Haw, by the Erbar. This Church being near unto Downgate, on the
River of Thames, has the addition of Bothaw or Boat-haw, of near adjoining to
an Haw or Yard, wherein (of old time) Boats were made and landed from Downgate
to be mended, as may be supposed; for other reason I find none, why it should
be so called. This Church has one remarkable thing in it, viz. The Monument of
the first Lord May or of London, Sir Henry Fitz Alwin; His dwelling House
remains yet in the Parish, but divided to diverse Tenements; Mr. Stow relates,
that he was buried in the holy Trinity within Algate, but it is far more
probable that he was buried here, because his Arms^ are both upon the
Gravestone and the Windows.

Of the Thirteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Dowgate
Ward.
WE will now, following the thread of our Discourse, descend to Downgate Ward,
which begins at the South end of Wallbrook Ward, over against the East
corner of St. John's Church upon Walbrook, and descends on both the sides to
Downgate or Dowgate, on the Thames, and is so called of that down going or
descending thereunto, and of this Downgate the Ward takes name; This Ward
turns into Thames street Westward, some ten Hou^es on a side, to the course
of Walbrooke, but East in Thames street (on both sides) to Ebgate Lane, or Old
Swan, the Land-side whereof has many Lanes turning up, as shall be showed when
we come to them.

But first to begin with the High street called Dowgate: at the upper end
thereof, is a fair Conduit of Thames Water, castellated, and made in the year
1568, at the charges of the Citizens, and is called, the Conduit upon Dowgate.
The descent of this stre^t is such, that in the year 1574, on the fourth of
September in the afternoon, there fell a storm of rain, where-through the
Channels suddenly aro^e and ran with such a swift course toward the
Common-shores, that a Lad of eighteen years old, minding to have leapt over the
Channel near unto the said Conduit, was taken with the stream, and carried from
thence toward the Thames, with such a violence, that no man, with staves, or
otherwise, could stay him till he came against a Cart-wheele, that stood in the
said Watergate; before which time he was drowned and stark dead.

On the West side of this street is Tallow-Chandlers Hall, a hansome house,
which Company was incorporated in the second year of Edward the fourth.

Somewhat lower stands the Skinners Hall, a fair house, which was sometimes
called Copped Hall by Downgate, in the Parish of St. John upon Wallbrook. In
the nineteenth year of Edward the second, Ralph Cobham possessed it, with five
shops, etc.

This Company of Skinners in London, was incorporate by Edward the third, in
the first of his Reign; they had two Brotherhoods of Corpus Christi viz. one at
St. Mary Spittle, the other at St. Mary Bethlem without Bishopsgate. Richard
the second, in the eighteenth of his Reign, granted them to make their two
Brotherhoods one, by the name of the Fraternity of Corpus Christi of Skinners;
diverse Royal persons were named to be Founders, and Brethren of this
Fraternity, to wit, Kings six, Dukes nine, Earls two, Lords one; Kings, Edward
the third, Richard the second, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, and Edward the
fourth.

This Fraternity had also once every year on Corpus Christi day afternoon a a
pro^ession, which passed through the principal streets of the City, wherein was
borne more than one hundred Torches of Wax, (costly garnished) burning light,
and above two hundred Clerks and Priests in Surplesses and Coaps, singing;
After the which, were the Sheriffs servants, the Clarks of the Compters,
Chaplains for the Sheriffs, the Mayors Sergeants, the Council of the City, the
Mayor and Aldermen in Scarlet and then the Skinners in their best Liveries.

Then lower, was a College of Priests, called Jesus Commons, a House well
furnished with Brass, Pewter, Napery, Plate, etc. besides a fair Library well
stored with Books; all which of old time were given to a number of Priests that
should keep Commons there; and as one left his p^ace (by death or otherwise)
another should be admitted into his room; but this Order within these 70.
years, being discontinued, the said House was dissolved, and turned into
Tenements.

Down lower have ye Elbowe Lane, and at the corner thereof, was one great
Stone-house, called Old-hall; it is now taken down, and diverse fair Houses of
Timber placed there: This was sometimes pertaining to William de pont le Arch,
and by him given the Priory of St. Mary Overy in Southwark, in the Reign o^
Henry the first. In this Elbow-lane, is the Inholders Hall, and other fair
Houses: this Lane runs West, and suddenly turns South, into Thames Street,
and therefore (of that bending) is called Elbow-lane: on the East side of this
Downgate-street, is the great old House before spoken of, called the Erbar,
near to the Church of St. Mary Bothaw; Geffery Scroop held it by the gift of
Edward the third, in the fourteenth of his Reign: It belonged since, to John
Nevel, Lord of Raby; then to Richard Nevel, Earl of Warwick; Nevel, Earl of
Salisbury, was lodged there, 1457. Then it came to George Duke of Clarence, and
his Heirs Males, by the gift of Edward the fourth, in the fourteenth yea^ of
his Reign. It was lately builded by Sir Thomas Pull^son Mayor, and was
afterward Inhabited by Sir Francis Drake, that famous Navigator; Next to this
great House, is Lane turning to Bush-lane, (of old time called Carter-lane, of
Carts, and Carmen having Stables there) and now called Chequer-lane, or
Chequer-Alley, of an Inn called the Chequer.

In Thamesstreet, on the Thames side West from Downgate, is Greenwitch lane, of
old time so called, and now Friar lane, of such a sign there set up.

In this Lane is the Ioyners Hall, and other fair Houses.

Then is Granthams Lane, so called of John Grantham, sometime Mayor, and owner
thereof, whose house was very large and strong, builded of stone, as appears
by Gates Arched yet remaining; Ralph Dodmer, first a Brewer, then a Mercer,
Mayor 1529. dwelled there, and kept his Majoralty in that house: it is now a
Brew House, as it was before.

Then is Down-gate, whereof is spoken in another place; East from this
Downegate, is Cousin lane, named of one William Cousin, that dwelled there in
the fourth of Richard the second, as diverse his Predecessors, Father,
Granfather, etc. had done before him; William Cousin was one of the Sheriffs,
in the year 1306.

That House stands at the South end of the Lane, having an old and Artificial
conveyance, of Thames water into it; And is now a Dye-house, called Lambards
Mess^age; Adjoining to that House, there was lately erected an Engine, to
convey ^ hames water unto Downgate Conduit aforesaid.

Next to this Lane, on the East, is the Steel-yard (as they term it) a place
for Merchants of Almain, that used to bring hither, as well Wheat, Rye, and
other Grain, as Cables, Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tar, Flax, Hemp, Linen Cloth*
Wainscots, Wax, Steel, and other profitable Marchandizes; unto these Marchan
sin the year 1259. Henry the third, at the Request of his Brother Richard, Earl
of Cornwall, King of Almain, granted, that all and singular the Merchants;
having a House in the City of London, commonly called Guilda Aula
The^^onicorum, should be maintained and upholden through the whole Realm, by
a^l such freedoms, and free usages or Liberties* as by the King and his Noble
Progenitors time they had, and enjoyed, etc. Edward the first renewed and
confirmed that Charter of Liberties granted by his Father; And in the tenth
year of the same Edward, Henry W^llis being Mayor, a great Controversy did
arise between the said Mayor, and the Merchants of the Haunce of Almaine, about
the reparations of Bishops-gate, then likely to fall; for that the said
Merchants enjoyed diverse privileges, in respect of maintaining the said Gate,
which they now denied to repair; for the appeasing of which controversy, the
King sent his Writ to the Treasurer, and Baron of his Exchequer commanding that
they should make Inquisition thereof; Before whom the Merchants being called,
when they were not able to discharge themselves, s^^h they enjoyed the
Liberties to them granted for the same, a precept was sent to the Mayor and
Sheriffs, to distrain the said Merchants to make reparations; namely, Gerard
Marhod, Alderman of the Haunce, Ralph de Cussarde a Citizen of Colen, Ludero de
Denauar, a Burgess of Trivar, John of Aras a Burgess of Trivon, Bartram of
Hamburgh, Godestalk of Hundoudale, a Burgess of Trivon, John de Deal a
Burgess of Munster, then remaining in the said City of London, for themselves,
and all other Merchants of the Haunce, and so they granted 210 Marks sterling,
to the Mayor and Citizens; and undertook, that they and their Successors,
should (from time to time) repair the said Gate, and bear the third part of the
Charges in money, and men to defend it, when need were.

And for this Agreement, the said Mayor and Citizens, granted to the said
Merchants their liberties, which till of late they have enjoyed; as namely,
amongst other, that they might lay up their Grain, which they brought into this
Realm, in Inns, and sell it in their Garners, by the space of forty days,
after they had laid it up; except by the Mayor and Citizens they were expressly
forbidden, because of Dearth, or other reasonable occasions. Also they might
have their Aldermen, as they had bin accustomed; provided always, that he were
of the City, and presented to the Mayor and Aldermen of the City, so often as any
should be chosen, and should take an Oath before them, to maintain Justice in
their Courts, and to behave themselves in their Office, according to Law, and
as it stood with the Customs of the City.

Thus much for their privileges, whereby it appears, that they were great
Merchants of Corn, brought out of the East parts hither; insomuch, that the
Occupiers of Husbandry in this Land, were en^orced to complain of them, for
bringing in such abundance, when the Corn of this Realm was at an easy price;
whereupon it was ordained by Parliament, That no person should bring into any
part of this Realm, by way of Merchandise, Wheat, Rye, or Barley, growing out
of the said Realm, when the Quarter of Wheat exceeded not the price of six
shilling eight pence, Rye four shillings the Quarter, and Barley three
shillings the Quarter, upon forfeiture one half to the King, the other half to
the seisor thereof: These Merchants of the Hawnce, had their Guild Hall in
Thames Street, in the place aforesaid by the said Cosin-lane: Their Hall is
large, builded of Stone, with three Arched Gates toward the street; the
middlemost whereof, is far bigger than the other, and is seldom opened, the
other two be mured up, the same is now called the Old Hall.

In the 6th of Richard the 2d, they hired one House next adjoining to their Old
Hall, which sometime belonged to Richard Lions, a famous Lapidary, one of the
Sheriffs of London in the 49 of Edward the 3d; and in the 4th of Richard the
2d, by the Rebels of Kent, drawn out of that House, and beheaded in
West-Cheape: This also was a great House, with a large Wharf on the Thames; and
the way thereunto was called Windgoose, or Wildgoose-lane, which is now called
Windgoose-Alley; for that the same Alley is (for the most part) builded on by
the Styliard Merchants. The Abbat of St. Albans, had a Message here, with a
key given to him, 34. of Henry the 6th.

Then is one other great House, which sometime pertained to John Rainwel,
Stock-Fishmonger, Mayor, and it was by him given to the Mayor and Commonalty,
to the end, that the profits thereof, should be disposed in deeds of piety;
which House, in the 15th of Edward the 4th, was c^^firmed unto the said
Merchants, in manner following, viz.

It is ordered by our Sovereign Lord, and his Parliament, that the said
Merchants of A^main* being of the Company, called the Guild Hall Theutonicorum,
(or the Flemish Geld) that now be, or hereafter shall be, shall have, hold, and
enjoy to them and their Successors for ever, the said place, called the
Steel-house, yielding to the Mayor and Commonalty, an annual Rent of threescore
and ten pounds, three shillings, four pence, etc.

In the year 1551, the 5th of Edward the 6th, through complaint of the English
Merchants, the liberty of the Steel-yard Merchants, was seized into the Kings
hands, and so it rests.

Then is Church-lane, at the West end of Alhollowes Church, called Alhollowds
the more in Thames Street, for a difference from Alhollowes the less, in the
same street; It is also called Alhollowes ad faenum in the Ropery, because Hay
was sold near thereunto, at Hay-Wharf, and Ropes of old time made and so^d in
the high street: This is a fair Church, with a large Cloister on the South side
thereof about their Churchyard, but foully defaced and ruinated. Dr. Lichfield,
a learned man, and an Author, who died 1447. lies here buried, with other
Benefactors.

At the East end of this Church goes down a Lane, called Hay Wharf-lane, now
lately a great Brew House, builded there by one Pot; Hen, Compion, Esquire a
Beere-Brewer, used it, and Abraham his Son, since possessed it: Then was there
one other Lane, sometime called Woolseys Gate, now out of use, for the lower
part thereof, upon the Bank of Thames, is builded by the late Earl of
Shrewsbury; and the other end is builded on, and stopped up by the Chamberlain
of London. I. Butler, Draper, one of the Sheriffs, in the year 1420. dwelled
there; He appointed his house to be sold, and the price thereof to be given to
the poor; it was of Alhollowes Parish the less.

Then is there the said Parish Church of Alhollowes called the Less, and by
some Alhollowes on the Cellars; for it stands on Vau^ts, it is said to be
builded by Sir John Poultney, sometimes Mayor: The Steeple and Quire of this
Church, stand on an Arched Gate, being the entry to a great House, called Cold
Harborough, the Quire of late being fallen down, is now again at length, in the
year 1594. by the Parishioners new builded.

Touching this Cold Harborough, I find, that in thirteenth of Edward the
second, Sir John Abel, Knight, demised, or let unto Henry Stow, Draper, all
that his Capital Message, called the Cold Harborough, in the Parish of All
Saints ad fanum, and all the pu^tenances within the Gate, with the Key which
Rob. Hartford Citizen, Son to W. Hartford, had, and ought, and the foresaid
Rob. paid for it Rent, 335. the year. This To. Hartford being owner thereof, as
also of other Lands in Surrey, deceasing without issue Male, left two Daughters
his Co-heires, to wit, Idonia, married to Sir Ralph Biggot, and Maude married
to Sir Stephen Cosenton Knights, between whom the said House and Lands were
parted. After the which Io. Bigot Son to the said Sir Ralph, and Sir John
Cosent^n, did ^ell their Moyeties of Cold Harborough unto John Poultney, Son
of Adam Poultney, the 8th of Edward the 3d. This Sir John Poultney dwelling in
this House, and being four times Mayor, the said House took the name of
Poultneys Inn; notwithstanding this, Sir John Poultney, the 21. of Edward the
3d, by his Charter gave and confirmed to Humphrey de Bohune, Earl of Hereford,
and Essex, his whole Tenement, called Cold Harborough, with all the Tenements
and Key adjoining, and appurtenances sometime pertaining to Robert de Hereford,
on the way called Hay-wharf Lane, etc. for one Rose at Midsommer, to him and
his Heirs, for all services, if the same were demanded, This Sir John Poultney
deceased 1349. and left issue, by Margaret his Wife, William Poultney, who dyed
without issue; and Margaret his Mother was married to Sir Nicholas Lovel Knight
etc. Philip St. Clear, gave two Messuages, pertaining to this Cold Harbrough,
in the Ropery, toward the enlarging of the Parish Church, and Churchyard of
Al-Saints, called the less, in the 20. of Richard the second.

In the year 1397. the 21. of Richard the 2d. John Holland, Earl of Huntington,
was lodged there, and Richard the second his Brother, dined with him, it was
then counted a right fair and stately house; But in the next year following, I
find, that Edmund, Earl of Cambridge, was there lodged, notwithstanding, the
said house still retained the name of Poul^neys Inn, in the Reign of Henry the
sixth, the 26 of his Reign. It belonged since to H. Holland, Duke of Excester,
and he was lodged there, in the year 1472. In the year 1485. Richard the third,
by his Letters Patents, granted and gave to John VVrith, alias Garter,
principal King of Arms of English men, and to the rest of the Kings Heralds,
and Pursevants of Arms, all that Message, with the appurtenances called Cold
Harber, in the Parish of Al-Saints the little in London, and their Successors
for ever, Dated at Westminster, the second of March, Anno regni sui primo,
without fine or fee. How the said Heralds departed therewith, I have not read;
^ut in the Reign of Henry the eighth, the Bishop of Durhams house near Charing
Cross, being taken into the Kings hand, Cuthbert Tunstall, Bishop of Durham,
was lodged in this Cold Harber; since the which time it has belonged to the
Earls of Shrewsbury, by composition, (as is supposed) from the said Cuthbert
Tunstall. The last decea^ed Ear^ took it down, and in place thereof, builded a
great number of ^mall Tenements, now letten out for great Rents, to people of
all sorts.

Then is the Dyers-hall, which Company was made a Brotherhood and a Guild, in
the fourth Henry the sixth, and appointed to consist o^ a Guardian, or Warden,
and a Communalty, the twelvth of Edward the fourth. Then be there diverse large
Brew-houses, and others, till you come to Ebgate Lane, where that Ward ends
in the East; On the North side of Thames Street, be diverse Lanes also, the
first is at the South end of Elbow Lane, before spoken of, West from Downgate,
over against Greenwich-lane, then be diverse fair Houses for Merchants, and
others all along that side; The next Lane East from Down^gate, is called
Bush-lane, which turns up to Candlewick-street, and is of Down-gate Ward.
Next is Suffolk, lane, likewise turning up to Candlewick-street, in this Lane
is one notable Grammar School, founded in the year 1561. by the Master,
Wardens, and Assistants of the Marchant-Taylors, in the Parish of St. Lawrence
Poultney, Richard Hills, sometimes Master of that Company, having before given
500 l. toward the purchase of an House, called the Manor of the Rose, sometime
belonging to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein the said School is kept.

Then is there one other Lane, which turns up to St. Lawrence-hill, and to
the South west Corner of St. Lawrence Churchyard, then another Lane, called
Poultney-lane, that goes up of this Ward to the South-East corner of St.
Lawrence Churchyard, and so down again, and to the West corner of St. Martin
Orgar lane, and over against Ebgate-lane; and this is all of Downgate-vvard,
the thirteenth in number, lying East from the Watercourse of VVallbrooke, and
hat hnot any one House on the West side of the said Brook.

This Dowgate ward is more considerable then others, in diverse things; for it
has more Halls then any other; it has also the Great Hans, or the Teutonique
Guild, called now the Stil-yard. Mr. John Robinson, who has his House in
Milk-street, is lately made the Alderman of this Ward, a generous, discreet,
and worthy Gentleman, being of the Company of the Turkey, or Levantine
Merchants.

Of the Fourteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Vintry
Ward.
THe Wards spoken of hitherto may besaid to lie on the East. Now I am to treat
of the other Ward^ twelve in number, all lying on the West side of the course
of Wallbrook, and first of the Vintry Ward, so called of Vintners, and of the
Vintry, a part of the Bank of the River of Thames, where the Merchants of
Bourdeaux craned their Wines out of Lighters, and other Vessels, and there
landed and made sale of them, within forty days after; until the twenty eighth
of Edward the first, at which time the said Merchants complained, that they
could not fell their Wines, paying poundage, neither hire Houses or Cellars to
lay them in: and it was redressed by virtue of the Kings Writ, directed to the
Mayor and Sheriffs of London, dated at Carlaveroke or Carlisle, since the which
time, many fair and large houses (with Vaults and Cellars for stowage of Wines
and lodging of Bordeaux Merchants) have been builded, in place where before
time were Cooks houses:* for F^tz Stephen, in the Reign of Henry the second,
writes, that upon the Rivers side, between the Wine in Ships, and the Wine to
be sold in Taverns, was a common Cooks row, etc. as in another place I have set
down. Whereby it appears, that in those days, (and till of late times) every
man lived according to his own professed Trade, not any one interrupting
another* The Cooks dressed meat, and sold no Wine; and the Taverner sold Wine,
but dressed ^o meat for sale, etc.

This Ward begins in the East, at the West end of Downgate Ward, at the
Watercourse of Walbrook, which parts them, to wit, at Granthams Lane on the
Thames side, and at Elbow-Lane on the Lands side, it runs along in Thames
street West, some three houses beyond the Old Swan a Brew House; and on the
Land side, some three Houses West, beyond Saint James at Garlic Hithe.

In breadth, this Ward stretches from the Vintry North, to the Wall of the
West gate of the Tower Royal, the other North part is of Cordwainer-street
Ward. Out of this Royal street by the South gate of Tower Royal, runs a
small street East to St. John's upon Walbrook, which street is called
Horseshooe-Bridge, of such a Bridge sometime over the Brook there, which is now
vaulted over, and pav^d.

Then from the South gate West, runs one other street, called Knight-riders
street, by Saint Thomas Apostles Church, on the North side, and Wr^^gwren Lare,
by the said Church, at the West end thereof, and to the East end of Trinity
Church in the said Knight-riders street, where this Ward ends, on that South
side the street; but on the North side it runs no farther than the corner
against the new builded Tavern, and other Houses, in a plot of ground where
sometime stood Ormond place; yet have ye one other Lane, lower down in
Royall-street, stretching forth from over against Saint Michaels Church, to and
by the North side of Saint James Church by Garlic Hithe, this is called,
Kerion Lane; and thus much for the bounds of the Vintry Ward. Now on the Thames
side, West from Granthams Lane, have ye Herbert Lane, or Brickles Lane, so
called of John Brickles, sometimes owner thereof.

Then is Simpsons Lane, of one Simpson; or Emperors head Lane, of such a Sign:
then the Three Cranes Lane, so called, not only of a Sign of three Cranes at a
Tavern door, but rather of three strong Cranes of Timber placed on the Vintry
Wharf, by the Thames side, to Crane up Wines there as is aforesaid; this Lane
wa^ of old time, to wit, the ninth of Richard the second, called the Painted
Tavern Lane, of the Tavern being painted.

Then next over against St. Martins Church, is a large House builded of Stone
and Timber, with Vaults for the stowage of Wines, and is called the Vintry;
There dwelled John Gisers Vintner, Mayor of London, and Constable of the Tower;
and then was Henry Picard, Vintner, Mayor; In this house Henry Picard feasted
four Kings in one day, as is showed before.

Then next is Vanners Lane, so called of Vanner that was owner thereof; it is
now called Church Lane, of the coming up from St. Martins Church.

Next is Proad-Lane, for that the same is broader for the passage of Carts from
the Vintry Wharf, than be the other Lanes. At the Northwest corner of this
Lane, is the Parish Clerks Hall, by them purchased, since they lost their old
Hall in Bishopsgate-street. Next is Spittle-Lane, of old time so called, since
Stodies-Lane, of the owner thereof named Stodie; Sir John Stodie, Vintner and
Mayor in the year 1357 gave it, with all the Quadrant wherein Vintners Hall now
stands, with the Tenements round about, unto the Vintners.

The Vintners builded for themselves a fair Hall, and also thirteen Almshouses
there, for thirteen poor people, which are kept of Charity Rent-free.

The Vintners in London, were (of old time) called Merchant Vintners of
Gascoyne, and so I read them in the Records of Edward the second, the eleventh
year, and Edward the third the ninth year; they were as well Englishmen as
strangers born beyond the Seas, but then subjects to the King of England, great
Bordeaux Merchants of Gascoyne and French Wines, diverse of them were Mayors of
this City; namely, John Adrian Vintner, Reignold at Conduit, John Oxenford,
Henry Picard that feasted the Kings of England, France, Scotl and, and Cypres;
John Stodie, that gave Stodies Lane to the Vintners, which four last named,
were Mayors in the Reign of Edward the third, and yet Gascoyne Wines were then
to be sold at London, not above fourpence, nor Rhenish Wines above six pence
the Gallon.

I read of Sweet Wines, that in the fiftieth of Edward the third, John Peachie,
Fishmonger was accused of, for that he procured a License for the only sale of
them in London, which he endeavored to justify by Law, yet he was imprisoned
and fined.

More I read, that in the sixth of Henry the sixth, the Lombards corrupted
their Sweet Wines; when knowledge thereof came to John Raynwel Mayor of London,
he (in diverse places of the City) commanded the heads of the Buts and other
Vessels in the open streets, to be broken, to the number of a hundred and
fifty, so that the liquour running forth, passed through the City like a stream
of rain water, in the sight of all the people, from whence there issued a most
loathsome savor.

I read in the Reign of Henry the seventh, that no Sweet VVines were brought
into this Realm but Malmsyes, by the Longobards, paying to the King for his
License, six shillings eight pence of every Butt, besides twelve pence for
Bottellage.

In those days Malmsey was not to be sold above three halfpence the pint; For
proof whereof, it appears in the Church of St. Andrew Under-shaft that in the
year 1547, I. G. and S. K. then Churchwardens, for eighty pints of Malmsey
spent in the Church, after one penny half penny the pint, paid at the years end
for the same ten shillings.

Moreover, no Sacks were sold, but Rumney, and that for Medicine more than for
drink; but now many kinds of Sacks are known and used. And so much for Wines.

I read further that in the Reign of Henry the fourth, the young Prince Henry,
T. Duke of Clarence, I. Duke of Bedford, and Humphrey Duke of Gloucester the
Kings sons, came to Supper amongst the Merchants of London, in the Vintry^ in
the House of Jews John a Briton.

The successors of those Vintners and Wine-drawers, that retailed by the
Gallons, Pottel, quart, and pint, were all incorporated by the name of
Wine-tunners, in the Reign of Edward the third, and confirmed the fifteenth of
Henry the sixth.

Next is Palmers Lane, now called, Anchors Lane, the Plummers have their Hall
there, but are Tenants to the Vintners.

Then is Worcester House, sometimes belonging to the Earls of Worcester, now
divided into many Tenaments; The Fruiterers have there Hall there.

On the Land side, is the Royal street, and Pater noster Lane, I think of old
time called the Arches, for I read, that Robert de Suffolk, gave to Walter
Darford, his Tenement with the apurtenance, in the Lane called Les Arches, in
the Parish of Saint Michael de Pater noster Church, between the Wall of the
field called Winchester field on the East, and the same Lane on the West, etc.

More, there was a stone House called Stoda de Winton, juxta Stodum Bridge,
which in that Lane was over Walbrook water.

Then is the fair Parish Church of Saint Michael, called Pater noster Church,
in the Royal street; This Church was new builded, and made a College of S.
Spirit, and S. Mary, founded by Richard VVhittington, Mercer, four times Mayor,
for a Master, four Fellows, Masters of Art, Clerks, Conducts, Chorists, etc.
and an Almshouse, called Gods house or Hospital, for thirteen poor men, one of
them to be Tutor, and to have sixteen pence the week, the other twelve, each of
them to have fourteen pence the week for ever, with other necessary provision,
an Hutch with three Locks, with a common Seal, etc.

The License for this foundation was granted by King Henry the fourth, the
eleventh of his Reign, and in the twelfth of the same Kings reign, the Mayor
and the Communalty of London, granted to Richard VVhittington, a vacant piece
of ground thereon, to build his College in the Royal; all which was confirmed
by Henry the sixth the third of his Reign, to John Coventry, Jenkin Carpenter,
and William Grove, Executors to to Richard Whittington.

This foundation was again confirmed by Parliament, the tenth of Henry the
sixth, and was suppressed by the Statute of Edward the sixth. The Almshouses,
with the poor men, do remain, and are paid by the Mercers.

This Richard VVhittington was (in this Church) three times buried, first, by
his Executors, under a fair Monument; then, in the Reign of Edward the sixth,
the Parson of that Church, thinking some great riches (as he said) to be buried
with him, caused his Monument to be broken, his Body to be spoiled of his
Leaden sheet, and again the second time to be buried; And in the Reign of Queen
Mary, the Parishioners were forced to take him up, and lap him in Lead, as
before, to bury him the third time, and to place his Monuments, or the like,
over him again, which remains still and so he rested.

Among others, Sir Thomas Tanke Knight of the Garter born in Almain, a great
Martial man, lies buried there.

At the upper end of this street, is the Tower Royal, whereof that street
takes name; This Tower and great place was so called, of pertaining to the
Kings of this Realm, but by whom the same was first builded, or of what
Antiquity continued, it does not appear, more than that in the Reign of King
Edward the first, the second, fourth, and seventh year, it was the Tenement of
Simon Beawmes; Also that in the thirty sixth of Edward the third the same was
called the Royal, in the Parish of St. Michael de Pater noster, and that in the
three and fortieth of his Reign, he gave it by the name of his Inn, called the
Royal, in his City of London, in value twenty pounds by year, unto his
College of Saint Stephen at Westminster: Notwithstanding, in the Reign of
Richard the second, it was called the Queens Wardrobe, as appears by this
that follows.

King Richard, having in Smithfield overcome and dispersed the Rebels, He, his
Lords, and all his Company, entered the City of London with great joy, and went
to the Lady Princess his Mother, who was then lodged in the Tower called the
Queens Wardrobe, where she had remained three days and two nights much
affrighted; But when she saw the King her Son, she was greatly rejoiced, Ah
Son, What great sorrow have I suffered for you this day? The King answered and
said, Certainly, Madam, I know it well, but now rej^^ce, and thank God, for I
have this day recovered mine Heritage, and the Realm of England, which I had
near-hand lost.

This Tower seems to have been (at that time) of good defense; for when the
Rebels had beset the Tower of London, and got possession thereof, taking from
thence whom they listed, the Princess being forced to fly, came to this
Tower-Royall, where she was lodged, and remained safe, as ye have heard and it
may be also supposed, that the King himself was at that time lodged there.

I read, that in the year 1386, Lion King of Armony, being chased out of his
Rea^m, by the Tartarians, received innumerable gifts of the King and of his
Nobles, the King then lying in the Royal, where he also granted to the said
King of Armony, a Charter of a thousand pounds by year during his Life; This
for proof may suffice, that Kings of England have been lodged in this Tower,
though the same (afterward) has been neglected, and turned into stabling for
the Kings Horses, and now letten out to diverse men and ^ivided into Tenements.

In Horse-Bridge-street, is the Cutlers Hall, Richard de Wilehale, 1295,
confirmed to Paul Butelar this House, and Edifices, in the Parish of Saint
Michael Pater noster Church, and Saint John upon Walbrook, which sometime
Lawrence Gisers, and his son Peter Gisers did possess, and afterward Hugonis
de Hingham, and lies between the Tenement of the said Richard toward the
South; and the Lane called Horse-shoe-Bridge, toward the North, and between
the way called Pater noster Church on the West, and the course of Walbrooke on
the East, paying yearly one Clove of Gilliflowers at Easter, and to the poor
and Convent of Saint Mary Overy, six shillings. This House sometime belonged to
Simon Dolesly Grocer, and Mayor 1359, They of this Company had (of old time)
three Arts, or sorts of Workmen, to wit, the first were Smiths, Forgers of
Blades, and therefore called Bladers, and diverse of them proved wealthy men, as
namely, Walter Nele Blader; one of the Sheriffs, the twelfth of Edward the
third, Deceased 1352, and was buried in Saint James Garlic Hithe, He lest
Lands to the mending of Highways about London, betwixt Newgate and Wicombe,
Ealdgate and Chelmesford, Bishopsgate and Ware, Southwark and Rochester, etc.
The second were Makers of Hafts, and otherwise Garnishers of Blades. The third
sort were Sheath-makers for Swords, Daggers, and Knives. In the tenth of Henry
the fourth, certain Ordinances we^e made betwixt the Bladers, and the other
Cutlers, and in the fourth of Henry the sixth, they were all three Companies
drawn into one Fraternity, or Brotherhood, by the name of Cutlers.

Then is Knight-riders street, so called (as is supposed) of Knights well
armed' and mounted at the Tower-Royall, riding from thence through the street
West to Creed-Lane, and so out at Ludgate, toward Smithfield, when they were
there to Turney, Just, or otherwise to show activities before the King and
States of the Realm.

In this street is the Parish Church of Saint Thomas Apostles, by Wring-wren
Lane a hansome Church, and in the year 1629, well repaired and fine^y
garnished; but Monuments of antiquity, there are none beyond the Reign of Henry
the eighth, except some Arms in the Windows, as also in the Stone-work, which
some suppose to be of John Barnes Mercer, Mayor of London, in the year 1371, a
great builder thereof. H. Causton Merchant, was a Benefactor and had a Chantry
there about, 1396. T. Roman Mayor 1310, had also a Chantry there 1319. Fitz
Williams also a Benefactor, had a Chantry there. More, Sir William Littlesbury,
alias Horn, (for King Edward the fourth so named him) because he was a most
excellent Winder of an Horn; he was a Salter, and Merchant of the Staple,
Mayor of London in the year 1487, and was buried in this Church, having
appointed (by his Testament) the Bells to be changed for four new Bells of good
tune and sound; but that was not performed: he gave five hundred Marks toward
the repairing of Highways, between London and Cambridge; his dwelling House,
with a Garden and appurtenances in the said Parish, to be sold, and bestowed in
charitable actions.

His House called the George in Bread-street he gave to the Salters, they to
find a Priest in the said Parish, to have six pounds, thirteen shillings, four
pence the year; to every Preacher at Pauls-Crosse, and at the Spittle, four
pence for ever; to the Prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, Marshalsey, and
King's Bench, in Victuals, ten shillings at Christmas, and ten shillings at
Easter for ever, which Legacies were not performed.

Among others, there is one Epitaph in Greek in this Church on the Lady Katherine
Killegree.

Then West from the said Church on the same side, was one great Message,
sometime called Ipres Inn of William of Ipres a Flemming, the first Builder
thereof; This William was called out of Flanders, with a number of Flemmings to
the aid of King Stephen, against Maude the Empress, in the the year 1138, and
grew in favor with the said King for his service, so far, that he builded this
House near unto Tower-Royall, in the which Tower it seems the King was then
lodged, as in the heart of the City, for his more safety.

Robert Earl of Gloucester, Brother to the Empress, being taken, was committed
to the Custody of this William, to be kept in the Castle of Rochester, till
King Stephen was also taken, and then the one was delivered in exchange for the
other, and both set free.

This William of Ipres gave Edredes Hith, now called Queens Hith, to the Prior
and Canons of the Holy Trinity in London, he founded the Abbey of Borley in
Kent, etc.

In the first of Henry the second, the said William, withal the other
Flemmings (fearing the indignation of the new King) departed the Land, but it
seems that the said William was shortly called back again, and restored both
to the Kings favor, and to his old possessions here, so that the name and
Family continued long after in this Realm.

On the other side, I read of a Message, called Kinged Hall: King Henry the
eighth, the thirty two of his Reign, gave the same (with four Tenements
adjoining) unto Morgan Phillip, alias Wolf, in the Parish of Saint Thomas
Apostles in London, etc.

Over against Ipres Inn in Knight-Riders street, at the corner toward Saint
James Garlic Hith, was sometime a great House builded with Stone, and called
Ormond place, for that it sometime belonged to the Earls of Ormond.

King Edward the Fourth in the fifth of his Reign, gave to Elizabeth his Wife,
the Manor of Greenwich with the Tower and Park, in the County of Kent.

He also gave this Tenement called Ormond place, with all the appurrenances to
the same, situate in the Parish of Saint Trinity in Knight-Rider street in
London. This House is now taken down, and diverse fair Tenements are builded
there.

Then lower down in Royall-street, is Kerion Lane, of one Kerion sometime
dwelling there. In this Lane be diverse fair Houses for Merchants, and amongst
others is the Glasiers Hall.

At the South corner of Royall-street, is the fair Parish Church of Saint
Martin, called, in the Vintry, sometimes called St. Martin de Beremand Church;
This Church was new builded about the year 1399, by the Executors of Matthew
Columbars, a stranger born, a Bordeaux Merchant of Gascoine and French Wines:
His Arms remain yet in the East Window, and is a Cheveron, between three
Colombins.

Sir John Gisors Mayor, with his Brother, and his Son, lie there buried; He had
a great Mansion House called Gisors Hall, in St. Mildreds Parish in
Bread-street. There are sundry Latin Epiraphs in this Church.

Then is the Parish Church of St. James, called, at Garlic Hith, or Garlic
Hive, for that (of old time) on the River of Thames, near to this Church
Garlic was usually sold; This is a comely Church, whereof Richard Rothing one
of the Sheriffs 1326, is said to be the new builder, and lies buried in the
same: so was Walter Nele Blader, one of the Sheriffs 1337, John of Oxenford,
Vintner, Mayor 1341.

I read in the first of Edward the third, that this John of Oxenford gave to
the Priory of the Holy Trinity in London, two Tofts of Land, one Mill, fifty
Acres of Land, two Acres of Wood, with the appurtenances in Kentish Town, in
value twenty shillings and three pence by year.

The Lady Stanley, the Countess of Hunting^on, and the Lady Harbert, lie
buried in this Church.

Of the Fifteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called Cordwayner
Ward.
WE will pass now from the Vintry to Cordwainer-street Ward, taking that name
of Cordwayners or Shoomakers; Curriours, and Workers of Leather dwelling there;
for it appears in the Records of Henry the sixth, the ninth of his Reign,
that an Order was taken then for Cordwayners and Curriours, in Corney-street
and Sopers Lane. This Ward begins in the East, one the West side of
Walbrooke, and runs West through Budge-row, (a street so called of Budge
Furre, and of Skinners dwelling there) then up by Saint Anthen^es Church,
through Atheling (or Noble-street) as Leyland terms it, commonly called
Wathling-street, to the Red-Lion, a place so called, of a great Lion of Timber
placed there, at a Gate entering a large Court, wherein are diverse fair and
large Shops, well furnished with Broad-cloths, and other Draperies of all sorts
to be sold, and this is the farthest West part of this Ward.

On the South side of this street from Budge-row, lies a Lane turning down by
the West-gate of the Tower Royal, and to the South end of the Stone Wall beyond
the said Gate, which is of this Ward, and is accounted a part of the
Royall-street.

Against this West gate of the Tower-Royall, is one other Lane, that runs
West to Cordwainer-street, and this is called Turn base Lane; on the South side
whereof is a piece of Wring-wren-Lane, to the North-west corner of Saint Thomas
Church the Apostle. Then again out of the High Street called Wathling, is one
other street, which runs thwart the same, and this is Cordwayner street,
whereof the whole Ward takes name.

This street begins by West-cheap, and Saint Mary Bow Church is the head
thereof on the West side, and it runs down South, through that part which of
latter time was called Hosier Lane, now Bow Lane; and then by the West end of
Aldermary Church to the new builded Houses, in place of Ormond House, and so to
Garlic hill, or Hith, to St. James Church.

The upper part of this street toward Cheap, was called Hosier Lane, of
Hosiers dwelling there in place of Shoomakers; but now those Hosiers being worn
out by men of other Trades, (as the Hosiers had worn out the Shoomakers) the
same is called Bow-Lane, of Bow Church.

On the West side of Cordwainer-street, is Basing-lane, right over against
Turnbase-lane, This Basing-lane, West to the back gate of the Red Lion, in
Wathling-street, is of this Cordwainer-street Ward.

Now again on the North side of this high street, is Budge-row: by the East end
of St. Anthonies Church, have ye St. Sithes Lane, so called of St. Sithes
Church, (which stands against the North end of that Lane) and this is wholly
of Cordwainer-street Ward; also the South side of Needlers lane, which reaches
from the North end of St. Sithes lane, then west from St. Anthonies Church, is
the South end of Sopers lane, which lane took that name, not of Sope-making, as
some have supposed, but of Alen le Sopar, in the ninth of Edward the second;
nor can we read of Sope-making in this City, till within this hundred and fifty
years, that John Lamb, dwelling in Grasse-street, set up a boiling house; for
this City (in former time) was served of white Soap in hard Cakes (called
Castle-Soap, and other) from beyond the Seas, and of gray Soap, speckled with
white, very sweet and good, from Bristow, sold here for a penny the pound, and
never above penny farthing; and black Soap for an halfpeny the pound.

Then in Bow-lane (as they now call it) is Goose-lane, by Bow-Church; Will^am
Essex, Mercer, had Tenements there, in the six and twentieth of Edward the
third.

Then from the South end of Bow-lane, up Wathling-street, till over against the
Red Lion, are the bounds of Cordwainer-street Ward.

Then is there a fair Parish in Budge-row, called St. Anthonies at first, and
now St. Antlins. Sir Thomas Knowles Lord Mayor of London, lies buried there,
who repaired, and was a great Benefactor to that Church, upon whom is this
Epitaph, Here lies graven under this Stone,
Thomas Knowles, both flesh and bone, etc.


Next on the South side of Budge-row, by the West corner thereof, and on the
East side of Cordwainer-street, is one other fair Church, called Aldermary
Church, because the same was very old, and elder then any Church of St. Mary in
the City; till of late years, the foundation of a very fair new Church, was
laid there by Henry Keeble, Grocer, and Mayor, who deceased 1518. and was there
buried in a Vault, by him prepared, with a fair Monument raised over him, on
the North side of the Q^ire, now destroyed and gone: he gave by his Testament,
a thousand pound toward the building up of that Church; and yet was not
permitted a resting place for his bones there afterward. Richard Chawcer
Vintner, thought to be the Father of Ieffrey Chawcer the Poet, was a great
Benefactor to this Church.

At the upper end of Hosier-lane, toward VVest-Cheape, is the fair Parish
Church of St. Mary Bow; this Church in the Reign of William the Conqueror,
being the first in this City, builded on Arches of Stone, was therefore called
New Mary Church, of St. Mary de Arcubus, orle Bow, in West Cheaping; As
Stratford Bridge, being the first builded (by Matilda, the Queen, Wife to
Henry the first) with Arches of Stone was called Stratfordle Bow; which names,
to the said Church and Bridge, remain till this day; the Court of the Arches is
kept in this Church, and takes name of the place, not the place of the Court;
but of what Antiquity, or continuation that Court has there continued, it is
uncertain.

This Church is of Cordwainer-street, and for diverse accidents happening there,
has bin made more famous than any other Parish Church of the whole City, or
Suburbs.

First we read, that in the year 1090, and the third of William Rufus, by
tempest of vvin^, the roof of the Church of St. Mary Bow in Cheap, was
overturned, wherewith some persons were slain, and four of the Rafters of six
and twenty foot in length, with such violence were pitched in the ground of the
high street, that scantly four foot of them remained above ground, which were
fain to be cut even with the ground, because they could not be plucked out; for
the City of London was not then paved, but a Moorish ground.

In the year 1196. William Fitz Osbert, a seditious Traitor, took the Steeple
of Bow, and fortified it with Munitions and victuals, but it was assaulted, and
VVilllam with his Accomplices, were taken (though without bloodshed) for he was
forced by fire and smoke to forsake the Church, and then being by the Judges
condemned, he was by the heels drawn to the Elmes in Smithfield, and there
hanged with nine of his fellows, where because his favorers came not to
deliver him, he forsook Mary's Son, (as he termed Christ our Savior) and
called upon the Devil to help and deliver him: such was the end of this
deceiver, a man of an evil life, a secret murderer, a filthy fornicator, a
keep^r o^ Concubines, and (amongst other his detestable facts) a false accuser
of his elder Brother, who had (in his youth) brought him up in learning, and
done many things for his preferment.

In the year 1271. a great part of the Church of Bow fell down, and slew many
people, men and women.

In the year 1284, the thirteenth of Edward the first, Lawrence Ducket,
Goldsmith, having grievously wounded one Ralph Crepin in West Cheap, fled into
Bow-Church, into the which (in the night time) entered certain evil persons,
friends unto the said Ralph, and slew the said Laurence, lying in the Steeple,
and then hanged him up, placing him so by the Window, as if he had hanged
himself, and so was it found by Inquisition; for the which fact, Lawrence
Ducket being drawn by the feet, was buried in a ditch without the City; but
shortly after (by relation of a Boy, who lay with the said Lawrence, at the
time of his death, and had hid him there for fear) the truth of the matter was
disclosed; for the which cause, Jordan Good-Cheape, Ralph Crepin, Gilbert
Clarke, and Ieffrey Clarke, were attainted, and a certain Woman named Alice,
that was chief causer of the said mischief, was burned, and to the number of
sixteen men, were drawn and hanged, besides others that, being richer, after
long imprisonment, were hanged by the purse.

The Church was interdicted, the Doors and Windows were stopped up with Thorns
for a while, but Lawrence was taken up, and honestly buried in the Churchyard
afterward.

The Parish Church of St. Mary Bow, by means of incroachment, and building of
Houses, wanting room in their Churchyard, for burial of the Dead, John Rotham,
or Rodham, Citizen and Tailor, by his Testament dated the year 1465. gave to
the Parson and Churchwardens, a certain Garden in Hosier-lane, to be a
Churchyard, which so continued near a hundred years, but now is builded on,
and is a private man's house. The old Steeple of this Church, was by little and
little re-edified, and new builded up, at the least so much as was fallen down,
many men giving sums of money to the furtherance thereof, so that at length, to
wit, in the year 1469, it was ordained by a Common Council, that the Bow Bell
should be nightly rung at nine of the Clock.

Shortly after, John Done Mercer, by his Testament dated 1472, according to
the trust of Reginald Longdon, gave to the Parson and Churchwardens of St.
Mary Bow two Tenements, with the appurtenances, since made into one, in
Hosierlane, then so called, to the maintenance of Bow Bell, the same to be rung
as aforesaid, and other things to be observed, as by the Will appears.

The Arches or Bows thereupon with the Lanthorns five in number, to wit, one
at each Corner, and one on the top in the middle upon the Arches, were also
afterward finished of Stone, brought from Cane in Normandy, delivered at the
Customers Key, for four shillings eight pence the Tun 1515, and 1516, William
Copland being Churchwarden. It is said that this Copland gave the great Bell,
which made the fifth in the Ring, to be rung nightly at nine of the Clock: This
Bell was first rung (as a Knell) at the Burial of the same Copland; It
appears, that the Lanthorns on the top of this Steeple, were meant to have
bin glazed, and lights in them placed nightly in the Winter, whereby Travelers
to the City might have the better sight thereof, and not to miss of their
ways.

In this Parish also was a Grammar School, by commandment of King Henry the
sixth, which School was (of old time) kept in an house for that purpose
prepared in the Churchyard; But that School being decayed, as others about
this City, the School-house was let out for Rent, in the Reign of Henry the
8th, for four shillings the year, a Cellar for two shillings the year, and two
Vaults under the Church, for 15 s. both.

There are Monuments of diverse Citizens of note in this Church, but most of
them much defaced, and mouldred away.

Without the North side of this Church of St. Mary Bow, toward West-Cheape,
stands one fair building of Stone, called in Record Sildam, a shed which
greatly darkneth the said Church; for by means thereof, all the Windows and
doors on that side, are stopped up; King Edward the third, upon occasion, as
shall be showed in the Ward of Cheap, caused this side or shed to be made, and
strongly to be builded of Stone for himself, the Queen, and other States, to
stand there to behold the Justings, and other shows at their pleasures; And
this House (for long time after) served to that use, namely, in the Reign of
Edward the third, and Richard the second; but in the year 1410. Henry the
fourth, in the twelfth of his Reign, confirmed the said shed or building, to
Stephen Spilman, William Marchford, and John Wattle, Mercers, by the name of
one new Sildain, Shed or Building, with Shops, Cellars, and Edifices,
whatsoever appertaining, called Crounsild, or Tamersild, situate in the
Mercety of West-Cheape, and in the Parish of St. Mary de Arcubus in London, etc.

Notwithstanding which grant, the Kings of England, and other great Estates, as
well of foreign Countries repairing to this Realm, as Inhabitants of the same,
have usually repaired to this place, therein to behold the shows of this City,
passing through West-Cheape; namely, the great Watches accustomed in the night,
on the Even of St. John Baptist, and St. Peter at Midsommer; the Examples
whereof were overlong to recite, wherefore let it suffice briefly to rouch one.

In the year 1510, on St. John's Eve at night, King Henry the eight, came to
this place, then called the King's Head in Cheap, in the Livery of a Yeoman of
the Guard, with an Halberd on his shoulder, and there beholding the Watch,
departed privily, when the Watch was done; and was not known to any, but whom
it pleased him; But on Saint Peter's night next following, He and the Queen came
Royally riding to the said place, and there with their Nobles, beheld the Watch
of the City, and returned in the morning.

Of the Sixteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Cheape-Ward.
WE enter now into the Center of the City, which is Cheap-Ward, taking name of
the Market there kept, called West Cheaping; which Ward, as a River, as Mr.
Stow says, that has three heads, and running along to the uttermost of his
bounds, issues out on the sides into little streams: so this Ward, beginning
on the Course of Wallbrook, and is not the meanest of the Wards, (if for no
other cause, yet because it is nearest to the heart of the City) has his
beginning on the East from three places. The High street of the Poultrey, the
lower end of Buckles bury, and the nether part of the Venell, or entry into
Scalding Alley, and so running along, as far as unto the North-East corner of
Bow-lane on the South side, and from thence into Bow-lane on the East side,
until ye come to the Channel over against the Cellardoor under the Church; and
then, on the North side of Cheap up to the Standard, stretching it self into
diverse Lanes and pieces, on the right hand, and on the left hand, as it comes
along.

First, for the High street of the Poultrey (which is the main body of this
Ward:) on the South side thereof toward the East, this Ward begins in the
way going down to St. Mary Wooll-Church.

Now for Antiquities, and things worthy of memory in Cheap-Ward.

First, in the main Body of this Ward, that is, the Poultry, stands the
hansome little Church, that bears the name of St. Mildred in the Poultry the
Virgin, which name was given surely for distinction not for superstition; for
so was the Custom of the Kingdom (and yet is) in building their things for the
service of God, that the Founders called them by the name of some Apostle,
Saint, Martyr, or Confessor, as best liked their own conceit, at the present
time, to distinguish them from others.

Who this Mildred was, whether she was the Eldest Daughter of Merwaldus, King
of the VVest-Mercians, as some think, or that she was Daughter of Ethelbert,
King of Kent, one of the founders of Paul's Church, it is uncertain: neither is
it much material, but it is probable, that she was some holy and devout Maid,
which the People of that Age held to be a Saint afterward in Heaven.

In what years this Church was first erected, or who was the first Founder of
it, we find not; but it appears by some ancient Evidences of the said Church,
that from the beginning it had not so much spare ground about it, as to make a
Churchyard of, until in the year of our Lord God 1420, and the 8th of King
Henry the fifth, Thomas Morsted Esquire, and Surgeon to the Kings, Henry the
fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth. (And afterward, in Anno Dom.
1436. was Sheriff and Alderman of London) gave unto the Church a parcel of
ground, lying between his dwelling house and the said Church (and adjoining
unto the said Church toward the North) to make a Churchyard of, for the burial
of their Dead, containing in length, from the Course of VVallbrook, toward the
West, forty five foot, and in breadth, from the Church toward the North, thirty
five foot.

Within short time after, some body, of Religious and Charitable disposition,
erected upon the sides of the said Churchyard, but upon Posts and Pillars,
with Cloisters underneath, toward the West, a Parsonage House, or Mansion, and
free dwelling of the Ministers and Rectors of the said Church, and toward the
East four Chambers, then called the Priests Chambers, now converted into a
Tenement or dwelling House, and demised for yearly Rent; but the Churchyard is
much abridged, and of late foully defaced; and the lights of the said Parsonage
hindered by additions of pieces, to the said ancient Chambers, which ought not
to be: In this ancient Church, some Citizens of note lie buried.

Some few Houses West from this Parish Church of St. Mildred, is a Prisonhouse,
pertaining to one of the Sheriffs of London, and is called the Counter in the
Poultry: This has bin there kept, and continued time out of mind; for I have
not read of the Original thereof: West from this Counter, was a proper Chapel,
called of Corpus Christi, and St. Mary, at Cony-hope lane end, in the Parish of
the said Mildred, founded by one named Iorivirunnes, a Citizen of London, in
the Reign of Edward the third; in which Chapel was a Guild, or Fraternity,
that might dispend in Lands better then twenty pounds by year; it was
suppressed by Henry the eighth, and purchased by one Thomas Hobson,
Haberdasher: he turned this Chapel into a fair Warehouse, and Shops toward
the street, with fair Lodgings over them.

Then is Cony-hope lane, of old time so called, of a sign of three Coneys,
which hung over a Poulterers Stall at the Lanes end; within this Lane stands
the Grocers Hall, which Company being of old time called Pepperers, were first
incorporated by the name of Grocers, in the year 1345, at which time, they
elected for Cus^os, or Guardian of their Fraternity, Richard Oswin, and Lawrence
Hallwell, and twenty Brethren were then taken in, to be of their Society.

In the year 1411, the Custos or Guardian, and the Brethren of this Company,
purchased of the Lord Robert Fitzwaters, one Plot of ground, with the building
thereupon, in the said Cony-hope lane, for three hundred twenty Marks, and then
laid their foundation of their new Common Hall.

About the year 1429, the Grocers had License to purchase five hundred Marks
Land; since the which time, near adjoining unto the Grocers Hall, the said
Company have builded seven proper Houses, for seven aged poor, Almspeople;
Thomas Knowles Grocer and Mayor, gave his Tenement in St. Anthonies Churchyard
to the Grocers, toward the relief of the poor Brethren in that Company: Also
Henry Keeble, Grocer and Mayor, gave to the seven Almspeople, six pence weekly
for ever; which Pension is now increased by the Masters, to some of them two
shillings a piece weekly, and to some of them less, etc.

Henry Ady Grocer, 1563, gave a thousand Marks to the Grocers to purchase
Lands, and Sir Henry Pechy, Knight Banneret, free of that Company, gave them
five hundred pounds to certain uses: he builded Almshouses at Luding stone in
Kent, and was there buried.

West from this Cony-hope Lane, is the Old Jury, whereof some portion is of
Cheap Ward; at the South end of this Lane, is the Parish Church of St. Mary
Cole-Church, named of one Cole, that builded it: this Church is builded upon a
Vault above ground, so that men are forced to go to ascend up thereunto, by
certain steps, I find no Monuments of this Church more, than that Henry the
fourth granted License to William Marshal, and others, to found a Brotherhood
of Saint Katherine therein, because Thomas Becket and St. Edmond, the Arch
Bishop were baptized there.

The Old Jury has had always Citizens of quality, and fair large Houses, as
there is now Gurney-house, where Alderman Friderique lives, a very worthy
Gentleman.

There is also another ancient fair House of Thomas Bowyer, and another of Mr.
Bonnel, worthy and wealthy brave Merchants.

We read of Bordhangli-lane, to be of that Parish; and thus much for the North
side of the Poultry. The South side of the said Poultry, beginning on the Bank
of the said Brook, over against the Parish Church of St. Mildred passing, up to
the great Conduit, has diverse fair Houses, which were sometimes inhabited by
the Poulterers, but now by Grocers, Haberdashers, and Upholsters.

Concerning other Antiquities there, first is Bucklesbury, so called of a
Manor, and Tenements pertaining to one Buckle who there dwelled, and kept his
Courts; this Manor is supposed to be the great Stone-Building. yet in part
remaining on the South side of the street, which of late time has been called
the Old Barge, of such a sign hanged out, near the Garte thereof; This Manor,
or great House, has of long time bin divided, and letten out into many
Tenements; and it has bin a common Speech, that when Wallbrook did lie open,
Barges were rowed out of the Thames, or towed up so far; and therefore the
place has ever since bin called the Old Barge.

Also, on the North side of this street, directly over against the said
Bucklesbury, was one ancient and strong Tower of Stone; the which Tower, King
Edward the third, in the eighteenth of his Reign, called by the name of the
Kings house, and Cornet Stoure in London, and ^id appoint his Exchange of
money, there to be kept: In the nine and twentieth, he granted it to Fr^idus
Guynysane, and Landus Bardaile, Merchants of Luke, for twenty pound the year;
And in the three and twentieth, he gave the same Tower to his College, or Free
Chapel of St. Stephen at VVestmister, by the name of Cornet Stoure, at
Bucklesbury in London.

This whole street, called Buckles bury, on both the sides throughout, is
possessed of Grocers, and Apothecaries; toward the West end thereof, on the
South side, breaks out one other short lane, called in Records,
Peneritch-street, it reaches but to St. Sythes lane; and St. Sythes Church, is
the farthest part thereof; for by the West end of the said Church, begins
Needles Lane, which reaches to Sopers Lane, as is aforesaid.

This small Parish Church of St. Sith, has also an addition of Bennet Shorn,
(or Shrog, or Shorehog) for by all these names it has bin called; but the
ancient is Shorn, wherefore it seems to take that name of one Benedict
Shorn, sometime a Citizen and Stock-fishmonger of London, a new Builder,
repairer, or Benefactor thereof, in the year of Edward the second, so that
Shorn is but corruptly called Shrog, and more corruptly Shorehog, Here are
diverse Monuments, and among other the Tomb of Sir Raph V^arren, Knight,
Alderman, twice Lord Mayor of London, and Merchant of the Staple at Callis,
with his two Wives, Anno 1553.

Then in Needlers Lane, have ye the Parish Church of St. Pancrase, a proper
small Church, but diverse rich Parishioners therein, and has had of old time,
many liberal Benefactors; But of late, such as (not regarding the Order taken
by Queen Elizabeth,) the least Bell in their Church being broken, have rather
sold the same for half the value, then put the Parish to charge with new
casting: late experience has proved this to be true, besides the spoil of
Monuments there; This little Church has also some handsome Monuments.

Then is a part of Sopers-lane, turning up to Cheap.

By the assent of Stephen Abunden, Mayor, the Pepperers in Sopers lane, were
admitted sell all such Spices, and other Wares, as Grocers now use to sell,
retaining the old name of Pepperers in Sopers lane, till at length, in the
Reign of Henry the sixth, the same Sopers lane was inhabited by Cordwayners and
Curriers, after that the Pepperers or Grocers had seated themselves in a more
open street, to wit, in Buckles bury, where they now remain: Thus much for the
South Wing of Cheap-Ward.

At the West end of this Poultry, and also of Bucklers bury, begins the
large street of West Cheaping, a Market place so called, which street
siretcheth West, till ye come to the little Conduit by Paul's Gate, but not all
of Cheap Ward. In the East part of this street stands the Great Conduit, of
Sweetwater, conveyed by Pipes of Lead, under ground from Paddington, for
service of this City, castellated with stone, and Cisterned in Lead, about the
year 1285, and again new builded and enlarged by Thomas Ilam one of the
Sheriffs, 1479.

About the midst of this street is the Standard in Cheap: of what Antiquity,
the first foundation is, I have not read. But Henry the sixth by his Patent,
dated at Windsor the one and twentieth of his Reign (which Patent, was
confirmed by Parliament, 1442) granted License to Thomas Knolles, John Chichle,
and other Executers to John Wells, Grocer, sometime Mayor of London, with his
Goods to make new the highway, which leads from the City of London, toward
the place of Westminster, before and nigh the Manor of Savoy, parcel of the
Dutchey of Lancaster, a way then very ruinous, and the Pavement broken, to the
hurt and mischi^f of the Subjects, which old Pavement, then remaining in that
way, within the length of five hundred foot, and all the breadth of the same.
before and nigh the fire of the Manner aforesaid, they were to break up, and
with Stone, Gravel, and other stuff, make one other good and sufficient way
for the Commodity of the Subjects; And further, that the Standard in Cheap,
where diverse Executions of the Law before time had bin performed; which
Standard at that pre^ent was very ruinous with age; in which there was a Cond
it, should be taken down, and another competent Standard of Stone; together
with a Conduit in the same, of new, strongly to be builded, for the Commodity
and honor of the City, with the goods of their Testator, without interruption
etc.

Of Executions at the Standard in Cheap, we read, that in the year 1293. three
men had their right hands smitten off there, for rescuing of a Prisoner,
arrested by an Officer of the City.

In the year 1326, the Burgesses of London, caused Walter Stapleton, Bishop of
Exceter, Treasurer to Edward the second, and others, to be beheaded at the
Standard in Cheap (but this was by Paul's Gate.)

In the year 1351, the six and twentieth of Edward the third, two Fishmongers
were beheaded at the Standard in Cheap. 1381, wat Tylar beheaded, Richard
Lions, and others, there.

In the year 1^99, Henry the fourth, caused the Blank Charters, made by Richard
the ^econd, to be burnt there.

In the year 1450, Jack Cade, Captain of the Kentish Rebels, beheaded the Lord
Say there.

In the year 1461, John Davy had his hand stricken off there, because he had
stricken a man before the Judges at Westminster, etc.

Then next is the great Cross in West Cheap, which Cross was there erected
in the year 1290, by Edward the first; upon occasion thus, Queen Elianor his
Wise, dyed at Hardeby (a Town near unto the City of Lincoln) her Body was
brought from thence to Westminster, and the King in memory of her, caused in
every place, where her Body rested by the way, a stately Cross of Stone to be
erecte^, with the Queens Image, and Arms upon it, as at Grantham, VVoborn,
Northampton, Stony-stratford Dunstable, St. Albones, Waltham, VVest-Cheape,
and at Charing, from whence she was conveyed to Westminster, and there buried.

This Cross in VVest-Cheape, being like to those other which remain to this
day; and being by length of time decayed, John Hatherley, Mayor of London,
procured in the year 1441, License of King Henry the sixth, to re-edifie the
same in more beautiful manner, for the honor of the City; and had License
also, to take up two hundred Fodder of Lead, for the building thereof, and of
certain Conduits, and a common Granary. This Cross was then curiously wrought,
at the Charges of diverse Citizens; John Fisher Mercer, gave six hundred Marks
toward it, the same was begun to be set up 1484, and finished 1486, the second
of Henry the seventh: It was, after, gilt over, in the year 1522, against the
coming in of Charles the fifth, Emperor. In the year 1553, against the
Coronation of Queen Anne. New burnished against the Coronation of Edward the
sixth; And again new guilt 1554, against the coming in of King Philip. Since
which time, the said Cross having bin presented by diverse Juries, (or Quests
of Wardmote) to stand in the highway, to the let of carriages (as they
alleged) but could not have it removed; it followed, that in the year 1581,
the twenty one of June, in the night, the lowest Images round about the said
Cross (being of Christ his Resurrection, of the Virgin Mary, King Edward the
Confessor, and such like) were broken, and defaced: Proclamation was made, that
who so would discover the doers, should have forty Crowns, but nothing came to
light: the Image of the blessed Virgin, at that time was robbed of her Son, and
her Arms broken, by which she stayed him on her knees; her whole body was also
haled with Ropes, and left likely to fall; but in the year 1595. was again
fastened and repaired; and in the year next following, a new misshapen Son, as
born out of time, all naked, was laid in her Arms; the other Images remaining,
broke as before. But on the East side of the same Cross, the steps being taken
thence; under the Image of Christ's Resurrection defaced, was set up a curious
wrought Tabernacle of gray Marble, and in the same an Alabaster Image of Diana,
and water conveyed from the Thames, prilling from her naked Breast for a time,
but now decayed.

In the year 1599, the Timber of the Cross at the top, being rotted within the
Lead, the Arms thereof bending, were feared to have fallen, to the harming of
some people; and therefore the whole Body of the Cross, was seasfolded about,
and the top thereof taken down, meaning in place thereof, to have set up a
Pyramid: but some of her Majesty's honorable Counselors, directed their
Letters to Sir Nicholas Mosley, then Mayor, by her Highness express
Commandment concerning the Cross, forthwith to be repaired, and placed again
as it formerly stood, etc. Notwithstanding, the said Cross stood he adless
more then a year after, whereupon the said Counselors in great number, meaning
not any longer to permit the continuance of such a contempt, wrote to William
Rider, then Mayor, requiring him, by virtue of her Highness said former
direction and Commandment, without any further delay, to accomplish her
Majesty's most princely care therein, respecting especially, the Antiquity and
continuance of that Monument, and ancient Ensign of Christianity, etc. dared
the four and twentieth of December, 1600. After this, a Cross of Timber was
framed, set up, covered with Lead, and gilded, the Body of the Cross downward,
cleansed of dust, the Scaffold cartyed thence. About twelve nights following,
the Image of our Lady was again defaced, by plucking off her Crown, and almost
her head, taking from her, her naked Child, and stabbing her in the Breast.

But in the year 1644, during the Reign of the long Parliament, the said
Cross, by an Ordinance thereof, was utterly demolished; and while the thing
was a doing, there was a noise of Trumpets blew all the while. Upon the utter
demolition of this so ancient and visible a Monument, or Ornament of the City
of London as all Forrainers esteemed it, it fortuned, that there was another
new one, popp'd up in Cheap Side, hard by the Standard, viz. a high square
Table of Stone, left in Legacy by one Russel a Porter, and well-minded man,
with this Distichengraven, God bless the Porter who great pains does take,
Rest here, and welcome when thy back does ache.


Thus much for the Cross in West-cheape. Then at the West end of
West-Cheap-street, was sometimes a Cross of Stone called the Old Cross. Ralph
Higden in his Polychronicon says, that Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exceter,
Treasurer to Edward the second, was by the Burgesses of London beheaded at this
Cross, then called the Standard, without the North door of St. Paul's Church;
and so it is noted in other Writers that then lived. This old Cross stood and
remained at the East end of the Parish Church called St. Michael in the corner
by Paul's Gate, near to the North end of the old Exchange, till the year 1390,
the thirteenth of Richard the second, in place of which old Cross then taken
down, the said Church of St. Michael was enlarged, and also a fair
Water-Conduit builded, about the ninth of Henry the sixth.

In the Reign of Edward the third, diverse Justings were made in this street,
betwixt Sopers Lane and the gre^^ Cross, namely, one in the year 1331, about
the one and twentieth of September, as it is obserted by diverse Writers of that
time. In the middle of the City of London, (say they) in a Street called Cheap,
the Stone pa^ement, being covered with sand, that the Horses might not slide,
when they strongly set their feet to the ground, the King held a Tournement
three days together with the Nobility, valiant men of the Realm, and others,
some strange Knights; And to the end the beholders might with the better ease
see the same, there was a wooden Scaffold erected cross the street, like unto
a Tower, wherein Queen Philip and many other Ladies, richly attired, and
assembled from all parts of the Realm, did stand to behold the Justs, but the
higher frame in which the Ladies were placed, brake in sunder, whereby they
were (with some shame) forced to fall down, by reason whereof the Knights, and
such as were underneath, were grievously hurt; wherefore the Queen took great
care to save the Carpenters from punishment, and through her prayers (which she
made upon her Knee^) pacified the King and Council, and thereby purchased great
love of the people. After which time, the King caused a shed to be strongly
made of Stone for himself, the Queen, and other States to stand on, and there
to behold the Justings, and other shows, at their pleasure, by the Church of
St. Mary Bow, as is showed in Cordwayner-street Ward. Thus much for the High
street of Cheap.

Now of the North side of Cheap street and Ward, beginning at the great
Conduit, and by St. Mary Cole Church, where we left; Next thereunto Westward,
is the Mercers Chapel, sometime an Hospital, entitled of St. Thomas of Acon,
or Acars, for a Master and Brethren. Militia Hospitalis etc, says the Record
of Edward the third, the fourteenth year, it was founded by Thomas Fitz
Theobald de Heili, and Agnes his Wife, sister to Thomas Becket, in the Reign of
Henry the second: they gave to the Master and Brethren the Lands with the
appurtenances, that sometimes were Gilbert Beckets, Father to the said Thomas,
in the which he was born, there to make a Church; There was a Charnel, and a
Chapel over it of St. Nicholas and St. Stephen; This Hospital was valued to
dispend two hundred seventy seven pounds, three shillings four pence,
surrendered the thirtieth of Henry the eighth, the one and twentieth of October,
and was since purchased by the Mercers, by means of Sir Richard Gresham, and
was again set open on the Eve of Saint Michael 1541, the three and thirtieth of
Henry the eighth; It is now called the Mercers Chapel, therein is kept a free
Grammar School, as of old time had been accustomed, commanded by Parliament.

In this Chapel there is every Sunday morning throughout the year a Sermon in
the Italian Tongue, beginning about ten a clock.

Here be many Monuments remaining, but more have been defaced; among others,
there is James Butler Earl of Ormond, and Dame Ioane his Countess, 1428.

Before this Hospital toward the street, was builded a fair and beautiful
Chapel arched over with stone, and thereupon the Mercers Hall, a most curious
piece of work, Sir John Allen Mercer, being founder of that Chapel, was there
buried, but since his Tomb is removed thence into the Body of the Hospital:
Church, and his Body-room divided into Shops, are letten our for Rent; These
Mercers were enabled to be a Company, and to purchase Lands to the value of
twenty pound the year, the seventeenth of R^chard the second; they had three
Messuages and Shops in the Parish of Saint Martins Otesw^ch, in the Ward of
Bishopsgate, for the sustentation of the poor, and a Chantry, the two and
twentieth of Richard the second. Henry the fourth in the twelfth of his Reign,
confirmed to Stephen Spilman, W. Marchford and John Watild Mercers, by the name
of one new Sildam, shed, or building, with Shops, Cellars, and Edifices
whatsoever appertaining, called Crownsildes Situate in the Mercery in
West-cheap, in the Parish of St. Mary de Arcubus in London, etc. to be holden
in Burgage, as all the City of London is.

Next beyond the Mercers Chapel, and their Hall, is Ironmonger Lane, so called
of Ironmongers dwelling there.

In this Lane, is the small Parish Church of St. Martin, called Pomary, upon
what occasion I certainly know not; it is supposed to be of Apples growing,
where now Houses are lately builded.

Farther West, is St. Lawrence Lane, so called of St. Lawrence Church, which
stands directly over against the North end thereof. Antiquities in this Lane
I find none other, then that among many fair Houses, there is one large Inn
for receipt of travelers, called Blossoms Inn, but corruptly Bosoms Inn,
and has to Sign St. Lawrence the Deacon, in a Border of Blossoms or Flowers.

Then near to the standard in Cheap, is Hony-lane, being very narrow, and
somewhat dark.

In this Lane, is the small Parish Church called Alhallowes in Hony-Lane; There
be no Monuments in this Church worth the noting. I find that John Norman,
Draper, Mayor 1453, was buried there. He gave to the Drapers his Tenements on
the North side the said Church; they to allow for the Beam light and Lamp,
thirteen shillings four pence yearly, from this Lane to the Standard. And thus
much for Cheap Ward, in the High Street of Cheap, for it stretches no farther.

Now, for the North wing of Cheap Ward, have ye Catte-street, corruptly called
Catteaten-street, which begins at the North end of Ironmong^^ Lane, and
runs to the West end of Saint Lawrence-Church, as is aforeshewed.

On the North side of this street is the Guild Hall, wherein the Courts for the
City are kept, namely, first the Court of Common Counsel, second the Court of
the Lord Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen, third the Court of Hustings,
fourth the Court of Orphans, fifth the two Courts of the Sheriffs ^ixt the
Court of the Wardmote, seventh the Court of Hallmote, eight the Court of
Requests, commonly called the Court of Conscience, nine the Chamberlains Court
for Prentices, and making them free; This Guild Hall, says Robert Fabian, was
began to be builded new, in the year 1411, the twelfth of Henry the fourth, by
Thomas Knowles, then Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen; The same was made,
of a little Cottage, a large and great House, as now it stands toward the
charges whereof, the Companies gave large benevolences; Also offenses of men
were pardoned for sums of money toward this work, extraordinary Fees were
raised, Fines, Amercements, and other things employed, during seven years, with
a Continuation thereof, three years more, all to be employed to this building.

The first year of Henry the sixth, John Coventry and John Carpenter Executors
to Richard Whittington, gave toward the paving of this great Hall twenty
pounds and the next year fifteen pounds more to the said pavement, with hard
Stone of Purb^ck; They also glazed some Windows thereof, and of the Mayors
Court, on every which Window, the Arms of Richard Whittington are placed. The
foundation of the Mayors Court was laid in the third year of the Reign of Henry
the sixth, and of the Porch on the South side of the Mayors Court, in the
fourth of the said King. Then was builded the Mayors Chamber, and the Council
Chamber, with other Rooms above the stairs.

Having here so just occasion, speaking of that former ancient Council Chamber,
which has continued so ever since, I cannot but account it expedient (as in no
place better fitting) to remember the fair and goodly new Council Chamber, a
worthy Act, and an Honor to the City. The said new Council Chamber, with a
fair Room over the same, appointed for a Treasury, wherein to preserve the
Books and Records belonging to the City, and another Room also underneath the
same Chamber, reserved for necessary use and employment, began to be builded
the first week after Easter, in the time of the Majoralty of Sir Thomas
Middleton, Knight, and Alderman, in the year of our Lord 1614, it was fully
finished shortly after Michaelmas 1615, at the la^ter end of the Majoralty of
Sir Thomas Hayes, Knight and Alderman; But the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen his
Brethren, kept their first Court in the said new Council Chamber, on the
seventh day of November, in the year of our Lord 1615, Sir John Iolles Knight
and Alderman, being then Lord Mayor; by whose order and direction, the said
building was performed, from the first beginning thereof, to the final
finishing of the same, amounting to the charge of 1740 l. than which, no money
could be better bestowed, nor more to the Cities credit and renown.

Last of all, a stately Porch en^ring the great Hall, was erected; the front
thereof toward the Stouth, being beautified with Images of Srone.

Now for the Chapel or College of our Lady Mary Magdalene, and of All Saints
by Guild Hall, called London College, we read, that the same was builded about
the year 1299, and that Peter Fanelore, Adam Francis, and Henry Frowick
Citizen, gave one Message with the appurtenances, in the Parish of St. Foster,
to William Brampton Custos of the Chauntry, by them founded in the said
Chapel, with four Chaplains; and one other House in the Parish of St. Giles
without Creplegate, in the seven and twentieth of Edward the third, was given
to them.

Adjoining to this Chapel on the South side, was sometime a fair and large
Library, furnished with Books pertaining to the Guild Hall and College.

These Books (as it is said) were in the Reign of Edward the sixth, sent for by
Edward Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector, with promise to be restored shortly;
Men laded from thence threescore Carts with them, but they were never returned;
This Library was builded by the Executors of R. Whittington, and by W. Bury; on
the other side, it is now lofted through, and made a Storehouse for Clothes,

South-west from this Guild Hall, is the fair Parish Church of St. Lawrence,
called, in the Jury, because (of old time) many Jews inhabited there about;
This Church is fair and large, and has diverse Monuments.

In this Church there was the Shank-bone of a man, and also a Tooth of a very
great bigness, hanged up for show, in Chains of Iron, upon a Pillar of Stone:
the Tooth (being about the bigness of a man's fist) is long since conveyed from
thence; the Thigh or Shank-bone, of five and twenty inches in length by the
Rule, remains yet fastened to a post of Timber, and is not so much to be noted
for the length, as for the thickness, hardness, and strength thereof; for when
it was hanged on the Stone Pillar, it fretted (with moving) the said Pillar,
and was not it self fretted, nor (as seems) is not yet lightened by remaining
dry: but where or when this Bone was first found or discovered, I have not
heard.

Of the Seventeenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called
Colemanstreet Ward.
WE will now stear our course Northward, and look toward London Walls to find
out another Ward, and next to Cheap Ward on the North side thereof, is
Coleman-street Ward, and begins also in the East, on the course of
Wallbrook, in Lothbury, and runs West, (on the South side to the end of
Ironmongers Lane, and on the North side, to the West corner of Basing-Hall
street; On the South side of Lothbury, is the street called the Old Iewry; the
one half, and better, on both sides toward Cheap, is of this Ward.

Antiquities therein to be noted, are these, First, the street of Lothbury,
Lathbery, or Loadbay; This street is possessed (for the most part) by Founders,
that cast Candlesticks, Chasing-dishes, Spice^Mortars, and such like Copper or
Latin works, and do after turn them with the Foot, and not with the Wheel, to
make them smoth and bright, with turning and scrating, (as some do term it)
making a loathsome noise to the by-passers, that have not been used to the
like, and therefore by them disdainedly called Lothbury. On the South side of
this street amongst the Founders be some fair Houses and large, for Merchants;
namely, one that of old time was the Jews Synagogue, which was defaced by the
Citizens of London, after that they had slain seven hundred Jews, and spoiled
the re^due of their goods, in the year 1262, the forty seventh of Henry the
third. And not long after, in the year 1291, King Edward the first banished the
remnant of the Jews out of England, as is before showed.

The Synagogue being so suppressed, certain Friars got possession thereof; For
in the year 1257, (says Matthew Paris) there were seen in London a new Order
of Friars, called De poenitentia Jesus, or Fratres de sacco, because they were
apparrelled in sackcloth, who had their House in London, near unto Aldersgate,
without the gate, and had License of Henry the third, in the four and twentieth
of his Reign, to remove from thence to any other place; and in the fifty sixth,
she gave unto them this Jews Synagogue. After which time Elianor the Queen,
wife to Edward the first, took into her protection, and warranted unto the
Prior and Brethren De poenitentia Jesu Christi, of London, the said Land and
building in Cole-Church street, in the Parish of Saint Olave in the Jury and
St. Margaret in Loathbury, by her granted, with consent of Stephen de Fulborn,
under-Warden of the Bridge-house, and other Brethren of that House, for
threescore Marks of Silver, which they had received of the said Prior and
Brethren of repentance, toward the building of the said Bridge. This Order of
Friars gathered many good Scholars, and multiplied in number exceedingly,
until the Council, of Lions; by the which it was Decreed, that (from that time
forth) there should no more Orders of Begging Friars, be permitted, but only
the four Orders, to wit, the Dominick or Preachers, the Minorites or Gray
Friars, and the Augustines: and so from that time the Begging Friars decreased
and fell to nothing.

Now it fo^lowed, that in the year 1305, Robert Fitzwalter, requested and
obtained of the said King Edward the first, that the same Friars of the Sack,
might assign to the said Robert, their Chapel or Church, of old time, called
the Synagogue of the Jews, near adjoining to the then Mansion house of the
same Robert, which was in place where now stands the Grocers Hall, and the
said Synagogue was at the North Corner of the old Jury, Robert Large, Mercer,
Mayor, in the year 1439, kept his Majoralty in this House, and dwelled there
until his dying day.

This House s^andeth, and is of two Parishes, as opening into Lothbury, of St.
Margarets Parish, and opening into the Old Iewry, of St. Olaves Parish, The
said Robert Large, gave liberally to both these Parishes, but was buried at St.
Ol^ves.

Hugh Clopton, Mercet, Mayor 1492, dwelled in this House, and kept his
Majoralty there: it is now a Tavern, and has to sign a Windmill.

And thus much for this House, sometimes the Jews Synagogue, since an house of
Friars, then a Noble man's House, after that, a Merchants House, wherein
Majoralities have bin kept, and now a Wine-Tavern.

Then is the Old Jewry, a street so called of Jews, sometime dwelling there,
and near adjoining in the Parishes of St. Olave, St. Michael Basing Hall, St.
Martin Ironmonger-lane, St. Lawrence, called the Jewry, and so West to
Wood-street. William Duke of Normandy, first brought them from Roane to inhabit
here.

William Rusus favored them so far, that he swear by Lukes face, his common
Oath, if they could overcome the Christians, he would be one of their Sect.

Henry the second, grievously punished them for corrupting his Coin. Richard
the first forbad Jews, and Women to be present at his Coronation, for fear of
Enchantments; for breaking of which Commandment, many Jews were slain, who
being ass^mbled, to present the King with some gift, one of them was ^^icken by
a Christian, which some unruly people perceiving, fell upon them, beat them to
their houses, and brent them therein, or slew them at their coming out.

Also the Jews at Norwich, St. Edmonds bury, Lincoln, Stanford, and Lyn, were
robbed and spoiled; and at York, to the number of five hundred, besides Women
and Children, entered a Tower of the Castle, proffered money to be in surety of
their lives; but the Christians would not take it; whereupon, they ^^t the
throats of their own Wives and Children, and cast them over the Walls on the
Christian^ heads; and then, entering the Kings Lodging, they burned both the
House and themselves.

King John in the 11th of his Reign, commanded all the Jews, both Men and
Women, to be imprisoned, and grievously punished, because he would have all
their Money; some of them gave all they had, and promised more, to escape so
many kinds of torments; for every one of them, had one of their eyes at the
least plucked o^t. Amongst whom there was one, which being tormented many
ways, would not ransom himself, till the King had caused (every day) one of
his great teeth to be plucked out, by the space of seven days, and then he
gave the King ten thousand Marks of silver; to the end, they should pull out no
more, the said King at that time, spoyl^d the Jews of sixty six thousand Marks.

The 17th of this King, the Barons brake into the Jews Houses, rifled their
Coffers, and with the Stone of their Houses, repaired the Gates and Walls of
London.

King Henry the third, in the 11th of his Reign, granted to Semaine, or
Ballaster, the house of Benomie Mittun the Jew, in the Parish of St. Michael
Bassing-hanghe, in which the said Benomy dwelt, with the fourth part of all his
Land in that Parish, which William Elie held of the Fee of Hugh Nevel, and all
the Land in Colemanstreet, belonging to the said Benomy; and the fourth part of
the Land, in the Parish of St. Lawrence, which was the Fee of Thomas Buckerel,
and were excheted to the King, for the murder which the said Benomy committed
in the City of London, to hold to the said Semaine, and his Heirs, of the
King, paying at Easter, a pair of gilt Spurs, and to do the servi^e thereof due
unto the Lords Court.

In the like manner, and for like services, the King granted to Guso for his
Homage, the other part of the Lands of the said Benomye in St. Michaels Parish;
which Law, the Painter held, and was the Kings Excheter, and the Lands of the
said Benomye, in the said Parish, which Walter Turner held, and fifteen foot
of Land, which H^gh Harman held, with fifteen Iron Else of Land, and an half,
in the front of Iron-monger-lane, in the Parish of St. Martin, which were the
said Benomyes, of the Fee of the Hospital of St. Giles, and which Adam the
Smith held, with two Stone-Houses, which were Moses the Jew of Canterbury, in
the Parish of St. Olave; and which are of the Fee of Arnold de Reus, and are
the Kings Exchetes, as aforesaid.

The 16th of the said Henry, the Jews in London, builded a Synagogue, but the
King commanded, it should be dedicated to our blessed Lady, and after gave it
to the Brethren of St. Anthonies of Vienna, and so was it called St. Anthonies
Hospital.

This King Henry founded a Church and House for converted Jews, in a new street
by the Temple, whereby it came to pass, that (in short time) there was
gathered a great number of Converts.

The twentieth of this King Henry, seven Jews were brought from Norwich, which
had stolen a christened Child, had circumcised, and minded to have cruci^^ed
him at Easter, wherefore their Bodies and Goods were at the Kings pleasure:
The six and twentieth, the Jews were constrained to pay to the King, twenty
thousand Marks, at two Terms in the year, or else to be kept in perpetual
Prison.

The five and thirtieth, He takes inestimable sums of money, of all rich men,
namely, of Aaron, a Jew born at York, fourteen thousand Marks for himself, and
ten thousand Marks for the Queen; and before, he had taken of the same Jew as
much, as in all, amounted to thirty thousand Marks of Silver, and two hund^red
Marks of Gold to the Queen.

In the fortieth year, were brought up to Westminster, two hundred Jews from
Lincoln, for crucifying a Child, named Hugh; eighteen of them were hanged.

The forty third, a Jew at Tewksbury fell into a Privy on the Saturday, and
would not that day be taken out, for reverence of his Sabbath; wherefore
Richard Clare, Earl of Gloucester, kept him there till Monday, that he was dead.

The forty seven, the Barons slew of the Jews at London, seven hundred; the
rest were spoiled, and thei^r Synagogue defaced, because one Jew would have
forced a Christian to have paid more than two shillings, for the lone of twenty
shillings a week.

The third of Edward the first, in a Parliament at London, usury was forbidden
to the Jews; and that all Usurers might be known, the King commanded that every
Usurer should wear a Table on his breast, the breadth of a Paveline, or else to
avoid the Realm.

The sixth of the said King Edward, a Reformation was made for clipping of the
Kings Coin; for which offense, two hundred sixty seven Jews were drawn and
hanged; three were English Christians, and other were English Jews.

The same year the Jews crucified a child at Northampton; for the which fact,
many Jews at London were drawn at Horses Tayls, and hanged.

The 11th of Edward the first, John Perkham, Arch Bishop of Canterbury,
commanded the Bishop of London, to destroy all the Jews Synagogues in his
Diocese.

The 16th of the said Edward, all the Jews in England, were (in one day)
apprehended by precept from the King, but they redeemed themselves for twelve
thousand pounds of silver; notwithstanding, in the nineteenth of his Reign, he
banished them all out of England giving them only to bear their Charge, till
they were out of this Realm, the number of Jews then expulsed, were fifteen
thousand and sixty persons: the King made a mighty mass of money of their
Houses, which he sold, and yet the Commons of England had granted, and gave him
a fifteenth of all their Goods, to banish them; and thus much for the Jews.

In this street called the Old Iewry, is a proper Parish Church of St. Olave
Upwell, so called in Record, 1320, John Brian, Parson of St. Olave Upwell, in
the Iewry, founded there a Chauncery, and gave two Messuages to that Parish,
the sixteenth of Edward the second, and was by the said King confirmed. In this
Church to the commendations of the Parsons and Parishioners, the Monuments, of
the dead, remain less defaced than in many other.

From this Parish Church of St. Olave, to the North end of the Old Iewry, and
from thence West to the North end of Ironmonger-lane, almost to the Parish
Church of St. Martin, (was of old time) one large building of stone, very
ancient, made in place of Jews Houses; but of what antiquity, or by whom the
same was builded, or for what use, is not known: more than that King Henry) the
sixth, in the sixteenth of his Reign, gave the Office of being Porter, or
Keeper thereof, unto John Stent, for term of his life, by the name of his
principal Palace in the Old Jewry. This was called the Old Wardrobe, but of
latter time, the outward Strone-Wall has bin by little and little taken down,
and diverse fair Houses builded thereupon, even round about.

Now or the North side of this Lothbury, beginning again at the East end
thereof, upon the Watercourse of Wallbrook, have ye a proper Parish Church,
called St. Margaret, which was newly re-edified and builded, about the year
1440.

By the West end of this Parish Church, have ye a fair Warter-Conduit, builded
at the Charges of the City, in the year, 1546.

Next is the Founders Hall, a hansom House, and so to the South-West corner of
Basing-hall-street, have ye fair and large Houses for Merchants, namely, the
Corner-house, at the end of Basings-Hall-street, an old piece of work, builded
of Stone, sometime belonging to a certain Jew, named Mansere, the Son of
Aaron, the Son of Coke the Jew, the seventh of Edward the first, since, to
Rahere Sopers-Lane, then, to Simon Francis. Thomas Bradbury, Mercer, kept his
Majoralty there, deceased 1509. part of this House has bin lately employed as
a Market-house for the sale of Woollen Bays, Watmoles, Flanels, and such like.

On this North side, against the Old Iewry, is Colemanstreet, so called of
Coleman* the first builder and owner thereof; is also of Cole-Church, or
Coleman-Church, against the great Conduit in Cheap: This is a fair and large
street, on both sides builded with diverse fair Houses, besides Allies with
small Tenements in great number, on the East side of this street, almost at the
North end thereof, is the Armorers-Hall, which Company of Armorers, were made a
Fraternity of Guild of St. George, with a Chantry in the Chapel of St. Thomas,
in Paul's Church, in the first of Henry the sixth; also on the same side is
Kings All^y, and Love-lane, both containing many Tenements, And on the West
side, toward the South end, is the Parish Church of St. Stephen, wherein the
Monuments are defaced.

This Church was sometime a Synagogue of the Jews, then a Parish Church, then a
Chapel to Saint Olaves in the Jewry, until the seventh of Edward the fourth,
and was then incorporated, a Parish Church.

Of the Eighteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called
Basings-Hall-Ward.
THe next adjoining to Coleman-street-Ward, on the West side thereof, is
Bassings-Hall-VVard, a small thing, and consists of one street, called
Basings-Hall-street, of Basings-Hall, the most principal House, whereof the
Ward takes name: it begins in the South, by the late spoken Market House,
called the Bay Hall, which is the last of Coleman-street-VVard. This street
runs from thence North, down to London-Wall, and some distance both East and
West, against the said Hall, And this is the bounds of Basings-Hall-VVard.

Amongst diverse fair Houses for Merchants, have ye three Halls of Companies,
namely, the Masons Hall for the first; but of what Antiquity that Company is, I
have not read. The next is the Weavers Hall, which Company has bin of great
Antiquity in this City, as appears by a Charter of Henry the second, in these
words, Rex omnibus ad Quos, etc. to be englished thus.

Henry King of England, Duke of Normandy, and of Guyan, Earl of Anjou, to the
Bishop, Justices, Sheriffs, Barons, Ministers, and all his true Lieges of
London, sends greeting: Know ye, that we have granted to the Weavers in
London their Guild, with all the Freedoms, and Customs that they had in the
time of King Henry my Grandfather, so that they intermit none but within the
City, of their Craft, but he be of their Guild; neither in Southwark, or other
places pertaining to London, otherwise than it was done in the time of King
Henry my Grandfather; wherefore I will and straightly command, that over all
lawfully they may treat, and have all aforesaid, as well in peace, free,
worshipful, and wholly, as they had it ftreer, better, worshipfuller, and
whollier than in the time of King Henry my Grandfather, so that they yield
yearly to me, two Marks of Gold, at the feast of St. Michael. And I forbid,
that any man to them do any Unright, or Disease, upon pain of ten pound, etc.

Lower down, is the Girdlers Hall, and this is all touching the East side of
this Ward.

On the West side, almost at the South end thereof is Bakewell-Hall, corruptly
called Blackwell-Hall, concerning the Original whereof, I have heard diverse
Opinious, which I over-passe as Fables, without color of truth; for though the
same seemed a Building of great Antiquity, yet (in mine Opinion) the Foundation
thereof was first laid, since the Conquest of William, Duke of Normandy; for
the same was builded upon Vaults of Stone; which Stone was brought from Cane in
Normandy: The like of that in Paul's Church, builded by Mauritius and his
Successors, Bishops of London; but that this House has bin a Temple, or Jewish
Synagogue (as some have fantisied) I allow not, seeing that it had no such form
of roundness, or other likeness; neither had it the form of a Church, for the
Assembly of Christians, which are builded East and West; but contrariwise, the
same was builded North and South, and in the form of a Noblemans House, and
therefore the best Opinion (in my judgment) is, that it was (of old time)
belonging to the Family of the Bassings, which was in this Realm, a name of
great Antiquity and Renown; and that it bears also the name of that Family,
and was called therefore Basings-Haugh, or Hall.

Now how Bakewell-hall took that name, is another Question, For which I read,
That Thomas Bakewel dwelled in this House, in the 36. of Edward the 3d, and
that in the 20. of Richard the 2d, the said King for the sum of 50. pounds,
which the Mayor and the Communalty, had paid into the Hanapar, granted License,
so much as was in him, to John Frosh, William Parker, and Stephen Spilman,
(Citizens and Mercers) that they, the said Message, called Bakewell-hall, and
one Garden, with the appurtenances, in the Parish of St. Michael of
Bassings-Haugh, and of St. Lawrence, in the Jewry of London, and one Message,
two Shops, and one Garden, in the said Parish of St. Michael, which they held
of the King in Burgage, might give and assign to the Mayor and Communalty for
ever.

This Bakewell-Hall thus established, has bin long since employed, as a weekly
Marketplace for all sorts of Woollen Clothes, broad and narrow, brought from
all parts of this Realm, there to be sold. In the 21. of Richard the second,
Richard Whittington Mayor; and in the 22, Drew Barringtine being Mayor, it was
decreed, that no Foreign or stranger, should sell any Woollen-Cloth; but in
Bakewell-hall, upon pain of forfeiture thereof.

This House (of late years) growing ruinous, and in danger of falling, Richard
May, Merchant-Taylor, at his decease, gave toward the new building of the
outward part thereof, 300l. upon condition, that the same should be performed,
within three years after his Decease; whereupon, the old Bakewell-Hall, was
taken down, and in the Month of February next following the foundation of a
new, strong, and beautiful Storehouse being laid, the work thereof was so
diligently applied, that within the space of ten months after, to the charges
of two thousand five hundred pounds, the same was finished, in the year 1588.

Next beyond this House, are placed diverse fair Houses for Merchants, and
others, till ye come to the back Gate of Guild Hall; which Gate, and part of
the building within the same, is of this Ward: some small distance beyond this
Gate, the Coopers have their common Hall.

Then is the Parish Church of St. Michael, called St. Michael at Bassings-hall,
a proper Church, lately re-edified or new builded.

The Nineteenth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of LONDON, called Cripplegate
Ward.
THe Next Ward is called of Cripplegate, and consists of diverse Streets and
Lanes, lying as well without the Gate and Wall of the City, as within. First,
within the Wall on the East part thereof, toward the North; it runs to the
West Side of Bassing Hall's Ward, and toward the South, it joyneth to the Ward
of Cheap; It begins at the West end of the St. Laurence Church in the Jury,
on the North-side, and runeth West to a Pumpe, where sometimes was a well with
Buckets, at the South Corner of Alderman-Bury-Street, which Street runs down
North to Gayspur Lane, and to London Wall, which Street and Lane are wholly (on
both sides) of this Ward, and so be some few houses (on both sides) from
Gayspur Lane, by and against the Wall of the City, East to the Grates, made for
the watercourse of the Channels, and West to the Creplegate.

Now on the South side, from over against the West End of Saint Laurence
Church, to the Pumpe, and up Milke-Street South unto Cheap, which Milke-Street
is wholly (on both the sides) of Cripplegate Ward, as also without the South
end of Milke-Street, a part of West Cheap, to wit, from the Standard to the
Cross, is all of Cripplegate Ward. Then down great Wood-Street, which is
wholly of this Ward on both the sides thereof, so is little Wood-Street, which
runs down to Creplegate.

Out of this Wood-Street be diver Lanes, namely on the East side is Lad lane,
which runs East to Milke-Street Corner, down lower in WoodStreet is Love
lane, which lies by the South side of St. Albans Church in Wood-Street, and
runs down to the Conduit in Aldermanbury-Street; Lower down in Wood-Street,
is Addle-Street, out of the which runs Philip-lane, down to London Wall.
These be the Lanes on the East Side.

On the West side of Wood-Street, in Huggen-lane, by the South side of St.
Michaels Church and goes through to Gutherons lane; Then lower is Maiden-lane,
which runs West to the North End of Gutherons lane, and up the said lane on
the East side thereof, till against Kery lane, and back again, then the said
Maiden-lane, on the North side, goes up to Staining lane, and up a part
thereof on the East side, to the farthest North part of Haberdashers Hall, and
back again to Wood-Street, and there lower down is Silver Street, which is of
this Ward, till ye come to the East End of St. Olaves Church on the South side,
and to Monkes-well Street, on the North side, then down the said Monkes-well
Street on the East side thereof, and so to Cripplegate, do make the bonds of
this Ward within the Walls.

Of these More-Feilds, you have formerly read, what a Moorish rotten ground
they were, unpassable, but for Cawsways; purposely made to that intent; what
they were also in our own nearer times of Memory, even till Sir Leonard
Halliday was Lord Major of London, I am very well assured many do perfectly
remember. And what they are now at this instant by the honorable cost and care
of this City, and the industrious pains and diligence of that worthy Citizen
Mr. Nicolas Leate, we all (to our continual comfort) do evidently behold.

Then to turn back again, through the said Posternlane to More lane, which
More-lane, with all the Allies and buildings there, is of this Ward. After that
is Grub-Street more rhen half thereof to the Streightning of the Street, Next
is White-Crosse-Street, up to the End of Beech-lane, and then
Red-Crosse-Street, wholly with a part of Golding-lane, even to the posts there
placed, as a bounder.

Then is Beech lane before spoken of; the East side of the Red-Crosse, and the
Barbican-Street, more than half thereof toward Aldersgate Street.

Touching the Antiquity of this Old Aldermans-Bury or Court, I have not read
other, then that Richard Kenery, one of the Sheriffs of London; in the first of
Richard the first, which was in the year of Christ 1189. gave to the Church of
Saint Mary at Os^ey by Oxford, certain grounds and rents in Alderman-Bury, of
London, as appears by the Register of that Church, as as also entered into
the Hustings of the Guild Hall in London.

This Old Bery, Court, or Hall continued, and the courts of the Major and
Aldermen were continually holden there, until the New Bery-Court, or
Guild Hall that now is, was builded and finished, which Hall was first begun to
be founded in the year 1411, and was not fully finished in twenty years after,
The ruins of the Old Court Hall in Alderman-Bury-Street yet appear which of
late has bin employed as a Carpenters yard, etc.

Then is the parish Church of St. M^ry Aldermanbury, a fair Church, with a
Churchyard and Cloister adjoining. In the which Cloister is hanged and fastened
a Shanke-bone of a man (as is said) very great, and larger by three inches and
a half, than that which hangs in St. Laurence Church in the Jury, for it is
in length twenty Eight inches and a half of assise, but not so hard and Steely,
like as the other; for the same is Leight, and somewhat pory and spongy. This
bone is said to be found amongst the bones of men removed from the Charnell
house of Paul's, or rather from the Cloister of Paul's Church.

Beneath this Church have ye Gayspur-lane, which runs down to London Wall,
as is before showed. In this lane, at the North end thereof, was (of old time) a
house of Nuns, which house being in great decay William Elsing, Mercer, in the
year of Christ 1329. the third of Edward of the third, began in place thereof
the foundation of an Hospital, for sustentation of one hundred blind men:
Toward the erection whereof, he gave his two houses in the Parishes of St.
Alphage and our Blessed Lady in Aldermanbury Near Cripplegate.

This house was after called a Priory or Hospital of St. Mary the Virgin,
founded in the year 1332. by W. Elsing for Canons Regular, the which W. became
the first Prior there.

In the same place where the aforesaid Elsing Spittle and priory, were formerly
situated, there is now newly erected a College for the Clergy of London, and
Liberties thereof, called by the name of Sion-Colledge: And Almes-houses for
twenty poor people, ten men and ten women.

This was done by the especial care and pains of Mr. John Simson, Rector of
St. Olaves Hart-Street London, one of the Executors of the last Will and
Testament of Mr. Thomas White, Doctor in Divinity, Vicar of S. Dunstans in the
West, and one of the Canons Residentiary of S. Paul's Church London: which
ore-named Thomas White, (besides sundry sums of money, and great yearly
Revenues given by him to pious and Charitable uses in diverse places) gave three
thousand pound to purchase and build the foresaid College for the use of the
Clergy, and Almes-houses for the twenty poor people aforesaid.

He gave also unto the said College, and Almes-houses, a hundred sixty pound,
per annum for ever; whereof there is a hundred twenty pound yearly allowed for
the maintenance of the poor Almes-men and women: And forty pound yearly for
four dinners for the Clergy, who are to have four Latin Sermons in the year
one every quarter, and upon these days are to dine together in the College.

In the same College the forenamed John Simson did in his life time, at his
own proper Costs and Charges, build a very fair and spacious Library,
containing, a hundred twenty one foot in length, within the Walls, and above
twenty five foot in breadth. And has furnished it with Wainscot, Stalls,
Desks, Seats, and other Necessary and useful Ornaments befitting the place.

To this Library there have been already diverse bountiful, and well disposed
Benefactors, who have given large sums of money toward the furnishing of it
with Books.

Then is there the Parish Church of Saint Alphage; The principal I Will of this
Church toward the North, was pulled down, and a frame of four houses set up in
the place: the other part, from the Steeple upward, was converted into a Parish
Church of S. Alphage; and the Parish Church which stood near unto the Wall of
the City by Cripplegate, was pulled down; the plot thereof made a Carpenters
Yard, with Saw-pits.

The Hospital it self, the Prior, and Canons house, with other Lodgings were
made a dwelling house, the Churchyard is a Garden plot, and a fair Gallery on
the Cloister, the Lodgins for the poor are translated into stabling for horses.

Now we will return to Milk-Street so called of Milk sold there at the
beginning. In this Milk-Street, is a small Parish Church of Saint Mary
Magdelen, which has of late years been repaired. William Brown, Mayor 1513.
gave to this Church forty pounds, and was buried there.

Then Next is Wood-Street, by what reason so called, I know not. True it is,
that (of old time) according to a Decree made in the reign of Richard the
first, the houses of London were builded of Stone, for defense of fire, which
kind of building was used for two hundred years or more, but of latter time,
for the winning of ground, taken down; and houses of Timber were set up in
their place. It seems therefore that this Street has been of the latter
building, all of timber, (for scarce one house of stone has been known there)
and therefore called Wood-Street: otherwise it might take the name of some
builder or owner thereof.

On the East side of this Street is one of the Prison-houses, pertaining to the
Sheriffs of London, and is called the Compter in Wood-Street, which was
prepared to be a prisonhouse in the year 1555. And on the Eve of S. Michael
the Archangell, the prisoners that lay in the Compter in Bread-Street, were
removed to this Compter in Wood-Street. Beneath this Compter in Lad-lane, or
Ladle Hall, for so I find it of Record, in the parish of Saint Michaell
Wood-Street; and Beneath that is Love lane, so called of wantons.

By this lane is the Ancient parish Church of S. Albans. One note of the great
Antiquity of it, is the name, by which it was at first dedicated to St.
Albanus, the first Martyr of England. Another Character of the Antiquity of it,
is to be seen in the manner of the turning of the Arches in the windows, and
heads of the Pillars. A third Note, appears in the Roman Bricks, here and there
here and there inlayed amongst the stones of the building. Very probable it is,
that this Church is at least of as ancient a standing as King Aldelstane the
Saxon, who, as the Tradition says, had his house at the East end of this
Church. This Kings house, having a door also into Adel-Street in this Parish,
gave name, as it is thought, unto the said Adel-Street, which in all Evidences
to this day, is written King Adel-Street. One great square Tower of this Kings
house seems yet remaining, to be seen at the North corner of Love lane, as you
come from Alderman-bury; which Tower is of the very same stone and manner of
building with S. Albans Church.

There is also (but without any outward Monument) the head of James the Fourth
King of Scots of that name, slain at Flodden field, and buried here by this
occasion: After the Battle, the body of the said King being found, was closed
in ^ead, and conveyed from thence to London, and so to the Monastery of Sheine
in Surrey, where it remained for a time, in what order I am not certain: But
since the dissolution of that house, in the reign of Edward the Sixth, Henry
Gray Duke of Suffolk, being lodged and keeping house there, the same body was
to be showed, so lapped in lead, close to the head and body, thrown into a
waste room amongst the old timber, lead, and other rubble; since which time,
the workmen there (for their foolish pleasure) hewed off his head; and
Lancelot Young, Master Glasier to Queen Elizabeth, feeling a sweet savor to
come from thence, and seeing the same dried from all moisture, and yet the form
remaining, with the hair of the head and beard red, brought it into London, to
his house in Woodstreet, where (for a time) he kept it for the sweetness; but
in the end, caused the Sexton of that Church, to bury it amongst other bones,
taken out of their Charnell, etc.

There are diverse Records of a house in Wood-street, then called Black Hall,
but no man at this day can tell thereof. On the North side of this Saint
Michaels Church is Maiden-lane, now so called, but (of old time) Ingene-lane,
or Inglane. In this Lane the Wax-Chaundlers have their Common Hall, on the the
South side thereof; and the Haberdashers have their Hall on the North side, at
Stayning-lane end. This Company of the Haberdashers, or Hurrers, of old time so
called, were incorporated a Brotherhood of St. Katherines, the twenty sixth of
Henry the Sixth, and so confirmed by Henry the Seventh, the seventeenth of his
Reign; the Cappers and Hat-Merchants, or Hurrers, being one Company of
Haberdashers.

Down lower in VVood-street is Silver-street (I think, of Silver-Smiths
dwelling there) in which be diverse fair houses.

And on the North side thereof is Monks-well street, so called, of a well, at
the North end thereof, where the Abbot of Garendon had an house or Cell, called
Saint James in the wall by Cripple-gate, and certain Monks of their house were
Chaplains there; wherefore the Well (belonging to that Cell or Hermitage) was
called Monks-well, and the street of the well, Monks-well street. The East side
of this street down against London wall, and the South side thereof to
Cripple-gate, be of Cripple-gate Ward, as is afore-shewed.

In this street, by the corner of Monks-well street, is the Bowyers Hall. On
the East side of Monks-well street, be convenient Almshouses, twelve in
number, founded by Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, Mayor. 1575. wherein he placed
twelve poor and aged people rent-free, having each of them seven pence the
week, and once the year each of them five sacks of Charcoals, and one quartem
of one hundred of Faggots, of his gift for ever.

On the North side of the way, turning toward Cripple-gate, and even upon, or
close to London wall, (as it were) are certain new erected Almes-houses, six in
number, of the cost and gift of Mr. Robert Rogers, Leather-Seller, and very
good maintenance allowed (for ever) to such people as are appointed to dwell in
them.

Then, in little VVood-street, be seven proper Chambers in an Alley on the West
side, founded for seven poor people, therein to dwell rent-free, by Henry
Barton, Skinner, Mayor, 1516.

Now without the Postern of Cripple-gate, first is the Parish Church of Saint
Giles, a very fair and large Church, lately repaired, after that the same was
burned, in the year 1545, the thirty seventh of Henry the Eighth, by which
mischance, the Monuments of the dead in this Church are very few.

In White Crosse-street King Henry the Fifth builded a fair house, and founded
there a Brotherhood of S. Giles to be kept, which house had sometime been an
Hospital of the French Order, by the name of Saint Giles without Cripple-gate.
In the reign of Edward the First, the King having the Jurisdiction, and
pointing a Custos thereof, for the Precinct of the Parish of Saint Giles, etc.
which Hospital being suppressed, the lands were given to the Brotherhood for
relief of the poor.

One Alley, of diverse Tenements, over against the North wall of Saint Giles
Churchyard, was appointed to be Almshouses, for the poor, wherein they
dwelled rent-free, and otherwise were releeved; but the said Brotherhood was
suppressed by Henry the Eighth, since which time, Sir John Gresham, Mayor,
purchased the lands, and gave part thereof to the maintenance of a Free School,
which he had founded at Holt, a Market Town in Norfolk.

In Red Crosse-street, on the West side from S. Giles Churchyard, up to the
said Cross, be many fair houses builded outward, with diverse Alleys, turning
into a large plot of ground, of old time called the Jews Garden, as being the
only place appointed them in England, wherein to bury their dead, till the year
1177, the twenty fourth of Henry the Second, that it was permitted them (after
long suit to the King and Parliament at Oxford) to have a special place
assigned them in every quarter where they dwelled.

On the East side of this Red Crosse-street, be also diverse fair houses, up to
the Cross, and there is Beech-lane, peradventure so called of Nicholas de la
Beech, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, put out of that office in the
thirteenth of Edward the Third. This Lane stretches from Red Crosse-street to
White Crosse-street, replenished not with Beech trees, but with beautiful
houses of Stone, Brick, and Timber: Amongst the which was (of old time) a great
house pertaining to the Abbot of Ramsey, for his lodging, when he repaired to
the City; it is now called Drewry House, of Sir Drew Drewry, who dwelt there.

On the North side of this Beech-lane, toward White Cross street, the
Drapers of London have lately builded eight Almshouses of Brick and Timber,
for eight poor widows of their own Company, whom they placed there rent-free.

Then is Golding-lane: Richard Gallard of Islington Esquire, Citizen and
Painter-Stainer of London, founded thirteen Almshouses, for so many poor
people placed in them rent-free. He gave to the poor of the same Almshouses,
two pence the piece weekly, and a load of Charcoals among them yearly for ever:
He left fair lands about Islington, to maintain his Foundation. T. Hayes,
sometime Chamberlain of London, in the latter time of Henry the Eighth, married
Elizabeth, his daughter and heir, which Hayes and Elizabeth had a daughter
named Elizabeth, married to John Ironmonger, of London Mercer, who had the
ordering of the Alms-people.

On the West side of Red Crosse-street, is a street called the Barbican,
because sometime there stood on the North side thereof a Burghkenning or
VVatch-tower of the City, called in some language a Barbican, as a Bikening is
called Beacon. This Burgh-kenning, by the name of the Manor of Base Court,
was given by Edward the Third, to Robert Ufford Earl of Suffolk, and was
afterward pertaining, to Peregrine Barty, Lord Willoughby of Ersby.

Next adjoining to this, is one other great house, called Garter Place,
sometime builded by Sir Thomas VVrithe, or VVrithesly, Knight, alias Garter,
principal King of Arms, second son of Sir John VVrithe, Knight, alias Garter,
and was Uncle to the first Thomas, Earl of Southampton, Knight of the Garter,
and Chancellor of England: He built this house, and in the top thereof a
Chapel, which he dedicated by the name of S. Trinitatis in Alto.

Of the Twentieth Ward, or Aldermanry, of the City of LONDON, called Aldersgate
Ward.
THe Next is Aldersgate Ward, taking name of that North Gate of the City: this
Ward also consists o^ diverse Streets and Lanes, lying as well within the Gate
and Wall, as without, And first, to speak of that part within the Gate, thus it
is, the East part thereof joyneth unto the West part of Cripplegate Ward, in
Engain lane, or Maiden lane; It begins on the North side of that Lane, at
Staining lane End runs up, from the Haberdashers Hall, to St. Mary Staining
Church, and by the Church East, winding almost to Wood Street; and West through
Oate lane; and then by the South side of Bacon house in Noble-Street, back
again by Lilipot lane, which is also of that ward, to Maiden lane; and so on
that North side West to Saint John Zacharies Church, and to Foster lane. Now on
the south side of Engain or Maiden lane, is the West side of Gutherons lane. to
Kery lane and Kery lane it self (which is of this ward) and back again into
Engain lane, by the North side of the Goldsmiths Hall, to Foster lane are
almost wholly of this Ward: which begins in the South toward Cheap on the
East side by the North side of Saint Fosters Church, and runs down North
West by the East end of Engain lane by Lilipot lane, and Oate lane, to
Noble-Street, and through that by Shelly house, (of old time so called, as
belonging to the Shellies) Sir Thomas Shelley Knight, was owner thereof in the
first of Henry the fourth. It is now called Bacon-House, because the same was
new builded by Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; Down on that
side by Sergeant Fleet-Woods house, Recorder of London, who also new builded it
to Saint Olaves Church in Silver-Street, which is by the North-West End of this
Noble-Street.

Then have ye Maine Street of this Ward, which is called Saint Martins lane, in
cluding Saint Martin, on the East side thereof; and so down on both the sides
to Aldersgate. And these be the bounds of this Ward, within the Wall and Gate.

Without the Gate, the main Street called Aldersgate Street, runs up North
on the East side to the West end of Hounds-ditch or Barbican-Street; a part of
which Street, is also of this Ward; And on the West side to Long-Lane, a part
whereof is likewise of this Ward. Beyond the which Aldersgate, is Goswell
Street up to the Bars.

And on the West side of Hidersgate Street, by Saint Buttolphs Church, is
Briton-Street which runs West to a Pumpe, and then North to the Gate, which
enters the Churchyard, sometimes pertaining to the Priory of Saint
Bartholomews on the east side and on the west side toward St. Bartholomews
Spittle, to a pair of posts there fixed. And these be the bounds of this
Aldersgate Ward without.

The antiquities be these, first in Stain^ng lane, of old time so called, as
may be supposed of Painter-stainers dwelling there.

On the East side thereof, adjoining to the Aaberdashers Hall, be ten
Almeshouses, pertaining to the Haberdashers; wherein be placed ten Alms people
of that Company, every of them having Eight pence the piece every Friday for
ever, by the gift of Thomas Huntlow, Haberdasher, one of the Sheriffs, in the
year, 1539.

Then is the small Parish Church of Saint Mary, called Staining, because it
stands, at the North end of Staining lane.

Then is Engain lane, or Maiden lane; and, at the North-West Corner thereof,
the Parish Church of St. John Zachary, a fair Church, with the Monuments well
preserved, of Thomas Lichfield who founded a Chancery there, in the fourteenth
of Edward the second.

On the East side of this Foster Lane, at Engane Lane end, is Goldsmiths Hall,
a proper House, but not large; and therefore to say* that Bartholmew Read
Goldsmith, Mayor in the year 1502 kept such a feast in this Hall, as some have
fabuled, is far incredible, and altogether unpossible, considering the
smallness of the Hall, and number of the Guests, which as they say, were more
than one hundred persons of great estate; But of late years the said Goldsmiths
Hall is much enlarged and in a stately and sumptuous manner, in so much that it
may compare with any other Hall in London.

Then at the North end of Noble-street, is the Parish Church of St. Olave in
Silver-street, a small thing.

On the West side of Foster-Lane, is the small Parish Church of St. Leonards,
for them of St. Martins le Grand. A number of Tenements being lately builded in
place of the great Collegiate Church of St. Martin: that Parish is mightily
increased.

Then in Pope-lane, so called of one Pope that was owner thereof* On the North
side is the Parish Church of Saint Anne in the Willowes, so called, I know not
upon what occasion, but some say, of Willowes growing thereabouts, but now
there is no such void place for Willowes to grow, more than the Churchyard,
wherein do grow some high Ash-trees to this day.

Then in St. Martins Lane was (of old time) a fair and large College, of a
Dean and Secular Canons or Priests, and was called Saint Martins le grand,
founded by Ingelricus, and Edwardus his Brother, in the year of Christ 1056,
and confirmed by William the Conqueror, as appears by his Charter, dated
1068. This College claimed great Privileges of Sanctuary, and otherwise, as
appears in a Book written by a Notary of that House, about the year 1442 the
nineteenth of Henry the sixth: wherein, amongst other things, is set down and
declared that on the first of September, in the year aforesaid, a Soldier,
prisoner in Newgate, as he was led by an Officer toward the Guild Hall of
London, there came out of Panyer Alley five of his fellowship, and took him
from the Officer, brought him into Sanctuary, at the West door of St. Martins
Church, and took Grithe of that place; But the same day Philip Malpas, and
Robert Marshall, then Sheriffs of London, with many other entered the said
Church, and forcibly took out with them the said five men thither fled, led
them fettered to the Counter, and from thence chained by the Necks to Newgate:
of which violent taking, the Dean and Chapter in large manner complained to the
King, and required him as their Patron, to defend their Privileges, like as
his Predecessors had done, etc. All which complaint and suite, the Citizens by
their Counsel Markham Sergeant at the Law, John Carpenter common Clerk of the
City, and others, learnedly answered, offering to prove, that the said place of
St. Martin had no such Immunity or Liberty, as was pretended. Notwithstanding,
after long debating of this Controversy, by the Kings commandment, and assent
of his Council in the Starr-Chamber, the Chancellor and Treasurer, sent a Writ
unto the Sheriffs of London, charging them to bring the said five persons, with
the cause of their taking and withholding, before the King in his Chancery on
the Vigil of Alhallowes: on which day, the said Sheriffs, with the Recorder and
Counsel of the City, brought and delivered them accordingly, before the said
Lords; where the Chancellor, after he had declared the Kings Commandment,
sent them to St. Martins, there to abide freely, as in a place having
Franchises, whiles them liked, etc.

Without Aldersgate on the East side of Aldersgate Street, is the Cooks Hall,
which Cooks (or Pastlers) were admitted to be a Company, and to have a Master
and Wardens, in the two and twentieth of Edward the fourth; From thence, along
unto Houndsditch, or Barbican street, be many fair Houses; on the West side
also, be the like fair buildings, till ye come to Long-Lane, and so to Goswell
street.

In Britain street, which took that name of the Duke of Britain Lodging there,
is one proper Parish Church of St. Buttolph; In which Church was sometime a
Brotherhood of St. Fabian and Sebastian, founded in the year 1377, the fifty
one of Edward the third; and confirmed by Henry the fourth in the sixth of his
Reign. Then Henry the sixth in the twenty fourth of his Reign, to the honor of
the Trinity, gave License to Dame Joane Astley, sometime his Nurse, to R.
Cawood and T. Smith, to found the same a Fraternity perpetually, to have a
Master and two Custos with Brethren and Sisters; This Brotherhood was endowed
with Lands, more than thirty pounds by the year, and was suppressed by Edward
the sixth.

Of the One and Twentieth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called
Faringdon Ward Intra.
ON the South side of Aldersgate Ward, lies Faringdon Ward, called Intra, or
within, for a difference from another Ward of that name, which lies without
the Walls of the City, and is therefore called Farringdon Extra. These two
Wards (of old time) were but one, and had also but one Alderman; The whole
great Ward of Faringdon, both Intra and Extra took name of W. Farrendon
Goldsmith, Alderman of that Ward, and one of the Sheriffs of London, in the
year 1281, the ninth of Edward the first; He purchased the Aldermanry of this
Ward, as by the Abstract of Deeds which are yet extant, may appear.

At the South-West corner of Wood-street, is the Parish Church of St, Peter the
Apostle, by the said Cross: a proper Church. John Sha Goldsmith, Mayor,
deceased 1503, appointed by his Testament, the said Church and Steeple to be
new builded of his goods, with a flat roof. Notwithstanding, Tho. Wood
Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs 1491, is accounted a principal Benefactor,
because the roof of the middle Isle is supported by Images of Woodmen, thought
to be at his charge.

The long Shop, or Shed encroaching on the High Street before this Church Wall,
was licenced to be made in the year 1401, yielding to the Chamber of London
three shillings four pence yearly for the time. Also the same Shop was letten
by the Parish, for three pounds at the most, many years since.

Then is Guthuruns Lane, so called of Guthurun, sometime owner thereof, the
Inhabitants of this Lane (of old time) were Gold-beaters, as does appear by
Records in the Exchequer. For, the Easterling money, was appointed to be made
of fine Silver, such as men made into foil, and was commonly called Silver of
Gu^hrons Lane, etc. The Imbroyderers Hall is in this Lane, John Throwstone
Imbroyderer, then Goldsmith, Sheriff, deceasing 1519. gave forty pound toward
the purchase of this Hall; Hugon Lane on the East side, and Key Lane called of
one Kery on the West.

Then in the High street on the same North side, is the Sadlers Hall, and then
Foster-Lane, so called, of Saint Fosters, a fair Church, lately new builded.
Henry Coote Goldsmith, one of the Sheriffs, deceased 1509, builded St. Dunstans
Chapel there. John Throwstone, one of the Sheriffs, gave to the building
thereof one hundred pounds by his Testament. John Brown Sergeant-painter
Alderman, deceased 1532, was a great Benefactor, and was there buried. William
Trist Selerar to the King 1425. John Standelf Goldsmiths, lie buried there.
Richard Galder 1544, Agnes Wife to William Milbourne, Chamberlain of London,
1500.

In this West side is the Barber Chirurgions Hall; This Company was
Incorporated by means of Thomas Morestead, Esquire, one of the Sheriffs of
London, a thousand four hund^ed thirty six; Surgeon to the Kings of England,
Henry the fourth, fifth, and sixth He deceased 1450. Then Jaques Fries,
Physician to Edward the fourth, and William Hobbs, Physician and Surgeon to
the same Kings Body, continuing the Suite the full term of twenty years.
Edward the fourth in the second of his Reign, and Richard Duke of Gloucester
became Founders of the same Corporation, in the Parish of Saint Cosme and
Damiane. The first assembling of that Mystery was by Roger Strippe, William
Hobbs, Thomas Goddard, and Richard Kent, since the which time they builded
their Hall in that street, etc.

At the North corner of this street, on the same side, was sometime an
Hermitage, or Chapel of Saint James called in the Wall, near Creplegate, it
belonged to the Abbey and Covent of Garadon, as appears by a Record the seven
and twentieth of Edward the first; and also the fiftieth of Edward the third,
William de Lions was Hermit there, and the Abbot and Convent of Garadon found
two Chaplains Cesterc^an Monks of their House, in this Hermitage one of them,
for Aymor de Valence Earl of Pembrooke, and Mary de Saint Paul his Countess.

Of these Monks, and of a Well pertaining to them, the street took that name,
and is called Monkes-Well street. This Hermitage with the appurrenances, was in
the Reign of Edward the sixth, purchased from the said King by W. Lamb, one of
the Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel, Citizen, and Cloth-worker of London; He
deceased in the year 1577, and then gave it to the Cloth-workers of London,
with other Tenements to the value of fifty pounds the year, to the intent they
shall hire a Minister, to say Divine Service there.

Again, to the High street of Cheap, from Foster Lane end, to St. Martins, and
by that Lane to the Shambles or Flesh-mark^t, on the North side whereof is
Pentecost Lane, containing diverse Slaughter-houses for the Butchers.

Then was there of old time, a hansome Parish Church of Saint Nicholas, whereof
the said Flesh-market took the name, and was called Saint Nicholas Shambles.

This Church with the Tenements and Ornaments, was by Henry the eighth given to
the Mayor and Communalty of the City, toward the maintenance of the New Parish
Church, then to be erected in the late dissolved Church of the Gray Friars, so
was this Church dissolved and pulled down, in place whereof, and of the
Churchyard; many fair Houses are now builded, in a Court with a Well, in the
midst whereof the Church stood.

Then is Stinking Lane, formerly so called, or Chick Lane, at the East end of
the Gray Friars Church, it is now kept clean, and free from annoyance, and
called by the name of Butchers Hall Lane, for there is the Butchers Hall.

In the third of Richard the second, motion was made, that no Butcher should
kill any flesh within London, but at Knightsbridge, or such like distant place
from the Walls of the City.

Then is there the late dissolved Church of Gray Friars, the Original whereof
was thus;

In the year 1224, being the 8th year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d, there
came out of Italy nine Friars of the order of the Franciscans, or Frior Minors;
five whereof were Priests, and the other four Laymen; the Priests placed
themselves at Canterbury in Kent, but the other four came to London, and were
lodged (for some short while) among the preaching Friars, who lived then in
Oldburn, now Holborne, Afterward, they obtained to be placed in Cornhil
London, man House belonging to one John Travers, who was then one of the
Sheriffs of London, in the same year 1224 in which House they made themselves
Cells, and inhabited there for a certain time, till their number so increased,
and the Citizens devotion grew to be so great, that (within few years after)
they were thence removed, by the means of one John Ewin Mercet, who purchased a
void plot of ground, near to St. Nicholas Shambles, where to erect an House for
the said Friars.

Diverse Citizens seemed herein to join with the said John Ewin, and erected
there very beautiful Buildings, upon the same ground so formerly purchased by
John Ewin, and a great part builded at his own Charge, which he appropriated to
the Communalty of London, and then entered into the same Order of Friars, as a
Lay-Brother himself.

This whole Church contained in length three hundred foot, of the feet of St.
Paul, in breadth eighty nine foot, and in height from the ground to the roof,
sixty four foot, and two inches, etc. It was consecrated 1325, and at the
General suppression, was valued at thirty two pound, nineteen shillings; and
surrendered the twelfth of November 1538, the thirty of Henry the eighth: the
Ornaments and goods being taken to the Kings use, the Church was shut up for a
time* and used as a Storehouse of goods taken prizes from the French, but in
the year 1546, on the third of January, it was again set open, on the which day
preached at Paul's Cross the Bishop of Rochester, where he declared the Kings
gift thereof to the City, for the relieving of the poor; which gift was
enrolled by Patents.

St. Bartholmews Spittle in Smithfield, lately valued at three hundred five
pounds: six shillings, seven pence, and surrendered to the King, was of the said
Church of the Gray Friars and of two Parish Churches the one of St. Nicholas in
the Shambles, and the other of St. Ewins in Newgate-Market; they were to be
made one Parish Church, in the said Friars Church: In Lands he gave for
maintenance of the said Church, with Divine Service, reparations, etc. five
hundred Marks by year for ever.

The thirteenth of January, the thirty eighth of Henry the eighth, an agreement
was made betwixt the King and the Mayor, and Communalty of London, dated the
twenty seven of December, by which the said gift of the Gray Friars Church,
with all the Edifices and ground, the Fratrie, the Library, the Portar, and
Chapter House, the great Cloistry and the lesser, Tenements, Gardens, and
vacant grounds, Lead, Stone, Iron, etc. The Hospital of St. Bartholmew in West
Smithfield* the Church of the same, the Lead, Bells, and Ornaments of the same
Hospital, with all the Messuages Tenements and appurtenances.

The Parishes of Saint Nicholas and of Saint Ewin, and so much of Saint
Sepulchers Parish as is within Newgate, were made one Parish Church in the Gray
Friars Church, and called Christ's Church, founded by King Henry the eighth.

In the year 1552, began the repairing of the Gray Friars House, for the poor
fatherless Children; and in the Month of November, the children were taken
into the same, to the number of almost four hundred. On Christmas day in the
afternoon, while the Lord Mayor and Aldermen rod to Paul's, the Children of
Christ's Hospital stood, from Saint Lawrence Lane end in Cheap toward Paul's,
all in one Livery of Russet Cotton, three hundred and forty in Number, and in
the Easter next they were in Blue at the Spittle, and so have continued ever
since.

For these sorts of poor, three several Houses were provided. First, for the
innocent and fatherless, which is the Beggars Child, they provided the House
that was the late Gray Friars in London, and called it by the name of Christ's
Hospital, where poor Children are trained up in the Knowledge of God, and some
virtuous exercises, to the overthrow of beggary.

For the second degree, was provided, the Hospitals of Saint Thomas in
Southwark, and Saint Bartholmew in West Smithfield, where are continually, (at
least) two hundred diseased persons, which are not only there lodged and cured,
but also fed and nourished.

For the third degree, they provided Bridewell, where the Vagabond and idle
Strumpet is chastised, and compelled to labor, to the overthrow of the vicious
life of idleness.

They provided also for the honest decayed householder, that he should be
relieved at home at his House, and in the Parish where he dwelled, by weekly
relief and Pension; And in like manner they provided for the Lazer, to keep him
out of the City, from clapping of dishes and ringing of Bells, to the great
trouble of the Citizens, and also to the dangerous infection of many, that they
should be relieved at home at their Houses by several Pensions. St.
Bartholmewes Hospital is incorporated by the name of Mayor, Communalty, and
Citizens of the City of London, Governors of the Hospital for the poor, called
little St. Bartholmews, near to West Smithfield, of the Foundation of King
Henry the eighth.

Christ's Hospital, Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apostle in Southwarke, are
incorporated, by the names of the Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London,
Governors of the Possessions, Revenues, and Goods of the Hospitals of Edward
King of England the sixth, of Christ, Bridewell, and Saint Thomas the Apostle,
etc.

This Church was full of many great Monuments, as of the Lady Margaret Daughter
to Philip of France, and Wife to Edward the first.

Of Queen Isabel Wife to Edward the second.

Of Joane Queen of the Scots, Wife to David Bruce.

Of Isabel, Daughter to Edward the third.

Of Eleanor Duchess of Britain.

Of the Lady Beatrix, Duchess of Britain, Daughter to Henry the third.

Of Roger Mortimer, Earl of March.

Of John Hastings Earl of Pembrook.

Of John Duke of Bourton, who had been taken Prisoner at Agencourt, with diverse
other great Personages.

There is lately erected there in the South end of the Chancel and
extraordinary hansome Monument to the Lady Venetia Stanley, Wife to the noble
Knight Sir Kenelme Digby.

Now for the South side of this Ward, beginning again at the Cross in Cheap,
from thence to Fryday-street, and down that street on the West side, till over
against the North-west corner of Saint Matthewes Church; And on the West side,
to the South corner of the said Church, is wholly in the Ward of Faringdon.

From this Fryday-street West, to the old Exchange, a street so called of Kings
Exchange there kept, which was for the receipt of Bullion, to be coined. For
Henry the third, in the sixth year of his Reign, wrote to the Scahines, and men
of Ipre^ that he and his Council had given prohibition, that no Englishmen, or
other should make change of Plate, or other Mass of Silver, but only in his
Exchange at London, or at Canterbury; Andrew Bukerel, then had to ^arm the
Exchange of England and was Mayor of London; in the Reign of Henry the third,
John Somercote, had the keeping of the Kings Exchange overall England.

In the eighth of Edward the first, Gregory Rock^ley, was Keeper of the said
Exchange for the King^ in the fi^th of Edward the second, William Hausted was
Keeper thereof; And in the eighteenth, Roger de Frowick, etc.

These received the old stamps, or Coyning-Irons, from time to time, as the
same were worn, and delivered new to all the Mints in England.

This street begins by VVest-Cheap in the North, and runs down South, to
Knight-rider-street-that part thereof which is called Old Fish-street: But the
very Housing and Office of the Exchange and Coynage, was about the midst
thereof, South from the East Gate, that enters Paul's Churchyard, and on the
West side, in Baynards-Castle Ward.

On the East side of this Lane, betwixt West-Cheap, and the Church of St.
Augustine, Henry VValleis Mayor, (by License of Edward the first) builded one
row of Houses, the profits rising of them to be employed on London Bridge.

The Parish Church of St. Augustine, and one House next adjoining, in
VVathing-street, is of this Ward called Faringdon.

Then is the North Churchyard of Paul's, in the which stands the Cathedral
Church first founded by Ethelbert, King of Kent, about the year of Christ 610.
He gave Lands thereunto, as appears, Ethelbertus, Rex, Deo inspirante, pro
animae suae remedio, dedit Episcopo Melito terram quae appellatur Tillingeham,
ad Monasteris sui solatium* scilicet, S. Pauli, etc. Ego Rex Ethelbertus ita
firmiter concedo tibi praesuli Melito potestatem ejus habendi and possidendi ut
in perpetuum in Monasterii utilitate permaneas, etc. Athelstan, Edgar, Edward
the Confessor, and others also, gave Lands thereunto. William the Conqueror,
gave to the Church of St. Paul, and to Mauricius, then Bishop, and his
Successors, the Castle of Stortford* with the appurtenances, etc. He also
confirmed the gifts of his Predecessors, in these words, ut habeant quiet as in
perpetuum, 24. Hidas quas Rex Athelbert dedit S. Paulo juxta Murum London, etc.
The Charter of King William the Conqueror, exemplified in the Tower, englished
thus.

William, By the Grace of God, King of Englishmen, to all his well-beloved
French and English People, greeting: Know ye, that I do give unto God, and the
Church of St. Paul of London, and to the Rectors and Servi^ors of the same, in
all other Lands which the Church has, or shall have, within Borough, and
without, Sack and Sock, Thole and The, Infangtheef, and Grithbirche, and all
free Sh^ps by Sea, and by Land, on Tide, and off-Tide, and all the Rights that
unto them Christendom by rad and more speak, and on Buright hamed, and on
Buright work, before all the Bishoprics in mine Land, and on each other man's
Land. For I will, that the Church in all things, be as free, as I would my soul
to be in the day of Judgment.

In the year 1087. this Church of St. Paul, was burnt with fire, and therewith
the most part of the City; which fire began at the entry of the West Gate, and
consumed the East Gate. Mauricius then Bishop, began therefore the Foundation
of a new Church of St. Paul, a work, that men (of that time) judged* would
never have bin finished, it was to them so wonderful for length and breadth;
and also the same was builded upon Arches (or Vaults) of stone, for defense of
fire, which was a manner of work (before that time) unknown to the people of
this Nation, and then brought in by the French, and the Stone was fetched from
Cane in Normandy.

The Steeple of this Church was builded and finished in the year 1222. The
Cross on the said Steeple fell down, and a new was set up in the year 1314.

The new work of Paul's (so called) at the East end abo^e the Quite, wa^ begun
in the year 1251. Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, Constable of Chester, and Custos
of England, in his time was a great Benefactor to this work, and was there
buried, in the year 1310.

The first of February, in the year 1444. about two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, the Steeple of Paul's was fired by Lightning, in the midst of the
Shaft, or Spire, both on the West side, and on the South; but by labor of many
well dispo^ed people, the same was (to appearance) quenched with Vinegar.

This Steeple was repaired in the year 1462. and the Weathercock again
erected, Robert Goodwin winding it up, the Rope brake, and he was destroyed on
the Pinacles, and the Cock was sore bruised; but B^rchwood (the Kings Plummer)
set it up again; since the which time, needing reparation, it was both taken
down and set up in the year 1553. At which time it was found to be of Copper,
gilt over, and the length from the Bill to the Tail, being four foot, and the
breadth over the Wings, three foot and a half, it weighed forty pounds, the
Cross from the Bole, to the Eagle (or Cock) was fifteen foot and six inches of
assize; the length thereof, overthwart, was five foot and ten Inches, and the
Compass of the Bole was nine foot and one inch. The inner Body of this Cross
was Oak, the next Cover was lead, and the outermost was of Copper red
varnished. The Bole and Eagle, or Cock, were of Copper, and gilt also. The
height of the Steeple was 520 Foot, whereof the Stone-work was 260 Foot, and
the Spire was likewise 260 Foot. The length of the whole Church is 240 Tailors
yards, which make 720 Foot. The breadth thereof is 130 Foot, and the height of
the Body of that Church, is 150 Foot.

The College of petty Cannons there, was founded by King Richard the second,
in honor of Queen Anne his Wife, and of her Progenitors, in the seventeenth of
his Reign. Their Hall and Lands was then gi^en unto them, as appears by the
Patent, Robert Dokesworth, then being Master thereof.

In the year 1408. the petty Canons then building their College, the Mayor and
Communalty granted them their Watercourse, and other Easements.

There was also one great Cloister, on the North side of this Church,
invironing a Plot of ground of old time called Pardon Churchyard, whereof
Thomas Moore, Dean of Paul's, was either the first builder, or a most special
Benefactor, and was buried there.

About this Cloister, was artificially, and richly painted the Dance of
Mochabray, or Dance of Death, commonly called the Dance of Paul's, the like
whereof was painted about S. Innocents Cloister, at Paris in France; the
Meeters or Poesy of this Dance, were translated out of French into English, by
John Lidgate, Monk of Berry, the Picture of Death leading all estates.

In the midst of this Pardon Churchyard, was also a fair Chapel, first
founded by Gilbert Becket, Portgrave, and principal Magistrate of this City, in
the Reign of King Stephen, who was there buried.

There was also a Chapel at the North door of Paul's, founded by Walter
Sherington, by License of Henry the sixth.

There was furthermore, a fair Chapel of the Holy Ghost, in Paul's Church, on
the North side, ^ounded in the year 1400, by Roger Holmes, Chancellor, and
Prebendary of Paul's.

Then under the Quire of Paul's, is a large Chapel, first dedicated to the name
of Jesus, founded, or rather confirmed the 37. of Henry the sixth, as appears
by his Parent thereof, dared at Crowdown to this effect.

Many Liege-Men and Christian People, having begun a Fraternity and Guild, to
the honor of the most glorious name of Jesu Christ, our Savior, in a place
called the Crowds of the Cathedral Church of Paul's in London, which has
continued long time peaceably, till now of late; whereupon they have made
request, and we have taken upon us, the name and charge of the Foundation, to
the laud of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and
especially, to the honor of Jesu, in whose honor the Fraternity was begun,
etc.

At the West end of this Jesus Chapel, under the Quire of Paul's, also was, and
is, a Parish Church of St. Faith, commonly called St. Faith under Paul's, which
served (as still it does) for the Stationers and others, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard* Pater Noster Row, and the places near adjoining.

The said Chapel of Jesus, being suppressed in the Reign of Edward the sixth,
the Parishioners of St. Faiths Church were removed into the same, as to a place
more sufficient for largeness and lightsomness, in the year 1551. and so it
remains.

In the East part of this Churchyard stands Paul's School, lately new
builded, and endowed in the year 1512. by John Collet, Doctor of Divinity, and
Dean of Paul's, for a hundred fifty three poor men's Children, to be taught free
in the same School; for which he appointed a Master, a Sub-master or Usher, and
a Chaplain, with large stipends for ever, committing the oversight thereof, to
the Masters, Wardens, and Assistants of the Mercers in London, because he was
Son to Henry Collet, Mercer, sometime Mayor.

Near unto this School, on the North side thereof, was (of old time) a great
and high Clochier, or Bell-house, four square, builded of stone, and in the
same, a most strong frame of Timber, with four Bells, the greatest of England:
these were called Jesus Bells, and belonging to Jesus Chapel: The same had a
great spire of Timber, covered with Lead, with the Image of St. Paul, on the
top, but was pulled down by Sir Miles Partridge Knight, in the Reign of Henry
the eighth: the common speech then was, that he did set one hundred pounds,
upon a cast at Dice against it, and so won the said Clochier and Bells of the
King, and then causing the Bells to be broken as they hung, the rest was pulled
down: This man was afterward executed on the Tower Hill, for matters concerning
the Duke of Summerset, the fifth of Edward the sixth.

In the year 1561. the fourth of June, betwixt the hours of three and four of
the Clock in the Afternoon, the great Spire of the Steeple of St. Paul's Church,
was fired by lightening, which brake forth (as it seemed) two or three yards
beneath the foot of the Cross, and from thence it burnt downward the spire to
the Battlements, Stone-work, and Bells, so furiously, that within the space of
four hours, the same Steeple, with all the roofs of the Church, were consumed,
to the great sorrow, and perpetual remembrance of the beholders; After this
mischance, the Queen Elizabeth directed her Letters to the Mayor, willing him
to take order for speedy repairing of the same; And she, of her gracious
disposition, for the furtherance thereof, did presently give, and deliver in
gold, one thousand Marks, with a Warrant for a thousand Loads of Timber, to be
taken out of her Woods, or elsewhere.

The Citizens also gave first a great Benevolence, and after that three
fifteens to be speedily paid.

The Clergy of England, within the Province of Canterbury, granted the fortieth
part of the value of their Benefices, charged with first fruits, the thirtieth
part of such as were not so charged; but the Clergy of London Dioces, granted
the thirtieth part of all that paid first fruits, and the twentieth part of
such as had paid their fruits.

Six Citizens of London, and two Petty Canons of Paul's Church, had charge to
further and oversee the work, wherein such expedition was used, that within one
Month next following the burning thereof, the Church was covered with boards
and Lead, in manner of a false roof, against the Weather, and before the end of
the said year, all the said Isles of the Church* were framed out of new Timber,
covered with Lead, and fully finished.

Paul's Church was full of great Monuments, the ancientest are of King Sibba,
and King Ethelred, two Saxon Kings: There are two ancient Bishops of London,
viz. Erkenvald, and William Norman, who being of the privy Council to William
the Conqueror, not only preserved, by his Mediation, the old pri^iledges of
London, but got them enlarged; whereupon, it was the Custom of the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, upon solemn days, when they came to Paul's to walk to the Graves
stone, where this Bishop lay; and Sir Edward Barkham, caused a Table to be hung
up there with Verses thereupon, called the Monument of Gratitude.

Touching other remarkable pieces of Antiquity, which belong to St. Paul's
Church, I leave them to such a Person of knowledge and industry, who may happily
make it his sole task to preserve the memory of so stately a Temple from the
injury of time.

Without the North Gate of Paul's Church, from the end of the old Exchange, West
up Pater Noster Row, by the two Lanes out of Paul's Church, the first out of
the Cross Isle of Paul's, the other out of the body of the Church, about the
midst thereof, and so West to the Golden Lion, be all of this Ward, as is
aforesaid: The Houses in this street from the first North Gate of Paul's
Churchyard, unto the next Gate, were first builded without the Wall of the
Churchyard, by Henry Walleis Mayor, in the year 1282. the rest of those Houses
go to the maintenance of London Bridge.

This street is now called Pater Noster Row, because of Stationers, or
Text-Writers, that dwelled there, who wrote, and sold all sorts of Books then
in use, namely, A. B. C. with the Pater Noster, Ave, Creed, Graces, etc.

There dwelled also Turners of Beads, and they were called Pater Noster makers.

At the end of this Pater Noster Row, is Ave-mary lane, so called upon the
like occasion, of Text-writers, and Bead-makers then dwelling there.

And at the end of that Lane, is likewise Creed-lane, lately so called, but
sometime Spurrier Row, of Spurriers dwelling there; And Amen-lane is added
thereunto, betwixt the South end of Warwick Lane, and the North end of Ave Mary
Lane.

At the North end of Ave Mary Lane, is one great House, builded of Stone and
Timber, of old time pertaining to John Duke of Britain, Earl of Richmond, as
appears by the Records of Edward the second; since that, it was called
Pembrooks Inn, near unto Ludgate, as belonging to the Earls of Pembrooke, in
the times of Richard the second, the eighteenth year, and of Henry the sixth,
in the fourteenth year: it was after called Aburgaveny House, and belonged to
Henry, late Lord of Aburgaveny; but the Company of Stationers have since
purchased it, and made it the Hall for the Meeting of their Society, converting
the Stone-work into a new fair Frame of Timber, and applying it to such
serviceable use, as themselves have thought convenient.

Betwixt the South end of Ave Mary Lane, and the North end of Creed-lane, is
the coming out of Paul's Churchyard, on the East, and the high street on the
West, toward Ludgate, and this was called Bowyer Roue, of Bowyers dwelling
there in old time, now worn out by Mercers and others.

In this street, on the North side, is the Parish Church of St. Martin, wherein
there are diverse hansom Monuments, and Epitaphs.

On the South side of this street, is the turning into the Black Friars, which
Order (sometime) had their Houses in Old-born, where they remained for the
space of five and fifty years, and then, in the year 1276. Gregory Rocksley,
Mayor, and the Barons of this City, granted and gave to Robert Kilwarby, Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, two Lanes or ways next the street of Baynards Castle;
and also the Tower of Mount fitchet, to be destroyed; in place of which, the
said Robert, builded the late new Church of the Blackfriars, and placed them
therein; King Edward the first, and Eleanor his Wife, were great Benefactors
thereunto: this was a large Church, and richly furnished with Ornaments,
wherein diverse Parliaments, and other great Meetings have been holden; namely,
in the year 1450* the twenty eighth of Henry the sixth, a Parliament was begun
at Westminster, and adjourned to the Black Friars in London, and from thence
to Leicester.

In the year one thousand five hundred twenty two, the Emperor Charles the
fifth, was lodged there.

In the year one thousand five hundred twenty four, the fifteenth of April, a
Parliament was begun at the Black Friars, wherein was demanded a Subsidy of
800000. pounds, to be raised of Goods and Lands, four shillings in every pound;
and in the end, was granted two shillings of the pound, of their Goods and
Lands, that were worth twenty pound, or might dispend twenty pounds by the
year, and so upward, to be paid in two years.

This Parliament was adjourned to Westminster, amongst the black Monks, and
ended in the Kings Palace there, the 14th of August, at nine of the Clock in
the night, and was therefore called the Black Parliament.

The same year, in the month of October, began a Parliament in the Black
Friars; in the which, Cardinal VVoolsey was condemned in the praemunire: this
House, valued at a hundred and four pound, fifteen shillings five pence, was
surrendered the 12th of November, the 30th of Henry the 8th.

Now to turn again to the Black Friars, through Bowyer Row, Ave Mary Lane, and
Pater Noster Row, to the Church of St. Michael ad Bladum, or at the Corn,
(corruptly, at the Querne) so called, because in place thereof, was sometime a
Corn-Market, stretching up West to the Shambles; It seems, that this Church
was new builded, about the Reign of Edward the third, Thomas Newton, first
Parson there, was buried in the Quire, in the year 1461. At the East end of
this Church stood a Cross, called the old Cross, in West Cheap, which was
taken down in the year 1390. since the which time, the said Parish Church was
also taken down, but new builded, and enlarged in the year 1430. the eighth of
Henry the sixth, William Eastfield Mayor, and the Communalty, granted of the
common ground of the City, three foot and an half in breadth, on the North
part, and four foot in breadth toward the East, for the enlarging thereof.

At the West end of this Parish Church, is a small passage for people on foot,
through the same Church, and West from the said Church, some distance, is
another passage out of Pater Noster Row, and is called (of such a sign)
Panyer Alley, which comes out into the North, over against Saint Martins Lane.

Next is Ivy Lane, so called of Ivy, growing on the Walls of the Prebends
Houses; but now the Lane is replenished on both the sides, with fair Houses,
and di^ers Offices have bin there kept, by Registers, namely, for the
Prerogative Court of the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, the Probate of Wills, which
is now removed into Warwick lane; and also for the Lord Treasurers Remembrance
of the Exchequer, etc.

This Lane runs North, to the Westend of St. Nicholas Shambles: of old time
there was one great House, sometimes belonging to the Earls of Brita^n; since
that, to the Lovels, and was called Lovels Inn.

Then is Eldenesse Lane, which stretches North to the high street of Newgate
Market, the same is now called Warwick Lane, of an ancient House there builded
by an Earl of Warwick, and was since called Warwick Inn: It is in Record,
called a Message in Eldenesse lane* in the Parish of St. Sepulcher: the twenty
eighth of Henry the sixth, Cicilie, Duchess of Warwick possessed it.

Now again, from the Conduit by Paul's Gate, on the North side, is a large
street, running West to Newgate; the first part whereof, from the Conduit to
the Shambles, (of selling Bladders there) called Bladder-street: then behind
the Butchers Shops, be now diverse Slaughter-houses inward, and Tipling-houses
outward: This is called Mount Goddard-street, of the Tipling-houses there, and
the Goddards mounting from the Tap to the Table, from the Table to the Mouth,
and sometimes over the Head.

This street goes up to the North end of Ivy lane; before this Mount-goddard
street, Stall-boards were of old time set up by the Butchers, to show, and to
sell their Flesh meat upon, over the which Stall-Boards; they first builded
sheds, to keep off the Weather; but since that, (incroaching by little and
little) they have made their Stall-boards and sheds, fair Houses, meet for the
principal Shambles.

Next is Newgate Market, first of Corn and Meal, and then of other victuals,
which stretches almost to Eldenese-Lane, a fair new and strong Frame of
Timber, covered with Lead, was therefore set up at the Charges of the City:
near to the West Corner of St. Nicholas Shambles, for the meal to be weighed,
in the first of Edward the sixth, Sir John Gresham being then Mayor.

On this side the North Corner of Eldenese Lane, stood sometime a proper
Parish Church of St. Ewine, as is before said, given by Henry the eighth
toward the erecting of Christ's Church. It was taken down, and in place
thereof, a fair strong Frame of Timber erected, wherein dwell men of diverse
Trades, And from this Frame to Newgaete* is all of this Ward, and so an end
thereof.

Of the two and Twentieth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called
Bread-street Ward.
THen is Bread-street it self, so called, of Bread in old time there sold, for
it appears by Records, that in the year 1302, which was the thirty of Edward
the first the Bakers of London were bounden to sell no Bread in their Shops or
Houses, but in the Market, and that they should have four Hall-motes in the
year, at four several Terms, to determine of enormities belonging to the said
Company.

This street, giving the name to the whole Ward, begins in West Cheap,
almost by the Standard; and runs down South, through or thwart
Wathling-street, to Knight Riders-street aforesaid, where it ends; This
Bread-street is wholly on both sides of this Ward, out of the which street, on
the East side is Basing Lane, a piece whereof, to wit, to, and over against the
back gate of the Red Lion in Wathling-street, is of this Bread-street Ward.

Then is Fryday-street beginning also in West Cheap, and runs down South
through Wathling-street, to Knight-Riders street, or old Fishstreet. This
Fryday-street is of Bread-street Ward, on the East side, from over against the
North-East corner of Saint Matthews Church, and on the West side, from the
South corner of the said Church, down as aforesaid.

In this Fryday-street, on the West side thereof, is a Lane, commonly called
Maiden Lane, or Distaffe Lane, corruptly for Distar Lane, which runs West
into the old Exchange, and in this Lane is also one other Lane, on the South
side thereof; likewise called Distar Lane, which runs down to Knight-Rider
street, or Old Fish-street And so be the bounds of this whole Ward.

Monuments to be noted here, first at Bread-street corner, the North-East end,
1595, of Thomas Tmolioson, causing in the High street of Cheap, a Vault to be
dug and made; there was sound at fifteen foot deep, a fair payement, like
unto that above ground, and at the further end, at the Channel, was found a
Tree, sawed into five steps, which was to step over some Brook, running out of
the West, toward Walbrooke, and upon the edge of the said Brook as it seems,
there were found lying along, the bodies of two great Trees, the ends whereof
were then sawed off, and firm Timber, as at the first when they fell, part of
the said Trees remain yet in the ground undigged; It was all forced ground,
until they went past the Trees aforesaid, which was about seventeen foot deep,
or better; Thus much has the ground of this City (in that place) been raised
from the main.

Next to be noted, the most beautiful Frame of fair Houses and Shops, that be
within the Walls of London, or else where in England, commonly called
Goldsmiths Row, betwixt Bread-street end, and the Cross in Cheap, but is
within this Bread-street Ward.

Then for Watheling-street, which Leyland calls Atheling, or Noble-street,
but since he shows no reason why, I rather take it to be so named, of the
great Highway of the same calling. True it is, that at this present the
Inhabitants thereof are wealthy Drapers, Retailers of Woollen Cloths, both Broad
and Narrow, of all sorts, more than in any one street of this City.

Of the Old Exchange, I have noted in Faringdon Ward, wherefore I pass down to
Knight-Riders street, whereof I have also spoken in Cordwayner street Ward; But
in this part of the said Knight-Riders street, is a Fish-market kept, and
therefore called Old Fish-street, for a difference from New Fishstreet.

In this Old Fishstreet, is one Row of small Houses, placed along in the
midst of Knight-Riders-street, which Row is also of Bread-street Ward. These
Houses, now possessed by Fishmongers, were at the first but moveable Boards, or
Stalls, set out on Market-daies, to show their fish there to be sold, but
procuring License to set up Sheds, they grew to shops, and by little and
little, to tall Houses of three or four Stories in height, and now is called
Fish-street.

Walter Turk, Fishmonger, Mayor, 1349, had two Shops in Old Fish-street, over
against Saint Nicholas Church, the one rented at five shillings the year, the
other four shillings.

Bread-street, so called of Bread sold there (as I said) is now wholly
inhabited by rich Merchants, and diverse fair Inns be there, for good receipt of
Carriers, and other Travelers to the City.

On the East side of this street, at the corner of Watheling street, is the
comely Church of Alh^llowes in Bread-street.

On the same side is Salters Hall, with six Almshouses in number, builded for
poor decayed Brethren of that Company; This Hall was burned in the year 1539,
and again re-edified.

Lower down, on the same side, is the Parish Church of Saint Mildred the Virgin.

Out of this Bread-street, on the same side, is Basing Lane, a part whereof (as
is before showed) is of this Ward, but how it took the name of Basing, I have
not read; In the twentieth year of Richard the second, the same was called the
Bake-house, whether meant of the Kings Bake-house, or of Bakers dwelling there,
and baking Bread to serve the Market in Bread-street, where the Bread was sold,
I know not, but sure I am, I have not read of Basing, or of Gerrard the Giant,
to have any thing there to do.

On the South side of this Lane, is one great House, of old time builded upon
arched Vaults, and with arched Gates, of Stone brought from Cane in Normandy,
the same is now a common Ostrey for receipt of Travelers, commonly and
corruptly called Gerrards Hall, of a Giant said to have dwelled there. In the
high roofed Hall of this House, sometime stood a large Firr-pole, which reached
to the roof thereof, and was said to be one of the sta^es that Gerrard the
Giant used in the Wars to run withal, there stood also a Ladder of the same
length, which (as they said) served to ascend to the top of the staff. Of later
years this Hall is altered in building, and diverse rooms are made in it;
Notwithstanding, the Pole is removed to once corner of the Hall, and the Ladder
hanged broken, upon a Wall in the yard.

Now on the West side of Breadstreet, amongst diverse fair and large Houses for
Merchants, and fair Inns for Passengers, had ye one Prisonhouse pertaining to
the Sheriffs of London, called the Compter in Bread-street, but in the year
1555, the Prisoners were removed from thence, to one other new Compter in
Wood-street, provided by the Cities purchase, and builded for that purpose, the
cause of which remove was this; Richard Husband Pasteler, Keeper of this
Compter in Breadstreet, being a willful and headstrong man, dealt (for his own
advantage) hard with the prisoners under his charge, having also servants such
as himself liked best for their bad usage, and would not for any complaint be
reformed; whereupon, in the year 1550, Sir Rowland Hill being Mayor, by the
assent of a Court of Aldermen, he was sent to the Goal of Newgate, for the
cruel handling of his prisoners, and it was commanded to the Keeper, to set
those Irons on his legs which are called the Widows Alms; These he ware from
Thursday, till Sunday in the afternoon, and being by a Court of Aldermen
released on the Tuesday, was bound in an hundred Marks, to observe from thence
forth an Act made by the Common Council, for the ordering of prisoners in the
Compters; all which notwithstanding, he continued as before: For being on a
Jury, to enquire against a Sessions of Goal delivery, in the year 1552, it was
found that the Prisoners were still hardly dealt with all for their achates,
and otherwise, as also that Thieves and Strumpets were there lodged for four
pence the night, whereby they might be safe from searches that were made
abroad, for the which enormities, and other not needful to be recited, he was
indicted at that Session, but did rub it out, and could not be reformed, till
this remove of the prisoners, for the House in Bread-street was his own by
Lease, or otherwise, so that he could not be put from it.

Now in Friday-street, so called of Fishmongers dwelling there, and serving
Frydays Market, on the East side is a small Parish Church commonly called Saint
John Evangelist. The Monuments therein be, of John Dogget, Merchant-Taylor, one
of the Sheriffs in the year 1509.

Then lower down, is another Church of Saint Margaret Moses, so called (as
seems) of one Moses, that was Founder, or new Builder thereof.

In this Distar Lane, on the North side thereof is the Cordwayners or
Shoomakers Hall, which Company were made a Brotherhood or Fraternity, in the
eleventh of Henry the fourth.

Of the Twenty third Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called
Queen-hithe Ward.
NExt unto Bread-street Ward, on the South side thereof, is Queen-Hith Ward, so
called of a Watergate, or Harborow for Boats, Lighters, and Barges, and was
(of old time) for Ships: at what time, the Timber Bridge at London, was drawn
up, for the passage of them to the said Hith, as to a principal Strand for
landing and unlading against the midst and heart of the City; this Ward
begins in the East, in Knight-Riders-street; on the South side thereof, at
the East end of the Parish Church called the Holy Trinity, and runs West on
the South side, to a Lane called Lambert Hill, which is the length of the Ward
in Knight-Riders street, out of the which street are diverse Lanes, running
South to Thames street, and are of this Ward; the first is Trinity Lane, which
runs down by the West end of Trinity Church; Then is Spuren Lane, or
Spooners Lane, now called Huggen Lane; Then Bread-street Hill, Then Saint Mary
Mounthaunt, out of the which Lane, on the East side thereof, is one other Lane,
turning East through St. Nicholas Olaves Churchyard, to Bread-street Hill;
This Lane is called Finimore Lane, or Five foot Lane, because it is but five
foot in breadth; at the West end, in the midst of this Lane, runs down one
other Lane broader, South to Thames street, I think the same to be called
Desborne Lane; for we read of such a Lane to have been in the Parish of Saint
Mary Summerset in the twenty two of Edward the third where there is said to ly
between the Tenement of Edward de Mountacute Knight, on the East part, and the
Tenement sometime pertaining to William Gladwine, on the West, one plot of
ground, containing in length toward Thames street, twenty five foot, etc. Last
of all have ye Lambart Hill, so called of one Lambart owner thereof, and this
is the farthest West part of this Ward.

First in Knight-Riders street is the small Parish Church of the Holy Trinity,
lately very old, and in danger of down falling, Collections were made for the
repairing thereof; but they would not stretch so far; until a general means was
made, as appears by a public notice thereof, declared in the said Church.

Toward the West end of Knight-Riders street, is the Parish Church of Saint
Nicholas Cold Abbey, a proper Church somewhat ancient, as appears by the
ways raised there about, so that men are forced to descend into the body of
the Church, it has been called of many Colden Abbey, of some Cold Abbey or
Cold Bay, and so have the most ancient Writings; as standing in a cold place,
as Cold Harbor, and such like, the Steeple or tall Tower of this Church, with
the South I Will, has been of later building, to wit, the first of Richard the
second, when it was meant, that the whole old Church should have been new
builded, as appears by the Arching begun on the East side the Steeple, under
the which, in the Stone work, the Arms of one Buckland, Esquire, and his Wife,
Daughter to Beaupere, are cut in Stone, and also are in the Glass Windows,
whereby it appears, he was the Builder thereof, and Repairer of the residue.

In Trinity Lane, on the West side thereof, is the Painter Stainers Hall, for
so of old time were they called, but now that workmanship of Staining is
departed and out of use in England. Lower down in Trinity Lane, on the East
side thereof, was sometime a great Message pertaining unto John Earl of
Cornwall, in the fourteenth of Edward the third.

On Bread-street Hill, down to the Thames, on both sides, be diverse fair
Houses, inhabited by Fishmongers, Cheesemongers, and Merchants of diverse
Trades; on the West side whereof is the Parish Church of St. Nicholas Olave, a
convenient Church.

The next is Old Fish-street Hill, a passage so called, which also runs down
to Thames street; In this Lane, on the East side thereof, is the one end of
Finimore or Five foor Lane.

On the West side of this Old Fish-street Hill, is the Bishop of Hereford's
Inn, or lodging, an ancient House, and large rooms, builded of Stone and
Timber, which sometime belonged to the Mounthaunts in Norfolk. Radulphus de
Mayden-stone, Bishop of Hereford about the year, one thousand two hundred
thirty four, bought it of the Mounthaunts, and gave it to the Bishops of
Hereford, his Successors. Charles, both Bishop of Hereford, and Chancellor of
the Marches, about the year 1517 repaired it, since the which time, the same is
greatly ruined, and is now divided into many small Tenements; The Hall, and
principal Rooms, are in House to make Sugar-Loaves, etc.

Next adjoining is the Parish Church of Saint Mary de Monte also, or
Mounthaunt; this is a very small Church, and at the first builded to be a
Chapel for the said House of the Mounthaunts, and for Tenements thereunto
belonging.

On the East side of this Old Fish-street Hill, is one great House, now letten
out for Rent, which House sometime was one of the Halls pertaining to the
Company of Fishmongers, at such time as they had six Hall-Motes or Meeting
places, namely, twain in Bridge-street, or New Fish-street, twain in Old
Fish-street, whereof this was one, and twain in Stock-Fishmonger Row, or Thames
street, as appears by a Record the twenty two of Richard the second.

Next Westward is one other Lane, called Lambart Hill, the East side whereof is
wholly of this Ward, and but half the West side, to wit, from the North end of
the Black-smiths Hall.

Then in Thames street, of this Ward, and on the North side over against the
Queens Hith, is the Parish Church of Saint Michael a convenient Church, but all
the Monuments therein are defaced.

At the West end of that Church, goes up a Lane, called Pyel-lane; on the same
North side, at the South end of Saint Mary Mounthaunt Lane, is the Parish
Church of Saint Summerset, over against the Broken-Wharfe.

Then is a small Parish Church of St. Peter, called parva, or little, near unto
Paul's Wharf. In this Church no Monuments do remain.

At the West end thereof is a Lane called Saint Peter's Hill; but two Houses up
that Lane, on the East side, is of this Ward, and the rest is of Castle
Baynards Ward.

On the South side of Thames street, beginning again in the East among the
Cooks, the first in this Ward, is the Sign of David the King.

Then is Towns-end Lane, turning down to the Thames.

Then is Queen-hithe, a large receptacle for Ships, Lighters, Barges, and such
other Vessels. Touching the Antiquity and use of this Gate and Hithe, first I
find, that the same belonged to one named Edred, and was then called Edreds
Hith, which since falling into the hands of King Stephen, it was by his Charter
confirmed to William de Ypre, the Farm thereof in Fee and in Heritage; William
de Ypre, gave it unto the Prior and Covent of the Holy Trinity within Ealdgate.

This Edreds Hith, after the foresaid Grant, came again to the Kings hands, by
what means I have not read, but it pertained unto the Queen, and therefore was
called Ripa Reginae, the Queens Bank, or Queens-Hith, and great profit thereof
was made to her use, as may appear by this which follows.

King Henry the third, in the ninth of his Reign, commanded the Constables of
the Tower of London, to arrest the Ships of the Cinque Ports on the River of
Thames, and to compel them to bring their Corn to no other place, but to the
Queens Hith only. In the eleaventh of his Reign, he charged the said Constable,
to distrain all Fish offered to be sold in any place of this City, but at the
Queens Hith. Moreover, in the eight and twentieth of his Reign, an Inquisition
was made before William of York, and the Provost of Beverley, Henry of Bath,
and Hierome of Caxton, Justices Itinerantes, sitting in the Tower of London,
touching the Customs of Queen-hith, observed in the year last before the Wars
between the King and his Father, and the Barons of England, and of old Customs
of other times, and what Customs had been changed, at what time the Tax and
Payment of all things coming thither, and between VVoore-path, and Anede Hith,
were found and seized, according to the old Order, as well Corn and Fish, as
of other things; All which Customs were as well to be observed in the part of
Down-gate, as in Queen-Hith, for the Kings use, when also it was found, that
the Corn arriving between the Gate of Guild Hall, of the Merchants of Colleyne,
and the Soke of the Archbishop of Canterbury, (for he had a House near unto
the Blackfriars) was not to be measured by any other quarter, than by that of
the Queens Soke.

Next adjoining to this Queen-hith, on the West side thereof, is Salt-Wharf,
named of Salt taken up, measured, and sold there.

The next is Stew Lane, of a Stew, or Hot-house there kept.

After that is Timber-Hith, or Timber street, so called, of Timber, or Boards,
there taken up, and wharsed; it is in the Parish of Saint Mary Summers Hith, as
we read in the fifty six of Henry the third, and in the ninth of Edward the
second.

Then is Brooks Wharfe, and Broken Wharfe, a Watergate or Key, so called of
being broken and fallen down into the Thames.

By this Broken-VVharfe remains one large old building of Stone, with Arched
Gates; which Message, as we find, in the Reign of Henry the third, the forty
three year, pertained unto Hugh de Bigot, and in the eleaventh of Edward the
third, to Thomas Brotherton, the Kings Brother, Earl of Norfolk, Marshall of
England, in the eleventh of Henry the sixth, to John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
etc.

Within the Gate of this House (now belonging to the City of London) is lately,
to wit, in the year 1594. and 1595, builded one large House, of great height,
called an Engine, made by Bevis Bulmar, Gentleman, for the conveying and
forcing of Thames water, to serve in the middle and West parts of the City; the
ancient great Hall of this Message, is yet standing, and pertaining to a great
Brew House for Beer.

West from this is Trigge Lane, going down to the Thames. Next is called
Bosse-Lane of a Bosse of water, like unto that of Belingsgate, there placed by
the Executors of Richard Whittington.

Then is one great Message, sometime belonging to the Abbots of Chartsey, in
Surrey, and was their Inn, wherein they were lodged when they repaired to the
City: it is now called Sandy House, by what reason we have not heard; some
think the Lord Sands has been lodged there.

Of the Twenty fourth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called
Castle-Baynard Ward.
THen next is Castle Baynard Ward, so named of an old Castle there; This Ward
begins in the East on the Thames side, at an House called, Huntington House,
and runs West by Paul's Wharfe, by Baynards Castle, Puddle Wharfe, and by the
South side of Blackfriars; Then turning by the East Wall of the said Friars to
the South-West end of Creed Lane; then on the North side of Thames street, over
against Huntington House, by St. Peter's Church and Lane, called Peter Hill,
along till over against Puddle Wharfe, and then North up by the great Wardrobe,
to the West end of Carter Lane; Then up Creed Lane, Ave Mary Lane, and a piece
of Pater noster Row, to the Sign of the Golden Lion, and back again up Warwick
Lane, all the East side thereof, to the Sign of the Crown by Newgate-Market;
and this is the farthest North part of this Ward.

Then out of Thames street be Lanes ascending North to Knight-Riders street;
The first is Peter's Hill Lane, all of that Ward, (two Houses excepted,
adjoining to St. Peter's Church) The next is Paul's Wharfe Hill, which thwarting
Knight-Riders street, and Carter Lane, goes up to the South Chain of Paul's
Churchyard.

Then is Adle-street, over against the West part of Baynards Castle, going up
by the West end of Knight-Riders street, and to Carter Lane.

Thus much for Lanes out of Thames street. The one half of the West side of
Lambert Hill Lane being of this Ward, at the North-west end thereof, on the
South side, and at the West end of St. Mary Magdalens Church; on the North
side, begins Knight-Riders street to be of this Ward, and runs West on
both sides, to the Parish Church of St. Andrew by the Wardrobe.

Then at the said East end of St. Mary Magdalens Church, goes up the Old
Exchange, all the West side whereof, upto the South-East gate of Paul's
Churchyard, and by St. Austins Church, is of this Ward.

About the midst of this Old Exchange, on the West side thereof, is Carter
Lane, which runs West to the East entry of the Blackfriars, and the South
end of Creed-Lane, out of the which Carter Lane descends a Lane, called
Dolittle Lane, and comes into Knight-Riders street, by the Boar-head Tavern,
and more West is Sermon Lane, by an Inn called the Powl-head. Then out of
Carter Lane, on the North side thereof, the South Chain of Paul's Churchyard,
and the Churchyard it self, on that South side of Paul's Church, and the Church
of St. Gregory, the Bishops Palace, and the Deans Lodging, be all of this Ward
and such be the bounds thereof.

The Ornaments in this Ward, be Parish Churches four, of old time a Castle'
diverse Noble-mens Houses, Halls of Companies twain, and such others as shall be
showed.

In Thames street at the South-East end, is an ancient Message, of old time
called Beaumonts Inn, as belonging to that Family of Noblemen of this Realm,
in the fourth of Edward the third. Edward the fourth in the fifth of his Reign,
gave it to W. Hastings, Lord Chamberlain, Master of his Mints; It is how
called Huntington House, as belonging to the Earls of Huntington.

Next is Paul's Wharfe a large landing place, with a common Stayre upon the
River of Thames, at the end of a street called Paul's Wharf Hill, which runs
down from Paul's Chain.

Next is a great Message, called Scroopes Inn, sometime belonging to the
Scroopes, in the thirty one of Henry the sixth.

Then is one other great Message, sometime belonging to the Abbey of Fiscampe,
beyond the Sea, and by reason of the Wars, it coming to the hands of King
Edward the third, the same was given to Sir Simon Burley, Knight of the Gar^er,
and therefore called Burley House in Thames street, between Baynards Castle and
Paul's Wharfe.

Then have you Baynards Castle, whereof this whole Ward takes name; This
Castle banketh on the River Thames, and was call Baynards Castle, of Baynard
a Nobleman, that came in with William the Conqueror, of the which Castle and
of Baynard himself, we have spoken in another place. There was also another
Tower by Baynards Castle, builded by King Edward the second. Edward the third,
in the second of his Reign, gave it to William Duke of Hamelake, in the County
of York, and his Heirs, for one Rose yearly to be paid for all service; the
same place (as seems) was since called Legates Inn, in the seventh of Edward
the fourth, where be now diverse Wood-Wharfes in the place.

Then is there a great Brew House, and Puddle-Wharfe, a Watergate into the
Thames, where Houses use to be watered, and therefore being filled with their
trampling and made puddle-like, as also of one Puddle dwelling there, it is
called Puddle Wharfe. Then is there a Lane between the Black Friars and the
Thames, called in the twenty six of Edward the third, Castle-lane. This Ward
ascends up by the East Wall of the Blackfriars, to the South West end of
Creed Lane where it ends on that side. Then to begin again on the North side
of Thames Street, over against Huntington House, by St. Peter's Church and Lane,
called Peter Hill, and so to St. Bennet Hude, (or Hithe) over against Paul's
VVharfe, is a convenient Parish Church, which has the Monuments of Sir
William Cheny Knight, and Margaret his Wife 1442 buried there.

West from this Church, by the South end of Addle street, almost against
Puddle VVharfe, there is one ancient building of Stone and Timber, builded by
the Lords of Barkley, and therefore called Barkleys Inn. This House is now all
in ruin, and letten out in several Tenements, yet the Arms of the Lord Barkley
remain in the Stone-work of an arched Gate, and is between a Cheveron Crosses
ten, three, and four.

Richard Beauchampe, Earl of Warwick, was lodged in this House, then called
Barkleys Inn, in the Parish of St. Andrew, in the Reign of Henry the sixth;
Then turning up toward the North* is the Parish Church of St. Andrew in the
Wardrobe, a proper Church, but few Monuments has it. John Parnt has founded
a Chauntrey there.

Then is the Kings great Wardrobe, Sir John Beauchamp Knight of the Garter,
Constable of Dover, Warden of the Cinqueports, (son to Guido de Beauchamp Earl
of Warwick) builded this House, was lodged there, deceased in the year 1359,
and was buried on the South side of the middle I Will of Paul's Church. His
Executors sold the House to King Edward the third. Touching La^es ascending out
of Thames street, to Knight-Riders, the first is Peter Hill, wherein I find no
ma^ter of note more than certain Almshouses, lately founded on the West side
thereof, by David Smith Embroyderer, for six poor Widows, whereof each to have
twenty shillings by the year. At the upper end of this Lane toward the North
the corner Houses there, be called Peter Key, but the reason thereof we have
not heard. Then is Paul's VVharfe, on the East side whereof is VVoodmongers
Hall. And next adjoining is Darby-house, sometime belonging to the Stanleys,
for Thomas Stanley: first Earl of Darby, of that name, who married the Lady
Margaret, Countess of Richmond, Mother to Henry the seventh, in his time
builded it. Queen Mary gave it to Gilbert Dethick, then Garter, principal King
of Arms of English men; Thomas Hauley, Clarentieux, King of Arms of the South
parts; William Harvey alias Norroy, King of Arms of the North parts, and the
other Heralds and Pursevants of Arms, and their Successors, all the Capital
Message or House called Darby house, with the appurtenances, situate in the
Parish of Saint Bennet, and Saint Peter, and then being in the tenure of Sir
Richard Sackvile Knight, and lately parcel of the Lands of Edward Earl of
Darby, etc. To the end, that the said Kings of Arms, Heralds, and Pursevants
of Arms, and their Successors might (at their liking) dwell together, and at
meet times congregate, speak, confer, and agree among themselves, for the good
Government of their Faculty, and their Records might be more safely kept, etc.

On the West side of this street is one other great House builded of Stone,
which belongs to Paul's Church, and was sometime lette^ to the Blunts, Lord
Mountjoy; but of later time to a College in Cambridge, and from them to the
Doctors of the Civil Law, and Arches, who keep a Commons there; and many of
them being lodged there, it is called the Doctors Commons.

In Lambard Hill Lane, on the West side thereof, is the Black-smiths Hall.
Over Against the North-west end of this Lambard Hill Lane in Knight-Riders
street, is the Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, a small Church, having but
few Monuments.

By the East end of St. Mary Magdalene Church, runs up the Old Exchange
Lane, by the West end of Carter Lane, to the South-East Gate or Chain of Paul's
Churchyard, as is before showed; And in this part was the Exchange kept, and
Bullion was received for Coynage, as is noted in Faringdon Ward Within.

In this Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, out of Knight-Riders street, up to
Carter Lane, be two small Lanes, the one of them called Doo-little Lane, as a
place not inhabited by Artificers, or open Shopkeepers, but serving for a near
passage from Knight-Riders street to Carter-Lane. The other corruptly called
Sermon Lane, for Sheremoniers Lane; For we find it by that name recorded in the
fourteenth of Edward the first; And in that Lane, a place to be called the
Black L^ft, (of melting Silver) with four Shops adjoining. It may therefore be
well supposed, that Lane to take its name of Shermonier^, such as cut and
rounded the Plates, to be Coined or stamped into Estarling pence; for the place
of Coining was the Old Exchange.

In Knight-Riders street, was the College of Physicians, wherein was founded
in the year 1582, a public Lecture in Surgery, to be read twice every week,
etc. as is showed elsewhere.

Toward the South, is called the Lollards Tower, and has been used as the
Bishops prison, for such as were detected for opinions in Religion, contrary to
the Faith of the Church.

Adjoining to this Lowlards Tower, is the Parish Church of St. Gregory,
appointed to the Petty Chanons of Paul's.

Of the Twenty fifth Ward, or Aldermanry of the City of London, called
Farringdon Ward without, or Extra.
THe farthest Westward of this City, being the twenty fifth Ward of London,
but without the Walls, is called Farringdon without, and was of old time, part
of the other Faringdon within, until the seventeenth of Richard the second,
that it was divided and made twain, by the names of Faringdon Intra, and
Faringdon Extra, as is before showed.

Touching Ornaments and Antiquities in this Ward; First, betwixt the said
Newgate, and the Parish of St. Sepulchers, is a way toward Smithfield, called
Gilt-Spur, or Knight-Riders street, of the Knights and other riding that way
into Smithfield, replenished with buildings on both sides up to Pye-corner, a
place so called of such a Sign, sometimes a fair Inn, for receipt of
Travelers, but now divided into Tenements, and over against the said
Pye-corner, lies Cock-lane, which runs down to Oldburn Conduit. Beyond this
Pye-corner, lies West Smithfield, compassed about with buildings: at first on
the South side, following the right hand stands the large Hospital of St.
Bartholmews, founded by Rahere, the first Prior of Saint Bartholmewes thereto
near adjoining, in the year, 1102.

Alfune, that had not long before builded the Parish Church of Saint Giles,
without Creplegate, became first Hospitelar, or Proctor for the poor of this
House and went himself daily to the Shambles and other Markets, where he Begged
the Charity of devout people for their relief, promising to the liberal
givers, (and that by alleging Testimonies of the holy Scripture) reward at the
hands of God. Henry the third, granted to Katherine late Wife to William
Hardell, twenty foot of Land in length and breadth in Smithfield, next to the
Chapel of St. Bartholomew, to build a Recluse or Ankorage, commanding the
Mayor and Sheriffs of London, to assign the said twenty foot to the said
Katherine, the eleventh of Henry the third, the foundation of this Hospital for
the poor and diseased, and their special sustentation, was confirmed by Edward
the third, the twenty sixth of his Reign; It was governed by a Master, and
eight Brethren being Priests, for the Church, and four Sisters to see the poor
served.

This Hospital was valued at the suppression, in the year 1539, the thirty one
of Henry the eighth, to five and thirty pounds, six shillings, seven, pence
yearly. The Church remains a Parish Church to the Tenants dwelling in the
Precinct of the Hospital; But in the year 1546, on the thirteenth of January,
the Bishop of Rochester, preaching at Paul's Cross, declared the gift of the
said King to the Citizens, for relieving of the poor, which contained the
Church of the Gray Friars, the Church of Saint Bartholomew, with the Hospital,
the Messuages, and appurrenances in Gilt-Spur, alias Knight-Riders street,
Briton street, Peter Key, in the Parish of Saint Mary Magdalen, in old
Fish-street, and in the Parish of Saint Bennet, Huda, Linie-hurst, or Limehost,
in the Parish of Stebunheth, etc.

Then also were Orders devised for relief of the poor, the Inhabitants were all
called to their Parish Churches, where, by Sir Richard Dobbs, then Mayor, their
several Aldermen, or other grave Citizens, they were by eloquent Orations
persuaded, how great, and how many Commodities would ensue unto them, and their
City, if the poor of diverse sorts, which they named, were taken from out their
streets, Lanes, and Alleys, and were bestowed and provided for in Hospitals
abroad, etc. Therefore was every man moved, liberally to grant (what they would
impart) toward the preparing and furnishing of such Hospitals; and also, what
they would contribute weekly toward their maintenance for a time, which (they
said) should not be past one year, or twain, until they were better furnished
of endowment; To make short, every man granted liberally, according to his
ability. Books were drawn of the Relief in every Ward of the City, toward the
new Hospitals, and were delivered by the Major to the Kings Commissioners, on
the seventeenth of February; and order was taken therein, at the six and twenty
of July. In the year 1552, the repairing of the Gray Friars House for poor
Fatherless Children, was taken in hand; and also, in the latter end of the same
Month, began the repairing of this Hospital of St. Bartholmew, and was of new
endowed, and furnished at the charges of the Citizens.

On the East side of this Hospital lies Duck-lane, which runs out of
Smithfield South, to the North end of Little Britain street.

On the East side of this Duck-lane, and also of Smithfield, lies the late
dissolved Priory of St. Bartholmew, founded also by Rahere, a pleasant witted
Gentleman, and therefore in his time called the Kings Minstrel, about the year
of Christ, 1102. He founded it in a part of the before named Moorish ground,
which was therefore a common Lay-stall of all filth, that was to be voided out
of the City: He placed Canons there, himself became their first Prior, and so
continued till his dying day, and was there buried in a fair Monument, renewed
afterward by Prior Bolton.

To this Priory, King Henry the second, granted the privilege of a Fair, to
be kept yearly at Bartholomew-tyde, for three days, to wit, the Eve, the Day,
and the next Morrow; to the which, the Clothiers of England, and Drapers of
London repaired, and had their Boothes and standings within the Churchyard of
this Prioty, closed in with Walls and Gates locked every night, and watched,
for safety of Men's Goods and Wares, a Court of Pipepowders was daily, during
the Fair holden, for debts and Contracts.

On the North side of this Priory, is the lane truly called Long, which
reaches from Smithfield to Aldersgate Street.

This Lane is now lately builded on both the sides, with Tenements for Brokers,
Tiplers, and such like; the rest of Smithfield, from Long lane end, to the
Bars, is enclosed with Inns, Brew-houses, and large Tenements.

On the West side is Chicken-lane, down to Cow-bridge; then be the Pens or
Folds, so called of Sheep there parted, and penned up to be sold on the Market
days.

Then is Smithfield Pond, which of (old time) in Records, was called
Horse-Poole, for that men watered Horses there, and was a great water.

In the sixth of Henry the fifth, a new Building was made in the West part of
Smithfield, betwixt the said Pool and the River of the Wells, or
Turnmill-brook, in a place then called the Elmes, for that there grew many
Elm-Trees, and this had bin the place of Execution for offenders; since the
which time, the building there has bin so increased, that now remains not
one Tree growing.

Amongst these new buildings is Cow-bridge street, or Cow-lane, which turns
toward Holdbourn; in which Lane, the Prior of Semperingham had his Inn, or
London Lodging.

The rest of that West side of Smithfield, has diverse fair Inns, and other
comely Buildings, up to Hosier-lane, which also turns down to Houldbourn,
till it meet with Cowbridge-street, from this Lane to Cock-lane, over against
Pie-Corner.

In the year 1362, the thirty sixth of Edward the third, on the first five
days of May, in Smithfield, were Justs holden, the King and Queen being
present, with the most part of the Chivalry of England, and of France, and of
other Nation, to the which came Spaniards, Cyprians, and Armenians, Knightly
requesting aid of the King of England, against the Pagans that invaded their
Confines.

The 48. of Edward the third, Dame Alice Perrers, or Pierce, (the Kings
Concubine) as Lady of the Sun, rode from the Tower of London, through Cheap,
accompanied by many Lords and Ladies, every Lady leading a Lord by his Horse
Bridle, till they came into West Smithfield, and then began a great Just,
which endured seven days after.

In the year 1393. the 17th of Richard the second, certain Lords of Scotland,
came into England, to get worship, by force of Arms, the Earl of Mar
challenged the Earl of Nottingham, to Just with him, and so they rode together
certain Courses, but not the full Challenge, for the Earl of Mar was cast
both Horse and Man, and two of his Ribs broken with the fall, so that he was
conveyed out of Smithfield, and so toward Scotland, but dyed by the way at
York.

Sir William Darel Knight, the Kings Banner-bearer of Scotland, challenged Sir
Percey Courtney Knight, the Kings Banner-bearer of England, and when they had
run certain Courses, gave over without conclusion of Victory: Then Cookborne,
Esquire of Scotland, challenged Sir Nicholas Hawberke Knight, and rode five
Courses; but Cookborne was born over Horse and Man.

Now to return through Gilt-spur-street by Newgate, where I first began, there
stands the fair Parish Church called St. Sepulchers in the Bailey, or by
Chamberlain Gate, in a fair Churchyard, though not so large as of old time;
for the same is letten out for buildings, and a Garden plot.

This Church was newly re-edified, or builded, about the Reign of Henry the
sixth, or of Edward the fourth, one of the Popham's, was a great builder
there, and it is lately also vvashed over, and furbish'd.

Next to this Church, is a fair and large Inn, for the receipt of Travelers,
and has to sign the Sarasens Head, where Oxford men resort.

There lies a street from Newgate, West, to the end of Turn again-lane, and
winding North to Oldbourne Conduit; but of late, a new Conduit was there
builded in place of the old, namely, in the year 1577. by William Lamb,
sometime a Gentleman of the Chapel to King Henry the eighth, and afterward a
Citizen and Clothworker of London.

From the West side of this Conduit, is the high way, there called Snow-hill,
stretching out by Oldbourne-bridge, over the oft-named Water of
Turn-mill-Brook, and so up to Old-bourn-hill, all replenished with fair
Buildings.

Without Ould-bourn-bridge, on the right hand, is Gold-lane, as is before
showed, up higher on the Hill, be certain Inns, and other fair Buildings;
amongst the which, (of old time) was a Message called Scroops Inn, for so we
find the, same recorded in the 37. of Henry the sixth.

This House was sometime letten out to Sergeants at the Law, as appears, and
was found by Inquisition taken in the Guild Hall of London, before William
Purchase Mayor, and Escheater for King Henry the 7th, in the 14th of his Reign.

Then is the Bishop of Elies Inn, so called of, belonging and pertaining to
the Bishops of Ely, Will, de Luda* Bishop of Ely, deceased 1297, and gave this
House, by the name of his Manor, with the Appurrenances in Holdbourne, to his
Successors, with condition, that his next Successor should pay a thousand
Marks, toward the finding of three Chaglains, in the Chapel there.

The first in the year 1464. the fourth of Edward the fourth, in Michaelmas
Term, the Sergeants at Law, held their Feast in this House; to the which,
amongst other Estates, Matthew Philip, Mayor of London, with the Aldermen,
Sheriffs, and Commons of diverse Crafts, being invited, did repair; but when the
Mayor looked to keep the state in the Hall, as it had bin used in all places
within the City and Liberties (out of the Kings presence) the Lord Gray of
Ruthen, then Lord Treasurer of England, unwitting the Sergeants, and against
their wills (as they said) was first placed, whereupon, the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons, departed home, and the Mayor made the Aldermen to dine with him;
howbeit, he and all the Citizens were wonderfully displeased that he was so
dealt with, and the new Sergeants and others, were right o^ry therefore, and
had rather then much good (as they said) it had not so happened.

Next beyond this Manor of Ely-house, is Lither-lane, turning into the Fields.
Then is Furnivals Inn, now an Inn of Chancery, but sometime belonging to Sir
William Furnival Knight, and Thomasin his Wife, who had in Holdbourne two
Messuages, and thirteen Shops, as appears by Record of Richard the second, in
the sixth of his Reign.

Now again from Newgate, on the left hand, or South side, lies the Old Baylay,
which runs down by the Wall, upon the Ditch of the City, called Houndsditch,
to Ludgate: we have not read how this street took that name; but it is like to
have risen of some Court of old time there kept; and we find, that in the year
1356. the thirty four of Edward the third, the Tenement and ground upon
Houndsditch, between Ludgate on the South, and Newgate on the North, was
appointed to John Cambridge, Fishmonger, Chamberlain of London, whereby it
seems, that the Chamberlains of London, have there kept their Courts, as now
they do in the Guild Hall: and till this day, the Mayor and Justices of this
City, keep their Sessions in a part thereof, now called the Sessions Hall, both
for the City of London, and Shire of Middlesex; over again^ the which House, on
the right hand, turns down St. Georges Lane, toward Fleet Lane.

In this St. Georges Lane, on the North side thereof, remains yet an old wall
of stone, enclosing a piece of ground up Sea-cole-Lane, wherein (by report)
sometime stood an Inn of Chancery; which House being greatly decayed* and
standing remote from other Houses of that Profession, the Company removed to a
Common Hostery, called of the sign, out Lady Inn, not far from Clements Inn,
which they procured from Sir John Fineox, Lord chief Justice of the Kings
Bench; and since, have held it of the owners, by the name of the New Inn,
paying therefore six pounds Rent, by the year, as Tenants at their own will,
for more (as is said) cannot be gotten of them, and much less, will they be
put from it.

Beneath this Saint Georges Lane, is the Lane called Fleet-lane, winding South
by the Prison of the Fleet, into Fleet Street, by Fleet-bridge.

Next out of the high street, turns down a Lane, called the Little Bailey,
which runs down to the East end of St. Georges Lane.

The next is Sea-cole-lane, I think, called Limeburners Lane, of burning Lime
there with Sea-cole; For we read in Record of such a Lane, to have bin in the
Parish of St. Sepulcher, and there yet remains in this Lane, an Alley, called
Lime-burners Alley.

Near unto this Sea-cole-lane, in the turning toward Oldbourne-Conduit, is
Turn-again-lane, or rather, as in a Record of the fifth of Edward the third,
Wind-again-lane, for that it goes down West to Fleet Dike, from whence, men
must turn again the same way they came, for there it is stopped.

Then the high street turns down Snow-hill, to Holdbourne Conduit, and from
thence, to Ouldbourn-bridge; beyond the which Bridge on the left hand, is
Shooe-lane, by the which, men pass from Ouldbourne to Fleet street, by the
Conduit there.

In this Shooe-lane, on the left hand, is one old House, called Oldbourn-Hall,
it is now letten out into diverse Tenements.

On the other side, at the very corner, stands the Parish Church of Saint
Andrew.

From this Church to St. Andrew, up Oldbourn-hill, be diverse fair builded
Houses; amongst the which, on the left hand, there stands three Inns of
Chancery, whereof the first, adjoining unto Crook-horn-Alley, is called Thavies
Inn, and stands opposite to Ely House.

Then is Fewter-lane, which stretches South into Fleet Street, by the East end
of St. Dunstanes Church, and is so called of Fewters (or idle people) lying
there, as in a way leading to Gardens; but the same is now of later years, on
both sides builded through with many fair Houses: and in the wast grounds and
Gardens, betwixt Shooe-lane and Fewter-lane; there are now many fair convenient
Houses, built by the Company of the Goldsmiths; as also a street called
New-street, betwixt Aldersgate and Redcrosse-street.

Beyond this Fewters Lane, is Baynards Inn, alias Mackworths Inn, which is of
the Chancery.

Then is Staple-Inne also of the Chancery, but whereof so named, I am ignorant;
the same of late, is (for a great part thereof) fair builded, and not a little
augmented; And then at the Bars ends this Ward, without Newgate.

Without Ludgate, on the right hand, or North side, from the said Gate lies
the Old Bayley, as I said, then the high street, called Ludgate Hill, down to
Fleet-Lane; in which Lane stands the Fleet, a Prisonhouse, so called of the
Fleet, or water running by it, and sometime flowing about it, but now vaulted
over.

Then also, against the South end of Shooe-lane, stands a fair Water-Conduit,
whereof William East field, sometime Mayor, was Founder; for the Mayor and
Commonalty of London, being possessed of a Conduit Head, with diverse Springs of
water gathered thereunto, in the Parish of Padington, and the water conveyed
from thence, by Pipes of Lead, toward London unto Teyborn, where it had lain
by the space of six years, and more: the Executors of Sir Will^am Eastfield,
obtained License of the Mayor and Communalty, for them, in the year 1453. with
the Goods of Sir William, to convey the said Water, first, in Pipes of Lead,
into a Pipe, begun to be laid besides the great Conduit Head at Maribone, which
stretches from thence unto a separall, late before made against the Chapel of
Rounseval, by Charing-Crosse, and no further; and then from thence, to convey
the said water into the City, and there to make Receipt, or Receipts for the
same, unto the Commonweal of the Commonalty; to wit, the poor to drink, the
rich to dress their Meats, which water was by them brought thus into
Fleet Street, to a Standard which they had made and finished 1471.

From this Conduit up to Fewters Lane, and further, is the Parish Church of St.
Dunstane, called in the West, (for difference from Saint Dunstane in the East.)

Next beyond this Church, is Cliffords Inn, sometime belonging to Robert
Clifford, by gift of Edward the second.

Somewhat beyond this Cliffords Inn, is the South end of Newstreet, (or
Chancellor Inn) on the right hand whereof, is Sergeants-Inne, called, in
Chancery lane.

And then next was sometime the House of the converted Jews, founded by King
Henry the third, in place of a Jews House to him forfeited, in the year 1233.
and the seventeenth of his Reign; who builded there for them, a fair Church,
now used, and called the Chapel; for the Custody of Rolls and Records of
Chancery, it stands not far from the old Temple and the new; in the which
House, all such Jews and Infidels, as were converted to the Christian Faith,
were ordained and appointed (under an honest rule of life) sufficient
maintenance: whereby it came to pass, that in short time, there were gathered
a great number of Converts which were baptized instructed in the Doctrine of
Christ, and there lived under a learned Christian, appointed to govern them;
since the which time, to wit, in the year 1290. all the Jews in England, were
banished out of the Realm, whereby the number of Converts in this place was
decayed, and therefore in the year 1377. this House was annexed by Parent, to
William Burstall Clark, Custos Rotulorum, or Keeper of the Ro^s of the
Chancery, by Edward the third, in the fifty one year of his Reign; and this
first Master of the Rolls was sworn in Westminster Hall, at the I able of
Marble-stone; since the which time, that House has bin commonly called the
Rolls in Chancery Lane.

On the West side, sometime was an House, pertaining to the Prior of Necto^
Park, a House of Canons in Lincolnshire: this was commonly called Hereflete
Inn and was a Brew House* but now fair builded for the six Clerks of the
Chancery, and stands over against the said House, called the Rolls, and near
unto the Lane, which now enters Fickets Croft, or Fickets field. Then is
Shere-lane, opening also into Fickets field, hard by the Bars.

Next is Bride-lane, and therein Bridewell, of old time the Kings House; for
the Kings of this Realm have bin there lodged, and till the ninth of Henry the
third, the Courts were kept in the Kings House, wheresoever he was lodged, as
may appear by ancient Records, whereof there are many; and for example, have
set forth one in the Chapter, or Towers and Castles.

King Henry the eighth, builded there a stately and beautiful House of new, for
receipt of the Emperor, Charles the fifth, who in the year of Christ 1522. was
lodged himself at the Blackfriars; but his Nobles, in this new builded
Bridewell, a Gallery being made out of the House over the Water, and through the
Wall of the City, into the Emperors Lodging at the Blackfriars: King Henry
himself often times lodged there also; as namely, in the year 1525. a
Parliament being then holden in the Blackfriars, he created States of Nobility
there.

In the year 1553. the seventh of Edward the sixth, the tenth of April, sir
George Barn, being Mayor of this City, was sent for to the Court at
White Hall, and there at that time the King gave unto him, for the Communalty
and Citizens, to be a Workhouse, for the poor and idle persons of the City,
his house of Bridewell: and seven hundred Marks Land, late of the possessions
of the house of Savoy, and all the Bedding and other Furniture of the said
Hospital of the Savoy, toward the maintenance of the said Workhouse of
Bridewel, and the Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark.

This gift, King Edward confirmed by his Charter, dated the 26. of June, next
following. And in the year 1555. in the month of February, Sir William Gerrard
Mayor, and the Aldermen, entered Bridewel, and took possession thereof according
to the gift of the said King Edward, the same being confirmed by Queen Mary.

The Bishop of St. David's had his Inn over against the North side of this
Bridewell, as I have said.

Then is the Parish Church of St. Bridget, or Bride, of old time a small thing,
which now remains to be the Quire; but since, increased with a large Body,
and side Isles, toward the West, at the charges of William Vinor E^quire,
Warden of the Fleet, about the year 1480. all which he cau^ed to be wrought
about in the stone, in the figure of a Vine, with Grapes and Leaves, etc.

The partition betwixt the old work and the new, sometime prepared as a Screne,
to be set up in the Hall of the Duke of Summersets House at the Strand, was
bought for eightscore pounds, and set up in the year, one thousand five hundred
fifty seven.

The next is Salisbury Court, a place so called, for that it belonged to the
Bishops of Salisbury, and was their Inn, or London House, at such time as they
were summoned to come to the Parliam^nt, or came for other business: It has of
late time bin the dwelling, first of Sir Richard Sackvile, and after, of Sir
Thomas Sackvile his Son, Baron of Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer, who very greatly
enlarged it with stately Buildings.

Then is Water-lane, running down by the West side of a House, called the
Hanging Sword, to the Thames.

Then was the White Friars Church, called Fratres beatae Mariae de monte
Carmeli, first founded (says John Bale) by Sir Richard Gray, Knight, Ancestor
to the Lord Gray of Codner, in the year 1241.

King Edward the first, gave to the Prior and Brethren of that house, a plot of
ground in Fleet Street; whereupon to build their House, which was since
reedified, or new builded, by Hugh Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, about the year
one thousand three hundred and fifty, the four and twentieth of Edward the
third.

John Lufken, Mayor of London, and the Commonalty of the City, granted a Lane,
called Crockers-lane, reaching from Fleetstreet to the Thames, to build in the
West end of that Church.

Then is the Sergeants Inn, so called, for that diverse Judges and Sergeants at
the Law keep a Commons, and are lodged there in Term time.

Next is the New Temple, so called, because the Templers, before the building
of this House had their Temple in Oldbourn: This house was founded by the
Knights Templers in England, in the Reign of Henry the second* and the same was
dedicated to God, and our Blessed Lady, by Heraclius, Patriark of the Church,
called the Holy Resurrection in Jerusalem, in the year of Christ, 1185.

Many Parliaments and great Councels have been there kept, as may appear by our
Histories.

In the year 1308. all the Templers in England, as also in other parts of
Christendom, were apprehended, and committed to diverse Prisons.

Anno 1310. a Provincial Council was holden at London, against the Templets in
England, upon Heresy, and other Articles, whereof they were accused; but
denied all, except one or two of them; notwithstanding, they all did confess,
that they could not purge themselves fully, as faultless, and so they were
condemned to perpetual penance, in several Monasteries, where they behaved
themselves modestly.

Philip King of France, procured their overthrow throughout the whole World,
and caused them to be condemned by a general Council to his advantage as he
thought; for he believed to have had all their Lands in France, and therefore
seizing the same in his hands, caused the Templers, to the number of 54. or
after Fabian, threescore, to be burnt at Paris.

Edward the second, in the year 1313. gave unto Aimer de la Valence, Earl of
Pembrook, the whole place and house, called the new Temple at London, with the
ground called Fiquetes Croft, and all the Tenements and Rents, with the
appurtenances that belonged to the Templers in the City of London, and Suburbs
th^reof.

After Aimer de Valence (says some) Hugh Spencer (usurping the same) held it
during his life; by whose death, it fell again to the hands of Edward the
third; but in the mean time, to wit, 1324. by a Council holden at Vienna, all
the Lands of the Templers (lest the same should be put to profane uses) were
given to the Knights Hospitalers, of the Order of St. John Baptist, called
Saint John of Jerusalem; which Knights had put the Turks out of the I Will of
Rhodes, and after, wan upon the said Turk, daily for a long time.

In the Reign of the same Edward the third, was granted (for a certain Rent of
ten pounds by the year) the said Temple, with the Appurtenances thereunto
adjoining, to the Students of the Common Laws of England, in whose possession,
the same has ever sithence remained, and is now divided into two Houses of
several Students, by the name of Inns of Court, to wit, the Inner Temple, and
the Middle Temple, who keep two several Halls; but they resort all to the said
Temple-Church, in the round walk whereof, (which is the West part, without the
Quire) there remain Monuments of Noblemen, buried to the number of eleven,
eight of them are Images of Armed Knights, five lying Crosse-legged, as men
vowed to the Holy Land, against the Infidels, and unbelieving Jews, the other
three straight-legged. The rest are coaped stones, all of Gray Marble: the
first of the Crosse-legged, was William Marshal the elder, Earl of Pembrooke,
who died 1219. William Marshall his Son, Earl of Pembrooke, was the second,
he dyed 1231. And Gilbert Marshall, his Brother, Earl of Pembrooke, slain in a
Turnament at Hartford, besides Ware, in the year 1241.

Of the Twenty sixth, or the last Ward of the City of LONDON, called the
Bridge-Ward without, containing the Bourough of Southwark.
WE have now almost finished the Perambulation; for having treated of Wards in
London, on the North side of the Thames, (in number five and twenty) we are now
to cross over the said River, into the Burough of Southwark, which is also a
Ward of London without the Walls, on the South side thereof, as is Portsoken on
the East, and Faringdon Extra on the West.

But before we come to the particular Description of this Ward, it will not be
impertinent to declare, when, and by what means the Burough of Southwark, now
called Bridge-Ward without, was made one of the six and twenty Wards, belonging
to the City of London, which was in this manner.

After the dissolution of the Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, and other
Religious Houses, in this Realm of England, The Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens
of this City of London, taking into their Considerations, how commodious, and
convenient it would be unto the City, to have the Burough of Southwark annexed
thereunto; and that the same Burough was in the Kings hands wholly, they became
humble suitors unto King Henry the eighth, and unto the Lords of his Highness
Privy Council, for the obtaining of the same. Which suit not being granted unto
them; after the Decease of King Henry the eighth, they renewed their Suit unto
his Son and next Successor, King Edward the sixth, and to the Lords of his
Privy Council for the obtaining of the same Borough.

At the length, after long suit, and much labor, it pleased King Edward the
fixth, by his Letters Parents, sealed with the great Seal of England, bearing
date at Westminster the three and twentieth day of April, in the fourth year
of his Reign, as well in consideration of the sum of six hundred forty seven
pounds, two shillings and a penny, of lawful money of England, paid to his
Highnesses use, by the Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens of London, as for diverse
other considerations him thereunto moving, To give and grant unto the said
Mayor, and Communalty, and Citizens of London, diverse Messuages, Lands and
Tenements, lying near the Borough of Southwark, in the said Letters Parents,
particularly expressed, which were sometimes the Lands of Charles late Duke of
Suffolk, and of whom King Henry the eighth did buy and purchase the same. But
there was excepted out of the said grant, and reserved unto the said King
Edward the sixth, his Heirs and Successors, and all that his Capital Message,
or Mansion Horse, called Southwark place, late of the said Duke of Suffolk,
and all Gardens and Land to the same adjoining; and all that his Park in
Southwarke, and all that his Message, and all Edifices and ground, called the
Antelope there.

And the said King Edward the 6th, did by his said Letters Patents, give and
grant to the said Mayor, Communalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, all
that his Lordship, and Manor of Southwarke, with all and singular the Rights,
Members, and Appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late
belonging to the late Monastery of Bermondsey in the same County; And also all
that his Manor and Borough of Southwarke, with all, and singular the Rights
Members, and Appurtenances thereof, in the said County of Surrey, then late
parcel of the Possessions of the Archbishop and Bishopric of Canterbury,
together with diverse yearly Rents, issuing out of the diverse Messuages or
Tenements, in the said Letters Patents particularly expressed.

But there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, to the said King
Edward the sixth, his Heirs, and Successors, all his Rights, Jurisdictions,
Liberties, and Franchises whatsoever within the Walk, Circuit, and Precinct of
his Capital Message, Gardens, and Park in Southwarke; and in all Gardens,
Curtilages, and Lands, to the said Mansion House, Gardens, and Park belonging.

Also, there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, the House,
Message, or lodging there, called the King's Bench, and the Gardens to the same
belonging so long as it should be used as a Prison for prisoners, as it was
then used.

Also, there was excepted and reserved out of the said Grant, the House,
Message, or Lodging there called, the Marshalsey, and the Gardens to the same
belonging, so long as it should be used as a Prison for prisoners, as it was
then used.

Also, it was provided, that the said Letters Patents, should not be
prejudicial to the Offices of the great Master or Steward of the Kings
Household, within the Borough and Precincts aforesaid, to be executed while the
same Borough and Precincts should be within the Verge; Nor to John Gates
Knight, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber, concerning any Lands,
Tenements, Offices, Profits, Franchises, or Liberties to him granted during his
life, by the said King Edward the sixth, or by his Father King Henry the eighth.

About the space of a Month after the said Borough of Southwark was so granted
by King Edward the sixth, to the Mayor Communalty and Citizens of London, and
that they by force of the said Letters Patents, stood charged with the
Ordering, Survey, and Government of the same Borough, and of all the Kings
Subjects, inhabiting therein, and repairing thither. At a Court holden before
Sir Rowland Hill Knight, then Lord Mayor of London, and the Aldermen of the
same City, in the Guild Hall of London, on Tuesday the eight and twentieth of
May, in the said fourth year of the Reign of King Edward the sixth, the said
Town or Borough was named and called the Ward, or Bridge Ward without.

Not long after, it was enacted, that besides the then ancient accustomed
number of five and twenty Aldermen, there should be one Alderman more elected,
to have the Rule, Charge, and Governance of the said Borough and Town. And that
four discreet persons, or more, being Freemen of London, and dwelling within
the said City, or the Borough of Southwarke, or in other the Liberties of the
said City, should from thenceforth, as often as the Case shall require, be from
time to time nominated, appointed, and chosen by the Inhabitants of the said
Borough for the time being, before the Lord Mayor of London for the time being;
And that the said Lord Mayor for the time being, should (at the next Court of
Aldermen, to be holden at the Guild Hall of the said City, next after such
election) present the Names and Sirnames of all such persons, as to should be
named before him, and put in the said Election; And that the said Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, for the time being, should of those four persons, or mo, so
presented, Elect and Choose one, by way of Scrutinie; to be an Alderman of the
said City, and to have the peculiar Ordering, Rule, and Governance of the said
Borough and Town of Southwarke, and of the Inhabitants thereof, and of all
other the Kings liege people, repairing to the same.

This Borough being in the County of Surrey, consists of diverse streets,
ways, and winding Lanes, all full of Buildings inhabited; And first, to begin
at the West part thereof, over against the West Suburb of the City, on the
Bank of the River Thames, there is now a continual building of Tenements, about
half a mile in length to the Bridge.

Then South a continual street called Long Southwark, builded on both sides
with diverse Lanes, and Alleys up to St. Georges Church, and beyond it through
Blackman street, toward New Town, (or Newington) the Liberties of which
Borough, extend almost to the Parish Church of New Town aforesaid, distant one
mile from London Bridge, and also South-west a continual building, almost to
Lambeth, more than one mile from the said Bridge.

Then from the Bridge along by the Thames Eastward, is St. Olaves street,
having continual building on both the sides, with Lanes and Alleys up to
Battle-Bridge: to Horse-down, and toward Rother-Hith also, some good half mile
in length from London Bridge, so that I account the whole continual buildings,
on the Bank of the said River, from the West toward the East to be more than a
large mile in length.

Then have ye from the entering toward the said Horse-down, one other continual
street, called Barmonds eye street, which stretches South, likewise furnished
with Buildings on both the sides, almost half a mile in length up to the late
dissolved Monastery of St. Saviors, called Bermondsey.

And from thence is one Long Lane (so called of the length) turning West to St.
Georges Church aforenamed, out of the which Lane, mentioned Long-lane, breaks
one other street toward the South and by East, and this is called
Kentvsh-street, for that it is the way leading into that County; and so have ye
the bounds of this Borough.

The Antiquities most notable in this Borough are these; First, for
Ecclesiastical, there was Bermondsey, an Abbey of Black Monks; St. Mary
Overies, a Priory of Canons Regular; St. Thomas, a College or Hosp^tal for the
poor; and the Look, a Lazar-house in Kent-street. Parish Churches there have
been six, whereof five do remain, (viz.) St. Mary Magdalen, in the Priory of
Saint Mary Overy; Now the same St. Mary Overy is the Parish Church for the said
Mary Magdalen, and for Saint Margaret on the Hill, and is called Saint Savior.

Saint Margaret on the Hill, being put down is now a Court for Justice; St.
Thomas in the Hospital serves for a Parish Church as before; St George a Parish
Church, as before it did; so does St, Olave, and St. Mary Magdalen by the Abbey
of Bermondsey.

There be also these five Prisons, or Goals, the Clink on the Bank, the Compter
in the late Parish Church of St. Margaret, the Marshalsey, the King's Bench, and
the White-Lyon, all in Long Southwarke.

Now to return to the West Bank, there were two Bear-Gardens, the old and new,
places wherein were kept Bears, Bulls, and other Beasts, to be bated; As also
Mastives, in se^eral Kenels, nourished to bait them. These Bears and other
Beasts are there baired in plots of ground, Scaffolded about, for the beholders
to stand safe; but this kind of sport is now prohibited. Next, on this Bank,
was sometime the Bord^llo or Stews, a place so called of certain Stew-houses,
privileged there, for the repair of incontinent men, to the like women, of the
which Privilege we read thus.

In a Parliament holden at Westminster, the eight of Henry the second, it was
ordained by the Commons, and confirmed by the King and Lords, That diverse
constitutions for ever should he kept in that Lordship or Franchise, according
to the old Customs, that had been there used time out of mind; Amongst the
which, these following were some, viz.

That no Stew-holder, or his Wife should let or stay any single Woman to go and
come freely at all times, when they listed.

No Stew-holder to keep any Woman to board, but she to board abroad at her
pleasure. To take no more for the Woman's Chamber in the week than fourteen
pence.

Not to keep open his doors upon the Holy Days.

Not to keep any single Woman in his House on the Holy Days; but the Bailiff
to see them voided out of the Lordship.

No single Woman to be kept against her will that would leave her sin.

No Stew-holder to receive any Woman of Religion, or any Man's Wife.

No single Woman to take money to lie with any man, except she lie with him all
night till the morrow. No man to be drawn or enticed into any Stew-house.

The Constables, Bayliffe, and others, every week to search every Stew-house.

No Stew-holder to keep any Woman, that has the perilous Infirmity of burning:
nor to sell Bread, Ale, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Coal, or any Victuals, etc.

These allowed Stew-houses had Signs on their Fronts, toward the Thames, not
hanged out, but painted on the Walls, as a Boars head, the Crosse-Keys, the
Gun, the Castle, the Crave, the Cardinals Hat, the Bell, the Swan, etc. Ancient
men of good credit do report, that these single Women were forbidden the Rights
of the Church so long as they continued that sinful life, and were excluded
from Christian burial, if they were not reconciled, before their death: And
therefore there was a plot of ground called the Single Woman's Churchyard,
appointed for them, far from the Parish Church.

In the year of Christ, one thousand five hundred forty six, the seven and
thirtieth of Henry the eighth, this Row of Stews in Southwarke, was put down by
the Kings commandment, which was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, no more to be
priviledg'd and used as a common Brothel.

Then next is the Clinke, a Goal or Prison for the Trespassers in those parts,
namely, in old time for such as should brabble, fray, or break the peace on the
said Bank, or in the Brothel Houses; they were by the Inhabitants thereabout,
apprehended and committed to this Jail, where they were straightly imprisoned.

Next is the Bishop of Winchesters House, or Lodging when he comes to this
City.

Adjoining to this on the South side thereof, is the Bishop of Rochesters Inn,
or lodging, by whom first erected, it is not upon Record; but it is known well,
the same of long time has not been frequented by any Bishop, and lies ruinous
for lack of reparations. The Abbot of Naverly had a House there.

East from the Bishop of Winchesters House, directly over against it stands a
fair Church, called St. Mary, over the Rye, or Overy, that is, over the water;
This Church, or some other in place thereof was (of old time long before the
Conquest) an House of Sisters, founded by a Maiden, named Mary, unto the which
House and Sisters they left (as was left to her by her Parents) the oversight
and profits of a Crosse-Ferry or Traverse-Ferry over the Thames, there kept
before that any Bridge was builded; This House of Sisters was after by Swithin,
a Noble Lady, converted unto a College of Priests who in place of the Ferry,
builded a Bridge of Timber, and from time to time kept the same in good
reparations; But lastly the same Bridge was builded of Stone, and then in the
year 1106, was this Church again founded for Canons Regular, by William Pont
del l' Arch, and William Daunly Knights Normans. This Peter de Rupibus or de
la Roch, founded a large Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, in the Church of St Mary
Overy, which Chapel was afterward appointed to be the Parish Church for the
Inhabitants near adjoining. This Church was again new builded in the Reign of
Richard the second, and King Henry the fourth.

John Gower Esquire, a famous Poet, was then an especial Benefactor to that
work, and was there buried on the North side of the said Church, in the Chapel
of St. John, where he founded a Chantry; He lies under a Tomb of Stone, with
his Image also of Stone over him; The Hair of his Head auburne, long to his
Shoulders, but curling up and a small forked Beard: on his Head a Chaplet, like
a Coronet of four Roses, an habit of Purple damasked down to his feet, a Collar
of Esses of Gold about his Neck, under his Feet the likeness of three Books,
which he compiled. The first named Speculum Meditantis, written in French; The
second, Vox clamantis, penned in Latin; The third, Confessio Amantis, written
in English, and this last is printed; Vox Clamantis, with his Chronica
Tripartita, and other both in Latin and French, were never printed. Besides on
the Wall where he lies, there was painted three Virgins Crowned, one of the
which was named Charity, holding this Device, En Toy qui es Fitz de Dieu le pere
Sav^e soit, qui gist soubs cest pierre.
In Thee who art the Son of God
Be saved who lies under this clod.


Now passing through St. Mary Overies Close (once in possession of the Lord
Montacute) and Pepper Alley into Long Southwark; on the right hand thereof the
Market Hill, where the Leather is sold, there stood the late named Parish
Church of Saint Margaret, given to St. Mary Overies by Henry the first, put
down and joined with the Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, and united to the
late dissolved Priory Church of St. Mary Overy.

A part of this Parish Church of St. Margaret is now a Court wherein the
Assizes and Sessions be kept, and the Court of Admiralty is also there kept;
one other part of the same Church is now a prison, called the Compter in
Southwarke, etc.

Farther up on that side, almost directly over against St. Georges Church, was
sometime a large and most sumptuous house, builded by Charles Brandon, Duke of
Suffolk, in the Reign of Henry the eighth, which was called Suffolk House, but
coming afterward into the Kings hands, the same was called Southwark place,
and a Mint of Coynage was there kept for the King. Queen Mary give this House
to Nicholas Heth, Archbishop of York, and to his Successors for ever, to be
their Inn or Lodging for their repair to London, in recompense of York House
near to Westminster, which King Henry her Father had taken from Cardinal
Woolsey, and from the Sea of York.

Then is the White Lion, a Goal so called, for that the same was a common
Hoftery for the receipt of Travelers by that Sign. This ^ouse was first used as
a Goal within these hundred years last, since the which time the prisoners were
once removed thence to an House in New-town, where they remained for a short
time, and were returned again to the aforesaid White Lion, there to remain as
the appointed Goal for the Countey of Surrey.

Next is the Goal or Prison of the King's Bench, but of what antiquity the same
is, it appears not. We read, that the Courts of the King's Bench and Chancery,
have often times been removed from London to other places, and so has likewise
the other Goals that serve those Courts, as in the year 1304, Edward the first
commanded the Courts of King's Bench and the Exchequer, which had remained seven
years at York, to be removed to their old places at London. And in the year
1387, the eleaventh of Richard the second, Robert Trisilian chief Justice, came
to the City of Coventry, and there sat by the space of a Month, as Justice of
the Kings Bench, and caused to be Indicted in that Court about the number of
2000 persons of that Country, etc. It seems therefore, that for that time the
Prison or Goal of that Court was not far off. Also, in the year 1392, the
sixteenth of the same Richard, the Archbishop of York, being Lord Chancellor,
for good will that he bare to his City, caused the Kings Bench and Chancery to
be removed from London to York, but ere long they were returned to London.

Then is the Marshalsey another Goal or Prison, so called, as pertaining to the
Marshalls of England, of what continuance kept in Southwark, it appears not;
but likely it is, that the same has been removeable, at the pleasure of the
Marshalls. And then Thieves Lane by St. Thomas Hospital, first found by
Richard, Prior of Bermondsey, in the Cellerers grounded, against the Wall of
the Monastery, in the year 1213, He named it the Almery, or house of Alms, for
Converts and poor Children.

In the year 1552, the Citizens of London, having the void suppressed Hospital
of St. Thomas in Southwark, in the Month of July, began the reparations
thereof, for poor, impotent, lame, and diseased people, so that in the Month of
November next following, the sick and poor people were taken in,; And in the
year 1553, on the tenth of April, King Edward the sixth in the seventh of his
Reign, gave to the Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of London, to be a Workhouse
for the poor, and idle persons of the City, his House of Bridewell, and seven
hundred Marks Lands of the Savoy Rents, which Hospital he had suppressed, with
all the Beds, bedding, and other furniture belonging to the same, toward the
maintenance of the said Workhouse of Bridewell, and of this Hospital of Saint
Thomas in Southwark. This gift, the King confirmed by his Charter. The Church
of this Hospital, which of old time served for the Tenements near adjoining and
pertaining to the said Hospital, remains as a Parish Church.

But now to come to St. Olaves street: on the Bank of the River of Thames, is
the Parish Church of St. Olave, a fair and mee^ly large Church, but a far
larger Parish, especially of Aliens or strangers, and poor people.

Next is the Bridge-House, so called, as being a Storehouse for Stone, Timber,
or whatsoever pertaining to the building or repairing of London Bridge.

This House seems to have taken beginning with the first founding of the
Bridge, either of Stone or Timber; it is a large plot of ground on the Bank of
the River of Thames, containing diverse large buildings, for stowage of things
necessary, toward reparation of the said Bridge. There are also diverse
Garners, for laying up of Wheat, and other Granaries for service of the City,
as need requires. Moreover, there be certain Ovens builded, in number ten, of
which six be very large the other four being but half so big: these were
purposely made to bake out the Bread Corn of the said Grayners, to the best
advantage, for relief of the poor Citizens, when need should require.

Then is Battle Bridge, so called of Battle Abbey, for that it stands on
the ground and over a Watercourse, (flowing out of Thames) pertaining to that
Abbey, and was therefore both builded and repaired by the Abbots of that House,
as being hard adjoining to the Abbots Lodging.

Beyond this Bridge is Bermondsey street, turning South, in the South end
whereof was sometime a Priory or Abbey of St. Savior, called Bermonds Eye in
Southwarke, founded by Ailwin, a Citizen of London, in the year 1081.

In the year 1094, deceased Alwin, founder of this House. Then William Rufus
gave to the Monks, his Manor of Bermondsey, with the appurtenances, and
builded there for them a new great Church.

In the year 1539. this Abbey was valued to di^pend by the year, 474 l.
fourteen shillings four pence half penny, and was surrendered to Henry the
eighth, the one and thirtieth of his Reign, the Abbey Church was then pulled
down by Sir Thomas Pope Knight, and in place thereof, a goodly House builded of
Stone and Timber, since pertaining to the Earls of Sussex. Next unto this Abbey
Church stands a proper Church of St. Mary Magdalen, builded by the Priory of
Bermondsey, serving for resort of the Inhabitants (Tenants to the Priors or
Abbots near adjoining) there to have their Divine Service; this Church
remains and serves as before, and is called a Parish Church. Then in Kent
street, is a Lazar House for Leprous people, called the Look in Southwark, the
foundation whereof is uncertain.

This Borough at a subsidy to the King, was used to yield about a thousand
Marks, or eight hundred pounds, which is more than any one City in England
pays except London; And also, the Muster of men in this Borough does likewi^e
in number surpass all other Cities, except London. And thus much for the
Borough of Southwarke, one of the six and twenty Wards of London.

Having thus traversed the whole Body of this great City, and her several
Wards, from the Center to the Circumference; it is now to be observed, that
every Ward has its particular Alderman as an Overseer, or Guardian assigned
thereunto, who has a greater latitude of power, than an ordinary Justice of
the Peace. This Alderman has one Deputy, and in some Wards more. There are
likewise a number of Common Counsel men, Constables, men of the Wardmote
Inquest, Scavengers* some more, some less, with Beadles in every Ward. The
last Ward which is the Borough of Southwark, differs from the rest in this,
that the Alderman appointed there, has three Deputies and a Bailiff, but no
Common Council men.

Of Places adjacent, and contiguous to the City of London.
HAving endeavored already to di^^ect the City of London, so that all her
Members, and homogeneal parts may be discerned: We will now pass on to her
heterogeneal, or Suburbian parts, which yet are contiguous, and make one entire
continued piece: We will, as formerly, take our first aim Eastward and begin
with those parts that are without the Postern by the Tower of London.

The second of Henry the third, the Forest of Middlesex, and the Warren of
Stanes, were difafforested; since which time, the Suburbs also about London, in
tract of time, and, as it were, by an insensible augmentation, have wonderfully
increased in people and edifices.

Near the Tower of London, is the Hospital of St. Katherine (spoken of before)
founded by Matilda, Wife to King Stephen, that renowned and most Religious
Queen.

From the Liberties of St. Katherine to Wapping, the usual place of Execution
for Pirates, and Sea-rovers, there to continue hanging till three Tides
overflow and cover them; I say, from St. Katherines to Wapping, it is yet in the
memory of man, there was never a House standing, but the Gallows which was
further removed, in regard of the Buildings. But now there is a continued
street toward a mile long, from the Tower, all along the River, almost as far
as Radcliffe, which proceeded from the increase of Navigation, Mariners and
Trafique.

The Citizens of London, were the chief Benefactors, toward the erecting of
the new Church at Wapping, a Chapel of ease to White-Chappel: And upon a high
Beam, in the midst thereof, there is a memorable neat Inscription, viz. This
Chapel was dedicated to Almighty God, and consecrated to the Honor and glory
of his great and wonderful name, the seventh day of July, 1617. by the right
Reverend Father in God, John King, then Bishop of London.

North-East of the Tower, lies East-Smithfield, Hoggs-street, and another
Tower Hill, near whereunto was an Hermitage, in times passed, called the new
Abbey of Grace, founded by Edward the third, in gratitude to Heaven, for his
victorious Successes in France; which commendable custom, continues still
beyond the Se^s, as lately there is a fair costly Church, erected in Venice,
dedicated to St. Lawrence, in remembrance of a signal Victory she obtained
against the common Enemy the Turk, about that Saints day; as Philip the second
did build the Escurial for St. Quinten Victory. Then is there Radcliffe, much
increased also in Buildings, and Nightingale-lane; from thence toward Aldgate,
were the Minories, a famous Abbey of N^ns, of the Order of Santa Clara, founded
by Edmund Earl of Lancaster, Leicester and Darby, Brother to Edward the first,
as has bin formerly spoken.

Without Algate there is a spacious huge Suburb, about a mile long, as far as
White Chapel, and further: White Chapel was as it were, a Chapel of Ease to
Stebunhith, now called by a strange contraction, Stepney Parish: the Church of
White Chapel, was called St. Mary Marfelon, because a Frenchman having served
a rich Widow hard by and murdered her for her Wealth, the Women and Boys
stoned the Felon to death, as he thought to fly away.

From Algate* North-West to Bishopsgate, lies Houndsditch, a long street, then
is the fair Parish Church of St. Buttolph: Then is the Hospital of St. Mary of
Bethlem, founded by a London Citizen, as has bin shown before; without which
is Norton-Fallgate, a liberty belonging to St. Paul's. Thence up to the Priory
of St. John Baptist, is Holy Well, where there was in ancient times, a Nunnery,
founded by Stephen Gravesend, Bishop of London 1318.

In the High street from Holy Well, there is a continual Building to Sewers
Ditch, then is there Shore-Ditch, Golding-lane, Goswell-street, then Hoxton,
(vulgarly called Hogsdon) which was once a Prebend belonging to St. Paul's.

Then is there in this Suburb, the Hospital of St. Mary Spittle, and a great
Palace, called Fishers Folly, built by the Lord John Powlet.

In former times, there was in Shoreditch, a Row of small Almshon^es, built
there by the Prior, which being suppressed, they were called the Rotten Row.

Then is there the Parish Church of St. Leonard, in Shoreditch, whereof the
Archdeacon of Paul's de jure, is always Parson; We are come now to Moorfields,
which in former times, was but a fenny quagge, or Moore, and is now, by the
industry and bounty of well disposed Citizens, come to that perfection, and
pleasantness, as now we behold it in, whereof mention is made before.

We pass now to Cripplegate, and St. Giles Church, built by one, Alfune, first
Hospitaler of St. Bartholomew in Smithfield; near unto this Church, there was
in former times, a fair pool of sweet water, where in Anne of Lodberry was
drowned, as the Story shows.

Then is there Forestreet, Moore-lane, and Grubstreet, White-crosse-street,
which is of great extent, and reaches to Old street. From the West end of
Forestreet, lies Redcrosse-street, and Beech-lane, with Golding-lane, full of
small Tenements.

Then is there Barbican, anciently called Houndsditch, all these populous
places, are within the Precincts of St. Giles Parish.

Aldersgate Suburb is next, where the Parish of St. Buttolph stands, and little
Britain street on the one side; then it stretches all along North, with very
handsome Edifices, and a large street, as far as Barbican, on the one side, and
Long-lane on the other.

This street resembles an Italian street, more then any other in London, by
reason of the spaciousness and uniformity of Buildings, and streightness
thereof, with the convenient distance of the Houses; on both sides whereof,
there are diverse very fair ones, as Peter-House, the Palace now, and Mansion of
the most Noble Marquis of Dorchester: Then is there the Earl of Tenets House,
with the Moon and Sun-Tavern, very fair structures, Then is there from about
the middle of Aldersgate Street, a handsome new street butted out, and fairly
built by the Company of Goldsmiths, which reaches athwart as far as
Redcrosse-street.

At the furthest point of this Suburb Northward, there was a Winde-Mill in
times past, which being blown down by a Tempest, Queen Katherine of Aragon,
first Wife to Henry the 8th, erected there a Chapel, and named it Mount
Calvary, which was afterward suppressed, and the place came to be called
Mount-mill, whereof the Long-Parliament made much use for their fortifications.

We are going now to Newgate, where toward Smithfield, I meet with Giltspur,
and Knight-riders-street: Then is Smithfield it self, which has bin spoken of
before, in Faringdon Ward.

Without Smithfield Bars, there is St. John's street; on the right hand
whereof, stood the Charter House, founded by Sir Walter Manuy, Knight of the
Garter to Edward the third. Hard by, is Pardon Churchyard, whereas the Annals
record, above fifty thousand souls were buried in one year, who had dyed of a
raging great sweeping Pestilence, in the Reign of the foresaid Edward the third.

The Chievalrou* and most devo^t Knight, first bui^t a Chapel there, then a
Monastery of Carthusian Friars, which are the ^evere^^ one most rigid of all
claustral Societies: this Monast^ery was called at first the Salutation.

In this Charter House, was the Monument of the said Sir Walter M^nny, and
above twenty Knights more, besides Ladies and other persons of high Rank, and
at the suppression of Abbeys, this Monastery had 642 l. yearly Rent, a mighty
sum in those days.

This demolished Charter House, came a while after, to the possession of Thomas
Earl of Suffolk, Lord Treasurer of England, in King James his Reign, and the
place being sweetly situated, with accommodations of spacious Walks, Orchards,
and Gardens, with sundry dependencies of Tenements, and Lands thereunto
belonging, gave occasion to that worthy and well disposed Gentleman, Mr. Thomas
Sutton, of Cast^e Camps, in the County of Cambridge Esquire, but born at Knayth
in Lincolnshire, to alter his Resolution of erecting an Hospital at Hallingbury
in Essex, where he had first pitched his design, and to purchase this place of
the Earl, for 13000 l. first penny paid before the s^aling of the Conveyance;
which charitable, great, and noble enterprise, was countenanced by King James,
and his privy Council.

So having in few years raised up that goodly Fabrique, (though it pleased God
to take him to himself, before it was quite finished) and endowed it with
competent allowance, by passing away many goodly Manors, he had in Lincoln,
Wiltshire, Middlesex, Cambridge and Essex, with other goodly possessions, the
work was completed, and nominated the Hospital of King James; which Hospital,
consisted of a Master, a Governor, a Preacher, a Free School, with a Master and
Usher, 80. poor people, and 40. Scholars, maintained all by the Revenues of
the House, Anno 1614. on Monday next, after Michaelmas day, the Captains,
Gentlemen, and Officers, entered into this new Hospital.

Now there were by Letters Pattents under the great Seal of England, diverse
Governors appointed of this Hospital, whereof the Arch Bishop of Canterbury was
chief, The Lord Chancellor, and Treasurer, The Bishops of London and Ely, the
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Attorney General, the Dean of
Paul's, the Dean of Westminster, and diverse others; But the late long
Parliament, inverting the order and will of the founder, did nominate others in
their rooms.

A little without the Bars of West Smithfield* is Charter House Lane; but in
the large yard before, there are many handsome Palaces, as Rutland House, and
one where the Venetian Ambassadors were used to lodge; which yard has lately
bin conveniently raised, and made more neat and comely.

Then is there St. John's street, with Turnmill-street, which stretches up
West, to Clarken-well, and it is vulgarly called Turnball-street: There is
another Lane called St. Peter's Lane, which turns from St. John's street, to
Cow-Crosse.

The dissolved Priory of St. John of Jerusalem, stood on the left hand, founded
almost 600. years since, by Jorden Briset, a pious brave man, who had founded
al^o a Priory of Nuns at Clarken-Well.

The Rebels and Rabble of Kent, did much mischief to this House 1381. setting
it on fire, and letting it burn seven days: At the suppression of Abbeys, this
House among the rest, felt the fury of fare; yet it was not quite demolished,
but employed as a Storehouse for the Kings toils and tents, as well for
hunting* as for the Wars. But in Edward the sixth's time, that goodly Church
for the most part, I mean the body and side Isles, with the great Bell-Tower, a
most curious piece of fabric, being engraven, gilt, and enameled, to the great
Ornament of City and Suburb, was barbarously undermined, and blown up with
Gunpowder: the stones whereof were carried to finish the then Protectors House
in the Strand, viz. the Duke of Somerset, but strange Judgments fell
afterward upon him, as is before mentioned.

Cardinal Pool, in Queen Mary's Reign, closed up again part of the Quire, and
side Walls on the West side, and made Sir Thomas Tresham, Prior thereof; but
thinking to bring the place to its first principles, it was suppressed again by
Queen Elizabeth. A great number of Knights of that Order, had Monuments in that
Church.

North from the said House of St. John's, was the Priory of Clarken-Well, which
also was very ancient, being built Anno 1100.

We must now go back to Giltspur-street, where this Suburb first begins, where
hard by stands a comely fair Church, called St. Sepulcher, in the Baylie.
Hard by is Turnagain-lane, Hosier-lane. and Cow-lane; then you come down
Sore^hill (now vulgarly called Snow-hill) to Oldborne, now called
Holborn-Bridge: then you go up by Chick-lane, and Lither-lane; but before you
come thither, you pass by the Bishop of Elies great Palace, and Hatton-House,
and Brook-House: beyond the Bars, there is Postpool-lane, and Grayes Inn
Lane.

Southward of this Lane, there is a row of small Houses, which is a mighty
hindrance to Holborn, in point of prospect, which if they were taken down,
there would be from Holborn Conduit, to St. Giles in the field, one of the
fairest rising street in the World.

From Newgate on the left hand, lies the Old Bayley; and so down by Seacole
and Fleet-lane, we pass then over the common Sewer, up to Shooe-lane and so to
Fewter-lane, now vulgarly called Fetter-lane; but betwixt these two Lanes,
there is another new street, butted out by the Company of Goldsmiths, called
Newstreet, where there is a knot of very handsome Buildings.

Above the Bars, there was a House of the Templers, but they removed thence
to Fleetstreet: There was also adjoining thereunto, the Bishop of Lincolns
House, which was very ancient; for the Records say, 'twas built Anno 1147. But
of late years, it has belonged to the Noble Earls of Southhampton; And lately,
it has bin quite taken down, and turned to several private Tenements, as
Durham House is in the Strand. Insomuch, that if one should ask, what God
Almighty does now in London, he might (as the pulse of the (...) beats) give
the same answer that was given by the Pagan Philosopher, who being demanded
what Jupiter did in Heaven, he said, Magnas ollas rump^t, and ex frustis earum
parvas componit, Jupiter breaks great Vessels, and makes small ones of their
pieces.

Side long of this ancient House of the Bishop of Lincoln, is Newstreet, for so
it was called at first; but now it is called Chancery Lane, where Edward the
third annexed the House of converted Jews, to the Office of Custos Rotulorum.

Here the Cursitors Office was built by Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal.

Here also is the six Clarks Office, which is a fair convenient piece of stone
and Brick Building newly erected, the old being consumed by a casual fire of
late years. The Bishop of Chicester, Ralph Nevil, had much ground given him
thereabouts, by Henry the third, which now is become all Tenements, thick
built, and quite alienated.

Then is Lincolns Inn, very much increased in building, it appertained
sometimes to the said Ralph Nevil, Bishop of Chicester, Lord Chancellor of
England, having bin before the House of the Blackfriars: and after the decease
of the said Bishop Nevil, Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, Constable of Chester* and
Custos of England, added much building to this place; and Sir Thomas Lovel did
also add much thereunto, in Henry the eighth's time; but now it is one of the
four Inns of Court, for the Students in the Law.

Behind Lincolns Inn Westward, is a spacious field, where many fair Houses, or
rather Palaces, are taken up by the Gentry. Then is there toward Drewry Lane,
a new Market, called Clare Market; then is there a street, and Palace of the
same name, built by the Earl of Clare, who lives there in a princely manner,
having a House, a street, and a Market, both for flesh and fish, all bearing
his name.

There was something omitted which should have bin spoken of the Church of St.
Giles of the Field, which is, that being a very ancient Church, and so decayed,
that it could not be repaired, a new one was erected, partly out of the ruins
of the old; which work was begun and finished in two years; and a while after,
the fair Brick Wall that encompasseth it. There were diverse well disposed
persons, who contributed to so pious a work; but specially the Lady Alice
Duddeley, according to that which is engraven upon the North door, in pure and
ponderous Latin, which I thought therefore worthy to be here inserted. Quod
faelix faustumque sit posteris,
Hoc Templum loco Veteris ex Annosa vetustate
Collapsi, mole et splendore auctum multa Paraecorum Charitas Restauravit.
In quibus pientissimae Heroinae,
Dom. Aliciae Duddeley
Munificentia gratum marmoris hujus meretur eloquium:
Huc etiam accessit aliorum pletas;
Quibus provisae sunt grates
In Coelo.
Heus viator an effaetum est bon^s Operibus
Hoc Saeculum?


From the North end of Chancery Lane, is High Holborn, which extends up to St.
Giles in the Field, where the famous devout Queen Matilda did found an
Hospital, as she did Eastward St. Katherines beyond the Tower. At this Hospital
the Prisoners conveyed from London to Tyborn, were used to be presented with a
Bowl of Ale, for their last refreshment in this life, and it was commonly
called St. Giles's Bowl: Then is there a spacious fair street, called Long
Acre, and then Pickadilly, full of fair Houses round about.

Thus have we as succinctly as we could, avoiding superfluities, and
unnecessary trivial things, spoken of the Skirts of London, and the places
thereunto annexed, without the Gates, and now, Navige^ hinc al^^ jam mihi
linter aqua.


I mean, let us steer now to the City of Westminster.

Of the Savoy, the Duchy, and City of Westminster, with the Antiquities, the
Tribunals of Justice, and Liberties thereunto belonging.
HAving taken so fair a Prospect, and finished the perlustration of London. It
were a high Incivility, and a soloecism in good manners (or rather a Piacle)
not to give Westminster also a visit, being so near and contiguous a
Neighborr: It is true, that they were once above a mile asunder; but by
insen^^b^e coalition and recruit of people, they came at last to be united, and
incorporated into one continued piece, in point of posture, though not of
Government. And the Union with Scotland, did not a little conduce, to make this
Union ^twixt London and Westminster* For the Scots multiplying here mightily,
neas^ed themse^ves about the Court, so that the Strand, from mud Walls, and
thatched Houses, came to that perfection of Buildings, as now we see.

Moreover, the City of Westminster has diverse Magnalia's, which may deserve
as exact a view as any within London; for if London of old had her Temple of
Diana, VVestm^nster had one to a greater Deity, which was Apollo; And since,
(in those very places); is St. Paul, has his Church in London: St. Peter, the
Prince of the Apostles, has his in Westminster, which was used to keep the
Regalia's and the Crown.

Add hereunto, that if London has her Guild Hall, and the Hustings.
Westminster has the great Praetorian, or common Hall, where the chief Courts,
and general Tribunals of Justice, do make their Sessions, though to her high
pray^e be it spoken, London has a far more expedite way of doing Justice, and
determination of cau^es then Westminster has; besides, in point of safety and
strength, if London has her Artillery Garden, Westminster has her Military:
And in point of Extent and Government, if London has her six and twenty Wards,
and so many Aldermen; Westminster also has her Twelve Burgesses, and so many
distinct Wards; but for the quality of Inhabitants, London mu^t vayl to her;
most of the Nobility and Gentry residing in, or about her Precincts.

Moreover, in one particular, Westminster may claim a great advantage of London
in regard as the Royal Court once was, so the residence of the Sovereign
Magistrate is still there: Insomuch, that Westminster may well glory of three
things, That she has the chiefest Courts of Justice, the chiefest Court of the
Prince, and the chiefest Court of the King of Heaven (for every Temple is his
Hou^e and Court.) Now the Abbey of Westminster, has bin always held the
greatest Sanctuary, and randevouze of devotion of the whole Island: w^ereunto,
the situation of the very place, seems to contribute much, and to strike a
holy kind of Reverence and sweetness of melting piety in the hearts of the
beho^ders.

But before we steer our course to Westminster, we must visit the Duchy o^
Lancaster, and the Savoy, which are liberties of themselves, and lie (as a
Parenthesis) 'twixt London and Westminster.

Without Temple-barre Westward, is a liberty pertaining to the Duchy of
Lancaster, which begins on the North side of the Thames, and stretches West
to Ivy-bridge, where it terminates.

And again, on the North side, some small distance without Temple-Barre, in the
High street, there stretches one large middle row, or troop of small
Tenements, partly opening to the South, and partly toward the North, up West
to a Stone Cross, over against the Strand; and this is the bounds of the
liberty, which first belonged to Brian Lisle, after to Peter of Savoy, and then
to the House of Lancaster.

Henry the third did grant to his Uncle Peter of Savoy, all those Houses upon
the Thames, which pertained to Brian Lisle, or de Insula, in the way, or the
street, called the Strand, to hold to him and his Heirs, yielding three gilded
Arrows, every year in the Exchequer.

This Peter, Earl of Savoy and Richmond, Son to Thomas Earl of Savoy, Brother
to Boniface Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Uncle unto Eleanor Wife to Henry the
third, was the first Founder of the Savoy, Anno 1245. which he gave afterward
to the Fraternity of Monjoy. Queen Eleanor did purchase it for Edmund Duke of
Lancaster, her Son, of the Fraternity; which Duke did much augment and improve
the structure. John the French King was lodged there, being then the fairest
Manor of England.

Anno 1381. The Rebels of Kent and Essex, did most barbarously burn this House,
with many Vessels of Gold and Silver, which they threw into the River; all
which they did out of a popular malice to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. It
came afterward to the Kings hands, and Henry the seventh did re-edifie and
raise it up again, but converted it to the Hospital of St. John Baptist; yet
was he content, that it should be still called the Savoy, and bestowed Lands,
for maintenance of 100. poor men; But afterward, it was suppressed by his
Granchild, Edward the sixth: the Beds, and Bedding, with other Furniture, were
given to the City of London; together, with Bridewell, to be a Workhouse for
idle persons; and some of Savoy Furniture was given also to furnish St. Thomas
Hospital in Southwark: But afterward, the Savoy Hospital was refounded, and
endowed with Lands, by Queen Mary, who made one Iackson, first Master thereof)
And it is memorable, how the Mayds of Honor, and Ladies of the Court, in those
times, did much contribute for storing it again with new Beds, and Furniture;
and so it has continued ever since: the Chapel of this Hospital serving for a
Parish Church, to the Neighbors thereof near adjoining, and others.

Now touching the Prerogatives, and enfranchisements of the Duchy of
Lancaster, let the Reader know, that Henry the fourth, by his Royal Charter,
and concurrence of Parliament, did sever the possessions of the said Duchy
from the Crown, And that which John of Gaunt held for term of life, was
established to perpetuity, by the Statutes of Edward the fourth, and Henry the
seventh: which separation was made by Henry the fourth, in regard he well knew,
that he had the Duchy o Lancaster (par Regno) by sure and indefesble Title,
whereas his Title to the Crown was not so assured, because that after the death
of Richard the second, the Royal right was in the Heir of Lionel, Duke of
Clarence, second Son of Edward the third. And John of Gaunt, who was Father to
Henry the fourth, was the fourth Son: therefore his policy was, to make it a
distinct thing from the Crown, for fear of after-claps.

It was Edward the third, who erected the County of Lancaster to a County
Palatine, and honored the Duke of Lancaster therewith, giving him Jura
Regalia, having a particular Court, The Officers whereof, were the Chancellor,
the Attorney, the Receiver General, Clark of the Court, the Auditors,
Surveyors, the Messenger; The Seal of the Duchy of Lancaster remains with the
Chancellor; but the Seal of the County Palatine, remains always in a Chest, in
the County Palatine under the safe custody of a Keeper.

Now, all Grants and Leases of Lands, Tenements, and Offices in the County
Palatine of Lancaster, should pass under that Seal, and no other; but all
Grants and Leases out of the County Palatine, and within the Survey of the
Duchy, should pass under the Seal of the Duchy, and no other; otherwise such
Grants are void, Ipso facto. Though this County Palatine was a younger Brother,
yet it had more honors manors, and Lands annexed unto it, th^n any of the
rest; and all this by Acts of Parliament, whereby all the Franchises,
Privileges, Immunities, Quittances and Freedoms, which the Duke of Lancaster
had for Himself and his Men, and Tenants, were confirmed.

The Liberty of the Duchy was used to be governed by the Chancellor, who had
under him a Steward, that kept Court Le^t, with an Attorney of the Duchy.
There were also four Burgesses, and four Assistants, a Bayliffe, who had others
under him* four Constables, four Wardens, that kept the stock for the poor,
four Wardens for high ways, a Jury of 14. Ale-cunners, which looked to the
assise of measures, four Scavengers, and a Beadle, and the common Prison is
Newgate.

And now we must make a step back toward Temple-barre, and so by degrees, to
Westminster all along, we will begin with the right hand, or the Northside, and
so pas^e up West, through a back lane or street, wherein do stand (as was
touched before) three Inns of Chancery* The first called Clements Inn, in
regard it is near St. Clements Church, and Clements Well. The second New Inn,
which was made of a common Hostery, about the beginning of the Reign of Henry
7. The third is Lions Inn. This street stretches up unto Drury lane, which
lane extends Northward toward St. Giles in the Field. But now we must go back,
as was said before, toward Temple-barre. and so by taking the Strand, all
along return by degrees to Westminster it self, in a direct line.

I have heard often of a British Prophecy, which came from an old Bard, viz.
The Church man was, the Lawyer is, and the Soul^ier shall be. True it is, that
Bishops lived in the Equipage of Princes, in former times; and among other
in^^ar^es, one is, the goodly Palaces they had in and about London, and
Westminster; for from Dorset House in Fleetstreet, as far as White Hall, all
the great Houses, which were built upon the Banks of the Thames, were all
Episcopal Palaces, except the Savoy and Suffolk-house. The first for greatness
was Excester House (now called Essex) whereof the chiefest Founder was Edward
Stapleton, Bishop of that See, who was beheaded by the Londoners in Cheap Side,
and his Body was then brought, and buried in a heap of Sand or rubbish, in his
own House near Temple-barre, in the Reign of Edward the second.

Bishop Edmond L^ey, built the great Hall in the Reign of Henry the sixth. The
same was since called Paget-House, being enlarged by William Lord Paget. Then
was it called Leicester-House, of Robert Dudley, who was the great Favorite to
Queen Elizabeth, and then it came to be called Essex-house, from Robert Earl of
Essex, who was also a Favorite of Queen Elizabeth, and beheaded in the Tower.

Opposite to this House, stands the Parish Church of Saint Clement Danes, so
called, because Harold, a Danish King, with other of that Nation, were buried
there.

Then was the Bishop of Baths Inn, or City-House, builded by the Lord Thomas
Seamer, Admiral of England: which House, came afterward to be possessed by the
Earl of Arundel, and so it bears the name of Arundel-house: near there
adjoining, there was once a Parish Church, called the Nativity of our Lady, or
the Innocents of the Strand, with a fair Coemitery, or Churchyard, wherein
there was a Brotherhood kept, called Saint Vrsula of the Strand.

Near adjoining to the said Church, betwixt it and the Thames, there was an
Inn of Chancery, called Chesters Inn, because it belonged to the Bishop of
Chester, and sometimes 'twas called Strand Inn.

Then was there a House belonging to the Bishop of Landaff, which one of those
Bishops purchased of the Duke of Lancaster.

Then was there the Bishop of Chesters Inn or Palace, which was first built by
Walter Langhton, Treasurer of England, in the Reign of Edward the first. And
not far from that was the Bishop of Worcesters Inn or Palace; All which viz.
The Parish Church called Saint Mary of the Strand, Strand Inn, with the Bishop
of Chester, and Bishop of Worcesters Houses, with all the Tenements adjoining,
were by commandment of Edward Duke of Somerset, Uncle to Edward the sixth, and
Lord Protector pulled down, and laid level to the ground Anno 1549. In place
whereof, he erected that large and goodly House, called now Somerset House,
which rose out of the ruins of the Church; Therefore the Roman Catholics
observed, that an apparent judgment from Heaven fell upon him afterward,
being beheaded a little after; and he and his Counsel were so infatuated, that
he forgot to call for his Clergy, which he might have claimed by the Law, and
so saved his life.

Then is there Bedford House, which was sometimes the Bishop of Carliles Inn.
It stretched from the Savoy to Ivy Bridge, where Sir Robert Cecill Earl of
Salisbury raised a large and stately House of Brick and Timber; Worcester House
lies sideling of it, and there being a great VValnut tree there growing, which
much hindered the prospect of Salisbury House Eastward, the Earl bargained with
one of the Lord Edward of VVorcesters servants, that if he could get leave of
his Lord to cut down that Tree, he would give him 100 li, the servanc told his
Lord of it, who bad him fell down the Tree and take the money; but the old Earl
(there being no good correspondence 'twixt Salisbury and him) caused presently
a new Brick building to be there erected, where the Tree stood.

We come now to Durham House, built by Thomas Hatfield Bishop of that See, a
very capacious Edifice, on the North side whereof stood a row of thatched
Stables, which the Earl of Salisbury purchased, and pulled down, and erected in
place thereof, the New Exchange, or Britains Burse; which was built with
wonderful celerity, for the first Stone thereof was ^ayed on the tenth of June
1608, and it was fully finished the November next following. The Earl did then
invite King James with the Queen, to see his new House, where after a rich
banquet the King named the place Britains Burse.

Next beyond Durham House and this new building, is another great Palace,
belonging of old to the Bishop of Norwich, but afterward it came to the
Archbishop of York, by this occasion. When Cardinal Woolsey, Arch Bishop of
York, was Indicted in a praemunire, whereby the King was entitled to all his
Goods and Possessions, he among other things, seized upon the said Cardinals
House, where he then dwelled, commonly called York Place, and changed the name
thereof to White Hall.

The Archbishops of York, having then no House in London or Westminster, Queen
Mary gave unto Nicholas Heath then Archbishop of York, Suffolk House in
Southwark, lately built by Charles Brandon; which House the said Archbishop
sold, and in lieu thereof he purchased the Bishop of Norwich's House, which
ever since has been called York House, though it came afterward to the
possession of the Duke of Buckingham George Villers, who added much to the old
Edifice, and would have had it called Buckingham House, which name is engraven
upon the watergate in great Letters.

There was of old, an Hospital of St. Mary Rouncival (an order which came from
Navarre in Spain) by Charing-Crosse, where a Fraternity was founded in the
fifteenth of Edward the fourth, which was afterward suppressed and turned to
Tenements. Near unto this Hospital was an Hermitage with a Chapel of St.
Katherine over against Charing-Crosse, which Cross was erected by Edward the
first to the honor of his Queen (as is spoken elsewhere) Eleanor, and it was a
goodly Monument, which was utterly destroyed by the fury of the long Parl^ament.

West of this Cross stood sometimes another Hospital called St. James,
consisting of two Hides of Land in the Parish of St. Margaret in Westminster,
and (...) by the Citizens of London, for 14 Sister-Maidens that were Lep^ous;
then were there added eight Brethren, to minister Divine Service there.
Afterward, there was a great addition of Land made to this Hospital, and
Edward the first granted a Fair to be kept there every year.

This Hospital being surrendered to Henry 8. the Sisters were allowed Pensions
during their (...), and the King erected there a Manor House, with a Park
annexed-encompassed about with a Brick Wall. But before we advance further
Northward toward Westminster, we must make a slep backward to Saint Martins
Church and Lane, where on the West side there are many gentile fair Houses in a
row built by the same Earl of Salisbury who built Britains Burse, but somewhat
before. Then have we Bedford Berry, commonly called the Coven ^arden, because
there was a large Convent, or Monastery there in times passed, where there are
many good structures, cloystered underneath some of them, with a large Piazza
or Market place, and a Church that bears the name of Saint Paul, which, though
within the Precincts of Saint Martins Parish, yet by Act of Parliament, it is
now exempted. The Founder who was the Earl of Bedford, p^ying the Minister
100l. per annum.

On the left hand of Charing-Crosse, there are diverse fair Houses built of late
yea^s, specially the most stately Palace of Suffolk or Northampton House, built
by Henry of Northampton Son to the Duke of Norfolk, and Lord Pri^ie Seal to
King James. Then is there a large plot of ground enclosed with Brick, called
Scotland yard where the Kings of Scotland were used to be lodged and Margaret
Queen Dowager of Scotland, eldest sister to Henry the 8th, kept her Court there
a^^er the King her Husband had been killed in Flodden field.

And now we are come to White Hall, belonging of old to Hubert de Burgh, Earl
of Kent* and Iusticier of England, who gave it to the Blackfriars in Holborne;
but being fallen to Henry the 8. ordained it to be called an Honor, and built
there a huge long Gallery, with two Gate-houses thwart the street to St. James
Park.

From these Gates we pass in a direct Line to Kings street; on one side
whereof passing through St. Stephen Alley is Canon Row, (but now though very
corruptly called Channel Row) to called because it belonged to the Dean and
Canons of Saint Stephens Chapel, who were lodged there, but now they are all
turned to be temporal habitations.

Then we come to Woolstaple now the common Market place of Westminster, In the
Reign of Edward the first, we read that the Staple being at Westminster, the
P^rishioners of Saint Margarets, and Merchants of the Staple bui^ded the said
Church of new. Henry the sixth, had six Wool-houses within the Staple at
Westminster, which he granted to the Dean and Canons of Saint Stephens.

Because we are not yet ready to speak of the Abbey, we will pass by it to the
Gatehouse of Westminster, and so to Totehill and Petty France. The Gate House
is called so of two Gates, the one out of the College Court toward the North,
on the Eastside whereof was the Bishop of Londons Prison for Clerks convict;
the other Gate House is a Goal or Prison for Felons, one Walter Warfield
Cellerer to the Monastery of Westminster, was founder of both these Gates, in
Edward the third's Reign.

On the South side of these Gates, Henry the the seventh founded an Almshouse
for 13 poor men; one of them to be a Priest, and above 45 years old, the rest
to be aged 50 years without Wives.

Near to this place, was of old, the Chapel of St. Anne, where the Lady
Margaret Henry the sevenths Mother, erected an Almshouse for poor women and it
was called Eleemosynary, and now Almory, or Ambry, because the Alms of the
Abbey were there distributed to the poor: And there Islp Abbot of Westminster
set up the first Press of Book-printing that ever was in England, Anno 1471.
And one Caxton Citizen of London, was the first who brought over that Art.

Then is there Totehill street, where there are of late years sundry fair
Houses on the back of St. James Park. The Lady Anne Dacre built there an
Hosptall for twenty poor Women, and so many Children to be brought up under
them.

Then is there Petty France, where, upon a place called St. Hermits Hill,
Cornelius Van Dun a Brabanter born, and Yeoman of the Guard to Henry the 8th,
Edward the sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, built twenty Houses for poor
Women to dwell Rent-free. And near hereunto there was of old a Chapel of St.
Mary Magdalen which is now quite ruinated.

There is of late years a new large Chapel of Brick erected there, at the
entrance to Totehil fields; Where Mr. Palmer, a well di^posed and reverend
Divine, has also erected lately another new Hospital, with a competent
allowance to the poor that shall be admitted thereinto.

And now we will return to the Abbey of Westminster, a place which was used to
be of very high devotion; It gives the denomination to the whole City, and
certainly, that place cannot choose but be happy which has Gods House for its
Godfather, as Munster a great and renowned City in Germany, takes her name from
the chief Church.

Of Westminster Abbey.
THis Church is famous, especially by reason of the inauguration and sepulture
of the Kings of England. Sulcard writes, that there stood sometimes a Temple
of Apollo in that place, and that in the days of Antoninus Pius, Emperor of
Rome, it fell down with an Earthquake; out of the remains whereof, Sebert King
of the East Saxons, erected another to St. Peter, which being by the Danes
overthrown, Bishop Dunstane re-edified, and granted it to some few Monks. But
afterward King Edward surnamed the Confessor, with the tenth penny of all his
Revenues, built it a new for to be his own Sepulture, and a Monastery for
Benedictine Monks, endowing it with Livings and Lands, lying dispersed in
diverse parts of England. But listen what an Historian says, who then lived.
The devout King destined unto God that place, both for that it was near unto
the famous and wealthy City of London, and also had a pleasant situation
amongst fruitful fields, and green grounds, lying round about it, with the
principal River running hard by, bringing in from all parts of the World, great
variety of Wares; and Merchandise of all sorts to the City adjoining; But
chiefly for the love of the Chief Apostle, whom he reverenced with a special
and singular affection. He made choice to have a place there for his own
Sepulcher: and thereupon commanded, that of the Tenths of all his Rents, the
work of a noble Edifice should be taken in hand, such as might beseem the
Prince of the Apostles: To the end (as the Annals have it) that he might
procure the propitious favor of the Lord, after he should finish the course of
this transitory life, both in regard of his devout Piety, and also of his free
Oblation of Lands and Ornaments, wherewith he purposed to endow, and enrich the
same. According therefore to the Kings commandment the work was nobly began,
and happily proceeded forward: neither the charges already disbursed, or to be
disbursed, were weighed and regarded, so that it might be presented in the end
unto God and Saint Peter, and made worth their acceptance. Thus the words of
the old Record run.

Touching the Form of that ancient building, we read in an old Manuscript Book,
that the principal plot or groundwork of the building was supported with most
lofty Arches, cast round with a four square work, and semblable joints. But the
compass of the whole, with a do^b^e Arch of Stone on both sides is enclosed
with joyned-work, firmly knit and united together, every way. Moreover, the
Cross of the Church which was to compass the mid Quire of those that chaunted
unto the Lord, and with a twofold supportance, that it had on either side to
uphold and bear the lofty top of the Tower in the midst, simply rises at first
with a low and strong Arch; then mounteth it higher, with many winding stairs,
artificially ascending with a number of steps: But afterward with a single Wall
it reaches up to the roof of Timber, well and surely covered with Lead. But
after an hundred and threescore years, King Henry the third, subverted this
Fabric of King Edwards, and built from the very foundation a new Church of
very rare Workmanship, supported with sundry rows of Marble Pillars, and the
roof covered over with sheets of Lead: a piece of work that cost fifty years
labor in building; which Church the Abbots enlarged very much toward the West
end; and King Henry the seventh for the burial of himself and his Children,
adjoined thereto, in the East end, a Chapel of admirable artificial elegancy,
The Wonder of the World, as Leland calls it: for a man would say, that all
the curious and exquisite work that can be devised, is there compacted; wherein
is to be seen, his own most stately magnificial Monument, all of solid and
mass^e Copper.

This Church, when the Monks were driven thence, from time to time, was altered
to and fro with sundry changes. First of all, it had a Dean and Preb^ndaries:
soon after one Bishop and no more, namely T. Thurlbey, who having wasted the
Church Patrimony, surrendered it to the spoil of Courtiers; and shortly after
were the Monks with their Abbot ^et in possession again by Queen Mary; and when
they also within a while after, were by authority of Parliament cast out, Queen
Elizabeth converted it into a Collegiate Church, or rather into a Seminary and
Nurse-Garden of the Church, appointing twelve Prebendaries there, and as many
old Soldiers past service, for Alms-men, forty Scholars, who in their due
time are preferred to the Universities; and from thence sent forth into the
Church and Commonweal, etc. Over these they placed D. B^ll Dean, whose
Successor was Gabriel Goodman, a right good man indeed, and of singular
integrity and an especial Patron of Literature.

Within this Church are intombed (that I may note them according to their
dignity and time wherein they died) Sebert the first of that name, and first
Christian King of the East Saxons. Harold the bastard Son of Canutus the Dane
King of England; Edward King and Confessor, with his Wife Ed^th; Maud Wife to
King Henry the first, the Daughter of Malcolme King of Scots; King Henry the
third, and his Son; King Edward the first, with Eleanor his Wife Daughter to
Ferdinando the first King of Castile and of Leon: King Edward the third, and
Philippa of Henault his Wife; King Richard the second, and his Wife Anne,
Sister to VVencelaus the Emperor; King Henry the fifth, with Katherine his
Wife, Daughter to Charles the sixth King of France; Anne, Wife to King Richard
the third, Daughter to Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick* King Henry the seventh,
with his Wife Elizabeth, Daughter to King Edward the fourth, and his Mother
Margaret Countess of Richmond; King Edward the sixth; Anne of Cleave the
fourth Wife of King Henry the eighth; Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth; Prince
Henry eldest Son of King James the sixth of Scotland, and first of England, who
lies there also interred with Queen Anne his Wife; and lastly, the first male
born of Charles the first, dying an Infant.

Of Dukes and Earls Degree, there lie here buried, Edmund Earl of Lancaster,
second Son of King Henry the third, and his Wife Aveline de Fortibus Countess
of Albemarle; William and Audomar of Valence of the Family of Lusignian, Earls
of Pembrooke; Alphonsus John, and other Children of King Edward the first; John
of Eltham Earl of Cornwall, Son to King Edward the second; Thomas of Woodstock
Duke of Gloucester, the youngest Son of King Edward the third with other of his
Children; Eleanor, Daughter and Heir of Humphrey Bohun Earl of Hereford, and of
Essex, Wife to Thomas of Woodstock; the young Daughter of Edward the fourth,
and King Henry the seventh; Henry a Child two Months old, Son o^ King Henry the
eighth; Sophia the Daughter of King James who died, as it were, in the very
first day-dawning of her age; Phill^ppa Mohun,, Duchess of York; Robert of
Hexault in right of his Wife Lord Bourchier; Anne, the young Daughter and Heir
of John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, promised in marriage unto Richard Duke of
York, younger Son to K. Edward the 4th; Sir Giles Daubeny, Lord Chamberlain to
King Henry the 7th, and his Wife of the house of the Arundels in Cornwall; I.
Viscount Wells; Farnces Brandon Duchess of Suffolk, Marry her Daughter,
Margaret Douglasse Countess of Lennox, Grandmother to James King of great
Britain, with Charles her Son; VVinifred Bruges, Marchioness of V^inchester;
Anne Stanhope Duchess of Sommerset, and Jane her Daughter; Anne Cecill
Countess of Oxford, Daughter to the Lord Burleigh, Lord High Treasure of
England, with Mildred Burghley her Mother; Elizabeth Berkeley Countess of
Ormond; ^Frances Sidney Countess of Sussex; James Butler Vicount Thurles, Son
and Heir to the Earl of Ormond.

Besides these, Humphrey Lord Bourchier of Cromwall; Sir Humphrey Bourchier Son
and Heir to the Lord Bourchier of Beruers, both slain at Bernet field; Sir
Nicholas Carew Baroness Powisse, T. Lord Wentworth; Thomas Lord Wharton; John
Lord Russel; Sir T. Bromley, Lord Chancellor of England; Douglas Howard
Daughter and Heir general of H. Vicount Howard of Bindon, Wife to Sir Arthur
Gorges; Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Edward Earl of Rutland, Wife to William
Cecill; Sir John Puckering Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England; Francis
Howard Countess of Hertford; Henry and George Carry, the Father and Son, Barons
of Hundsdon, both Lords Chamberlains to Queen Elizabeth; the Heart of Anne
Sophia, the tender Daughter of Christopher Harley; Count Beaumont, Ambassador
for the King of France in England, bestowed within a small gilt Urne over a
Pyramid; Sir Charles Blunt Earl of Devonshire, Lord Livetenant General of
Ireland; And (whom in no wise we must forget) the Prince of English Poets,
Geoffrey Chaucer; as also he that for pregnant wit, and an excellent gift in
Poetry, of all English Poets came nearest unto him, Edmund Spencer, William
Cambden, Clarencieux King of Arms; Causabon the great French Writer; Michael
Drayton. Then there is George Villers Duke, Marquess and Earl of Buckingham,
favorite to King James, and Charles the first. The late Earl of Essex, with
diverse other during the Reign of the long Parliament.

There was also another College or Free-Chappel hard by, consisting of a Dean
and twelve Chanons, Dedicated to St. Stephen, which King Edward the third in
his princely Magnificence repaired with curious Workmanship, and endowed with
fair possessions, so as he may seem to have built it new, the time as he had
with his Victories overrun and subdued all France, recalling to mind (as we
read the Charter of the Foundation) and pondering in a due weighty devout
consideration, the exceeding benefits of Christ, whereby of his own sweet mercy
and pity, he preventeth us in all occasions, delivering us, although without
desert, from sundry p^ills, and defending us gloriously with his powerful right
Hand, against the violent assaults of our adversaries, with victorious
successes, and in other Tribulations, and perplexities, wherein we have
exceeding much bin encumbred, by comforting us, and by applying, and in pouring
remedies upon us beyond all hope and expectation.

There was also adjoining hereto a Palace, the ancient Habitation of the Kings
of England, from the time of King Edward the Confessor, which in the Reign of
King Henry the eighth, was burnt by casual fire to the ground; A very large,
stately, and sumptuous Palace this was, and in that age, for building
incomparable, with a Vawmure, and Bulwarks for defense. The remains whereof,
are the Chamber wherein the King, the Nobles, with the Counselors, and,
Officers of State, do assemble at the High Court of Parliament; and the next
unto it, wherein anciently they were wont to begin the Parliaments known by the
name of St. Edwards painted Chamber, because the Tradition holds, that the
said King Edward therein dyed.

Adjoining unto this, is the White Hall, wherein at this day, the Court of
Requests is kept; beneath this is that Hall, which of all other is the
greatest, and the very Praetorium, or Hall of Justice, for all England, In
this, are the Judicial Courts; namely, The Kings Bench, The Common Pleas, and
the Chancery; and in places near thereabout, the Star Chamber, the Exchequer,
Court of Wards, and Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, etc. In which at certain
set times, (we call them Terms) yearly Causes are heard, and tried: whereas
before King Henry the third his days, the Court of Common Law, and principal
Justice, was unsettled, and always followed the Kings Court; But he in the
Magna Charta, made a Law in these words, Let not the Common Pleas follow our
Court, but be holden in some certain place; which notwithstanding, some expound
thus, That the Common Pleas, from thenceforch be handled in a Court of her own,
by it self a part, and not in the Kings Bench, as before. This Judgement-Hall,
which we now have, King Richard the second, built out of the ground, as
appears by his Arms, engraven in the Stone-work, and many Arched Beams, (when
he had plucked down the former old Hall that King William Rufus in the same
place had built before) and made it his own Habitation; For Kings in those
days, sat in Judgment place, in their own persons, And they are indeed, the
(...), that is, Judges, whose mouth (as the Royal Writer says) shall not err
in judgment; But the foresaid Palace* after it was burnt down, in the year of
our Lord, 1512. lay desolate, and King Henry the eighth, translated shortly
after, the Kings Seat, from thence to an House not far off, which belonged but
a while before, to Cardinal Woolsey, and is called White Hall. This House is a
Princely thing, enclosed on the one side with a Park, that reaches also to
another House of the Kings, named Saint James (where anciently was a Spittle
for Maiden Lepers) demolished by King Henry the eighth, as is spoken elsewhere.

Hard by, near unto the Mues, so called, for that it served to keep Hawks, and
now is become a most fair Stable for the Court Horses: there remains a
Monument in memorial of that most pious and kind Queen Eleanor, erected by King
Edward the first, her most dearly beloved Husband; and certainly, the memory of
her conjugal love shall remain worthy, to be consecrated to eternity; For she,
the Daughter of Ferdinand the third, King of Castile, being given in Marriage to
Edward the first, King of England, accompanied him into the Holy Land, where,
when as he was secretly fore-laid, and by a certain Moor, wounded with an
envenomed Sword, and by all the remedies that Physicians could devise, was not
so much eased as afflicted, she took her to a strange cure, I must needs say,
and never heard of before; howbeit, full of love, care, and affection. For, her
Husbands wounds infected with the poison, and which, by reason of the malignity
thereof, could not be closed and healed, she day by day, licked with her
Tongue, and sucked out the venomous humor, which to her was a most sweet
Liquor, by the vigor and strength whereof, or to say more truly, by virtue of
a Wives s^ingular fidelity, she so drew unto her, all the substance of the
poison, that the wounds being closed, and cicatrized, he becam perfectly
healed, and she caught no harm at all; what then can be heard more ra^e, what
admirable then this Woman's faithful more love? That a Wives Tongue thus
anointed, as I may so say, with faith and love to her Husband, should from her
well beloved, draw those poisons, which by an approved Physician, could not be
drawn; and that which many, and those right exquisite Medicines effected not,
the love only, and piety of a Wi^e performed: These are the words of the
a^cient Record.

But we must not pass by the Mewse so slightly; that place was called so of
the Kings Faulcons there kept, which in former times, was an Office of high
esteem; But Henry the eighth, having his Stablings at Lomesberry, (now called
Blomesberry) which was then a M^nnor in Holborn, it fortuned, that the same was
consumed by ^ire, with Hay and Horses; whereupon, the Mewse was enlarged, and
made fit for the Kings Stables, which has continued ever since receiving
diverse additions from time to time. But now we are according to the method of
our Discourse, summoned to appear at Westminster Hall; But I had almost
pretermitted one signal thing, which belongs to the great Dome or Temple of
Westminster Abbey, which is the great privilege of Sanctuary it had within the
Precincts thereof, viz. the Church, the Churchyard, and the Close, whereof
there are two; the little, and the great Sanctuary, vulgarly now called Centry;
from whence it was not lawful for the Sovereign Prince himself, much less, any
other Magistrate, to fetch out any that had fled thither, for any offense:
which Prerogative, was granted near upon a thousand years since, by King
Sebert, then seconded by King Edgar, and afterward confirmed by Edward the
Confessor, whose Charter I thought worthy the inserting here, the Tenor
whereof, runs thus, in the modern English.

Edward by the Grace of God, King of Englishmen, I make it to be known to all
Generations in the World, after me, that by special Commandment of our holy
Father Pope Leo, I have renewed, and honored the holy Church of the blessed
Apostle, St. Peter of Westminster; and I order and establish for ever, that
what Person, of what estate or condition soever he be, and from whence soever
he come, or for what offense, or cause it be, either for his refuge into the
said holy place, he be assured of his life, liberty, and Limbs. And over I
forbid under pain of everlasting damnation, that no Minister of mine, or any of
my Successors, intermeddle themselves with any the Goods, Lands, or possessions
of the said persons, taking the said Sanctuary; For I have taken their Goods
and Livelihoods into my special protection. And therefore I grant to every each
of them* in as much as my Terrestrial power may suffice, all manner of freedom
of joyous liberty; and whosoever shall presume, or does contrary to this my
grant, I will, he lose his name, Worship, Dignity and Power; and that with the
great Traitor Judas, that betrayed our Savior, he be in the everlasting fire
of Hell. And I will and ordain, that this my Grant, endure as long as there
remains in England, either love or dread of Christian name.

And this Record may be ranked among the most ancient of the Land. About what
time, King Edward the Confessor, did renew it, he removed St. Margarets Church,
which before was within the Abbey, to the place where now it stands.

Of Westminster Hall, and all the Tribunalls of Justice, which have their
motion therein; And first of the High Court of Parliament.
HAving visited God Almighties House, we will now take a view of the chief
Praetorium of Great Britain, which is Westminster Hall, and of the Courts of
Judicature, which are thereunto annexed; And first, of the Court Paramount, the
high national Court of Parliament: which great Council was used to be the
Bulwark of our liberties, the boundary and bank which kept us from slavery,
from the inundations of Tyrannical encroachments, and unbounded
VVill-Government.

And in this High Court, there was used to be such a Co-ordination of power,
such a wholesome mixture 'twixt Monarchy, Optimacy, and Democracy, I mean,
'twixt Prince, Peers, and Commonalty, during the time of consultation, that of
so many distinct parts, by a rare cooperation and unanimity, they made but one
Body Politic (like that sheaf of Arrows in the Fable;) they made but one
entire concentrical piece; and the results of their deliberations, but as so
many harmonious Diapazons arising from the touch of different strings. And what
greater mark of freedom can there be to a people, then to be liable to no
Laws, but what they make themselves? to be subject to no Contribution,
Assement, or pecuniary Levies whatsoever* but what they vote, and voluntarily
yield unto themselves. For in this great compacted Body politic, there be all
degrees of people represented; The Yeoman, Merchant, Tradesman, and mechanic,
have there their inclusive Votes, as well as the Gentry and Freeholders, in the
persons of their Trustees, viz. their Burgesses and Knights.

The Clergy also, which make a considerable part of the Commonwealth, were
used to have their Representatives there, not only in the persons of the
Bishops (which at the first constitution, were the prime Parliament, and
continued so many Ages) but in the Convocation which was an Assesmbly of
Divines, fairly chosen to that purpose.

Nor is this Sovereign super-intendent Council and Epitome of this Island only;
but it may be said, to represent the whole Universe, according to the primitive
constitution.

The Sovereign Prince was as the Sun, the Nobles the fixed Stars, the
Itinerant Judges, and other Officers, that were wont to go with Messages 'twixt
both Houses, to the Planets: The Clergy (when there was a Convocation House, as
was said before) to the Element of fire: The Commons to the solid body of the
Earth, and the rest of the Elements.

He who has bin conversant with the Chronicles of this Island, will find it
has bin her fare, to be four times conquered; but the Scot, never till now of
late. These so many Conquests, must needs bring with them, many tumblings and
tossings, many disturbances and changes in Government; yet I have observed,
that notwithstanding these various tumblings, England retained still the form
of Monarchy, and something there was always, that held an Analogy with the
great Assembly of Parliament.

The first Conquest was made by Claudius Caesar, at which time it may be said,
that the Standard of the Cross came in together with the Roman Eagles* it is
well known, how the Ro^an governed. He had his Comitia, which bore a
resemblance with our Convention in Parliament, the place of meeting was called
praetorium, and the Laws which were enacted, were called Plebiscita.

The Saxon Conquest succeeded next, in which were the English, and the Saxons
governed by Parliament, though it was under other names, as Michel Gemote,
Michel Sinoth, and VVitenage Mote. There are Records near upon a thousand
years, of these Parliaments, in the Raigns of King Ina, Offa, Ethelbert, and
others.

The third Conquest was by the Danes, and they governed also by such general
Assemblies, in the Reign of Canutus and others.

Then came the Norman, whose Successors did revive, and ratify the way of
governing by Parliament, witness Magna Charta, which was used to be called the
Foundation of the English liberty; and it may be compared to diverse outlandish
graffs set upon one stock: for the choysest of the British, Roman, Saxon,
Danish, and Norman Laws, being culled and picked out, and gathered as it were
in one bundle, out of them the foresaid grand Charter was extracted: the
establishment whereof, was a work of a Parliament: Now by an ancient Statute of
Edward the third, it was enacted, That all Statutes are repealed, which are
against Magna Charta, or Charta de foresta.

Nor are the Laws of this Island only, and the immunities of the people
conserved by Parliament; but all the best policed Countries of Europe have the
like. The Germans have their Diets: The Dane and Swedes their Rich-daghs. The
Spaniard, las Cortes; and the French, the Assembly of the three Estates, though
it has bin for many years discontinued.

And touching England, the Parliament was u^ed to be the principal Fountain,
whence the Sovereign Prince derived his happiness and safety. It was the great
Conduit-Pipe, which conveyed unto him the Peoples bounty and love. It was the
truest Looking-glass, wherein he discerned their affections and allegiance.

In Parliament, the Sovereign Prince used to appear, like the Sun in the
Meridian, in the altitude of his glory, in his highest Royal State, as the Law
tells us.

But we will go now more particularly to work, and treat of this great National
Conncel, according to the first constitution, and establishment thereof.

This Court consists of the Kings Majesty sitting there, as in his Royal
politic Capacity, and of the three Estates of the Realm, viz. of the Lords
spiritual Arch Bishops and Bishops, being in number twenty four, who sit there
by succession in respect of their Counties, or Baronies parcel of their
Bishoprics, which they hold also in their politic Capacity; And every one of
these, when any Parliament is to be holden, ought, Ex debito justitiae, to have
a writ of Summons. The Lords Temporal Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, who sit there, by reason of their Dignities, which they hold by Descent
or Creation; and likewise, every one of these being of full age, ought to have
a writ of Summons, ex debito justitiae; for they are called Parliamentary
Barons. The third Estate is the Commons of the Realm, whereof there be Knights
of shires, or Counties, Citizens of Cities, and Burghesses of Burghes. All
which are respectively elected by the Shires or Counties, Cities and Burghes,
by force of the Kings Writ, Ex debito justitiae, and none of them ought to be
omitted; and these represent all the Commons of the whole Realm, and trusted
for them, and were used to be in number, near upon 500.

Now the King and these three Estates, were the great Corporation or Body
politic of the Kingdom; but they were to sit in two Houses, viz. the King and
Lords in one House, called the Lords House, and the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses in another House, called the House of Commons.

The Commons are in Legal understanding, taken for the Franck Tenants, or
Freeholders of the Counties. And whosoever is not a Lord of Parliament, and of
the Lords House, is of the House of the Commons, either in person, or by
representation, partly coaugmentative, and partly representative.

Of this Court of Parliament, the Sovereign Prince by the Law is Caput
principium and finis, the head, beginning, and ending. And as in the natural
body, when all the sinews, being joined in the head, do unite their forces
together, for the strengthening of the body, there is ultimum potentiae; so, in
the poli^ique Body, when the King and the Lords spiritual, and temporal,
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are all by the Kings Command assembled and
joined together, under the Head in consultation for the common good of the
whole Realm there is ultimum sapientiae.

The third year of Henry the sixth, it appears in a Parliament Roll, that the
Parliament being called, as has bin said, Commune Consilium every member of
the House being a Counselor, should have the three properties of the Elephant;
which are First, That he has no Gall.

Secondly, That he be inflexible, and cannot bow.

Thirdly, That he is of a most ripe and perfect memory; which properties, as
there it is said, ought to be in every Member of the great Council of
Parliament.

First, to be without Gall, that is, without malice, rancor, heat, and envy,
In the Elephant, Melancholia transit in nutrimentum corporis, every gallish
inclination (if any were) should tend to the good of the whole body, the
Commonwealth.

Secondly, That he be constant, inflexible, and not to be bowed, or turned from
the right, either for fear, reward, or favor; nor, in judgment, re^pect any
person.

Thirdly, of a ripe memory* that they remembering perils past, might prevent
dangers to come, as in that Roll of Parliament it appears.

The Prince de advisamento consilii (for so be the words of the Writ of
Parliament) resolving to have a Parliament, does out of the Court of Chancery,
send out Writs of Summons, at the least forty days before the Parliament
begins: every Lord of Parliament, either spiritual, as Arch bishops, and
Bishops; or temporal, as Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, Peers
of the Realm, and Lords of Parliament, were used to have several Writs of
Summons.

And all the Judges of the the Realm, Barons of the Exchequer of the Coif, the
Kings learned Cousnel, and the Civilians Masters of the Chancery, are called to
give their assistance and attendance, in the upper House of Parliament; but
they have no Voices in Parliament, being only ministerial; and their Writs
differ from the Writs to the Judges; for their Writs be, Quod intersitis
Nobiscum and cum caeteris de Concilio Nostro, (and sometimes Nobiscum only)
super praemissis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; But the Writ to
the Barons is, Quod intersitis cum praelatis, Magnatibus and proceribus, super
dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri.

Moreover, in every Writ to Summons to the Bishops, there is a clause requiring
them to summon these persons to appear personally at the Parliament, which is
in these words, premonientes Decanum and Capitulum Ecclesiae Vestrae
Norwicensis, ac Archidi^conos totumque clerum vestrae Dioces, quod iidem Decani
and Archi diaconi in propr^is persmiss suis, ac dictum capitulum per unum,
idemque clerus per duos proeuratores idoneos plenam and sufficientem potestatem
ab ipsis capitulo and clero divisim habentes predict' die and loco personaliter
intersint ad consenti^ndum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi concilio dicti
regni Nostri divina favente clementia contigerit ordinari; and the Bishop under
his Seal makes Certificate accordingly.

And these are called Procuratores cleri, and many times have appeared in
Parliament, as spiritual Assistants, to consider, consult, and consent, ut
supra; but had never voices there, because they were no Lords of Parliament;
And this Assembly was called the Convocation-House, which the last King
continuing, (after the dissolution of the Parliament) and the Bishops coming
amongst them to consult, and make Canons, the next Parliament protested against
their proceedings as irregular, and prejudicial to the privileges of
Parliament.

Observable it is, what difference there was in the Writ, whereby the spiritual
Lords were summoned, and that whereby the temporal Lords were called. The
Ecclesiastical Barons were required by the Kings Writ to be present, In fide
and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, In the faith and Love you are bound to
us; But the secular Lords were summoned to appear, In fide and homagio, quibus
nobis tenemini. In the faith and homage you are bound unto us; Now touching the
Commons, their Writ or Summons to the Sheriff runs thus.

The King to the Vicount, or Sheriff, Greeting:
WHereas by the advice and assent of our Council for certain Arduous and urgent
Affairs concerning Us, the State, and defense of our Kingdom of England, and
the Anglican Church, we have ordained a certain Parliament of ours, to be held
at our City of the day of next ensuing, and there to have Conference, and to
treat with the Prelates, Great men and Peers of our said Kingdom, We command,
and strictly enjoin you, that making Proclamation at our next County Court,
after the receipt of this our Writ, to be holden the day and place aforesaid,
you cause two Knights girt with Swords, the most fit and discreet of the County
aforesaid, and of every City of that County two Citizens; of every Borough two
Burgesses, of the discreetest and most sufficient, to be freely and
indifferently chosen by them, who shall be present at such Proclamation,
according to the tenure of the Statutes in that case made and provided; And the
names of the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses so chosen, to be inserted in
certain Indentures to be then made between you and those that shall be present
at such Election, whether the parties so elected be present or absent, and
shall make them to come at the said day and place; so that the said Knights for
themselves, and the County aforesaid, and the Citizens, and the Burgesses for
themselves, and the Commonalty of the said Cities and Beroughs, may have
severally from them, full and sufficient power, to do, and to consent to those
things, which then by the favor of God, shall happen to be ordained by the
Common Council of our said Kingdom, concerning the businessse aforesaid, so
that the business may not by any means remain undone for want of such power, or
by reason of the unprovident Election of the foresaid Knights, Burgesses and
Citizens; But we will not, in any case that you, or any other Sheriff of our
said Kingdom, shall be elected, And at the day and place aforesaid, the said
Election being made in a full County Court, you shall certify without delay
unto us, in our Chancery under your Seal, and the Seals of them who shall be
present at the Election, sending back unto us, the other part of the Indenture
aforesaid, affil'd to these presents, ogether with the Writ.

Witness our Self at Westminster.

This Commission or Writ, is the foundation, whereon the whole fabric of the
power, and duty of both Houses of Parliament is grounded.

The first House is to parley, or have conference, and to treat and consult
with the King, the other House is to do and consent only unto what the other
shall ordain.

This was the Law and usage in former times; but what is the power of the
Commons in these days now that the Government is altered, and cast into another
mould, (the House of Peers being dissolved) it is not the intent of this
Discourse to determine.

At the return of the Writs aforesaid, the Parliament could not begin, but by
the Royal presence of the King, either in Person, or by Representation* By
Representation two ways, either by a Guardian of England, by Letters Patenrs
under the Great Seal, when the King was in remotis, out of the Realm; or by
Commission, under the Great Seal, to certain Lords of Parliament, representing
the Person of the King, he being within the Realm, but absent in respect of
some infirmity.

On the first day of the Parliament, the King himself, or most commonly, the
Lord Chancellor, or Keeper, in the presence of the Lords and Commons, did show
the causes of the calling of High Court of Parliament; but the King might have
appointed any other to be his Prolocutor, in this case.

Then the Commons are to choose their Speaker; but in regard, that after their
choice, the King might refuse him; for avoiding of time and contestation, the
use was as in the Conge deslire of a Bishop, that the King does recommend a
discreet and learned man, whom the Commons elect; but without their Election,
no Speaker can be appointed for them, because he is their mouth, and entrusted
by them, and so necessary, that the House of Commons cannot sit without him:
therefore a grievous sickness is a good cause to remove him, as in Henry the
4th Reign, John Chervy Speaker, was for sickness discharged and Sir John
Dorewoold chosen in his place; but sickness is no cause to remove any Knight,
Citizen or Burgess.

The Speaker being voted in the House, was presented to the King, where being
allowed, he made a supplication consisting of three parts.

First, That the Commons in Parliament might have free speech.

Secondly, That in any thing he should deliver in the name of the Commons, if
he should commit any error, no fault should be imputed to the Commons.

Thirdly, That as often as necessity for his Majesty's service, and the good of
the Commonwealth shall require, he may by the directions of the House, have
access to his Royal Person.

Any of the Pee^s, by the Kings leave, may absent himself, and make a proxy to
another Lord; but a Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, cannot make a Proxy, because
he is elected, and entrusted by multitudes of people. And it is to be observed,
though one be chosen for one particular County or City, yet when he is
returned, and sits in Parliament, he serves for the whole Commonwealth.

There belongs to Parliament, a Prorogation, or adjournment, which differ in
this: A Prorogation presupposes a Session, and then such Bills as passed in
either House, or by both Houses, and had no Royal assent unto them, must at the
next Assembly begin again; for every Session in Parliament, is in Law a several
Parliament; but if it be but adjourned, then there is no Session.

When a Parliament is called, and does sit, and is dissolved without any Act
passed, or judgment given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a Convention.

Touching the Power and Jurisdiction of Parliament, for making of Laws in
proceeding by Bill, it is so transcendent, and absolute, as it cannot be
confined within any bounds.

No Alien is capable to be chosen a Parliament Man, nor can any of the Judges
of the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, or Barons of the Exchequer, that have
Judicial places, or any Churchman, that has care of souls, be chosen a member
of the House of Parliament: For others, the King cannot grant a Charter of
Exemption to any man, to be freed from Election of Knight or Burgess of the
Parliament, because the Elections of them, ought to be free for the public
service.

OF THE COURT OF THE KING'S BENCH, THE Royallest Court in the Land; Now called,
The Upper Bench.
THe Laws of England, presuppose the King to be the Fountain and Oracle of
Justice, and to have special inspirations from Heaven to that purpose;
therefore all the Tribunals of Judicature, were used to be ambulatory with his
Court, and He was wont to sit in Person in the Upper Bench, which is the
Supreme Tribunal of the Land.

The Justices in this Court, are the sovereign Justices of Oyer and Terminer,
Jail-delivery, Conservation of the Peace, etc. in the Realm.

In this Court the Kings of this Realm have sat, as being the highest Bench,
and the Judges of that Court on the lower Bench at his Feet; but Judicature
only belongs to the Judges of that Court, and in his presence they answer all
Motions, etc.

The Justices of this Court are the sovereign Coroners of the Land, and
therefore, where the Sheriffs and Coroners may receive appeals by Bill a
fortiori, the Justices of this Court may do it: so High is the authority of
this Court, that when it comes and sits in any County, the Justices of Eire, of
Oier and Terminer, Coal-delivery, they which have conusance, etc. do cease
without any writing to them; But if any Indictment of Treason or Felony in a
Forain County, be removed before certain Commissioners of Oier and Terminer, in
the County where this Court sits, yet they may proceed, because this Court (for
that this Indictment, was not removed before them) cannot proceed for that
offense; But if any Indictment be taken in Midd* in the vacation, and after
this Court sit in the next Term in the same County (if this Court be adjourned)
then may special Commissioners of Oier and Terminer, etc. in the interim
proceed upon that Indictment; but the more usual way is by special Commission.
And this was resolved by all the Judges of England at Winchester, Anno 1'
Iacobi Regis, in the Case of Sir Everard Digby and others, and so had it been
resolved, Mich. 25 and 26 Eliz. in the Case of Arden and Somervile, for this
kind of special Commission of Oier and Terminer; and herewith agrees Pl. Com.
in the Earl of Leic' Case, Anno 1 Mar. Reginae. And so supreme is the
Jurisdiction of this Court, that if any Record be removed into this Court, it
cannot (being as it were in his Center) be remanded back, unless it be by Act
of Parliament; And this appears by the Judgment of the Parliament, in Anno 6.
H. 8. but by the authority of that Act, Indictments of Fellonies and Murders,
removed into the Kings Bench, may by the Justices of that Court be remanded,
and this Court may send down as well the Bodies of all Felons and Murderers, as
their Indictments, into the Counties where the same Murders of Felonies were
committed or done, etc. in such manner, etc. as if the Indictments had not been
brought into the Kings Bench.

Out of this Court, are other Courts derived, as from one Fountain several
Springs and Rivers, in repect of the multiplicity of Causes, which have
increased. Jurisdictio istius curiae est originalis seu ordinaria, and non
delegata. The Justices of this Court have no Commission, Letters Patents, or
other means to hold Pleas* etc. but their power is original and ordinary. They
were called ancienlty Iusticiae, Justiciarii, locum tenentes Domini Regis, etc.
The chief Justice, Justicia Angliae, Justicia prima, Iusticiarius Angliae
Capitalis, and Iusticiarius noster Capitalis adplacita coram nobis terminand'.
To observe the Changes of these names, and the reason and Changes thereof is
worthy of observation.

Before the Reign of E. 1. the Chief Justice of this Court was created by
Letters Patents, and the form thereof, (taking one example for all) was in
these words;

Rex etc. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Vicecomitibus, Forestariis, etc. and omnibus aliis fidelibus regni
Angliae, salutem. Cum pro conservatione nostra, and tranquill^tatis regni
nostri, and ad justiciam universis and sing^lis de rengo nostro exhibendam
constituerimus dilectum et fidelem nostrum Philippum Basset Iusticiarium
Angliae, quamdiu nobis placuerit, capit alem; vobis mandamus in fide qua nobis
tenemini firmiter insungentes, quatenus in omnibus quae ad officium Justitiarii
praedicti, nec non ad conservationem pacis nostrae et regni nos^ri eidem dum in
officio praedicto steterit, before sitis intendentes. Test Rege etc.

The King etc. to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons,
Vicounts, Foresters, etc. and to all other faithful to the Kingdom of England,
greeting. Whereas for our conservation and the tranquillity of our Kingdom,
etc. for the exhibition of justice to all and every one of our Kingdom, We have
constituted our beloved and faithful Philip Basset chief Justice of England, as
long as we shall please. We command you upon the faith you hold unto us, and
firmly enjoin you to all things that belong unto the office of Chief Justice
aforesaid, for the conservation of our Peace, and of our Kingdom, and that you
be very intentive, as long as you stand in the said Office. Witness the King,
etc.

This Philip Basset was the last of this kind of creation by any like Letters
Patents, and he died Chief Justice near to the end of the Reign of H. 3. King
E. 1. being a wise and prudent Prince, knowing that Cui plus licet quam par
est, plus vult quam licet, (as most of these Summi Iusticiarii did) made three
alterations, 1. By limitation of his authority. 2. By changing Summus
Iusticiarius to Capitalis Justice* 3. By a new kind of creation, viz. By Writ,
lest if he had continued his former manner of creation, he might have had a
desire of his former Authority, which three do expressly appear by the Writ yet
in use, etc.

Rex etc. E. C. Militi salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justiciarium
nostrum capitalem ad placita coram nobis tenenda, durante beneplacito nostro,
Test etc.

The King etc. to E. C. greeting. Know ye, that we have constituted you our
Capital (or Chief) Justice in Pleas, held before us during our pleasure.
Witness etc. A short Writ, but of large extent in point of Authority.

The rest of the Judges of the Kings Bench, have their Offices by Letters
Patents, in these words,

Rex omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem, Sciatis quod
constituimus dilectum et fidelem Johannem Doderidge, Militem, unum
Justiciariorum ad placita coram nobis tenenda durante beneplacito nostro, Test
etc.

These Justices of the Kings Bench, are styled, 1. Capitales. 2. Generales. 3.
Perpetui. 4. Majores a latere Regis residentes; But the Chief Justice is only
by the King, Capitalis Justiciarius noster. They are called first Capitales, in
respect of their supreme Jurisdiction. 2. Generales, in respect of their
general jurisdiction throughout all England, etc. 3. Perpetui, for that they
ought not to be removed without just cause, 4. Majores a latere Regis
residentes, for their honor and safety, that they should be protected by the
King in administration of justice, for that they be a latere Regis, that is, by
the Kings fide. And whereas 5. E. 4. it was holden by all the Justices in the
Exchequer Chamber, that a man cannot be Justice by Writ, but by Patent, or
Commission, it is to be understood of all the Judges, saving the Chief Justice
of this Court; But both the Chief Justice, and the rest of the Judges may be
discharged by Writ under the Great Seal.

None can be a Judge of this Court, unless he be a Sergeant of the degree of
the Coif; and yet in the Writ or Patent to them made, they are not named
Sergeants.

There have been for a long time, and still there are great Complaints for
multiplicity of Suits in Law, and it were a wholesome and happy thing, could it
be prevented: but because a Disease cannot be cured without knowledge of the
Cause, it is to be observed, that there be six Causes of the increase of them,
whereof two be general, the other four particular; The general be Peace, and
Plenty; The particular, 1. The dissolution of so many Monasteries, Chan^eries,
etc. and the dispersing of them into so many several hands. 2. The swarm of
Informers. 3. The number of Concealors. 4. The multitude of Atturneys.

For the first general; In the Reign of E. 3. R. 2. H. 4. H. 5. and part of the
Reign of H. 6. in respect of the wars in France, etc. and in the residue of the
Reign of H. 6. and in the Reign of E. 4. in respect of the bloody and intestine
Wars, and in almost continual Alarms within the bowls of this Kingdom, between
the Houses of Lancaster and York, there could not be so many Suits in Law, as
since this Kingdom has enjoyed Peace, which is the first general cause. Peace
is the Mother of Plenty, (which is the 2d general cause) and Plenty the Nurse
of Suits. In particulars, by the dissolution of Monasteries, Chanteries, etc.
and dispersing of them, etc. upon the Statutes made concerning the same (there
being such a confluence of Ecclesiastical possessions) there aro^e many
questions, and doubts, whereupon Suits were greatly increased. 2. Informers and
Relators raised many Suits, by Informations, Writs, etc. in the Kings Courts at
Westminster, upon penai Statutes, many whereof were obsolete, inconvenient, and
not fit for those days, and yet remained as snares upon the Subject, so as the
Subject might justly say with Tacitus, Prius vitiis laboravimus, nunc legibus.
3. Concealers; Helluones that endeavored to swallow up Cathedral Churches, and
the Ecclesiastical possessions of Churchmen, and the Livings of many others of
the Kings Subjects. Lastly, the multitude of Atturneys, more than is limited by
Law, is a great cause of increase of Suits.

Touching the jurisdiction of this Court, which was used to be called the King
Bench, it is of a larger extent of power, and more incontroulable than any
other Tribunal: for the Law presums, that the King is there still in Person: He
being the Lord Chief Justice of England himself: as King James gave a check to
one who called Lord Coke, Lord Chief Justice of England, saying, that he was
but Chief Justice of his Bench, and that it was his own Office to be Chief
Justice of England; Yet it is observable, that though the King be Chief Justice
of England, and that he personally sit upon the Bench, yet he can pass no
sentence of judgment, but by the mouths and mediation of his Judges, who did
use to sit there at his Feet when he was present.

Of the Court of Chancery, or Equity and Conscience.
IT is taken pro confesso by all Antiquaries, that both the British, and Saxon
Kings, had their Chancellors, and Court of Chancery, the only Court out of
which original and remedial Writs do issue; as taking some few examples before
the Conquest.

Edward the Confessor had Reinbald his Chancellor; this Edward granted many
Manors, Lands, etc. and Franchises to the Abbot of Westminster, and ends his
Charter thus, Adult^mum, cartam istam sigillari jussi, and ipse manu mea
propria signum Crucis impressi, and idon^os testes annotari praecepi. And
amongst those Witness this you shall find, Swardus Notarius ad vicem Reinbaldi
regiae dignitatis Chancellarii hanc cartam scripsi etc. subscripsi, He had also
Lefrick to his Chancellor.

King Etheldred also had a worthy name, and a worthy man to his Chancellor, Rex
Etheldredus statuit atque concessit quatenus Ecclesiam de Elye ex tunc and
semper in regis curia Cancellariae ageret dignitatem, etc. This King began his
Reign Anno Domini 978, which albeit, it was void in Law to grant the
Chancelorship of England in succession; yet it proves then there was a Court
of Chancery.

King Edgar had Adulph; King Edred had Thurkettle, King Edmond the same, King
Athelstane Wolsine, their Chancelors etc.

In the Chancery are two Courts, one ordinary, Coram Domino Rege in
Cancellaria, wherein the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
proceeds, according to the right line of the Laws and Statutes of the Realm,
Secundum legem and consuetudinem Angliae; Another extraordinary according to
the Rule of equity, secundum aquum and bonum; And first of the former Court.

He has power to hold Plea of Scire fac' for repeal of the Kings Letters
Patents, of Petitions, Monstrans de droite, Traverses of office, Partitions in
Chancery, of Scire fac' upon recognizances in this Court, Writs of Audita
querela, and Scire fac', in the nature of an Audita querela, to avoid
Executions in this Court, Dowments in Chancery, the Writ De dote assignanda,
upon Offices found, Executions upon the Statute Staple, or Recognizance in
nature of a Stature Staple, upon the Act of 23. H. 8. but the Execution upon a
Statute Merchant is retornable, either into the Kings Bench, or into the Common
place, and all personal actions by or against any Officer or Minister of this
Court in respect of their service or attendance there; In these if the parties
descend to issue, this Court cannot try it by Jury, but the Lord Chancellor or
the Lord Keeper, delivers the Record by his proper hands into the Kings Bench
to be tried there, because for that purpose both Courts are accounted but one;
and after trial had to be remanded into the Chancery, and there Judgment to be
given. But if there be a Demurrer in Law, it shall be argued and adjuged in
this Court. Nota, the legal proceedings of this Court, be not enrolled in
Rolls, but remain in Filaciis, being filed up in the Office of the Pe^y-bag:
upon a judgment given in this Court, a Writ of Error does lie retornable into
the Kings Bench. The style of the Court of the Kings Bench is Coram Rege, (as
has been said) and the style of this Court of Chancery is Coram domino Rege in
Cancellaria, and Additio probat minoritatem; And in this Court, the Lord
Chancellor or the Lord Keeper is the sole Judge, and in the Kings Bench there
are four Judges at the least.

This Court is Officina Justiciae, out of which all original Writs, and all
Commissions which pass under the Great Seal go forth; which Great Seal is
Clavis regni, and for those ends this Court is ever open.

And this Court is the rather always open, for that if a man be wrongfully
imprisoned in the Vacation, the Lord Chancellor may grant a Habeas Corpus, and
do him Justice according to Law, where neither the Kings Bench nor Common
Pleas, can grant that Writ, but in the term time; but this Court may grant it
either in Term time or Vacation: so likewise this Court may grant Prohibitions
at any time, either in Term or Vacation: which Writs of Prohibition are not
retornable, but if they be not obeyed, then may this Court grant an Attachment,
upon the Prohibition retornable, either in the Kings Bench or Common Place.

The Officers and Ministers of this Court of Common Law do principally attend,
and do their service to the Great Seal, as the twelve Masters of the Chance^y,
whereof the Master of the Rolls is the chief, who by their original
institution, as it is proved before, should be expert in the Common Law, to see
the forming and framing of original Writs, according to Law, which are not of
course; whereupon such are called in our ancient Authors, Brevia Magistralia;
Then you have the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the Hamper, the Sealer, the
Chafe wax, the Controuler of the Chancery, twenty four Cursitors for making
Writs of course, or formed Writs according to the Register of the Chancery; The
Clerk of the presentations, the Clerk of the Faculties, the Clerk Examiner of
the Patents, the Clerks of the Petty-bag, and the six Attorneys.

Having spoken somewhat of this Court's ordinary Jurisdiction, something shall
be said of the extraordinary proceedings thereof, according to the Rule of
Equity, secundum aquum et bonum, or according to the dictates of Conscience;
for the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, may be said to
be Keeper of the Kings Conscience, for mitigation of the rigor of the Common
Law. Yet this Court of Equity proceeding by English Bill, is no Court of
Record; therefore it can bind but the Person only, and neither the State of the
Defendants Lands, nor property of his Goods, and Chattles; therefore if the
Lord Chancellor impose any fine, it is void in Law, he having no power but on
the Person only.

Yet the Lord Chancellor or Keeper, is sole Judge both in this Court of Equity,
and in the Court concerning the Common Law; but in cases of weight or
difficulty, he does assist himself with some of the Judges: and no greater
exception can be taken hereunto, than in case of the Lord Steward of England,
being sole Judge in trial of the Nobility, who also is assisted with some of
the Judges.

Touching this Court of Equity, the ancient Rule is, that three things are to
be considered in a Court of Conscience; Covin, Accident, and Breach of
confidence; All Covins, collusions, frauds, and deceits, for which there is no
remedy by the ordinary course of Law. Accident, as when the servant of an
Obligor or Morgageor, is sent to pay the money on the day, and he is robbed
etc. then remedy is to be had in this Court against the for^eiture; The third
is breach of tru't and confidence, whereof there are plentiful examples.

The ancient Custom was when one was made Lord Chancellor, for the King to
hang the Great Seal about his Neck. Cardinal Woolsey had the Chancelorship by
Letters Pat^ents during life, but it was held void because an ancien Office
must be granted as it was accustomed. Henry the (...) had two great Seals, one
of Gold, which he delivered the Bishop of Durham; and another often Silver, which
he delivered the Bishop of London. The Chancellors Oath consists of six parts.

1. That well and tr^ly he shall serve the King our Sovereign Lord, and his
People in the Office of Chancellor, or Lord Keeper.

2. That ^e shall do right to all manner of people poor and rich, after the
Laws and usages of the Realm.

3. That he shall truly Counsel the King, and his Counsel, he shall layne (or
conceal) and keep.

4. That he shall not know, nor suffer the hurt or disheriting of the King, or
that the Rights of the Crown be decreased, by any means as far as he may let it.

5. And in case he cannot let it, he shall make it clearly and expressly to be
known to the King, with his true advice and counsel.

6. He shall do and purchase the Kings profit in all that he reasonably may.

There be in this Court many Officers, whereof mention is made before, the
principal whereof is the Master of the Rolls, which is an ancient Office, and
grantable either for life or at will, according to the Prince his pleasure.
Edward the third by Letters Patents, annexed the House of the converted Jews in
Chancery Lane to this Office, for keeping of the Records of the Chancery, viz.
Charters, Letters Patents, Commissions, Deeds, Recognizances* which before the
Reign of Henry the seventh, were used to be transmitted to the Tower of London,
The Master of the Rolls used to have Iure Officii, the gift of the Offices of
the six Clerks in the Chancery; and in the absence of the Lord Chancellor, he
hears Causes, and gives Orders.

OF THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS IN Westminster Hall.
IN times passed, the Courts and Benches, or Banks of Justices (as was touched
before) followed the Kings Person wheresoever he went, as well since the
Conquest as before: which thing being found chargeable and cumbersome; The
ninth of Henry the third, it was resolved, that there should be a standing
place appointed, where matters should be heard and determined; And the Court of
the Common Pleas was the first that was fixed, wherein tenures of Lands, and
civil Actions used to be pleaded; And it is one of the Statutes of Magna
Charta, Quod Communia placita non sequantur Curiam nostram sed teneantur loco
certo, That the Common Pleas follow not our Court, but be kept in a certain
place. Now, Pleas are distinguished into Pleas of the Crown, as Treason and
Felony, with misprision of Treason and Felony, (which belong to the Upper
Bench) and to Common or Civil Pleas, whereof this Court takes Cognizance. This
Court therefore is called, the Lock and Key of the Common Law of England, and
the Judges there sitting had need to be more knowing, and learned than any
other; for here all Real Actions whereupon Fi^es and recoveries, the common
assurances of the Land do pass, and all other real Actions by original Writs,
are to be determined, as also of all Common (...) mixed or personal, in diverse
of which the Kings Bench, and this Court have a concurrent authority; But
regularly this Court cannot hold Common (...) in any Action, real, mixed or
personal, but by Writ out of the Chancery and returnable to this Court; yet
this Court in some cases may hold Plea by Bill without any Writ in the
Chancery: as for, or against any Officer, (...) or privileged Person of this
Court. This Court also, without any Writ may upon a suggestion grant
Prohibitions, to keep Temporal as well as Ecclesiastical Courts, within their
bounds and jurisdictions, without any Original, or Plea depending; for the
Common Law, which in those cases is a Prohibition of it self stands instead of
an Original.

The Chief Justice of this Court, is created by Letters Patents during the
pleasure of the Prince, and so are the rest of his Associats, but none is
capable to be constituted a Judge here, unless he be a Sargeant at Law of the
degree of the Coif. The jurisdiction of this Court is general and extends
throughout England.

The Officers of this Court are many, viz. Custos Brevium, three Protonotaries,
Clerk of the Warrants, Clerk of the Kings Silver, four Exigenters, fourteen
Filazers, Clerk of the Juries, Clerk of the Essoins, Clerk of the Outlaries,
which belongs to the Attorney General, who does exercise it by Deputy. In
former times great abuses have been by Attorneys of this Court, by suing out a
Judicial Process with any Original, which when detected have been severely
punished.

OF THE COURT OF THE EXCHEQUER.
THe Authority of this Court is of Original Jurisdiction, without any
Commission. In the chief place of account for the Revenues of the Crown; The
Hearers of the accounts have Auditors under them, and they who are the chief
for the accounts of the Prince, are called Barons of the Exchequer, whereof one
is called Lord Chief Baron. The greatest Officer of all is the Lord Treasurer.
In this Court are heard, those that are Delators or Informers in popular or
penal Actions, having thereby part of the profit assigned unto them by the Law.
In this Court, if any question be, it is determined by the Common Law of
England, by twelve men, and all Subsidies, Taxes, and Customs by account; For
in this Office the Sheriffs of the Countries do attend upon the execution of
the Commandments of the Judges. If any Fines or Amercements be extracted out
of any Court or any arrearages of accounts of such things as is of Customs,
Taxes, and Subsidies, and other such like occasions, the same the Sheriff of
the Country does gather, and is answerable therefore to the Exchequer.

This Court is divided into two parts, viz. Judicial accounts called, Scaccarum
computorum, And into the Receipt of the Exchequer,

The prime Officer of this Court, as was mentioned before, is the Lord high
Treasurer of England, who receives a White Staff from the King; But in former
time he had this Office by delivery of a Golden Key. Then there is Cancellarius
Scaccarii the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who keeps the Seal. Then you have
the chief Baron, and his Associates, whereof one, though he sits there, yet he
has no voice; therefore he was used to be called by way of Drollery, Baron
Tell-clock; yet he takes the same Oath that others do, he has a Fee of 100
Marks per annum; At days of prefixions, he has to do with the Sheriffs
Accounts, he can take Recognizances; but he has not the Robes, nor any
suffrage upon the Bench in point of Judicature; And that nickname Baron
Tellclock came up first in Baron Southertons time, who when he felt the Chimes
ring in his Stomach toward dinner, he was used to tell chief Baron Tanfield,
My Lord it is twelve a clock.

Then have you sundry other inferior Officers, more then in any other Court,
except the Kings House.

This Court is called Exchequer from a French word vne place quarree a
foursquare place, because the Carpet that lay before the Judges, is in the form
of a Chess-board, and of two colors: thence the name of Exchequer was derived.

Now, it is to be observe'd, that albeit the Barons are the sole Judges of the
Exchequer Court, yet the Lord Treasurer is joined with them, in keeping of the
Records. The Lord Treasurer has also granted him by Parent under the great
Seal, Thesaurarium Scaccarii Regis Angliae, which of ancient time, as the Lord
Coke has it, was a distinct Office by it self.

Then is there the Pipe Office, whereof the Chancellor of the Exchequer is
Contrarotulator or Controuler. The Original institution of the Pipe Office was
taken from a Conduit of water, which was conveyed by Pipes into a Cestern which
lay in a Court: for as water is derived from many Fountains Springs, by
Aquaeducts into a Cestern House, and from thence into several Offices of the
same: so this golden and silver stream is drawn from sundry Courts as Fountains
of Justice, and other Springs of Revenue reduced and collected into one Pipe,
and thereby conveyed into the Grand Cestern of the Princes receipt, etc.
Therefore all Accounts and Debts to the Crown are delivered and collected out
of the Offices of the Kings Remembrancer, and Treasurers Remembrancer, and so
drawn, and p^t in charge in the Pipe. There be five Auditors of the Revenue
Royal within the survey of this Court, and their Office is, to take Accounts of
the Kings Receivers, Sheriffs, Escheators, Collectors, and Customers, and to
audite and perfect the Account; But an Auditor cannot allow any License or
Grant, in regard he knows not whether it be good, this belongs to the Barons;
Neither can the Auditor put any thing in Charge, his Office being only to take
and audite Accounts. There is the Auditor of the Prests, whose Office it is to
take the Accounts of the Mint, Ireland, and Barwick, and of all other imprested
or moneys advanced before hand.

Then is there the Auditor of the Receipts, which is an Office very
considerable, and consisting of many parts; For first, he is a kind of Filazer,
for he fileth the Tellers Bills, and enters them. Secondly, he is a
Remembrancer, for he gives the Lord Treasurer a certificate of the money
received the week before. Then he is an Auditor, for he makes Debenturs to
every Teller, before they pay any money, and takes and audites their Accounts.
Besides all this, he keeps the black Book of Receipts, and the Lord Treasurers
Key of the Treasury, and sees every Tellers money locked up in the new
Treasury. Of those Tellers there are four, and their Office consists in four
duties.

First, to receive money due to the Sovereign Prince.

Secondly, to pay all persons moneys by Warrant of the Auditor of the Receipt.

Thirdly, to make yearly and weekly Books of their Receipts and payments, which
they deliver to the Lord Treasurer.

And lastly, to give the Clerk of the Pell a Bill of what moneys they receive,
whereby he may be charged.

Now, touching Clericus Pellis the Clerk of the Pell; his duty is, to enter
every Tellers Bill into a Roll called Pellis Receptorum; his Office also is, to
enter ino another Roll payments, called Pellis exitus, signifying by what
Warrant the payment was made.

Concerning the Kings Remembrancer in the Exchequer his Office, consists in
eight Duties;

First, to write Process against Collectors of Customs, Subsidies, and Fifteens.

2. He enters in his Office all Recognizances before the Barons, and takes
Bond for any of the Kings Debts, for observing of Order, for appearances, and
his duty is to make out Process upon every of them.

3. He makes Process upon Informations upon penal Statutes, all which
Informations are entered into his Office.

4 He makes Bills of composition upon Informations upon penal Statutes.

5. He takes the stallment of Debts, and enters them.

6. The Clerk of the Star Chamber, was used to certify into his Office what
fines were there set, whereof he makes a Record, and draws them down in the
Pipe.

7. In this Office ought to be kept all Assurances, Conveyances and Evidences
whereby any Lands, Tenements, Herediraments, or other things are granted to the
Sovereign Prince.

8. There is a Court of Equity holden in the Exchequer Chamber by English Bill,
whereof all the proceedings and Bills are entered into this Office.

The Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, is also an Office of trust, and consequence,
which consists of seven Duties.

First, To preserve the Royal tenures, and to make out Process for the Revenues
thereof.

2. He makes Process of Fierifacias, to extend for Debts due to the Prince,
either in the Pipe or with the Auditors.

3. He awards Process against all Sheriffs, Escheators, Receivers, and
Bailiffs, to bring them to account.

4. He is to make an entry of Record, whereby it appears whether Sheriffs, and
other Accountants pay their proffers due at Easter and Michaelmas.

5. He makes another entry of Record, to the end that it may be known, whether
Sheriffs and other Accounts keep their day of prefixion.

6. The green Was is certified into this Office, and by him delivered to the
Clerk of the Estreats.

7. There ought to be brought into this Office, all the Accounts of Customers,
Controulers, and all other, to make an entry of Record in this Office, to avoid
delay and concealments.

The Oath of the Barons of the Exchequer, consists of ten parts.

First, That he shall well, and truly serve in the Office of Baron.

2. That, truly he shall charge, and discharge all manner of people, as well
poor as rich.

3. That for Higness, nor for Riches, nor for hatred, nor for any deed, gift,
or promise of any person, which is made unto him, nor by craft engine, he shall
let the Kings right.

4. He shall not let, disturb, or respite contrary to the Laws of the Land
the Right of any other person.

5. He shall not put in respite the Kings Debts, where goodly they may be
levied.

6. That he shall speed the Kings need before others.

7. That neither for gift, wages, nor good deed, he shall layn, disturb, nor
let the profit or reasonable advantage of the King, in the advantage of any
other Person, nor of himself.

8. That nothing he shall take of any Person to do wrong or right, to delay, or
deliver, or to delay the people that have to do before him, that as hastily as
he may them goodly, to deliver without hurt of the King, etc.

9. Where he may know any wrong or prejudice to be done to the King, he shall
put and do all his power and diligence that to redress.

10. The Kings Counsel he shall keep and layne in all things.

In the Exchequer Chamber, all cases of difficulty, either in the Kings bench,
or the Common Pleas, were used to be debated, argued, and resolved by all the
Judges of England, and the Exchequer Barons.

The Treasurer of the Kings Chamber, and the Keeper of the privy purse, with
such domestic Offices of the Kings House, are not subject to this Court of
Exchequer.

This Court was first erected for the particular profit and service of the
Sovereign Prince; And this profit is mediat or immediate; Immediate, as of Lands,
Rents, Franchises, Hereditaments, Debts, Duties, Accounts, Goods, Chatrels, and
other profits, and benefits whatsoever due unto the Sovereign Prince. Mediate,
as the privilege of the Officers, and Ministers of the Court; for two things
do principally support the jurisdiction of a Court (as my Lord Coke has it)
first the preservation of the dignity thereof, and then the due attendance of
the Officers and Ministers of the same.

The chief Baron is created by Letters Patents, and the Office is granted,
Quamdiu se been gesserit, wherein he has a more fixed estate, it being an
estate of life, than the Justices of other Benches have, who are durante
beneplacito; And in like manner are the rest of the Barons, constituted with
the Patents of the Attorney General and Solicitor.

There is a Court called the Court of Equity in the Exchequer Chamber. The
Judges of this Court are the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and the Barons; Their jurisdiction is as large for matter of Equity, as the
Barons of the Exchequer have for the benefit of the King by the common Law, but
if in either Court they hold any Plea that does not concern the profit of the
King, there lies a Prohibition.

To conclude, there are seven Courts that belong to the Exchequer. 1. The Court
of Pleas or of the Barons. 2. The Court of Accounts. 3. The Court of Receipts.
4. The Court of the Exchequer Chamber, being the Assembly of all the Judges of
England for matters in Law. 5. The Court of Exchequer for Errors in the Court
of Exchequer. 6. A Court in the Exchequer Chamber for Errors in the Kings
Bench. 7. The Court of Equity, spoken of a little before.

But touching all the Officers, either coordinate or inferior, that belong to
the Exchequer, and the Revenues Customs, and perquisits of the Sovereign
Prince, they are very many, and far more in number than in any other Court as
was touched before; yet nothing so numerous as those Financiers, and swarm of
other Officers which belong to the Revenues of France, which are so many that
their fees being paid there comes not a Quardecu in every Crown clearly to the
Kings Coffers, which is but the fourth part: But there is one public advantage
in it, that thousands of younger Brothers, and others, have a handsome
subsistence, to carry themselves hereby in the garb and equipage of men.

OF THE COURT OF ADMIRALTY.
HAving thus made some inspections into so many Courts, we must not pretermit
the Court of Admiralty; for Great Britain being an Island which makes the Sea,
and Wooden Castles, to be her chiefest Conservators: the Court of Admiralty
may be said to be more pertinent and necessary to her, then to diverse other
States: therefore the Lord High Admiral is by the Law of England, one of the
four Officers of the Crown, with the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, and
Lord privy Seal. Some hold the Etymology of Admiral, to come from the Greek
word (...), which signifies Salsugo maris, the saltness of the Sea; others
derive it from Ammir, an Arabian word, which signifies a King, or Emperor; And
some would have it to come from the low Dutch, Aen-meer-all, which signify, on
the Sea all, The Reader, according as his own judgment leads him, may adhere
to which he please; for I know of none that have positively asserted, which is
the truest.

But to know the nature and jurisdiction of this Court, it will conduce very
much, if we insert here certain grievances which the Lord Admiral presented in
the 8th year of K. James, concerning Prohibitions granted by the Judges of the
Courts of Westminster, against the Jurisdiction and Prerogatives of this Court,
with the answer which the Judges returned to every point.

1. The first Objection was, that whereas the cognizance of all Contracts, and
other things done upon the Sea, belongs to the Admirals jurisdiction, the
same are made tryable at the common Law, as if they had bin done in Cheapside
and such places.

The Judges of Westminster Hall answered, that by the Laws of the Realm, the
Court of the Admiral has no cognizance, power, or jurisdiction of any manner
of Contract, plea, or querele, within any County of the Realm, either upon the
Land or the water; but every Contract, Plea, or querele, and all other things
arising in any County of the Realm, either upon the Land, or the water; and
also Wrecks of the Sea, ought to be tried, discussed, determined, and remedied
by the common Laws of the Land, and not before, or by, the Admiral or his
Lieutenant, in any manner; so that it is not material, whether the place be
upon the water, intra fluxum and refluxum aqua, or whether it be upon any other
water within the precincts of a County. But the said Judges acknowledged, that
of Contracts, pleas, and quereles, made upon the Sea, or any part thereof,
which is not within any County, from whence no trial can be had by twelve men,
the Admiral has, and ought to have jurisdiction. And no president can be
showed, that any Prohibition has bin granted for any plea, contract, or
querele, concerning any Marine cause, made or done upon the Sea, taking that
only to be the Sea, wherein the Admiral has his jurisdiction, which is before
described by Law to be out of any County.

2. The second Objection was, that when actions are brought to the Admiralty,
upon Bargains and Contracts, made beyond the Seas, wherein the common Law
cannot administer justice; yet in these cases, prohibitions are awarded, in
prejudice of the Court of Admiralty.

The Judges answer, that Bargains and Contracts made beyond the Sea, wherein
the common Law cannot administer justice, do belong to the Constable and
Marshal; For the jurisdiction of the Admiralty, is wholly confined to the Sea,
which is out of any County; but if any Indenture, Bond, or other specialty, or
any Contract, be made beyond the Seas, for doing of any act, or payment of any
money, within this Realm, or otherwise, wherein the common Law can administer
justice, and give ordinary redress: In these cases, neither the Constable nor
Marshal, nor the Court of Admiralty, has any jurisdiction: therefore when that
Court has proceeding, in derogation of the common Law, prohibitions have bin
issued out, as by the Law they ought.

3. The third Objection was, that whereas time out of mind, the Court of
Admiralty has taken stipulations for appearance, and performance of the acts
and judgments of the same Court, It is now affirmed, by the Judges of the
common Law, that the Admirals Court, is no Court of Record, and therefore not
able to take such stipulations: hereupon, prohibitions are granted, to the
utter overthrow of that jurisdiction.

The Judges answered, that the Court of the Admiralty, proceeding by the course
of the Civil Law, is no Court of Record, and therefore cannot take any such a
recognizance as a Court of Record may. And for taking Recognizanses against the
Law of the Realm, we find, that prohibitions have bin granted. And if an
erroneous sentence be given in that Court, no Writ of Error, but an appeal
before certain Delegates do lie, which proves, it is no Court of Record.

4. The fourth Objection was, that Charter parties, made only to be performed
upon the Seas, are daily withdrawn from that Court by prohibitions.

The Judges answered, That if the Charter party be made within any City,
Port-Town, or County of this Realm, although it be to be performed, either upon
the Seas, or beyond the Seas, yet it is to be tried and determined by the
ordinary course of the Common Law, and not in the Court of the Admiralty, And
therefore, when that Court has encroached upon the common Law, in that case,
the Judge of the Admiralty, and party there suing, have bin prohibited, and
oftentimes the party condemned, in great and grievous damages, by the Laws of
the Realm.

5. The fifth Objection was, that notwithstanding the clause of Non obstante
statuto, which has foundation in his Majesty's Prerogative, and is current in
all other grants; yet in the Lord Admirals Patent, it is said to be of no force,
to warrant the determination of the Causes, committed to him in his Lordships
Patent, and so rejected by the Judges of the common Law.

The common Lawyers answer, that without all question, the sundry Statutes
which declare the jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty, and wherein all the
Subjects of the Realm have interest, cannot be dispensed with, by any non
obstante statuto; and therefore not worthy of any answer; but by color thereof
the Court of Admiralty has, contrary to those Acts of Parliament, encroached
upon the jurisdiction of the common Law, to the intolerable grievance of
Subjects, which has oftentimes urged them to complain, in his Majesty's
ordinary Courts of justice in Westminster Hall, for their relief in that behalf.

6. The sixth Objection was, that to the end that the Admirals jurisdiction,
might receive all manner of empeachment, and interruption, the Rivers beneath
the first Bridges where it ebbeth and flows, and all the Creeks and Ports are
by the Judges of the common Law, affirmed to be no part of the Sea, nor within
the Admirals jurisdiction, and thereupon, prohibitions are ordinarily awarded
upon actions depending in that Court for Contracts, and other things done in
those places, notwithstanding, that by use and practice, time out of mind, the
Admirals Court has had jurisdiction, within such Ports, Creeks, and Rivers.

The Judges answer was like to their first, And 'twas further added, that for
the death of a man, or mayhm in those two cases, only done in great Ships,
being and hovering in the main stream only, beneath the point of some Rivers
nigh unto the Sea, and no other place of the same Rivers, nor in other causes,
but only in those two, the Admiral has cognizance. But for all Contracts,
Pleas, and Quereles, made or done upon a River, Haven, or Creek within any
County of this Realm, the Admiral without question has no jurisdiction; for
then he should hold plea of things, done within the Body of the County, which
are tryable by verdict of twelve men, and merely determinable by the common
Law, and not within the Court of the Admiralty, according to the Civil Law; for
that were to change and alter the Laws of the Realm in like cases, and make
those Contracts, Pleas, and Quereles, tryable by the common Law of the Realm,
to be drawn off ad aliud Examen, and to be sentenced by the Judges of the
Admiralty, according to the Civil Law.

7. The seventh Objection was, that the Agreement made Anno 1575. between the
Judges of the Kings Bench, and the Court of the Admiralty, for the more quiet
and certain Execution of Admiral Jurisdiction, is not observed as it ought to
be.

The Judges answered, that the supposed Agreement, mentioned in the Article,
has not as yet bin delivered them; but having heard the same read before his
Majesty; they answered, that for so much thereof, as differs from these
answers, it is against the Laws, and Statutes of this Realm: therefore the
Judges of the Kings Bench, never assented thereunto, as was pretended.

8. The eighth Objection was, That many other grievances there were, which in
discussing of these former, would easily appear worthy of Reformation.

To this the Judges answered, that this Article was so general, as no
particular answer can be made thereunto, only it appears, by that which has
bin said, that the Lord Admiral his Officers and Ministers principally by
color of that Non obstante, and for want of learned advice, have injustly
encroached upon the common Laws of this Realm; for which the marvel is the
less, because that the Lord Admiral his Lieutenants, Officers, and Ministers,
have without all color, intruded upon the Right and Prerogative due to the
Crown, in that they have seized and converted to their own use, Goods and
Chattels, of infinite value taken at Sea; and other Goods and Chattels, which
in no sort, appertain unto his Lordship, by his Letters Patents, wherein the
said Non obstante is contained; and for which, he and his Officers, remain
accountable to his Majesty; And they now wanting, in this time of peace, causes
appertaining to their natural jurisdiction, do now encroach upon the
jurisdiction of the common Law, lest they should sit idle, and reap no profit.

They added further, That touching their proceedings in granting of
Prohibitions concerning any of the said Articles, two things were to be
considered of, first the matter, then the manner; touching the matter, nothing
has bin done therein, by the Court of Westminster, but by good Warrant of Law,
and former judicial Precedents; And for the manner, they granted none in the
Vacation time, nor in their Term time, in any of their Chambers, nor in the
Court in the Terme-time, ex officio, but upon motion made in open Court, by
learned Council; and after a day prefixed, and warning given to the adverse
party, etc.

Hereupon they proceeded, to prove and confirm their answers, by three kind of
Authorities in Law.

First, By Authority of High Court of Parliament.

Secondly, By Judgment, and judicial Precedents.

Thirdly, By Book-Cases.

Concerning the Acts of Parliament, they urged the Statute of Richard the
second, viz.

That the Admiralls and their Deputies, shall not meddle from henceforth, with
any thing done within the Realm of England, but only with things done upon the
Sea, according to that which has been duly used in the time of the Noble King
Edward, Grandfather to Richard the second.

Concerning the second proof by Judgments, and Judicial Precedents, and the
third by Book-Cases, they alleged diverse Cases, which are to be seen in that
great light, and laborious Champion of the Common Law of England, the Lord
Coke, in the third part of his Institutes; But, the Result of all which the
Judges of the Common Law driv' at, was, that the Court of Admiralty, was to
take no Cognizance, nor had power to determine any thing that had happened, and
should give occasion of Plea, upon any Waters, either fresh or salt, that were
within the Precincts of any County; but it was tryable by the Common Law of
England, and by the Empanelment, and Verdict of twelve men, which is not the
way of Trial of the Civil Law, by which the Admiralty is directed.

By this notable clash, and contestation 'twixt the Judges of Westminster Hall
and the Lord Admiral, the Reader may learn what the extent of the Authority of
that Court is, and that the jurisdiction of the Admiral is confined to the high
Sea.

In times past, there were distinct Admirals, in point of power, as we read in
Richard the seconds Reign, the Earl of Northumberland was Admiral of the North;
and the Earl of Devonshire, Admiral of the West: who were to receive the
Subsidy of Poundage and Tonnage, for the garding of the Seas.

Among other Prerogatives, which belonged to the Lord Admiral of England, one
was to erect Beacons upon the Maritim Coasts; which word, is derived from the
old Saxon, or Dutch Becnam, which signifies, to give a sign, as we use the
word, to becken at to this day.

Before the Reign of Edward the 3d, there were but stakes of Wood, set upon
high places, which were fired, upon the discovery of any enemies; but in his
time, pitched Barrels were set up; and by the Law of the Land, whosoever fired
a Beacon, commits Felony, unless there were Authority and just cause for it.

In other Countries they are called Phares, which are no other then
speculatory, or maritime monitory fires, which serve for two ends, as well to
direct Seafaring men, as to fore-warn the approach of an Enemy; which with such
wonderful celerity, give the whole Land an Alarm, and so puts them in a
posture of defense.

But there are three main matters, whereof the Lord Admiral is to take
Cognizance, which are Flotsan, Ietsan, and Lagan: whereof the first is, when a
Ship is sunk and perished, and the Goods floating upon the waters: The second
is Ietsan, when in stresse of weather, or other occasions, the Goods are thrown
overboard. The third is, when Goods are tied to a Cork, or Cable, and may be
found again; But the Court of Admiralty, has not to do with Wrecks; for then
the Goods are deposited in the custody of the Officers of the next Town, where,
if the Proprietor come within a twelve month and a day, he may claim them by
Law.

Henry the sixth did constitute by Charter, John Holland, Duke of Exceter, and
Henry his Son, to be Admirallos Angliae: But the Judges of the Common Law, held
that Charter to be invalid; and the Reason they alleged, was, that that
Charter being of a Judicial Office, it could not be granted to two.

When the former contestation happened 'twixt the Court of Admiralty and
Westminster Hall, they were choice powerful men at that time, who swayed as
Grandees of the Common Law, as Sir Edward Coke, the Lord Bacon, Judge
Doddridge, and Hubbard, which made them carry the Bucklers from the Civilians,
at that time; But there were some learned Treatises published afterward, to
vindicate the Right of the Civil Law; which, without controversy, has more in
it of natural equity, and reaches of pure Reason, then any other: It is the
Product of that mighty Monarchy of the Romans, who though they conquered by the
Lance, yet they con^er^ed by their Laws, so many vast distant Territories, and
Nations, which they had subdued, leading so many people Captive by their
policy, as much as by their Prowess; And indeed, the Civil Law is fitted for
the general Affairs of mankind, and for all Nations; For though every
particular state has some few municipal Laws peculiar to it self: yet no
where beyond the Seas is there any profession or Science of Law, but of the
Civil; nor are there any other studied in Universities. Only in England there
are Inns of Court, which are equivalent to an Academy, where lex Terrae, or the
common municipal Law of the Land is studied, and Graduates proceed, and are
made therein accordingly, which is no where else; But the Civil Law extends to
all mankind. And, if regard be had to the University of humane Reason, it is
no where ^o narrowly discussed, and eventilated, and the judgment rectified by
clear notions: Moreover, there is nothing, of what nature soever it be but the
Civil Law has ordained a means to bring it to a Trial, either by giving a
special action in the case, or a general one releeving by ordinary remedies;
or if those fail, by such as are extraordinary, helping the Clyent, Iure
actionis, or Officio Iudicis. Yet there was one notable Example of one
business, that not only caused a clash 'twixt the Civilian, and Common Lawyer,
but puzzel'd them both so that neither could try it. It was, that one Peacock,
struck Lacy in alto Mari, and the Ship landing at Scarborough, Lacy dyed a
little after, of the stroke that was given at Sea: there was a great
contestation, whether the Court of Admiralty, or the common Lawyer, should try
Peacock; but it was found, that the cognizance hereof belonged to neither, so
the party escaped without condemnation.

But now we will resume the thread of our Survay of Westminster, and add to that
which has bin already spoken of the Great Hall, which as it has bin, and
continues still the usual place of pleadings, and ministration of Justice; so
it was in former times, the principal Seat, and Palace of the Kings of England,
since the Conquest; for here the Feasts of Coronation, and other solemn Feasts,
as that of Christmas were kept: It is recorded, that at the day of
Circumcision, Henry the third commanded his Treasurer, William de Haverhull, to
cause 6000. poor people to be fed at Westminster Hall, upon the Kings account;
Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings Brother, Anno 1243. being married to
Cincia, Daughter to the Countess of Provence, kept his Bridal Feast at
Westminster Hall, where, the story says, there were three thousand dishes of
meat, served in at dinner.

Rich. the second having repaired the Great Hall which had bin burnt by a
pitiful fire, kept his Christmas there, in a most sumptuous manner, with
Justings, and running at Tilt, where there was such a huge confluence of
People, that for diverse days, there were spent 26. fat Oxen, and 300 Sheep.
The King himself wore a Gown of Cloth of Gold, garnished with precious stones,
which was valued at 3000 marks, a mighty sum in those days.

Henry the 7th keeping his Christmas at Westminster Hall, invited Ralph Austry,
Lord Mayor of London, with all the Aldermen, to a Feast on Twelf-day, The King,
the Queen, and some Ambassadors, sat at the Marble Table, 60. Knights and
Esquires, served in the Kings meat, which consisted of 60. dishes, and the
Queen as many. The Mayor was served with 24. where after sundry sort of
disports, he supped also, and it was break of day, before He, and the Aldermen
returned by Barges to London.

Parliaments also were used to be kept frequently at Westminster Hall, and one
was kept in Richard the seconds time, which proved fatal unto him; for he was
deposed there, notwithstanding, that he had bin the greatest Repairer of that
Hall, when it had bin destroyed by fire. For it has bin the hard destiny of
this Great Hall, to suffer many times the fury of fire; but the last that
happened, was in the beginning of Henry the eighths Reign, Anno 1512. at which
time, a great part of the Palace was consumed, which was never re-edified
since; so that the Kings Courts, have bin from that time, sometimes at Baynards
Castle, then at Bridewell, and since at White Hall, called before, York place,
as has bin said before.

In this great Palace at Westminster, there was St. Stephens Chapel, which was
built by King Stephen himself; It was repaired and enlarged by Edward the
third, and 38. persons were appointed there to serve God, viz. a Dean, 12.
secular Canons, 13. Vicars, 4. Clarks, 6. Chorists, a Verger, and a Keeper of
the Chapel, who had endowments, and Houses built them near the Thames: there
were also, Lodgings assigned them, 'twixt the Clock-house, and the
Wooll-Staple, called the Weigh-house: He also built for their use, a strong
Clochard, in the little Sanctuary, covered with Lead, where there were three
great Bells, which usually rung at Coronations, and Funerals of Princes, which
gave such a huge sound, that 'twas commonly said they sowred all the drink in
the Town; but now there is scarce any marks left of that Clochard.

This Chapel of St. Stephens, at the suppression in Henry the eights time, was
valued to dispend one thousand eighty five pounds; and in Edward the sixths
time it was made to serve as a Parliament for the House of Commons, who
formerly were used to sit in the Chapter House of the Abbot of Westminster.

Before the Great Hall, there is a large Court, called now the new Palace,
where there is a strong Tower of Stone, containing a Clock, which strikes on a
great Bell every hour, to give notice to the Judges, how the time passes;
when the wind is South South-West, it may be heard into any part of London, and
commonly, it presageth wet weather: The Dean of St. Stephens, was used to have
the keeping of this Clock, having six pence every day out of the Exchequer, for
keeping the Kings Clock, or Great Tom of Westminster.

We must now make a step Southward, before we leave Westminster, and perform
some further devotions to the old Abbey, the prime Sanctuary of the Land;
whereunto belongs another very ancient privileged place, and Sanctuary of St.
Martin le Grand, hard by Aldersgate in London, whereas formerly was said, there
was of old a fair and large College of a Dean, and secular Canons or Priests,
founded by Ingelricus 1056. and confirmed a little after by William the
Conqueror, as appears by that ample Charter he gave thereunto, which in
regard of the ancient Saxon Terms then used, I thought worthy the inserting
here, and it runs thus.

Willimus Conquester per chartam suam corroborat, and confirmat Deo and
Ecclesiae Beati Martini intramuros London sitae, quod sit quieta ab ^mni
exactione, and inquietudine Episcoporum, Archidiaconorum; etc. Et possessiones
suas ab omni regali Jurisdiction liberari, and ab Exercitus expeditione,
Pontis restaurat^one, munitione, and Castelli auxilio quietas habent, Secuam,
and Toll, and Team, and Infangthese, Blodwite, Mundbrice, Burghbrice,
Meskenning, Seawing, Alcesting* Frithsorn, Fleamina, Finnithe, Welgerthofe,
Vthleap, forfeng, fyhfeng, Firdwite, Firthwit, Weardite, Hengwite, Hamsokne,
Forsteal, and si quas alias libertates, and consuetudines aliqua Ecclesiarum
regni mei Anglie meliores habeat: Si quis vero hoc in aliud quam concessimus
transfer presumserit cum Judah proditore Deiluat poenas; Dat. Anno Dom. 1068.
Annoque Regni mei secundo, die Natalis Domini. Et post modum in d'^ Pentecostes
confirmo quando Matilda Conjux mea in Basilica Sancti Petri Westmonasterii in
Reginam divino nutu est consecrata.

This privilege of Sanctuary, was confirmed, and strictly enjoined by diverse
succeeding Kings, under the same Curse that the Infringers thereof should be
eternally damned, and suffer the like torments, as Judas the betrayer of God,
etc.

Touching the hard Saxons word of this Charter, the Reader is referred to those
worthy persons, who made additionals to Mr. Stow, where he shall find them
explained; For many Ages, this Saint Martin le Grand, continued by it self a
place of as great privileges, as Westminster, or Beverlay, which were counted
the chiefest in the whole Land; But Henry the 7th annexed it at last, to the
Monastery of St. Peter of Westminster, which claims Title ever since, to the
free Chapel, the Privileges, and Sanctuary thereof, and has enjoyed it,
without controlement or question.

And now before we bid a farewell to Westminster, we will acquaint the Reader in
brief, with the modern Civil Government thereof; Now as London is divided into
26. Wards, so Westminster is partition'd to 12. for the which, the Dean of the
Collegiat Church, was wont with the high Steward, to elect 12. Burgesses, and
as many Assistants, viz. one Burgess, and one Assistant, for every Ward: out
of which twelve, two are nominated yearly, upon Thursday in Easter week, for
chief Burgesses to continue for one entire year, who have Authority to hear,
examine, determine, and punish according to the Laws of the Realm, and Customs
of the City, matters of incontinency, common Scolds, Inmates, with public
annoyances; and likewise to commit such persons, as shall offend against the
peace, giving notice thereof within 24. hours, to some Justice of the Peace,
in the County of Middlesex; And this mode of Government, Westminster has by
virtue of an Act of Parliament, in the twenty seventh of Queen Elizabeth.

A PARALLEL, By way of COROLLARY, Betwixt LONDON, AND Other great Cities of the
World.
HAving hitherto rambled up and down the streets of London, and pryed into
every corner thereof; having endeavored to fetch Her from her very Cradle,
(which may not be improperly said; for we found Her at first a Grove of Wood)
and so attended Her all along, to that mavelous degree of perfection, she is
now arrived unto, by insensible Coalitions of people, improvement of Trade, and
increase of Structures: We will now, for the better illustration of things, and
further enlightening of the Reader, make a Comparison or Parallel 'twixt Her,
and other great Cities of the World, which are accounted Cities of the first
Magnitude; for as the Stars in Heaven are distinguished by degrees of
Magnitude, so are Cities on the Earth: Or, to descend lower, as there are Ships
of the first, second, and third rate; so there are Cities, Now among those
various ways, which tend to convey knowledge to the understanding, and
rectify ones judgment, Examples, Comparisons, and Parallels conduce much
thereunto; and Plutarch was the first that prescribed this way, who, as to was
said of him, by giving life to so many noble Greeks and Romans, after their
deaths, gave himself the longest life; so it may be said, that by his
Parallels, he made himself paralleled.

The Terrestial Globe, which the Great God of Nature was pleased to entail upon
mankind for his mansion, and to hold it (for himself and his Heirs) in Capite,
from Him; I say this Mass of Earth is compared by some, to a Camels back, in
regard of the bunchy unevenness of it; by others, to a Libbards skin, in regard
of the sundry (...) parts, and variety of Habitations: By others, to a great
piece of Embrodery, enchas'd up and down, whereof the most bossie, and richest
compacted parts are Towns and Cities, where People are linked in a nearer bond
of love, and lead a more civil course of life; For Urbanity, and Civility,
derived their names first from thence.

These Comparisons are less wide, and more significant, then that which Lucian
makes, when, by way of drollery, he makes the greatest Cities upon Earth, to
appear like so many Birds Neasts.

It is a Catholic truth, wherein all Chronologers, and Antiquaries, do
unanimously concur, that in the nonage of the World, mankind had no other
Habitation then Woods, Groves, and bushy Queaches, which they fenced about with
Hardles made of twigs, and loose Stone-walls, to defend them from the invasions
of wild and ravenous Beasts; some lived in Caves, and concavities of Rocks, to
shelter themselves from the inclemency, and rigor of the Air: Insomuch, that
all men were Troglodites at first, as there are many Nations, who are housed so
to this day, making themselves holes and hollowes, in Rocks, and sandy dry
grounds, as we find in this Island some of those Troglodites, both in
Nottingham, and Bridge-north. Then by degrees, they made themselves small Huts:
from Huts, they came to build Houses, and so to cohabit in Hamlets: and thence
sprung up Towns and Cities.

The first of any same, was that stupend, or City of Babylon, founded by
Nimrod, the great Hunter; and enlarged by that notable Virago, Semiramis: which
was girded about with Walls, 200. foot high, and fifty broad, whereof the
Circuit was 300 Furlongs; she had also 300. Turrets upon the Walls, which were
of such a latitude, that Chariots might go upon them; and if old Historians may
oblige us to a belief, there were three hundred thousand men that were employed
in the building thereof; she continues still, a vast and flourishing City,
called by the Turks Bagdat; Asia being the most Oriental Country on this side
the Hemisphere, as it was first peopled, for Adam was that Countreyman; so
Towns, Cities, Castles, Altars, and other Buildings, first began to be erected
there; and indeed, all other knowledge, besides Architecture, came first from
those parts, being next Neighbors to the rising Sun: The Indian Brachmans, or
Gymnosophists, were the first scientifical men, and Students of Philosophy; The
Persian Magi were her next Students: Then she crossed the red Sea, and came to
Memphis, among the Egyptians, whence she steered down the Nile, and got over
the Aegean Seas to Corinth and Athens among the Greeks, whence she took wing to
Rome, and from thence she clammer'd ore the Alps to France, Germany, Great
Britany, and other North-west Climats.

Now as Asia had the first Cities, so she glories to have to this day the
greatest: we will instance only in the City of Quinzay, who arrogates to her
self, the name of the Celestial City, whereof diverse modern Authors do write
portentous things; and truly, he must have a strong Faith, who will believe
them: She is the chief City of the Empire of China, lying under the same
Climate as Venice does, with whom she has a great resemblance, being built
upon the South side of a huge Laque; she has in length about forty miles, in
latitude thirty, and one hundred and twenty miles in circumference; she has
above a thousand Bridges, some whereof are so high, that Ships under sail, may
pass under them: Her Houses are of Stone and Earth; the lowest whereof, is
five stories high, of mavelous beauty and strength: She has many magnificent
Temples, but one next the Royal Palace, of a stupendous structure, being of
that altitude, that the ascent is threescore and four marble stairs: There are
an incredible number of fair Palaces in her; among which, after that of the
Emperor, those of the ten Governors, are the stateliest, and among them that
of the Captain of the Tartars.

About the Center of the City; stands the Imperial Court, which is fenced about
with seven Walls, whereof every one is guarded by ten thousand Soldiers, the
Palace is ten miles in Circuit, and has fourscore great Halls; but that where
the great Council sits is four square, and has Windows and Gates looking
toward the four parts of the Heaven, East, West, North and South, where
officers and others that have business, do enter, according to the situation
of the Country, whence they come, there being above threescore several
Kingdoms, under the Dominion of the Emperor, and every one has a particular
Hall and Council, where they deliberate, touching the Government of every
Kingdom. It Is such a ravishing voluptuous place; that there are objects to
please and charm all the five senses, The eyes are fed in beholding the goodly
Structures, Gardens, and Trees which are up and down: The Ears by hearing, the
chirping of the Birds, and sweet murmr of the waters; The smell is feasted
with odoriferous sent of flowers, and other rich perfumes; The Taste by most
delicate fruits; And the other sense, by most beautiful, and ravishing Women;
which are able to tempt a Stoic, having by their rolling large eyes, and other
postures, extraordinary ways of allurement. There was a computation made of
above a million of Houses within her, so that allowing ten to a Family, there
be ordinarily about ten Millions of humane souls that breath within the City;
They are very rich in their Habits, and there is not much difference in the
Clothes of male and female, only the women have more diversity of colors; blew
and red are the commonest, but black is never worn: There be Birds there, of
such a wonderful bigness, that they will take up a whole Mutton alive, up into
the Air, and sometimes a man in Armor.

There are abundance of Elephants, Dromedaries, Camels, and other huge Beasts,
that do their work; And all Animals, both volatile, and terrestrial, are there,
of a bigger size and proportion, then any where else, by special influences of
the Heavens: It is incredible, what number of Nations do resort thither for
Traffic and Commerce, as all the Indies, Cathay, Tartary, Arabia, and Persia;
They are rare Artists; for it is thought, that Guns and Printing were there
invented thousands of years ago; their Characters, and way of reading, being
not either from the left hand to the right, as the Greeks and Latins use; or
from the right hand to the left, as the Hebrew, and all the Dialect thereof, as
the Arabian, Persian, and others, but perpendicular downward: There is one Law
amongst them, that conduces much to make them such exquisite Artisans, which
is, that the Sons are always of their Fathers Trade, whereby they come to
have a more natural dexterity, genius, and aptitude to the Trade, and their
Parents train them therein more industriously, and discover unto them all the
mysteries thereof.

Touching the rare China Dishes and Cups they make, the mass of Earth, whereof
they are molded, uses to be buried in lumps, within the bowels of the Earth,
sometimes a hundred years before they fall to work upon it, and such a mass of
aged Earth is the common Patrimony, that Parents use to leave their Children:
In fine, they pretend to so much sagacity, wit, and industry, that it is a
saying among them, that They only have two eyes, the Europaeans one, and all
the rest of the World is blind.

They have such a high opinion of their King, that they think he is descended
of the race of some demy-God, and so adore him accordingly.

They believe there is some Divinity in his blood, insomuch, that he never
marries any, but either his own Sister, or Daughter, or next a kin, for fear of
staining the Royal Blood; He is seldom seen openly, but he has a private
place, when his Council sits, whence he may hear whatsoever is agitated, and he
signifies his pleasure invisibly through certain hollow Trunks, and he gives
audience to Ambassadors also in that manner.

We will now over the Red Sea to Afrique, and take a short transient Survay of
the Gran Cairo in Egypt, a City also of a huge Gigantique stature, being near
upon forty miles compass, having five and thirty thousand Meskeetos, that is,
Churches and Chapels: There are in her four and twenty thousand noted streets;
some whereof are two miles in length, every one is locked up in the night, with
a door and Chains at each end: There is a huge number of Horsemen, under the
command of so many Saniacks, which watch and guard the Town all the year long,
to the number of eight and twenty thousand men, for fear of the incursions of
the wild Arabs: the cause of the vastness of Gran Cairo is, that there are
three Cities incorporated into one, that is, old Memphis, Babylon, and
Elkhaire; for there was another City hard by, called Babylone, but by increase
of Trade, and new concourse of people, the Soldans and Mammalucks reduced all
three to one entire City: which would be a pitiful poor place, did not the
River of Nile give her a yearly visit from the Mountains of the Moon, about the
Summer Solstice, and retire again about eighty days after.

We will now cross the Greek Seas to Europe, and take a quick view of most of
those Cities, which are of the first magnitude; for indeed, this Parallel aims
only at the Europaean Cities; And it will be found by any impartial Reader,
that London needs not vail to any of them, if regard be had.

1. To convenience of situation, and to salubrity of air.

2. To method of strict Government.

3. To magnificence of the chief Magistrates.

4. To Regulation of Trade.

5. To variety of Artisans.

6. To a greater number of Corporations and Halls.

7. To plenty of all Provision, that Air, Earth, or Water can afford.

8. To Springs, Conduits, Aqueducts, and other conveyances of fresh wholesome
waters.

9. To the universality of Trafick, and bravery of the Adventurers.

10. To solidity, and richness of Commodities.

11. To Artillery, Ammunition, Docks, and a number of military stout well armed
Citizens.

12. To (once) a glorious Temple.

13. To an admirable great Bridge.

14. To a noble Navigable River.

15. To a cheerful and wholesome green circumjacent Soil.

16. To Hospitality, and Festival public meetings of Corporations, and other
Societies for increase of love, and good intelligence between Neighbors.

17. To number of Coaches by Land, and all sorts of Boats by water, for the
accommodation of Passengers.

18. For sundry kind of reliefs for the poor, and indigent.

19. For various kinds of honest corporal recreations and pastimes.

20. And lastly, for the number of humane souls. Many of these may be found
severally in other Cities, who may happily exceed London in some particulars; but
take them all together, she may vie with the best of them, and run no great
hazard.

But to proceed the more methodically in taking a view* to this purpose, though
short and cursory of the greatest Cities in Europe, we will begin Eastward at
Constantinople, called of old Bizantium, and now Stambole by the Turks, being
the chief Court or Port, as they term it, of the Ottoman Empire, the word
being derived from Faith and Plenty: It Is true, she is placed in a fit, and
advantageous posture, to be Commandresse of the World, she was raised by a
Constantine, and lost by a Constantine (both of them, the Sons of Helens)
about a thousand years after; but touching her site, she has on the one side,
the Pontus, or black Sea, and the Marmora, or Hellespont on the other: the
mouths of which Seas are so narrow, that no passage can be forced against the
Castles, she is built upon the utmost levant point of Europe, and has all the
vast Continent of Asia, before her from S^utari; Insomuch, that she stands
almost in the Center of the old World, and thereby, capable to send her
Commands more speedily to other Countries; yet since the discovery of America,
the new World, some modern Geographers balancing the parts of the old with the
new, they find that Rome stands more appositly to command the whole Earth,
because she is rather situated more toward the middle; In some things it is
confessed, Constantinople may claim the precedence of London, as first for the
huge Palace of the Seraglio, which is about three miles compass; It Is thought
also, she exceeds for number, of humane Souls and Houses; yet in point of
building, they are but low, and cottage-like, nothing comparable to those of
London. And if you go to the quality of the Inhabitants, Constantinople may be
called but a nest, or banner of slaves; and herein, as in many other of the
particulars pointed at, before London has the start of Her.

We come now to Italy, and first to Rome, which though in circuit she be yet
about as big as London; yet in point of people, she may be called a Wilderness,
in comparison of her: She is also far inferior for Traffic and Wealth; as
also for temperature, and wholsomness of Air, that of Rome being not so
healthy, which some impute to the burning of stubble, for fertilizing the bed
of the Earth; others, to the ill-favored vapors that come from diverse
subterranean hollowes that remain up and down, out of the ruins of old Rome;
for Rome at present, may be called but a Skeleton of the old; or like a tall
man, shrunk into the skin of a Pygmey, being compared to that monstrous
stature she was of, in Vopiscus his time, who leaves it upon Record, that she
was fifty miles about, and had above four hundred thousand free Citizens; and
consequently, about four millions of souls with in her bosom, as some infer;
She then made the Ocean to do homage unto the Tyber, she made Asia, and
Afrique, feudetaries to Europe; but she who daunted the World, yielded to the
Laws of Time, who gives all great Cities a space of growing, of subsistence,
and of declination; But a wonder it is, how so much of her is left,
considering, that from Brennus the Britain, to the Duke of Bourbon, she was
eight times sacked, whence it may be inferred, that there is an extraordinary
providence, that seems to watch over her. For as she subsisted before by the
Pike, the Pen may be said now to support Her, I mean her Ecclesiastical Courts,
which causes a great confluence of people to resort thither, from all corners
of the Earth: Insomuch, that the number of strangers in Rome, may be said to
exceed the number of the Natives, because she is accounted the Communis Patria,
and chief Randezvouze of all Christians, in regard of the residence of the
chief Bishop, in whom every Catholic claims an Interest: Insomuch, that Rome
may be said to be more beholden to Shepherds, then to any other profession;
for as a Shepherd was her Founder, so a Shepherd is still her Preserver.

The next City of the first magnitude in Italy, is Milan, which of all other
Towns, may be said to have this singularity, as to have no Suburbs; It Is true,
She may pretend much for Her Doure, her Citadel, and Hospital, with number of
excellent Artisans; yet who is well acquainted with both places, will find that
London is not much inferior to her, in any of these four things; And for other
particulars, as ubiquitary Traffic, by Sea as well as Land, for multitude of
people, and diverse other things, pointed at before, Milan comes short of London.

Touching the City of Venice, it is true, she has many things to glory of, as
her wonderful situation, that she was born a Christian, that she has continued
a Virgin, near upon thirteen hundred years, having been never ravished by the
assaults of any enemy, (though some out of malice would make her a Concubine to
the great Turk). She may also glory of her great Arsenal, and that she has the
Sea for her Husband; yet if one go to multitude of Inhabitants, to the
magnitude of both Cities, to number of Corporations, with other particulars
pointed at before, Venice will not disdain to vail to London; But touching the
last thing She glories of, London may claim as much interest in the Sea as
she, if regard be had to Maritime Dominion and Naval power.

And lastly, while Venice is steeping and pickling in Salt Water, London sports
her self upon the banks of a fresh stately River, which brings into her bosom,
all the Spices of the East Indies, the Treasure of the West, the Gems of the
South, and the rich Furs of the North.

Naples it is confessed, is a populous great Mercantile Town, and has three
Castles, with handsome Buildings, and store of Nobility; but besides magnitude
of places, and multitude of People, with other advantages which London has of
Her, the Sun, whiles he does as it were broyl the Neapolitan, does with the
gentle reverberations of his rays, but guild the Walls of London.

Genoa, though she be a proud City, yet she stands not upon her own legs, but
she subsists most by the King of Spains money, by being a Seal to convey it by
Cambio to Flanders; and elsewhere, having little of her own to trade withal;
whereas London has native substantial Commodities of her own, and is far
superior to her for bigness, and number of souls, with other advantages.

Touching Florence, there is beauty enough to be seen there, but she may partly
thank London, that she is so fair, by the Trade she bears to Ligorn, of late
years.

Touching the rest of the Cities of Italy, though they be ranked among those of
the first magnitude, yet they bear no proportion with London.

Touching Sicily, there is Palermo, the residence of the Viceroy, a jolly neat
City, which may glory of one thing, that neither London, nor any other City in
Christendom has the like, which is a fair spacious uniform street, of above a
mile long; Next to which, is that of Edinburgh in Scotland, extending it self
in a direct line, from the Royal Palace to the Castle.

Concerning Spain, there are diverse large Cities of the first magnitude, as
Barcelona, the metropolis of Catalonia; Saragossa the cape City of Aragon;
Valencia the chief of that Kingdom; Pampelona the head of Navarr; Burgos the
chief of old Castile, and Toledo of the new; Murcia, Granada, Sevill, and
Lisbonne in Portugal, which is the biggest of them all.

The two last are best peopled; but Madrid where the Catholic Court is kept
(though a Village) has more then any of them; but all these come short of
London, in point of greatness, and populousness, with diverse advantages besides.

Vienna the Imperial Court is of an extraordinary bigness, being fenced about
with English Walls, which Richard the first reared up for his Ransom: It is
also well peopled; so is Prague. Which though the latter be made up of three
Cities, yet they both come short of the City of London in amplitude, and number
of people, with diverse other properties mentioned before.

Germany has diverse fair Cities, that may take place amongst them of the first
magnitude, as Mentz, Colen, Frankfort, Strasburg, Norimburg, Auspurg,
Magdenburg, and others, which though they beat a Land Trade, being
mediterranean Cities, and abound with wealth, and numbers of Artisans, yet they
are inferior to London, for many respects.

Touching the Hans, and imperial Towns, there are diverse of them large,
wealthy, and full of Trade, as Lubeck, Danzick, and Hamburgh the biggest of
them, which owes much of her prosperity to the Staple of the London Merchant
Adventurers, who are there settled; but there is none of these Cities, though
they be threescore more in number, that will presume to compare with London, in
any of those twenty properties before mentioned.

Touching Copenhagen in Denmark, and Stockholm in Swethland, they come far
short; nay, if you go more Northward, upon the white Sea, as far as the gran
Mosco the Emperor of Russias Court, which is a huge wooden City, and environed
about with a treble wall to stop the incursions of the Tartar, you will find it
inferior to London, in every of those twenty particulars.

Touching Low Germany, or the Netherlands, which is one of the greatest
Countries of Commerce in Christendom; it is true, there are there many Noble
Cities. Among others, the City of Gant in Flanders, which for bigness, bears
the Bell of all the Cities of Europe, being computed to be twenty miles in
circuit, which makes the Flemins twit the French, by saying Nous auons un Gant
qui tiendra Paris dedans, We have a Glove (meaning Gant, which is a Glove in
French) that will hold Paris within it; yet for number of humane souls, this
great City is but a kind of Desert, being compared to London. Antwerp is a
Noble City, both for her Citadel, and Fortifications, which are so vast, that
two Coaches may go abrest upon the Walls; She may compare with any other City,
she was in former times, one of the greatest Marts, this side the Alps:
Insomuch, that Guicciardin reports, that after the Intercursus Magnus was
established betwixt England and the Netherlands, the Trade 'twixt London and
Antwerp, came to above twelve Millions yearly; But upon the Revolt of the
Confederate Provinces from the King of Spain, when Secretary Walsingham told
Elizabeth, that he would give both the Spaniard, and the French King such bones
to gnaw, that might shake both their teeths in their heads; meaning thereby,
the Revolt of the Hollander from the one, and the kindling of the Ligue in
France. I say, when these tumults began, Amsterdam may be said to have risen up
out of the ruins of Antwerp, which Town is come, in less then fourscore
years, and by a stupendous course of Commerce and Negotiation, to be one of the
greatest Marts of the World, being before, one of the meanest Towns of the
first magnitude in Holland; but she is swollen since, twice if not thrice as big
as she was: Insomuch, that she may be said to give the Law to all the rest of
the united Provinces, and to smell rank of a Hans Town, or little Commonwealth
of her self. Among other causes, this may be imputed to the Trade of the East
and West Indies, which is appropriated unto Her, and to a mixture with the
Jews, who have there two Synagogues: yet is this fresh great Mercantile Town,
much inferior to London, almost in all things.

First, in point of populousness, as may be conjectured out of her weekly Bills
of Mortality, which at the utmost, come but to about threescore a week; whence
may be inferred, that London is five times more populous; for the number that
dies in Her every week, comes commonly, to near upon three hundred.

Secondly, in point of Wealth, Amsterdam comes short of London; for when Sir
Ralph Freeman was Lord Mayor, it was found out by more than a probable
conjecture, that He, with the 24. Aldermen, his Brethren, might have bought the
Estates of one hundred of the richest Bourgemasters in Amsterdam. Then, for
sweetness of Site, and salubrity of Air, she is so far inferior to London,
that her Inhabitants may be said to draw in Fogs, in lieu of free Air, the
Country being all marsh and moorish about Her; so that Amsterdam is built as
it were in a bog, or quag; for in their fabriques, they are forced to dig so
deep for a firm foundation, by ramming in huge Piles of Wood, that the Basis of
a House, does oftentimes cost more then the superstructure.

Moreover, Amsterdam has neither Conduit, Well, or Fountain of fresh water
within her, but it is brought to her by Boats; and they wash with Rain water,
which every House preserves in Cisterns, to that purpose.

Touching the River of Texel, that brings her in all Commodities she is nothing
comparable to the Thames, in point of security of sailing, or sweetness of
water: touching the first, they say there stood a Forest of Wood in times
past, where now the Texel makes her bed, which could not be cut down so clean,
but there are diverse ill favored Trunks, and stubs of Trees, still found under
water, which is a great annoyance to Ships.

There are in the United Provinces, many jolly Towns besides, which may be
ranked among them of the first magnitude, especially Utrecht, which has the
face of an ancient stately Town, and subsists more by her self: the rest grow
great, and flourish in Wealth, Buildings, and People, by having some peculiar
staple-Commodity appropriated unto them, as Amsterdam has the Trade of the
East and West Indies assigned Her, (as was formerly mentioned). Rotterdam, has
the Staple of English Cloth; Dort, of the Rhenish-Wine, and Corn that comes
from Germany; Haerlam has a Charter for Weaving and Knitting; Leyden is an
University; The Hague subsists by the residence of the Hoghen Moghen, the
Council of State; Middleburgh in Zeland, by the Staple of French Wines;
Trevere, by the Scots Commodities, etc. but none of these bear any proportion
with the City of London, who trades in all these several Commodities together,
and has particular Corporations accordingly, with many more.

We will now hoyse up Sail for France, which also has diverse Cities of the
first Magnitude, as Rouen in Normandy, Bourdeaux in Gascogny, Toulouse in
Languedock, with the other five Courts of Parliament; as also Amiens in
Picardy, and the City of Lions, and Marseilles: the one whereof, subsists by
her Bank; the other, by being the chief Arsenal of the French Galleys; but none
of these will offer, I think, to compare with the City of London, nor any of
those Towns that stand upon the Loire, whereof there are many gentile ones.

Paris I confess, may be capable of some Comparisons with London, for which she
has many helps, as being a Cite, Vil^e and Universite, a City, a Town, and an
University; as also the chief residence of the French Kings, and the Parliament.

But lets go a little to particulars. And first, to the populousness of both
Cities; They say in Paris, that the Parishes of Saint Eustace, and Saint
Innocent, have above one hundred thousand Communicants in them alone: and that
by the last Cense that was made there, was near upon a million of humane souls,
found in the City and Suburbs of Paris. It may be so, but we shall find in the
ensuing Discourse that London has more.

Secondly, for magnitude: it is true, that Paris has the advantage of an
Orbicular figure, and so is more capacious. But by the judgment of those
Mathematicians, who have observed both Cities; if London were cast into a
Circle, she would with all her dimensions, be altogether as big as Paris.

Touching the Loure, it is true, that it is a vast fabric, and the like is not
found in London; but it is the only Court the French King has in Paris,
whereas in London there are four Royal Seats, with two Parks annexed to one;
I hope the Bastile will not offer to compare with the Tower of London, nor the
River of Seine with the Thames; much less I believe, will Paris offer to make
any comparisons with London, in point of Traffic, and Societies of Noble
adventuring Merchants, who trade on both the Hemispheres; nor of her Provost
with the Lord Mayor of London. I allow Paris to have rich Banquiers, but they
are most of them strangers, and not Natives.

Moreover, I think Paris would be loath to compare with London for neatness of
streets, or for sweetness of site; for Paris has scarce any verdure about her,
but the Proclere; whereas London has most delightful Fields round about Her,
of a deeper green, not so fading as that of France: and touching streets, the
dirt and crott of Paris may be smelt ten miles off, and leaves such a tenacious
oily stain, that it is indelible, and can never be washed off; it is confessed,
that Paris has waters of a singular virtue, for the die of Scarlets; but it is
as well known to the World, what extraordinary Virtues the Thames water has
for many things. Ask the Hollander, and he will tell you, there is no such
water to fatten Eeles, and all sorts of Fish. Thames water Beer bears the price
of Wine, in many places beyond the Seas. And the Portugalls have found of late,
such virtue in that water, that they carry it away by whole Tuns, to Lisbon. I
might enlarge my self further, in showing what advantages the City of London
has of Paris, but I will suspend my Discourse till I proceed a little further,
only I will conclude this Paragraffe with this one Objection, that London has
far better blood in her Veins, then Paris, I mean a greater number of wholesome
Springs, Conduits, Aqueducts, and Sources of sweet waters, whereof Paris has
not so many. And now there comes into my memory, a facetious passage, between
Henry the 4th, and the Provost of Paris, touching those waters; which happened
thus. The King had appointed the Suisse Ambassadors, whereof there were many in
Commission, to be lodged in the City, and that plenty of the best Wines should
be provided for them; The Ambassadors having lain long upon the Parisians, and
drunk daily very deep, and being at last dismissed. The Provost made an humble
Remonstrance to the King, how the City had so long time win'd the Suisse
Ambassadors, and their numerous retinue, which put Her in some Arreares,
therefore he humbly prayed, in the name of the City, that his Majesty would be
pleased to give leave, that a small Tax might be laid for a while upon the
Water-pipes and Cesterns of fresh Waters, for the discharge of those Arrears
for Wine, etc. The King pleasantly answered, Ventre de Saint Gris, there must
be some other way found out to do this; for 'Twas our Savior only, that could
turn water into Wine, therefore he would not presume to attempt it.

Having thus rambled up and down the World, and cast some few glances upon the
most renowned Cities; and having pointed before, at twenty properties, wherein
London may well compare with any of the greatest Cities in Europe, we will now
more particularly, treat a little of those properties, and take them all
single, as they are ranked.

1. The first is, Convenience of Situation, and salubrity of Air, wherein the
wisdom of the old Britains our Ancestors, in point of Election of the place,
and the benignity of the Heavens, in point of influences and temperature, have
made London as happy as any other City under the vast Canopy of the Heavens;
some say, that that City is best situated, which resembles a Camels back, who
has protuberancies, and bunches, so a City should be seated upon rising
grounds, or small Hillocks; It is the posture of London; for she is builded
upon the flanks, sides, and tops of diverse small Hillocks, lying near the Banks
of a Noble River, and being encompassed about with delightful green Medows, and
Fields on all sides; and she is in so fair a distance from the Sea, that no
danger of foreign invasion can surprise her, but she must have notice before:
The nature of her Soil sandy, which is wholsomest for Habitation, and conduces
much goodness of Air, the barrenness whereof, is made prolifical by art.

2. Touching the second property, which is a method of strict, and punctual
Government, there is no City goes beyond her, or indeed equals her, take night
and day together; for there is not the least misdemeanor, or inconvenience that
can be; but there be Officers in every corner of the City to pry into them, and
find them out; but especially, the Wardmote Inquest, which are to be men of
repute, and known integrity; They by virtue of their Office inquire, if any man
outlawed, or indicted of Treason, or Felony, lurk within the Ward; They inquire
if the public peace be any way disturbed, or broken; They enquire of all
offenses, and damages done to the River of Thames, and make a speedy
presentment of them to be redressed; They inquire after Riotors, dissolute
persons, and Barrators, walking by nightertayle, without light at unseasonable
hours. They inquire after those that play at unlawful Games. They inquire
after Potours, Panders, and Bawds, common hazardors, Champartors, maintainers
of quarrels, or embracers of Inquests. They inquire after Witches, Strumpets,
common Punks, and Scolds. They inquire after hot houses, and sweating houses,
whereunto any lewd Women resort, or others of ill repute. They inquire after
any Inholder, Taverner, Brewer, or Huckster, that hold open at unseasonable
hours. They by virtue of their Office, inquire if any manner of person, after
rain, or any other time, cast or lay any dung, ordure, rubbish, Sea-coal ashes,
rushes, or any other thing of noisance in the River of Thames, or the Channels
of the City. They inquire, whether any manner of persons, nourish Hogs, Oxen,
Kine, Ducks, or any other living thing, that may cause unwholsomness, or any
grievance. They inquire, if any false Chevesancers, or extortioning Usurers,
dwell within their Ward. They inquire, if any Freeman against his Oath made,
does conceal, cover, or color the Goods of Forreiners against the Franchises
of the City. They inquire, if any Forrainer buy and sell with any other
Forrainer, within they City or Suburbs thereof, any Marchandizes or Goods, to
the prejudice of the Natives.

They inquire, if every Freeman which receives, or takes benefit of the
Franchises of the City, but continually dwelling out of it, has not, nor will
not pay scot and lot after his Oath made, nor be partner to the common charges
of the City, when he is required. They inquire, if any conceal the Goods of
Orphans, whose Ward and Marriage belong to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen. They
inquire, if any Officer, by color of his Authority, do extortion to any man,
or be a promoter, or maintainer of quarrels against right, or take carriage,
and arrest victual unduly. They inquire, if any Boat-man, or Ferriman take more
then is due for his Boat-hire.

They are to inquire, if any pourprestures be made upon the common ground of
the City by Land, or water, as in Walls, Pales, Stoops, Grieces, Doors, or
Cellars; or if any Porch, Pent-house, or jetty be too low, in letting of
Passengers that ride, or Carts: They are to inquire, that Pentises, and
jetties, be at least the height of nine feet, and that the Stalls be not but
of two foot and a half in breadth, and to be flexible, and moveable, viz. to
hang by Jewmews or Garnets, so that they may be taken up, and let down. They
are to inquire, if any common course of water be forclos'd, or let to the
noyance of the City. They are to inquire, if any pavement be defective, or too
high in one place, and too low in another, to the disturbance of the Riders,
goers, and Carts that pass along. They are to inquire after Regrators, or
forestallers of Victuals, or of any other Marchandizes which should come to the
City to be publicly and fairly sold. They are to inquire, if any Butcher,
Fishmonger, Poulter, Vintner, Hostler, Cook, or seller of Victuals, do sell at
unreasonable prizes. They are to inquire, if any Retaylor do sell unwholesome
Victuals, or dearer then is proclaimed by the Lord Mayor. They are to inquire,
whether any Vintner, Inholder, Alehouse-keeper, or any other person whatsoever,
do use, or keep any Cans, stone-pots, or other measures which are unsealed, and
are less then due measure, and whether they sell any Beer or Ale above a penny
a quart, and small Ale above a half penny. They are to inquire in Shops and
Houses of Chandlers, and others which fell by weight, that all their Scales be
right, and according to the Standard; as also, that all Yards and Else, be of
their just length, and that none do sell by Venice weights. They are to
inquire, if any Inholder do bake Bread to sell within his own House; and if any
Baker of sour bread, bake white bread to sell, and take more for the baking
then three pence in a Bushel. They are to inquire, if any House be covered,
otherwise then with Tile, Stone, or Lead, for peril of fire. They are to
inquire, if any leper, faitor, or mighty Beggar reside in the Ward. They are to
inquire, if any Baker or Brewer, bake or brew with Straw, or any other fuel,
which may endanger fyring. They are to inquire, if any go with painted Vi^age.
They are to inquire, if any neglects to hang a Lanthorn at his door, with a
^^ndle therein burning, after the usage at the season of the year appointed.
They are to inquire, whether any bring to be sold, or sell and offer, or put to
sale any tall-Wood, Billets, Fagots, or other firewood, not being of the full
assize. They are also to inquire after them, who go to the Country, and
ingrosse any Billet, tall-wood, Faggot, Tosard, or other firewood, and so keep
it, till they may sell it at excessive prizes, and above the prizes set by the
Lord Mayor. They are also, to inquire after Ingrossers of Butter and Cheese, in
great quantities, in going into the Country to buy it, and after, convey it by
water, or otherwise to the City, to be sold at Excessive rates. They are to
inquire, whether any use the privilege of Freemen, being none; and to that
purpose, they shall demand a sight from those whom they suspect, of a Copy of
their Freedom, under the Seal of the Office of the Chamberlain. They shall
inquire after all such as melt Tallow, contrary to an Act of the Common Council
in that case made and provided.

They shall inquire after such who use any fire-presses within the City, and
liberties for pressing, or dressing of netherstocks, Woollen Clothes, or other
things. They shall inquire of all Armorers, and other Artificers, using to work
in Metals, which have or use any Reardorses, or any other places dangerous for
fire. They shall inquire, if any who have undertaken to be appraysers of the
Goods of any Freeman deceased, leaving behind him any Orphan or Orphans; and
the said Appraysers not having bin sworn before the Lord Mayor, or the Alderman
of the Ward. They are to inquire if any Freeman buy any Wares or Marchandizes
unweighed, which ought to be weighed at the Kings beam, of any stranger or
Forrainer free of the City of London. They are to inquire if any buy or sell
any Cloth or Clothes in the Shop, Warehouse, or other place of any
Cloth-worker; or if any Cloth-worker do receive, or harbor any Cloth, before
the same be brought to Blackwell-Hall. They are to inquire, if any Carman take
for Carriage of any Commodity, above the rates ordained. They are to inquire,
if any make, or cause to be made, any new Buildings, or divide, or cause to be
divided, any House, or Houses, or receive any Inmate, or Inmates, contrary to
the Kings Majesty's Proclamation, or to Law, or any Statute of the Land. They
are to inquire after Hawkers, which go up and down the streets, and from House
to House, to sell any Wares, contrary to an Act made in that behalf. They are
to inquire, if any have fraudulently, or unduly obtained the Freedom of the
City. They are to inquire after Women-Brokers, such as use to resort to men's
Houses, to suborn young Maidens with promise to help them to better service.
They are to inquire, if any have, or use any common Privy, having issue into
any common Sewer of the City. They are to inquire, if any Constable, Beadle, or
other Officer* be negligent, and remiss, in discharging their duties, touching
the execution of the Statute made for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and
sturdy Beggars, etc.

They are to inquire, if those to whom the execution of the Statute for the
relief of the poor, does appertain, be remiss in discharging their duties that
way. They are to inquire, if any Executor, or others, keep in their hands any
Legacy, sum of money, or other thing, given to charitable uses. They are to
inquire, if any that keep Horses in their Houses, do lay their Stable dung, or
such kind of noisome filth, in any streets, or lanes of the City, and do not
cause the Dung-cart to be led to the Stable door.

The Ward-mote Inquest, by virtue of their Office, are bound to search into all
these enormities, and to meet once a month, or oftener, if need require to that
purpose. And whosoever does judiciously observe these several heads, will find,
there is nothing wanting to preserve a City, or the people thereof in the ways
of neatness, safety, and industry, or for the advancement of Virtue, and
suppression of Vice.

By these particulars, with what has bin spoken of formerly, in the Body of
this Book, the Reader may observe, how exact the City of London is in her Urban
Government.

3. Now touching the magnificence, gravity, and state of the chief Magistrate:
neither the Praetor of Rome, or the Prefect of Milan; neither the Proctors of
Saint Mark in Venice, or their Podestas in other Cities; neither the Provost of
Paris, the Markgrave of Antwerp, can compare with the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs
of London: If one go to the variety of their Robes, sometimes Scarlet richly
fur'd, sometimes Purple, sometimes Violet, and Puke. What a goodly Spectacle it
is to behold the Lord Mayor, and the Companies attending him in so many dainty
Barges, when he goes to be sworn in Westminster Hall; and what brave shows
there are attending him by Land, at his return? what a plentiful sumptuous
Dinner, consisting of so many huge Tables, is provided for him? what a variety
of domestic Officers wait upon him perpetually, whereof, with the
Remembrancer, there are five of them Esquires by their places, as was hinted
before? what a comely sight it is to see the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and
Aldermen, going in their Robes upon Festivals to the Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul's, though they who stand not so well affected to the present Government,
say, that he goes in now at the wrong end of the Church: what a goodly sight
it is, when he goes upon Easter Holidayes, to the Spittle, with the Sword, and
Cap of Maintenance going before him? How his Robes are fitted for the season,
as from Michaelmas to Whitsontide, he wears Violet fur'd; from Whitsontide to
Michaelmas, Scarlet lined: And for distinction among the Aldermen, they who
have bin Lord Mayors, have their Cloaks lined with changeable Taffata; but
those that have not, with green Taffata; what great places of trust are
committed to the Lord Mayor, as the keeping of the great Bridge in repair,
which has such large Revenues belonging unto it, with a particular stately
Seal, which of old, had the Effigies of Thomas of Becket, (a Londoner born)
upon it, with this Inscription in the name of the City.

Me quae te peperi, ne cesses, Thoma, tueri; But the Seal was altered in Henry
the eighths Reign: what a great trust is it for the Lord Mayor to have the
conservation of the Noble River of Thames, from Stanes Bridge, till She
disgorgeth her self into the Sea? How stately is he attended, when he goes to
take a view of the River, or a Swan-hopping? and lately, what a Noble addition
was it for the Lord Mayor to have a Park of Deer of his own so near the City,
to find him sport, and furnish him with Venison? what an Honor is it for the
Lord Mayor to be accounted the first man of England, upon the death of the
Sovereign Prince. As when King James was invited to come, and take the Crown of
England; Robert Lee, Lord Mayor of London, was the first man who subscribed,
and then the Officers of the Crown, with the chief Noblemen after him. The
Recorder of London also, is primus Consiliarius Angliae, and is privileged to
plead within the Bar. The Lord Mayors of London have bin called sometime, to
sit at the Council Table, as Sir John Allen was in Henry the eighths time, with
others, (which Allen, gave that rich Collar of Gold, which the Lord Mayors use
to wear) and the Aldermen his Brethren, were used to be called Barons.

4. We are come now to Regulation of Trade, wherein London is not inferior to
any City whatsoever, witness (among others) what prudential Laws, Restraints
and Cautions the Merchant Adventurers, who trade in the Golden Fleece of
England, viz. in Woollen Manufactures, have proposed to themselves, as likewise
all other Corporations in like manner, for the improvement of that particular
Trade, and preserving it from confusion.

5. Touching variety of Artisans, London yields to no other, it is true, that
mingling with Forreiners, has much advantaged her in this kind; but it is
observed, and confessed by all Nations, that though the Londoners be not so apt
to invent; yet when they have got the Invention, they use always to improve
it, and bring it to a greater perfection.

6. Touching Corporations, Halls, Fraternities, Guilds, and Societies, London
has not her Fellow: witness the twelve Honorable Companies; out of one of
which, the Lord Mayor is yearly chosen. The several Societies of those, who
venture abroad in all parts of the habitable Earth, as far as the Antipodes. And
threescore Companies of Citizens besides; whereunto the new Company of
Coachmen, is lately added, who have their Halls, their regular Orders, and
Officers accordingly; And touching all sorts of Artificers, and variety of
industrious ways to improve all kind of Manufactures, and thereby gain an
honest Livelihood, and so enrich the place. London may be called a Hive of
Bees, (as formerly was touched) or a Hill of Ants, which have bin always made
the Emblems of industry, and providence.

7. Touching plenty, and abundance of all kinds of Provision, as Flesh, Fish,
Foul, Fruits, Fuel, variety of Drinks, and Wines, with any other Commodity,
that conduces to pleasure and delight, as well as necessity, London may glory
to be as well served, as any City under Heaven. A knowing Spaniard said, that
he thought Eastcheape Shambles alone, vends more Flesh in the year, then all
the Court of Spain. Gascon Wines drink better in London, then in Bourdeaux, and
so do all other, provided they be not sophisticated. Nor does London abound
with all things so plentifully, for the belly alone, but also for the back,
either to keep it warm, or make it gay; what varieties of woollen Stuffs there
are in every Shop, with broad Cloth equal to the price of Silk, being come to
that height of perfection, that some has bin made of ten pounds a yard in
price; But the Hollanders and others, have now got the art of making our Stuffs
and Cloths, by those foolish giddy headed Puritans that pretended to fly for
persecution of their Consciences, whereby they have done their own Country no
little mischief in this particular, as in many things besides.

But in point of plenty, it may be well avouch'd, that no Oppidan Magistrates
on Earth, go beyond the Lord Mayor of London, and the two Sheriffs, for
constant Hospitality all the year long: The time was, that the Lord Mayor of
London feasted four Kings at once. Insomuch, that of all other places in the
Island, those Verses of Michael, the Cornish Poet, may be most verified of
London. Nobilis Anglia, pocula, prandia donat, etc.

8. Concerning wholesome, clear waters, as 'twas said before that London has
good blood in her Veins, by those many Aqueducts, Conduits, and conveyances of
fresh waters, to serve for all uses, so she has good Veins in her Body, by
those rivulets, Springs, and Sources she has within and about Her* What an
Herculean work was that, to bring the River of Ware, to run through her
streets, and refresh all her Houses. And what an ingenious fabric is lately
reared up in the Thames, to furnish the Strand, Drury Lane, the Convent Garden,
and all the new Houses thereabouts, with convenient proportions of fresh water.

9. For Universality of Trade, there is no Country upon the Surface of the
Earth, no Seas that any of the Winds blow upon from the Artick to the Antartick
Pole, from the rising to the setting Sun, but London by her Navigations, finds
them out, and so barters, and brings all kind of Commodities; what goodly
Vessels does she send forth, to cross the Line to the East Indies, to Italy,
and the bottom of the Streights, the Turks Dominions: As also to the Baltic
Sea, how she flies ore the vast White Ocean, to Moscovy, and to hunt the great
Leviathan in Groenland.

How her Merchants and Factors are more reputed, and have greater privileges
every where, then any other, particularly in the huge Hause City of Hamburgh,
and Rotterdam, etc.

10. In point of solid and useful Wares she has of her own, what a substantial
Commodity, and of what high esteem, all the World over is her Cloth, her
Kersies, and diverse other kinds of Woollen manufactures; together with her Lead
and Tin, how she turns the first to Silk, and Cloth of Tissue, the last to Gold
and Silver; what rich returns she makes of her Fish, from all the Catholic
Countries? What large Warehouse, and spacious fair Shops she has of all
mercantile Commodities? And touching her Royal Exchange, those of Antwerp and
Amsterdam, have but baubling Pedlery Wares, in comparison of hers. Insomuch,
that a wager was offered once to be laid, that Crashawes Shop alone, was able
to buy all those in the Busse at Amsterdam.

11. For strength defensive and offensive, for Arms of all sorts, for
Artillery, Ammunition, for Arsenals and Docks on both sides the River, for
Castles and Block-houses, etc. London is not inferior to any; She has twelve
thousand Trained-Band-Citizens, perpetually in a readiness, excellently armed;
which when Count Gondamar saw in a Muster one day in Saint James's Fields, and
the King asking him what he thought of his Citizens of London; He answered,
That he never saw a Company of stouter men, and better Arms in all his
lifetime; but he had a sting in the Tail of his discourse; for he told the
King, that although his Majesty was well pleased with that sight at present, he
feared, that those men handling their Arms so well, might do him one day a
mischief, which proved true; for in the unlucky Wars with the long
Parliament, the London Firelocks did him most mischief.

In times passed, the City of London has sent out strong Fleets to scour, and
secure the four Seas from depredations, and Pyracy. And if in the year 1293.
she was able to set forth a Fleet of ninety five Ships, as it stands upon
Record, what would she be able to do now, if she were permitted?

Moreover, If in King Stephens Reign, as another Record has it, she raised
60000. Foot, and 2000. Horse for Land Service, how many more were she able to
do now in case of necessity, that being compared to what she was then, were to
compare a Giant to a dwarf? But besides these several kind of strengths, and
Arms, there is no place so well furnished with Amonition de bouche, as the
Frenchman has it, with munition for the mouth, viz. with Magazines of Corn,
and Arms against Famine, a^ London is; for besides that at Leaden Hall, and the
Bridge-house, how many Halls have Storehouses of this kind?

There Is no place also better armed against the fury of the fire; for besides
the pitched Buckets that hang in Churches and Halls, there are diverse new
Engines for that purpose. But it had bin wished, that the Proclamations of the
two last Kings for building with Brick, had bin observed by London, for besides
that, it had made Her less subject to casual fyrings, it had conduced much to
the beauty of her Streets, and uniformity of Structure.

12. For healthful corporal Recreations, and harmless passe-times, London may
go in the Van, to any place that I ever saw yet. Go and walk in her Fields, you
shall see some shooting at long marks, some at Buts; some bowling upon dainty
pleasant Greens, some upon Bares; some wrestling, some throwing the Bar, some
the stone, some jumping, some running, some with their Dogs at Ducking ponds;
some riding upon Nags, some in Coaches to take the fresh Air, some at
Nine-pins, some at Stool-ball, though that stradling kind of Tomboy sport be
not so handsome for Mayds, as Forreiners observe, who hold* that dansing in a
Ring, or otherwise, is a far more comely exercise for them.

Within the City, what variety of Bowling Allies there are, some open, some
covered? there are Tennis Courts, Shuffle-Boards, playing at Cudgels,
Cock-fightings, a sport peculiar to the English; and so is Bear, and
Bull-baytings, there being not such generous Dogs, and Cocks any where else.

Go to the River, what a pleasure it is to go thereon, in the Summer time, in
Boat or Barge? or to go a floundring among the Fishermen? There was in former
times a sport used upon the Thames, which is now discontinued: it was for two
Wherries to row, and run one against the other, with staves in their hands;
flat at the fore-end; which kind of Recreation, is much practiced among the
Gondolas of Venice.

The time was, that Stage Plays, and Fencing, were much used in London: The
History speaks of a Play, Anno 1391. performed by the Parish Clarks of London,
at the Skinners Well, besides Smithfield, which continued three several days:
the King, Queen, and the Court being present.

And of another, in the year 1409. which lasted eight days, the subject was
touching the Creation of the World, whereunto the Court, and Nobility were
invited: But those ^ind of Stage Plays, were turned after to Tragedies,
Comedies, Histories, and Enterludes; for representing whereof, there were more
theaters in London, then any where else; And it was a true observation, that
those comical, and tragical Histories, did much improve, and enrich the English
Language, they taught young men witty Complements, and how to carry their
Bodies in a handsome posture: Add hereunto, that they instructed them in the
stories of diverse things, which being so lively represented to the eye, made
firmer impressions in the memory.

Lastly, They reclaimed many from Vice and Vanity; for though a Comedy be never
so wanton, yet it ends with virtue, and the punishment of vice.

13. For a stately Cathedral Temple, and Dome of devotion, the time was, that
London did not yield to any City under the Sun in this particular; Saint Paul's
Church being esteemed by all Nations, to be one of the eminentest, and
visiblest Temple, one of the most glorious Piles of Stones under Heaven; taking
all the dimensions, together with the cheerful conspicuous Site thereof, being
near the Center of the City, and upon a rising ground; Being also founded upon
Faith's, by having a large Church of that name truckling, as one may say, under
her Chancel; Add hereunto, what a comfortable Object it was, to behold above
twenty miles distance, round about, this goodly Structure, raising it self
above the rest, and serving as it were for a Crest to the whole City; But now
this famous Fabric, which was accounted the greatest glory of London, is
become her greatest shame; For many Fortainers, (who are none of those that
place any inherent Sanctity in senseless inanimat stones) have bin overheard to
say, that Paul's Church in that posture she now is, is the saddest sight, and
most ruthful Spectacle upon the Surface of the whole Earth; nay, some have bin
heard to say, that whereas a Stable became once a Temple in Palestine, a Temple
among us has bin made a Stable; nay, they went further, not sticking to say,
that as Christ was born in a Stable, so Antichrist is like to be born in a
Stable in England.

The time was, that London was used to have a greater care of this Temple, when
a solemn Act of the Lord Mayors, and Common Council passed, which stands yet
upon good Record, to this effect, and stands still in force.

Forasmuch as the material Temples of God were first ordained for the lawful
and devout Assembly of people, there to lift their hearts, and lawd and praise
Almighty God, and to hear his Divine Service, and his holy Word, and Gospel,
sincerely said, sung, and taught, and not to be used as Markets, and other
profane places, or through faires, by carriage of things: And for that of late
years, many of the Inhabitants of the City of London, and other people
repairing thither, do commonly use, and accustom themselves very unseemly, and
unreverently (the more the pity) to make their common carriage of great
Vessels ^ll of Ale and Beer, great Baskets full of Bread, Fish, Flesh, and
Fruit, ^^d such other things, Fardels of Stuff, and other gross Wares, and
things, through the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul's, and some in leading
Moyles, Horses, and other Beasts, through the same unreverently, to the great
dishonor, and displeasure of Almighty God, and the great grief also, and
offense of all good people, Be it therefore for remedy and Reformation thereof,
^dained, enacted, and established, etc. That no person, either fi^e or foreign,
of what estate or condition soever, do at any time from henceforth, carry or
convey, or cause to be carried, and conveyed through the said Cathedral, any
manner of great Vessel, or Basket with Bread, Ale, Beer, Fish, Flesh, or any
other like thing or things, upon pain of forfeiture, or loosing, for every such
his or their offense, three shillings four pence; for the second, six shillings
eight pence; for the third, ten shillings; And for every other offense, after
such third time, to forfeit ten shillings, and to suffer two days and two
nights imprisonment, without Bayl or Mainprize, The one moiety of all which
pains and penalties, shall be to Christ's Hospital within Newgate, and the other
half, to him that will sue for the same, in any Court of Record within the
City, by Bill, original Complaint, or Information, to be commenced, or sued in
the name of the Chamberlain of the said City for the time being, wherein no
Essoyne, or wager of Law, for the Defendant shall be admitted, or allowed, etc.

Such was the Reverence, that London showed her Cathedral Church, not long
ago, which may be said, to look now like the hulk of a great weather beaten
Ship, that had crossed the Line eight times, forward and backward, to the East
Indies, and lies rotting upon the Carine: such is the condition of this stately
Church, which is like to be buried shortly in her own ruins, and so become a
heap of rubbish; and then how b^ld London will look, let them judge, who have
taken a judicious prospect of Her.

Moreover, there is another Reason, that may induce London to prevent this; for
if Paul's were down, She forfeits the name of a City; for all Lawyers concur in
this opinion, that there can be no City, without a Cathedral Church; it is but a
Village without one, or a Town at most: therefore London has great cause to
wish, that those unlucky Scismaticks had never bin born, who first brought
Paul's Church to this pitiful pass; for it may well be said, that all those
casual fires which she suffered, (whereof there were many) did not do her as
much mischief, as the faruous fires of some fanatical Zelots have done; as one
said also of the House of Peers, that the Long Parliament was more destructive
unto it, then the Powder Plot had bin, if it had taken effect.

Touching particular appropriated places for the service of God. We know there
were such from the beginning. As soon as Noah got footing on dry ground, he
erected an Altar, which was in live of a Church, the Patriarks had theirs; then
from Altars, they came to have Arks, and ambulatory Tabernacles; and we read,
what a conceit of holiness was carried toward them: Then Solomon, by
Instructions from Heaven, did build a fixed, and standing material Temple; And
we well know, how highly our Savior himself was incensed against the money
changers, and others, who profaned that place; and what sharp reprehensions
his Apostle gave afterward to those, who used to eat and drink in those places
which were appointed for devotion.

That Hyper^^ or room, where our Savior did please to celebrate the
Passe-over, and institute his last Supper, may well be thought to have more
Sanctity in it, then an ordinary Chamber, considering how many holy things were
done there afterward; for our Savior appeared in that very place, twice after
his Resurrection; the Holy Ghost came down in cloven tongues in that place.
James was created Bishop of Jerusalem, and seven Deacons were elected in that
place, which in regard of so many holy transactions, was enlarged, and made
afterward a goodly Church, long before Constantine: whosoever is versed with
the Primitive Fathers, knows well how often they speak of Peculiar places, set
apart to celebrate divine service; as also of set times, and that the posture
must be Eastward; Among the primitive Christians, those places were called by
some, Basilica; by others, Dominica, or (...) whence the German word Kerk, was
derived; by others, (...), by some they were termed (...) by others, (...),
etc. all which were but Synonyma's to Churches, or holy Oratories.

One of the first Fathers says positively, that Churches were in the Apostles
time.

Another says, they continued from the Apostles time, to Constantine, with
whom the Roman Empire came to be Christian first.

And in all the ten Persecutions, which happened by intermissions, we may read,
how that by the Edicts of the Emperors, the Oratories or Churches of the
Christians, were to be in some places burnt, in others, demolished. And in the
last persecution under Dioclesian, the History says, that a great number of
ancient Edifices, and Churches of the Christians were destroyed; And observable
it is, that one of those Primitive Fathers, compares the Churches on the shore,
to safe Harbors in the Sea, which surely must be interpreted, to relate to the
Places, and not to the persons only.

Histories also speak plainly, how in the first and second Century after
Christ, in the persecution that was in Persia, many goodly Oratories and
Churches of the Christians were destroyed.

By these short disquisitions into the Ages of the World and History, it
appears, that among the Patriarks, there were holy places that had an Analogy
with Churches, which continues among the Jews ever since: And touching
Christians, there were Oratories, and appropriate sacred places, from the very
infancy of the Gospel, which served as a general Rendezvous to celebrate Divine
service all along from the Apostles time, through the three Centuries of the
Primitive Church: therefore they must be possessed with a strange spirit of
contradiction, and profaneness, who make no account of those peculiar Houses,
which pious devout souls have appropriated, rea'rd up, and dedicated to the
sole service of Almighty God, but hold all places promiscuous, and
indifferently proper for that use.

It may justly be doubted, whether such sordid poor narrow souls, who so malign
the beauty, the holiness, and decencies of Gods House here in the Church
militant, will ever be admitted to behold the glory of the Church Triumphant.

And now, having presumed to speak so much of Londons great Temple (than which
there is not a more conspicuous Object upon Earth, except the Mount Olympus,
which is said to bear up Heaven); and having with a true sense of sorrow set
forth the sad condition thereof; my prayers are, that it would please God to
put it into the hearts, and move the spirits of those worthy Patriots, who are
now assembled to mend all breaches in the Commonwealth, to propose some way
for preserving this ancient great visible Ornament from tumbling down: And
there is a fair opportunity offered to this purpose; for if those irregular New
Buildings be questioned (whereof there are by computation, above a hundred
thousand pop'd up within these forty years), It would, most humbly under
favor, be very proper to employ part of the Tax upon those Houses, to repair
Gods House.

14. Touching a Noble Bridge, and a Navigable River, spoken of before, London
is not inferior to any other City whatsoever: concerning the first, what a
large Rent has it to preserve it self? what a vast Magazine of Corn is there
always in the Bridge-house, against a dearth? what a number of Officers, that
look to the reparations thereof, are handsomely maintained thereby, and some of
them persons of good quality?

Touching the second, the River of Thames has not her fellow, if regard be had
to the straightness and length of her course running from East to West, without
many meanders, her convenient distance from the Sea, to prevent surprizals, the
cheerfulness of the Soil on both sides, the wholsomness of her water, which
makes the best Beer in the World, and is transported by foreign Nations for
other uses; the variety of her Fish, the fatness of her mud; If regard be had
also to those Forests of Masts, which are perpetually upon her, the variety of
smaller Wooden bottoms plying up and down, the stately Palaces that are built
on both sides of her banks so thick, which made diverse foreign Ambassadors
affirm, that the most glorious sight in the World (take water and land
together) was to come upon a high Tide from Gravesend, and shoot the Bridge to
Westminster.

15. For number of humane souls, breathing in City and Suburbs; London may
compare with any in Europe, in point of populousness: the last Cense that was
made in Paris, came under a million; but in the year 1636. King Charles sending
to the Lord Mayor, to make a scrutiny, what number of Roman Catholics and
Strangers, there were in the City, he took occasion thereby, to make a Cense of
all the people; and there were of Men, Women, and Children, above seven hundred
thousand that lived within the Bars of his jurisdiction alone; and this being
one and twenty years passed, it is thought, by all probable computation, that
London has more by the third part now, then she had then. Now, for
Westminster, and Petty France, the Strand, Bedford Berry, St. Martins Lane,
Long Acre, Drury Lane, St. Giles of the Field, High Holborn, Grayes Inn Lane,
St. Jones, and St. Georges street, Clarken well, the out-lets of Red and
Whitecrosse-street, the out-lets beyond the Bars of Bishopsgate, Aldersgate,
and Southwark Bars, beyond the Tower, etc. take all these places, with diverse
more, which are contiguous, and one entire piece with London her self, I say,
take all these Buildings together, there will be found by all probable
conjecture, as many Inhabitants at least, as were found before within that
compass, where the point of the Lord Mayors Sword reaches, which may amount in
all, to a million and a half of humane souls: Now, one way to know the
populousness of a great City is, to observe the Bills of Mortality, and
Nativities every week. I think, there is no such Custom in Paris; but for
Amsterdam, which is a very populous Mercantile place, the ordinary number
there, of those that go weekly out of the World, is but fifty, or thereabouts,
and about so many come into the World every week; But in London, the common
Weekly Bills come to near upon 300. that come in, and about so many that go out
of the World, though the last years general Bill made twice as many to go out,
as came in; for it gives account of fourteen thousand and odd that dyed, and
but seven thousand christened; but this may be imputed (the more's the pity)
to the confusion of Sectaries, which swarm since the long Parliament, as
Anabaptists, and others who use not to christen their Children, a sad story to
tell, so that there were many thousands born, which were not baptized, and
whereof the Bill speaks not.

Touching the form and shape of London, it may be aptly compared to a Laurel
leaf, which is far more long then broad; and were London round, as Paris and
other Cities are, she would appear more populous, by a more often encounter of
the passengers.

Concerning the length of London, take all Buildings that are contiguous one to
another from East to West, from the utmost point of Westminster, to the utmost
point beyond the Tower, she may be well thought to be near upon five Italian
miles in longitude, and about half so much in latitude, and in Circuit, above
twelve miles. It Is true, that the Suburbs of London are larger then the Body of
the City, which make some compare her to a Jesuits Hat, whose brims are far
larger then the Block, which made Count Gondamar the Spanish Ambassador to say,
as the Queen of Spain was discoursing with him, upon his return from England,
of the City of London. Madam, I believe there will be no City left shortly; for
all will run out at the Gates to the Suburbs; and for the Men, I think they are
gone by this time into the Country, for I left them all booted and spurred when
I came away.

But touching the amplitude, and largeness of London, whereas Charles the
Emperor, to put a Complement upon Paris, said, that she might be called a
Province, rather then a City, this term may better befit London, who is a
County of her self.

16. From proportions and quantity, we will now go to the quality of the
persons she has produced from time to time: whereof there have been great
numbers of most gallant and generous, most wealthy and worthy, most eminent and
munificent brave men, who had souls as large as their substance, I mean such
that received, either their first being, or well being from Her.

Charles the Quint was used to glory, that he was a Citizen of Ghent, having
bin born there.

Henry the Great, in answer to a Letter of the King of Spains, wherein he had
enumerated above a score of Sovereign Titles, styled himself only Henry, Roy de
France, and Bourgeois de Paris. Henry King of France, and Burgess of Paris.
But London has greater cause to glory in this point, for Constantine, the
first Christian Emperor, a Britain born, was her Child. And a foul mistake it
was in Him, who writ the Book of Martyrs, when in his Epistle Dedicatory he
says, that Constantine was the Son of Helena, an English Woman, (being pure
British); for the name of English was not then in the World, nor did the
Saxons, whence the English are derived, take footing in great Britain, but a
long time after.

Maud the Empress was also a Londoner born, with diverse other great Kings and
Princes.

Thomas Becket, a man very famous in all the Catholic Countries, and held one
of the highest Saints, was born in London; he was first one of the Sheriffs
Clarks, then he was Parson of St. Mary Hil^ then he went to Bologna in Italy,
to study the Law; and at his return, he was made Chancellor of England, and
Arch Bishop of Canterbury. Innumerable other great Clarks, and eminent Bishops,
were born in London; and of late times, Bishop Lancelot Andrews, who for his
vast stock of learning, might be called, the Universal Bishop. There are now
living, two great Luminaries of the Church, Doctor Wren, and Doctor Warner,
born both in London, the one Bishop of Ely, the other Bishop of Rochester, a
person of most acute Intellectuals, and of rare excellent knowledge.

Fabian the famous Chronologer was Sheriff of London, and born there; what a
number of most munificent Benefactors has London had among her own Natives,
besides those whom she bred; what a Noble useful Structure is Leaden Hall,
built at the sole charge of Sir Simon Air Draper, and Lord Mayor of London?
what a worthy Foundation is St. John's College in Oxford, built by Sir Thomas
White, Lord Mayor of London, who was Benefactor also to Bristoll, Reading, and
above twenty Towns besides? what a bountiful Benefactor was Mr. William Lamb,
free of the Company of Clothworkers? what a world of charitable deeds, did he
do in Town and Country? what a Noble soul had Sir Thomas Gresham Mercer, and
Merchant, who built the Royal Exchange, Gresham College, with another great
Country Palace in Middlesex; what a notable Benefactor, was Mr. Thomas Howel,
bred in his youth in Spain, and afterward in London, who was one of the
greatest Benefactors of the Company of Drapers, and, besides many other large
acts of charity, he has left such means to Drapers Hall, that if any Maiden
can derive her self from the right lineage of Howel in Wales, the said Hall is
to give her 21 l. toward her portion; and this to continue for ever; what a
free large Soul had Mr. William Jones, Merchant, and free of the Haberdashers,
who in Monmouth, the Country where he was born, did build a fair Free School,
with very large allowance to the Masters; he was Benefactor also to Hamborough,
Stoad, and diverse other places at home and abroad. To these two Britains, we
will add a third, which is Sir Hugh Middleton, Goldsmith; what a hazardous,
expenceful mighty work, did he perform, in bringing Ware-River to run through
the streets of London? what an infinite universal benefit does accrue thereby,
to the whole City and Suburbs? how often did this great design take heat and
cold, what faintings and fears, what oppositions did it break through, before
it was perfectly finished?

What a large noble Soul had Sir Baptist Hicks, Lord Vicount Campden? what a
number of worthy things did he in his life, and at his death, both for the
advancement of Religion and Justice?

At Campden, in the County of Gloucester, he repaired, and adorned God
Almighties House, and reard another for the poor, before he built any for
himself; He founded also there, a very commodious Market-house, and having done
many things more for the public good in that place, he erected afterward, a
stately Palace for his Posterity, though the hard fate of the times, and the
fury of the War has half destroyed it: He was also a great Benefactor to the
Churches, and the poor of Hamsted, and Kensinton, to St. Bartholomewes, and
Christ-Church Hospitals in London, to all the Prisons; as also to St. Laurence
Church in the old Jury: He purchased diverse Impropriations, and bestowed them
upon the Church in diverse counties; He was at the charge of erecting a
convenient Session-house, for the Justices of Middlesex to meet, in the midst
of St. John's street, which is called Hicks Hall, and will so be called to all
posterity. All these great lights he carried before him, and at his death he
gave a World of Legacies, and diverse Pensions to pious Ministers and others,
and bequeathed a great sum to be distributed among all his Servants.

To speak of all those Noble Londoners, who have done glorious things, both for
Church and State, in point of piety, stately Structures of diverse natures, for
the public good, and deeds of charity, would make a large Volume of it self. I
will conclude for the present, with a late worthy man, one Mr. John Walter, who
was Clark of Drapers Hall, who, having resolved with himself, when he had
attained a competent subsistence for himself and his Children, to employ the
rest every year, for charitable uses, which he did constantly for many years:
He built two Hospitals near London, and it was a great while before the Founder
of them was known. He used to send a proportion of bread to be distributed
among the poor, to diverse Churches; and it was not known, who sent it, till he
was dead, and that he was missing. It is thought by a computation that was
made, that he had employed above ten thousand pounds to charitable uses of all
sorts, private and public, and he was so free from vainglory, that his
greatest care was to do them in such a manner, that his left hand should not
know what his right hand did; And in his study after his death, there was a bag
of 800 l. in Gold, with a label in paper upon it, This is none of mine, but the
poor's.

Lastly, for Prerogatives, Enfranchisements, Immunities, Charters, and
Liberties, for Hospitality, and plentiful treatments; as also for Antiquity,
the City of London comes not in the arrears to any.

Touching the last, it is true, there are some Cities in the East, that have the
start of her in point of time, yet London was built 354 years before Rome,
which is a fair Age.

Touching the second, some call London, a lick-peny, (as Paris is called by
some, a pick-purse) because of feastings, with other occasions of expense and
allurements, which cause so many unthrifts among Country Gentlemen, and
others, who flock into her, in such excessive multitudes; but this must be
imputed not to the place, but to the persons; for one may live in London as
frugally, if he has wit to make use of it, as in any other City whatsoever.

It Is true, that the prizes of all things use to be enhanc'd by confluences,
and swarms of people, which a judicious Forreiner observing in London, said,
that she bore no proportion with the Island, but might serve a Kingdom thrice as
big, and that England may be rather said, to be in London, then London in
England, which made some compare her to the spleen, whose over-swelling, make
the rest of the body languish; but it might be answered, that London is rather
like the stomach, which digests the wealth of the Land, and after a good
concoction, disperseth it again in wholesome nutriment to all parts.

Touching the third, viz. freedom and immunities, there is no City has more.

In the Reign of Richard the second, it was enacted, That the Citizens of
London were to enjoy their privileges, and franchises, licet usi non fuerint,
vel abusi fuerint, whether they were not used or abused, notwithstanding any
Statute to the contrary, as the Lord Coke has it in his Institutes.

In the Laws of the Land, London is called sometimes Camera Regis, Reipublicae
Cor, and totius Regni Epitome, the Kings Chamber, the heart of the
Commonwealth, and compendium of the whole Kingdom; sometimes she is called
Caput Regum and Legum, The head of Kings, and of Laws; nay, some of the Roman
Emperors in their Edicts, called her Augusta, which is a name always of
magnificence and State.

And now will I take leave of the Noble Augusta, or City of London, concluding
with this hearty wish, couched in these two Hexameters, and relating to her
proportion, or shape, which is a Laurel leaf, as formerly was said. Londinum
Lauri folio non impare forma,
Flore at Urbs, sicut Laurus, semperque virescat:
London is like a Laurel leaf, may She,
Be verdant still, and flourish like the Tree.


FINIS.
AN INDEX POINTING At the chief Passage throughout the whole Book.
A.
fol. AUgusta, a name given by the Roman Emperors to London. 2. Appellations
which foreign Authors give of London. 2. Of Algate. 5. Of Amwel River brought
to London, 11. The Lord Ailwine first Alderman in England, Anno 851. 34. Of the
Authority and State of the Lord Mayor of London. 35. His Attendants and
Officers, with diverse Prerogatives. 35. Of the ancient Court of the Hustings.
37. Austin the Monk, the Englishmens Apostle. 39. The Arms of all the Companies
and Corporations of London blazoned. 41. The antiquity of all the Companies of
London. 41. Of Allhallowes Barking. 48. Of Algate Ward. 52. Of St. Andrew
Undershaft. 55. Of Augustine Friars. 72. St. Albanes, a very ancient Church in
London. 301. Of Aldersgate Ward. 306. Of the ancient great Monuments in Christ's
Church. 311. The Antiquities of Southwark. 137. An Alderman allotted to every
Ward. 340. The Abbey of Westminster, ^ the greatest Sanctuary. 346. Of the
Court of Admiralty. 373. A Contest 'twixt the Court of Admiralty, and
Westminster Hall. 374. Of Amsterdam. 339. Of Auspurg. 389.
B.
fol. The Britains concreated with this Island. 2. The British Etymologies of
London. 2. The Britains were first Founders and Godfathers of London. 3. Of
Bainards Castle. 5. Of the chief Banner-bearer of the City of London. 27. The
Black Friars built of the ruins of the Tower of Monsiquet. 29. Bishops have
bin good Friends to London. 40. Of Barking Church. 48. The Bailiff of Rumford
strangely executed. 56. The common Burse at first in Lombard Street. 63 Of
Bishopsgate Ward. 63 Of Bethlem, now called Bedlam, and the notable deed of
gift that was made thereof. 63 Of Broad-street Ward. 71 Of Billingsgate Ward.
84 Of Billingsgate some things remarkable. 85 Of the Bridge-ward within. 87 Of
Backles-berry. 113 Of Basings-Hall Ward. 123 Of Backwell-Hall. 123 The History
of the Blackfriars. 316 Of Breadstreet Ward. 318 Of Bridewell. 332 Of St.
Brides. 333 Of the Bridge-House. 339 A British Prophecy, lately verified. 348
Bishop of Chesters Inn. 349 Of Bedford, York, Salisbury, Worcester-House, with
others. 349 Of Bedford Berry. 350 Of Babylon, 382
C.
fol, Cornelius Tacitus lived seven years in Britain. the Epist. The Character
which Tacitus gives of London. 3 Constantine the Great, first Builder of London
Walls. 4 Contests 'twixt the Lord Admiral, and Lord Mayor about the Thames. 14
The Conservancy of the Thames, belongs de jure to the Lord Mayor. 17 The
Character of London Bridge in Latin and English verse 1 A City compared to a
Ship. 33 Of the several Courts belonging to the City of London. 37 Ceremonies
used in the Election of the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs. 36 The Clashes 'twixt
the City of London, and diverse Kings. 40 No City without a Cathedral Church,
and a Bishops See. 40 Of the several Companies and Corporations belonging to
the City of London. 41 Corporations prejudicial to Monarchy. 46 The
Custom-house Key called in former times, Petty Wales. 49 Of the Crouched
Friars. 57 Of Cornhill-Ward. 77 Of Candlewick-Ward. 89 The Charter of the
Styliard. 98 Of Cordwainers-ward. 107 Of Cheap-ward. 111 Of the great Cross in
Cheap. 115 Of Colemanstreet-ward. 119 Of Cripplegate-ward. 301 Of the Chapel
of Jesus, hard by Paul's. 314 The Counter removed from Bread-street, to
VVood-street. 319 Of Castle-Baynard-ward. 324 A Clash 'twixt the Lord Mayor and
the Lawyers. 330
D.
Of Diana's Chamber hard by Paul's. 3 A Description of Paul's. 7 The duty of the
Lord Mayor to conserve the Thames. 18 Diverse small Bridges in former times in
London. 23 Of Drapers-Hall. 73 Of Dowgate-ward. 97 Dowgate-ward has many
things considerable. 100 Of the Dance of Death, painted at Paul's. 323 The
difference 'twixt Southark and London, in point of Government. 340 Of the
Duchy of Lancaster and Savoy, with the Liberties thereof. 347 Of Dorham-House.
349
E.
The English converted to Christianity by the Britains. 33 The Emperor Charles
lodged in the Blackfriars. 316 Of the Elms, the place of common Execution in
times passed. 326 Edward the Consessors Charter to Westminster. 355 Of the
Exchequer Court. 369 Of the Court of Equity, or Chancery. 365 An Encomium of
the Civil Law. 377 Of the City of Florence. 387 An extravagant saying of a
French Baron. In the Epist. Of the eminent Citizens of London. 405
F.
The foundation and first Rise of the City of London. 2 Fitstephen reports of
London. 8 Of the fresh water Rivers that were in London. 10. A factious saying
of the Lord Mayors to King James. 19 Fearful Fires on London-Bridg. 21 Of the
four Inns of Court. 31 Of the present factions in London. 47 Of Fishers Folly
hard by Bishops-gate. 67 Of Fenchurch. 83 Of the Fishmongers Company. 88 Of
Faringdon Intra Ward. 309 Of Faringdon Ward Extra. 327 Of Bartholomew-Fair, 328
Of Fewter or Fetter-lane. 331
G.
Of the Gates of London. 4 Of the great famous River of Thames. 12 Of Grayes
Inn. 32 Of Gr^tham College. 31 The Government of London. 33 Of Knighten
Guild. 49 Of Grasse-street, vulgarly called Gracious-street. 40 Of
Grocers-Hall. 113 Of the Guild Hall. 117 Of St. Giles by Cripplegate. 304 Of
Golding-lane. ibid. The History of the Gray Friars, by Newgate Market. 310 Of
the great wardrobe. 325 Of St. Giles of the Field. 345 Of the Gran Cayro. 384
Of Genoa. 387 A guess at the number of humane souls breathing in London. 403
Of the general Trade of London. 396 Of the Gravity, and state of the Lord
Mayor, and the Aldermen. 395
H.
Of Sir Hugh Middleton, and Ware River. 11 The History of London Bridge, from
its beginning. 20 The History of the great Tower of London. 24 The History of
the Saxons, or Englishmen. 33 Of the Hustings Court. 37 Of the Holy Trinity by
Algate, a famous Priory, with the great Prerogatives thereof. 50 Of St. Helens
Church, sometimes a Nunnery. 70 Of the Haunce of Almain, or the Styliard. 97
Henry the eighth came in habit of a Yeoman to see the Watch. 110 The History of
Cheap-side-Crosse. 115 The History of the Guild Hall. 117 The History of the
Jews in England. 120 The History of Moorfields. 301 The History of Sion
College. 302 The History of Paul's Church. 312 Of Houndsditch. 341 Of Hamburg
and the Hans Towns. 388 fol. Of the Inns of Court. 9 Iusts and Tournments in
former times upon London-Bridg. 22 Of the Inns of Chancery. 31 Julius Caesar
only a Discoverer of Great Britain, (...) Claudius Caesar the Conqueror. 33 The
ill May Day. 40 Of Jack Straw. 81 The Jews banished out of England. 119 Where
the Jews had their Synagogue in London. 119 700 Jews murdered by the
Londoners. 119 Of the Jew that fell into a Iakes at Tewksbury. 121 Of James the
fourth, King of Scots. 303 Of St. James Hospital, or the Charter House. 343 Of
St. James's House and Park. 356
L.
fol. Of London-Stone. 4 Of Ludgate. 4 London Bridge has two many Eyes. 20
London much beholden to her Bishops. 39 London like a Hive of Bees. 41 London a
Lick-peny. 406 Of Lumley-House. 48 Of Limestreet Ward. 59 Of Leaden Hall, and
the foundation thereof. 59 A laudable Custom at St. Mary Spittle, for rehearsal
of Sermons. 67 Of Loseworth or Spittle-field, and strange Monuments that were
found there. 68 Of Langborn Ward 82 Of Lombard Street. 82 Of Lothberry. 119 Of
Lollards Tower. 326 Of Lincolns Inn. 344 The length of London. 404 The
latitude of London. 404
M.
fol. The Method of the work. 1 Of Moorgate. 5 The Lord Mayors of London had
diverse appellations. 34 Of the Lord Mayor, and manner of his Election. 36 Of
Mart-lane, and Minchinlane. 48 Of the Minories. 51 Of St. Mary Spittle. 67 Of
Marchantaylors-Hall. 73 Of St. Michael in Cornhill. 81. Of Mercers Chapel.
116 Of Melitus Bishop of London. 312 Of the ancient Monuments in Paul's Church.
312 Of the Monuments in the Temple Church. 334 Of the Marshalsey. 339 The chief
Monuments of Westminster. 355 Of the Mewse. 355
N.
fol. A notable saying of Count Gundamar, touching the Jesuits. 9 Of
Northumberland-House. 57 A new Monument of a Porter in Cheape-side. 115 Of
Newgate, and the Market thereof. 317 Of the New Market in St. Clements Field.
344 Of the City of Naples. 387
O.
fol. Otia Imperialia, an ancient Book of Gervase of Tilberry. 5 Of the
Officers attending the Lord Mayor of London. 38 Of the old Jury. 120 Of the old
Exchange. 319 Of old Fishstreet-Hill. 322 Of the Heralds Office. 326 Of Old
Burn, or Holburn. 327 Of the Old Baylie. 330 Of the Clink. 337 Of St. Mary
Overy. 338 Of St. Olaves. 330
P.
The Proeme. 1 The Parallel. 381 Of the Posterns about London. 5 Of Paul's
Church. 7 Paul's Church built partly at first, and now destroyed, by the sins of
the People. 7 The passage of the Thames from her first Spring. 12 The pitiful
Speech of Queen Jane when beheaded. 26 Diverse privileges given to the Lord
Mayor of London. 34 Provost Marshal given the City by Queen Elizabeth. 35 The
Prior of the holy Trinity at Aldgate, once a great man in the Government of the
City of London. 39 Paris a Pick-purse. 406 Of Portsoken-Ward. 49 The famous
Priory of the holy Trinity, built by Queen Matilda. 53 The Prior of the Holy
Trinity, always an Alderman of London. 53 Of Pawlet, or Winchester House in
Broad-street. 72 Of St. Peter upon Cornhill, and of the ancient Table that
hangs there. 79 Of the Priory of St. Bartholomew. 328 Of the privileges of
London. 407 The Popes-head-Tavern a Kings Palace in times passed. 81 Of the
privileges of the Styliard. 98 Paul's Steeple and Church-fired. 313 Parliament
kept in Black Friars. 313 Of Puddle-Wharf. 325 A Purchase made of much Lands in
Southwark by the City, of Edward the sixth. 335 Of the Prisons in Southwark.
339 Of the high Court of Parliament. 356 Of the Common Pleas. 368 Of Palermo.
387 Of Paris. 391
Q.
Of Queen Hith. 322 Of the pious Queen Matilda. 345 Of the most pious Queen
Eleanor. 356 Of the City of Quinzay, called the Celestial City. 383
R.
Restitutus Bishop of London, s^te at the Council of Arles, in Constantines
time. 39 Of the Royal Exchange, and the name given unto it by Queen Elizabeth,
with the Ceremonies used. 78 Of Robert Fabian the Chronicler. 81 Of the Rolls
and six Clerks Office. 344 Of Rome. 386 Rome eight times sacked. 386 Of the
City of Roven. 391
S.
Of the public Schools in London. 31 Of the Sheriffs of London, and their
Election. 37 The several Courts belonging to the City of London. 38 Of the
spiritual Government of London. 39 Of Sydon lane, vulgarly Sithinglane. 48 Of
the Shaft of St. Andrew. 55 A strange accident happened in St. Michaels Church
in Cornhill. 18 A strange Tomb found in St. Mary Hill Church. 86 Of the Stock,
and Salt Fishmongers, and their antiquity. 89 Of the Stocks. 84 Of the
Steelyard, or Guilda aula Teutonicorum. 97 Of sweet Wines. 102 Of the Standard
in Cheap. 115 A Shank-bone and Tooth of a mavelous bigness in St. Laurence
Church. 118 Of Sion College. 302 Of St. Martin le grand, and the great
privileges it had. 307 Of Smithfield. 328 Of Southwark Ward. 335 Of the
Stew-houses allowed in times passed. 337 Of the Suburbs of London. 341 Of
Suttons Hospital. 343 The strange Judgments fallen upon the Duke of Somerset
for Sacrilege. 343 Of the Savoy. 347 Of the shape of London. 406
T.
Of the Tower of London. 23 Of the Lion Tower. ibid. The Tower of London
delivered to Lewis of France. 24 The on the Britain, first Bishop of London. 39
Of Tower-street Ward. 48 The Prerogatives of the Tower. 48 Of the Tun, a Prison
in Cornhill in times passed, now a Conduit. 77 Of the Tower Royal. 103 The
Tragical end of William Fitzosbert. 109 Great Triumph in Smithfield in times
passed. 329 The Templer Knight arraigned in London. 333 Twenty particulars,
wherein the City of London may compare with any other City. 385
V
Of the Vintry Ward. 101 The Vintners of old, called Marchant-Vintners of
Gascogne. 103 The Lady Venetia Stanley, has a fair Monument in Christ-Church.
311 Of the Upper Bench Court. 363 Of Venice. 386 Of Vienna. 388
W.
William the Conquerors Charter to the City of London. 40 The Wardmore-Inquest
a wholesome Constitution. 39 Of the six and twenty several Wards of London. 49
Westminster first called Thorney. 80 Of Wat Tylar. 81 Of Sir William Walworth,
and the manner of his knighting. 91 Of Wallbrook Ward. 83 Whittington four
times Lord Mayor, and thrice buried. 103 The Weavers ancient Charter. 123 Of
Watling-street. 318 Of Winchester-House. 338 Of Wapping. 341 Westminster and
London compared. 346 Of Westminster-Abbey, with the History thereof. 353 Of
White Hall. 356 A witty Speech of Henry the 4th of France. 391 A witty saying
of Charles the Emperor. in Epist. Of the Wardmote l^quest. 394 A witty passage
of Henry the Great, of France. 404 A witty saying of Count Gandamar of London.
404
A Catalogue of Mr. Howels Works, in several Volumes.
Printed by Mr. Humphrey Mosely.
1. Mr. Howels History of Lewis the thirteenth, King of France, with the life
of his Cardinal de Richelieu. Fol.

2. Mr. Howels Epistolae Hoelianae, familiar Letters, Domestic and Foreign,
in six Sections, partly Historical, Political, Philosaphical, the first Volume
with Additions, Octavo.

3. Mr. Howels New Volume of Familiar Letters, partly Historical, Political,
Philosophical; the second Volume with many Additions, Octavo.

4. Mr. Howels third Volume of additional Letters, of a fresher date, never
before published, Octavo.

5. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, in Folio; together, with
the second part in Folio, never printed before.

6. Mr. Howels Englands Tears, for the present Wars.

7. Mr. Howels pre-eminence and pedigree of Parliament, in duodecimo in an
answer to Mr. Pryn.

8. Mr. Howels Instructions and Directions for foreign Travels, in Twelves,
with diverse Additions for traveling into Turkey, and the Levant parts.

9. Mr. Howels Votes, or a Poem-Royal, presented to his Majesty, in Quarto.

10. Mr. Howels Angliae Suspiria, and Lachrymae in Twelves, Tumulus Thalamus,
two Counter-Poems; the first an Elegy upon Edward Earl of Dorset; the second,
an Epithalamium to the Lord M. of Dorchester.

Parallels reflecting on the times.

A German Diet, or the Balance of Europe, wherein the power and weakness,
Glory and Reproach, Virtues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Advantages and
Defects, Antiquity and Modernness, of all the Kingdoms and states of
Christendom, are impartially poised, by James Howel Esquire Fol.

Parthenopoeta, or the History of the most Noble and Renowned Kingdom of
Naples, with the Lists of all their Kings; the first part translated out of the
Italian, by Mr. Samson Lennard; the second part continued to the present times,
1654. by James Howel Esquire

More of Mr. Howels Works, printed by other men.
THe great French Dictionary refined and augmented, in a large Folio.

A Survey of the Signiory of Venice, in Folio.

A Dialogue 'twixt the Soul and the Body.

The first part of the late Revolutions in Naples.

The second part of the said Revolutions.

The War of the Jews epitomized.

Sir Robert Cottons works, which he was desired to publish.

Saint Paul's Progress upon Earth.

Some sober Inspections made into the Carriage and Consults of the late long
Parliament.

A Venetian Looking-glass.

A Winter Dream.

The Trance, or Mercurius Acheronticus.

A Dialogue 'twixt Patricius and Peregrin.

An Inquisition after blood.

The Instruments of a King.

The late Kings Declaration in Latin, French, and English.

Bella Scoto Anglica, or the Travers^s of War, 'twixt England and Scotland.

Mercurius Hibernicus.

The Process and Pleadings in the Court of Spain, for the Death of Mr. Ascham,
in Folio.

Londinopolis, or a new Prospect of the City of London and Westminster.

Three of all which Books are Translations, the rest his own Compositions.


