Heic tutus obumbror

Symbol. Auth.



A GERMAN DIET: OR, THE BALANCE OF EUROPE. WHEREIN The Power and Weakness
Glory and Reproach Virtues and Vices Plenty and Want Advantages and Defects
Antiquity and Modernes
Of all the Kingdoms and States of Christendom are impartially poised. At a
solemn Convention of some German Princes in sundry Elaborat Orations Pro and Con.

Made fit for the Meridian of ENGLAND, By James Howell Esquire.

Senesco, non Segnesco.

LONDON, Printed for HUMPHREY MOSELEY, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Prince's Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND The most accomplishd LORD, JOHN, EARL of CLARE,
etc.
MY LORD,
MY brain was a good while in labor before it could produce a Resolution, to
whom of those Noble Personages I have the honor to wait upon sometimes I should
most properly address this Piece in point of Dedication: At last, my thoughts
reflecting upon your Lordship, did there acquiesce and settle. Nor, I believe,
will any knowing Soul question my judgment in this Election, considering how
excellently your Lordship is versd in the Customs, Conditions and Languages of
diverse Nations, which is the scope and subject of these Critical Orations,
though running in a new untrodden way.

Moreover, the Orators here being Princes, and Noblemen, whereof those of
Germany are esteemd to be of the ancientst Extraction and purest Allaye of any
in Europe, being those who yet retain their first integrity as Machiavill
confesses, I say, the Orators here being all Peers, I thought it not
incongruous to present their Conceptions to a Personage of their own rank, that
Patronus might be par Operi.

Lastly, the main design of this application to your Lordship was to divulge my
gratitude for the frequent noble respects I receave within your walls, that not
only the present times may bear witness, but future Ages may find it also upon
Record (in this small Monument) how much I am (and was)

My Highly Honored Lord, Your most humble, and truly devoted Servitor, James
Howell.
London 30 Idus Junii, 1653.
To the Discerning Reader, whether Homebred, or broken in the World abroad.
AS Fire is commonly struck by concussion of Flint and Steel, which are two
differing bodies; So Truth, who is the Child of Light, as also Knowledge, who is
the Child of Truth use to break out, and appeer more conspicuous by contest of
Argument, and the clashing of discrepant Opinions: It was the first Dessein,
and it is the Method of this Work all along, which descants by way of
contraries and altercations upon the humors of all the European Nations: Some of
these Orations (in point of matter) may be said to be Sugar dissolved in Oil,
Others Salt mingled with Pepper and some dashes of Vinegar, yet it is not Sal
Momi, but Sal Mercurii, there is nothing here scurrilous or favoring of malice;
the dirt which is thrown here is like the dirt of Oysters, which rather
cleanses then contaminats: We all are Coppies of Adam the Prototype,
Infirmities are entailed upon us by a Conveyance drawn in his time, therefore it
must not be expected that Man should be better out of Paradis, then when he was
in it: There is neither Horse, nor Humane Creture so good but is subject to
stumbling, and that stumbling may make him afterward go faster and stronger in
the road of Virtue. I have read of an old French Poet Iean Clopinel or de Meung
who was a great Satyrist, his Pen was like the dart of Death, it spared none;
and having fallen foul upon the Queen's Maids of Honor for their wantones in
these two verses which were fixed upon the door of the back stairs.

Toutes estes, serez, ou futes
De fait on de volonte Puttes.
Ye are, or will be, or have bin
All Whores in Act, or Thought of Sin.
Complaint being made hereof, Iean de Meung was delivered over for a Sacrifice
to the Maids, who having got him bound to a post to be whipped, he said, Noble
Ladies, Let me desire but one boon of you before you fall to execution, and it
is, That She of you which finds her self most guilty would give me the first
lash: Thereupon they fell gazing one upon another, and none would begin; so the
Poet escaped. The application hereof is easy if it be made to relate to the
Countries of Europe: We read the Queen of Bewty herself had a Mole, and Queen
Anne of Bullen had a Wren upon her Neck, to hide which, Ruffs were brought
first in fashion. So the best Region and fairest City on earth have their
blemishes.

Now touching those frailties which are thus hereditary to Mankind; there is
nothing contributs more to the propagation and practice of them then diversity
of Opinions and Caprichios of the Brain, which are infinite; And how can it be
otherwise? for if out of 24. letters only in the Alphabet so many millions of
differing words may be framed, and if these two Verses alone (which relate to
Good and Bad according to the subject of the Book)

Rex, lex, Grex, Res, spes, Ius, thus, sal, sol, (bona) lux, laus,
Mars, Mors, sors, fraus, fex, styx, nox, crux, pus (mala) vis, lis;
I say if so few words (and we know words are the Indexes of the mind) may be
varyed (as it has bin tried) to nere upon four millions of Verses, how many
variations of Crochets and Opinions must then the boiling brains of so many
millions of men be subject unto? To this may be ascribed the miseries and
distempers of most Countries, especially the rents and heresies in Religion,
whereof some peeple have so many that they need not pray, Adauge Fidem nostram, (
Lord increase our Faith) but rather, O Lord decrease our Faiths, they are so
many; and I am sorry that England deserves to have a fillip upon the nose for
this.

Now as these alternative Orations treat of the humors of Nations, so they do
also of the quality of their Countries. They will tell you that France has the
best Granary of Europe, England the fattest Kitchen, Spain the best Exchequer,
Italy the richest Wardrobe, Germany the best Woodyard, Holland the best Dayrie,
etc. They will tell you that some Countries compared to others are like Gold
compared to Silver, others as Silver compared to brass: as Ireland to England
is as Silver in point of value to Gold which requires 12. ounces for one, and
Scotland to England is as Brass to Silver which requires 100. ounces for one
in proportion of intrinsique value; in so much that one may say the Union
'twixt England and Scotland was like Oil mingled with Vinegar: They will tell
you also that some Countries are so perfect that they are created to preserve
themselfs only, and not to propagat, as England with her Concomitant Provinces;
Others to plant abroad and expand themselfs, as Spain with her Dominions;
Others to be Umpires and Arbitrators among their Neighbors, for their fit
posture, as France, and the Popes Territories, the first being seated about the
midst of Europe, and the other running through the midst of Italy; Others are
unhappily placed 'twixt two Neighbors more potent then themselfs, as Savoy and
Lorain, the one being seated 'twixt the Emperor and France, the other 'twixt
France and the dominions of Spain in Italy, so that they cannot make a leg to
the one but they must pull off their hatts to the other; They will also tell
you how some peeple are so fiery mouthed that they must be ridd with a bitt as
the Napolitan and French, etc. whereas a small Snaffle will serve others,
fearing that if they cast their Rider they may fall from bad to worse, as the
Castillian, the Savoyard, the Venetian, and Florentine. --

Touching the perfecting of this Work, there were Stones fetched from many
Quarries (whereof the learned and well-read Lansius affoorded most) which were
pil'd up to compile this fabrique. Now, I imposed upon my self this task for
the demulsions of my life, and to delude those tedious hours and turbid
intervalls which the contemplation of these sad disjointed times makes many
subject unto besides my self, specially those active spiritts who having bin
formerly in Employment who lead now a sedentary and umbraticall life; So I wish
that this Piece may produce the same effects in the Reader as it did in the
Writer.

-- Sic Tempus adulor. The names of the Princes and Orators who convened upon
this Occasion.
1. THe Duke of Wirtemberg, and Teccia, Count of Mountpelgard, etc. Lord
President of the Assembly make the Proeme. 2. Francis Duke of Saxony, Angaria,
and Westphalia, etc. pleads for Germany High and Low. 3. The Lord Wilhelm of
Retwiz pleads against Germany. 4. The Lord Ioachim Ernest Duke of Sleswick, and
Holstein pleads for France. 5. The Lord (...) (...) D. of Saxony declaims
against France. 6. The Lord George Fredrique Baron of Limburg declaims for
Spain. 7. The Lord Magnus Duke of Wirtemberg declaims against Spain. 8. The
Lord George Baron of Stubenberg replies for Spain. 9. The Lord Wolfangus Baron
of Stubenberg declaims for England, Scotland, and Ireland. 10. Lord Daniel
Bensin declaims against England, Ireland and Scotland. 11. Lord Maximilian of
Mesch pleades for Poland. 12. The Lord Axelius of Goerholm declaims against
Poland. 13. Lord Albert Baron of Limburg pleades for Hungary. 14. Lord
Schafeliski declaims against Hungary. 15. The Lord Laurentius Bensin pleades
for Italy, the Popedom, Repub: of Venice, etc. 16. Lord George Rolderer
declaims against Italy.
The Result of all these Declamations, and Rising up of the Assembly.

To the Knowing Reader upon the Subject of these Princely Orations.
AXIOM. Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.

BLack sidelong putt, or standing opposite
Does use to add more luster unto White;
A Perl shine's brighter in a Negro's ear,
Some Ladies look more fair who Patches wear;
So Vice, if counterplac'd, or seated near
Makes Virtue show more lovely, strong, and clear.
This Book has Vice and Virtue, White and Black,
It Is as a Crystal Glass fo^l'd on the Back*
It Is like a Chessboard (Or an Ermins skin)
Checkquer'd with two Extremes both Out and In,
It weighs and winnowe's Good from Bad which any
Of Europe's Kingdom's have (and they have many.)
Now, if those purer Regions of the Sky
Where every Star's a perfect Monarchy;
If the bright Moon, and glorious Sun above
Have Spotts and Motes, as Optics Organs prove,
How then can these gross Earthly Regions be,
And we that peeple them, from taintures free?
This were for US to arrogat that bliss
Which ADAM could not keep in Paradise.
I. H.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
Whereas there are various Quotations here out of sundry Foreign Authors in their
own Language, you may please to take notice that they are rendered into English
all along, that so they may fall under the Capacity of any Reader.

Humphrey Moseley.

FREDERIQUE, DUKE OF WIRTEMBERG, etc. Appointed Lord President, and Proloquutor
of the Diet, HIS PROEME, OR INTRODUCTORY Oration to the rest of the Princes.
Most Illustrious, and High-borne Princes,
HOW joyful am I to see this day! O, how happy I am to behold this glorious
Assembly! What a high Honor is it to be a Member of it! Specially being met
upon such a brave Design of Virtue, as to render a voluntary free account of
our foreign Peregrinations; to discover what we have observed most memorable
abroad: And to do this with such a latitude of liberty, that our hearts and
tongues may be Relatives, they may go together all along; It being the
Prerogative of this Noble Consistory, that every one may deliver and descant
upon, without the least apprehension of danger, or giving any distaste, what he
has met withal most remarkable in other Countries, as well as his own, either
in point of Morality, or Military Discipline; either referring to their
Virtues, or Vices, their Poverty, or Wealth, their weakness, or strength,
their policy, or misgovernment. And so in order to the Province he has
undertaken, to vent his Conceptions, and pass his Judgment accordingly.

The Inhabitants of China, a Potent, and Eagle-ey'd People, as being the
nearest Neighbors to the Rising Sun of any upon this side of the Hemisphear,
are reported to have such a haughty conceit of themselves, that beholding all
other Nations with a Supercilious disdainful Countenance, they magnify and
extol their own, contemning as it were, the rest of Mankind, as an inferior
and ignorant Race of rational Creatures, which appears by a kind of
proverbiall Saying they have common amongst them: That the Chinese have two
eyes, the Europaeans one, and the rest of the World is blind. For my part, I
cannot deny but the people of China, or Sina, more properly the true
Appellation of the Country, being Sinarum, or Tzinarum Regio, may be an
ingenious progeny of men: They may be exquisite Artists, as we find by their
Manufactures; They may also have good Intellectuals, and forecasts in framing
wholesome Statutes, and Political Constitutions, for the safe and peaceful
Government of that huge tract of Earth, which is estimated to be in one entire
piece, eight times as big as the whole Continent of France. Yet, under favor,
they have two Laws which favor not so much of Prudence and Rationability. The
first, an Inhibition, that none of their Natives must travel abroad beyond the
bounds of their own Country, under pain of loosing one of his eyes. The second,
that no Forreigner be permitted to enter into the bowels of the Land, except
only Ambassadors, and Ministers of State, and they also must be carried
hoodwinked all along from the Marine. I say, though the Chinese in other
things may happily be wise, and Argc-ey'd (who was all eye) yet herein they may
be said to be as blind as Buzzards, and their Noddles to be as flat as their
Noses, which is a peculiar shape they have above all other people: for these
restrictive Laws are repugnant to common humanity; They destroy the magna
charta, the grand Ordinance of Nature, which injoynes mankind in general to
endeare themselves one to another, by reciprocal Offices of benevolence and
love, of Charity and Compassion, of comfort, and mutual Commerce. Such a dotage
as this seemed to have sez'd upon Lycurgus and Plato in point of Opinion: The
furred Muscovit, and frozen Russe is possessed also with it to this day.

But oh immortal Gods! what Infatuation, or Frenzy rather transports this
people so far from the dictates of reason? What a transcendent presumption is
it in them, to invade, as it were, the Capitol of Heaven, and violate the
Decrees of the divine Providence: For we well know that God Almighty himself,
by the mouth of his Chancellor Moses, has commanded Peregrinos non minui ac
Cives benign habendos esse: That strangers should be as gently entreated, as
the Natives themselves. Moreover there is a Sanction published by our Savior,
love thy Neighbor as thy self; Nay, Nature her self does dictate unto us,
that man has the least share in his own Nativity, but he is born to be (...).
a communicable Creature, born to benefit others: Therefore that Custom and
Constitution of China is dissonant to the Law of the Creator, the dictates of
nature, and disagreeable to humane reason. Now whom shall we give credit unto,
the eternal word of God, or the Policy of these men? For, if as the Canon
goes, de Imperatoris judicio disputare sacrilegij instar est, If to dispute of
the judgment of the Emperor be a kind of Sacrilege, what Trespass, what
Piacle, what a flagitious Crime are they guilty of, who doubt of the verity of
divine Oracles. It is the Imperial Decree of Gratianus, Valentinianus, and
Theodosius, confirmed by all their Successors, Qui Divinae legis sanctitatem
aut nesciendo ^mittunt, aut negligendo violant and offendunt, sacrilegium
committunt: Whosoever does by ignorance omit, or by negligence infringe, or
offend the Sanctity of the divine Law, commits Sacrilege. Therefore I may say,
that the Chinese are Sacrilegious, that the Muscovits are likewise so, with
all their Adherents, who unless they would go about to overthrow the Rights of
the Rational Creature, unless they would extinguish all the sparkles of
Charity, would not put in practice so absurd a Law. For it stops the Channels,
and choakes up the Cisternes of all Hospitality, of all kind of Humanity; it
utterly subverts all increase of knowledge, all mutual Offices of love, all
Trade and Commerce, all improvement of Wealth, and plenty, all intercourse of
Kindness, and Civility among the Children of Adam. For, in my judgment, this
whole Globe of the Earth, is no other then the Native Country of all kind of
men: It is but one common City, Domicile and Habitation. Therefore that Saying
of Socrates was a true Philosophical one; when being asked what Countryman he
was, he answered, I am a Cosmopolite, I am a Citizen, or free Denizon of the
World. For what an Indignity is it to Captivate the mind of man, which Heaven
can scarce hold, to one territory or clod of Earth? What an injustice is it,
that the Volatils of the Air should have such liberty to fly, and the Fish of
the Sea to swim where they please without controulement, or interruption, and
that man, who by divine Charter is Lord of all Elementary Creatures, should be
confined within the compass of one poor tract of ground.

Therefore as those high Ethereall, and heavenly bodies above delight in
motion, so among men all generous and noble Spirits should take pleasure in
Peregrination; they should make truce with their domestic Affairs, ask their
Parents blessing, embrace their Kindred, bid their Friends farewell, and shake
hands a while with their own Country, to take a view of the World abroad, to
observe the Customs, and Carriage of other people, to pry into their Laws and
Government, to their Policy and ways of preservation, to attain unto the
knowledge of their Language, to convert every good thing they see into
wholesome juice and blood, and for the future benefit of their own Country; to
learn how to converse with all people: For the French have no improper saying,
Un honneste homme est un homme mesle, an honest, or wise man, is a mixed man;
that is, one who has something in him, in point of knowledge of all Nations.

Truly, that I may discover unto you the most Intrinsic thoughts of my Soul,
I am of Opinion that it is a kind of degenerous thing, for any gentile Spirit
to sit still at home, as it were lurking in the Chimny corner, and be so
indulgent of himself, as never to see the World abroad. Nay, a noble mind
should resolve with himself to undergo any injury of the Elements, any
roughness of ways, any difficulty of passage, to be acquainted with foreign
Nations; he should presently get his Bills of exchange, or Letters of credit,
settle his Servants, call for his Boots and Spurs, put his Sword by his side,
and mount a Horseback, being invited thereunto by so many noble examples,
specially by yours, most Illustrious Princes, who have made such exuberant
fruits of your Peregrinations, whereof all Germany your dear Country is like
to make such a mighty benefit. For I know there is none of you here, but, as
the Prince of Poets speaks of Ulisses,

(...) You have seen the manners of millions of men, with so many magnificent
Cities, Castles, Fortifications, and Palaces. Touching my self, though I do
not travel in body, as I have done, yet in a contemplative way, and upon the
wings of Fancy I daily pass through, and measure with my thoughts all those
most flourishing Kingdoms of Europe I once perlustrated with my eyes: I travel
still in my imagination, and nothing is so delightful unto me, as the Ideas of
those various Objects I have seen abroad.

I confess there are some, and they are too many, who abuse this excellent
benefit of foreign Travel: if they have but once saluted France, they return
altogether Frenchified; If they have eaten their bread a while the other side the
Alps, they come back altogether Italianated: if they have crossed the
Pyrenies, they return altogether Spanioliz'd: They force themselves by affected
and fanstastick postures and gestures, to imitate foreign Fashions, by their
Garb, their Clothes, their Speech; they would show themselves Travelers in a
kind of Histrionicall, Mimick way, like Actors or Comedians upon a Stage, whose
part is to represent others; They seem to slight, and some of them to scorn the
Manners, the Custom, and Behavior of their own Country. Such a Caprichious
Traveller, or Stage Player, Sir Thomas More, that Golden English Knight, has
accurately set forth in his own Colors in that witty facetious Epigram, which
I believe is not unknown to any of this Illustrious Auditory.

Amicus and sodalis est Lalus mihi, etc. In the person of Lalus this renowned
Chancellor displayes a fantastic Travellor, or Landloper rather; who having
breathed a while the air of France, returned all metamorphozed, and
Frenchifield in the motion of his members, in the accent of his words, in the
tone of his voice: He was become, Ex Brittanno Gallus, or Capus; he came home
all transvers'd, not only in his brain, but in his body and bones, having
happily left a snip of the Nose he carried with him, behind him. Such sort of
Lalie's, such Capons are most worthy of Cybeles Priesthood (whose Flamins were
Hermaphrodites, or Capons) we find in the midst of Germany. Now, as the
Spanish mares use to conceive sometimes by the gentle breezes of a Southerly
Favonian wind, but the colts they bring forth, presently languish and dye; so
these fantastic Landlopers, returning home, pregnant with some odd opinions or
fashions, bring back nothing that is serious and solid; but their brains are
stuffed only with windy fables, and frivolous stories. And as near Charenton
Bridge in France there is an Echo, that reverberates the voice thirteen times
in atticulate sounds, so these Peregrinators do oftentimes multiply what they
hear, or see. As those who reported to have seen Flies in India as big as
Fo^es, Others, to have seen Trees in Russia which could not be shot over, and
that an Army of men might find shelter under their branches in foul weather;
Others had seen Pigmies upon Rams backs, going to War with the Cranes: Some
speak of the Generation of Basilisques, of the Crocodiles of Egypt, of the
Phoenix of Arabia, of the Rooks of Madagascar, of the Scots Clakes, and Geese,
and so come back more arrand Geese then they. And what they have happily read of
in Pliny, Lucian, or Brandanus, they vapor as if they had seen them all, and
that with strong asseverations, and sometimes with oaths.

De nihilo magna, and de parvo maxima fingunt.

They make Mountains of Molehills, and Whales of Sprats.

But the most judicious sort of Noble Germans make other use of Peregrination;
it makes them not to disdain their own Country afterward, or to be infected
with any affected foreign humor, but continue constant to themselves, and
true Germans in point of natural affection.

But now, Most illustrious Princes, and Noble Lords, whom I see present at this
splendid Convention, may you please now to reduce into an Oratory methodicall
way those discourses and Foreign observations, wherewith you have been used to
season your Tables and meetings at other times, confining your selves to the
Kingdoms and Commonwealths of Europe, according as you have pleased to
assign every one his particular task; that at last we may make a conjecture
which Country of Europe may merit the Palm and Prerogative of all the rest. I
know by proposing this, my boldness is as great as my request; but I shall
endeavor to make some retaliation unto you most Noble Princes, and brightest
eyes of Germany, when any opportunity whatsoever does present it self, and
shall court all occasions to do it.

And now, you my most Illustrious Cozen Francis Charles, Duke of Saxony, etc.
be pleased to begin.

THE ORATION OF PRINCE FRANCIS CHARLES, DUKE OF Saxony, Angaria, and
Westphalia, etc. FOR GERMANY.
Most Excellent Prince, and Princes, with the rest of this Illustrious
Assembly:
BEfore I launch out into the maine of this large Sea of matter, and that my
Sails be filld with the gentle breezes of your favorable attention, I have
something to say, while I remain yet in the Port, of Perigrination, or Foreign
Travel, which your Excellency has already approved of, and applauded in such
a high strain of Eloquence. Yet for my part I would after the example of the
Chinese, were I worthy to give Counsel herein, prohibit Foreign travel, under
pain of a penalty, as the times go now, or at least I would prescribe some exact
Laws to regulat Peregrination. Now whereas the young Traveller should apply
himself principally to the knowledge of that which might prove pertinent and
profitable to the public good of his own Country; let him make account
before hand that he cannot find that every where as he passes: For as a man
cannot expect to find out in a Tailors Shopp in Hungary a suite of Clothes that
will fit a Spaniard, or in Spain a suite that will fit a Frenchman, though
his next Conterranean Neighbor, their modes of habit being so different. So
every Country has some municipall constitutions and customs peculiar and
proper to themselfs, which are not only disagreeable, but incompatible with
the Government of other Nations; and one of the chiefest curiosity and care the
prime judgment of a Traveller should be to distinguish betwixt such Laws. But
helas, how many go now abroad, of whom there are high hopes conceav'd that at
their return they might act the part of Agamemnons; but having so journed some
years in Italy and other hott Countries in the flower and spring of their
youth, they com back grown old men before their time, bringing home Winter in
their faces, and so are rather fit to act the part of Thersites then
Agamemnon. How few do rerurn true Germans? having habituated themselves to
softness, Effeminacy, and Lux, or to some il-favour'd posture; either by
shrinking in the Shoulders, by cringing with the k^ee, and sweeping the earth
with their feet, or by ducking down their necks, by poudring their Dublets, by
extenuating the tone of their voice, after a womanish fashion, or by jetting,
dancing, or prattling up and down the Streets, with other loose, and affected
Modes. Now, as Paris in Homer, when he went abroad, fell enamored with Helen,
which was the only fruit of his Travels: So these never looking after serious
things, hunt after toys, and bables; Or as Physicians observe of
Horse-leeches, that when they apply them to the body, they use to suck only
the ill, corrupted blood: So these Travelers draw in the worst things, and it
were well, if it remained only with them; but the mischief is, that they
disperse the poison among others, and infest them by their touch, or breath.
For where can be found a greater Lux in Apparel, then in Germany? where a
greater vanity in clothing dead Walls? while poor living Souls, who bear the
Image of God Almighty, go naked. Where is there greater excess in Diet, in
Queckshoses, Made-dishes, and Sawces? And all this may be imputed to
Peregrination. Where is there more crisping of hair, more boring of Ears to
hang in Rings? where is there more dead men's hair worn upon the heads of the
living? And we may also thank Peregrination for this. How many have gone to
France with some Religion, and come back without any? How many have gone to
Spain with cheerful, and well-dispos'd humors, but come back with a kind of
dull Melancholy? How many have gone over the Alps with plain and open hearts,
but returned full of cunning and mental reservation? How many have gone to
England,' and come home with Tobacco-pipes in their mouths? How many have gone
to Holland gentile men, but come back mere Boors? And we may thank
Peregrination for all this. The French Disease, the English Sweat, the
Hungarian Scab, the African Leprosy, the Spanish Calenture came into Germany
by Peregrination. The Physicians observe that if a man has drunk Poison, and
be presently clapped into the belly of a Mule, he may recover; and if one Mule
will not serve, another must be killed. I was told of one that was preserved so
by the death of ten; but I believe if all the Mules of Barbary were sacrificed,
they would not be enough to cure our German Gentlemen, who have sucked in so
much Venom abroad, under the taste of Honey. Now, if there be a strict Law among
us, to punish those severely who import counterfeit Merchandises by way of
Commerce; And if it be death to bring in base Sophisticated Coin, how much
more do they deserve to be punished, who indroduce Vice instead of Virtue, bad
Customs for good; to pervert the manners, the dispositions, and nature of the
whole Nation? I know this itch of Traveling, and to wander abroad, is no where
greater then among us: How many thousands of us are found in Paris at this
time? How many hundred in Padua, and Venice; England is full of us, and many
other Countries. Prince Rodolphus discoursing with one that had been a great
Traveller, told him, Iam vidisti Orbem terrarum universum, qui nihil aliud est
quam colles, Montes, Valles, Planities, syluae and hujus generis alia. I find
thou have gone over most part of the earthly Globe, which is nothing else but
Hills, and Dales, Mountains, Valleys, Plains, and Champians, Woods, and
Groves, with such like things. Eudoxus wished and implored the Gods, that he
might but have power to go near the body of the Sun to behold his Beauty,
Magnitude, and Matter, and he would willingly be content to be afterward burnt
with the Beams thereof. So many of our Countrymen are so greedy of
Peregrination, that they will venture upon it though they shorten their lives
thereby. Let us hear how Seneca that grave Philosopher, descants upon
Peregrination, when he writes thus to Lucilius. Quid per se prodesse
Peregrinatio cuiquam potuit? What has Peregrination of it self profited any
man? It has not bridled lust, attemper'd pleasure, repressed anger, nor broke
the un^amed violence of love; It has ro^ted no ill out of the mind, it has
not improved the judgment, nor rectified error, but it has detained us a
while with new Sights, as Boys are with Rattles: It provokes the inconstancy
of the mind, and by tossing it to, and fro, makes it more light and moveable;
Therefore men use to be quickly cloyed with those places they formerly did so
much covet; and like Birds, fly away thence almost before they have taken any
footing. Peregrination will give you knowledge of Nations, it will show you new
shapes of Mountains, of Fields, and Meadows, with the course and nature of
some River: As how Nilus swells in the Summer Solstice, and Tygris is suddenly
snatched away from our sight, but passing a little under the Earth recovers her
former greatness: How Meander, which has afforded the Poets so much matter
and sport, is entangled with so many windings, and oftentimes rushes into her
Neighbor before she can recover her self, but she grows thereby neither
better, nor wiser. Believe me, my noble Countrymen, unless this strange itch
of foreign Travel be cured in us, or at leastwise unless there be some
Laws and Cautions prescribed to regular Peregrination, that there be better
returns made, our Ancestors Ghosts will rise up against us, and Posterity will
bewail our Incogitancy, and weakness too late; for they will hardly be able
to find out among us what were the Primitive manners, the continence, the
constancy and nature of a true German.

And now to the task imposed upon me; but before I buckle my self for the
business, I make it my humble request that those touches I have given of
Peregrination, may be understood in a sane sense: It is not out of any dislike
I have of it, for there is no Creature on earth has a greater esteem thereof,
then my self, acknowledging it to be the ripest School and principal
Academy, for the study both of men, and manners; and the World affoords not
more gallant Students and Proficients herein, then I find now before me in
this Princely Assembly: but what has dropped from me, was touching the abuse
thereof, as also in order to the method we have proposed to our selves, to
discourse of things pro and con, and to answer in part to that incomparable
Speech of your Highness, made in praise of Peregrination.

And now I will enter into the Province I have under-taken, which is high
Germany, and for performance of your desires, most Excellent Prince, which are
Commands to me, I will compose my voice and tongue accordingly; and at the very
first, will unmask my mind unto you in three words: Germania Europae Princeps,
Germany is the Princess of Europe. And truly never any Opinion proceeded more
impartially, and more from the Center of my heart, then this: For the
maintenance of which Tenet there wants not much Oratory, or any moving
persuasions and allurements of words, which the ancient Orators both Greek, and
Latin did use, when they delivered their minds in any doubtful or desperate
matter. The greatest difficulty I find in this business, is out of such a
hugh heap of matter to cull out, and put before you the choicest and best
pieces: And as Geographers in describing the World, use by little lines to show
the course of mighty Rivers; as Danube, Nile, Ganges, Thames, Tyber, Tagus,
with others; As also in small points to describe Rome, Constantinople, the gran
Cayre, Paris, London, and Ghent, the greatest walled Town in Europe: So will I
be as brief and as punctual as possibly I can, in setting forth the praises
of this mighty Country, and Nation.

But to speak the worst at first, I pray hear what Cornelius Tacitus, the
Critique of his times, writes of it; Quis prater periculum horridi and ignoti
Maris: Who without the dangers of a doubtful and unknown Sea would leave Asia,
Affrique, or Italy, to seek Germany, an informed piece of earth, a rough clime,
a Land unmanured, full of thick horrid Woods, huge Lakes, impatient of
fruitful Trees, yet full of Cattle though small: In stead of Silver Vessels
they have them of the same stuff as themselves, of pure earth: They have no
Cities, they are given to sleep, sloth, and gluttony, being ignorant of the
secrets of Letters; they use Dice among their serious affairs, with so much
rashness in winning or losing, that at one cast they will hazard their bodies,
and liberty. Caes^r also says, that the Germans hold it a kind of policy to
have large vast Wilderness about them, wherein they permit Robberies for the
exercise of their young men, and avoiding of idleness, etc. Such speeches
Caesar and Tacitus give of the Germans; but will you know the reason of it?
Because the one in diverse conflicts was soundly beaten by them, and the other
speaks ignorantly, or partially, because he was an Officer under Vespasian in
France, then a little after upon the beginning of Trajans Reign, the Emperor
Nerva being newly gone out of the World, a matter of a hundred years after the
Incarnation he scribbled a Book, De mori^u Germanorum, of the manners of the
Germans: But Caesar himself saw only the Skirts of the Country, whence he
was repelld, he never entered into the bowels of the Land, and what he delivers
he took up in trust by confused rumors: But if either of these lived now, they
would sing another note, they would stand astonished that Germany should have so
many flourishing Provinces, so many noble and opulent Cities, so many pleasant
Villages* such fruitful Orchards, fragrant Gardens, and fart Fields, such
Mines of Gold* Silver, Lead, Iron, with all other Mettalls, such martial
people so many Universities, so many Archdukes, Princes, Marquises, Landgraves,
Earls, Barons, Knights, with a world of Noble Families that can exactly draw
their Pedigree thousands of years passed: I say, if Caesar or Tacitus lived
now, they would be more enlightened, and cry out, We Romans in many things were
too credulous in believing what was spoken of our Enemies, and in some things
we injured them to show our wits, but our own senses do convince us now, and
tell us that Germany is another thing: We were Trojans once, but all our glory
hes buried in the dust of our Nephews and Posterity, having with sloth,
idleness, and foulness of vice, soyld all our Heroik exploits: But the
Germans continu still great Heroes both in respect of their own Virtues, and
their Progen^tors. They are still magnanimous, most just, Religious, fortunat,
and so blessed, that there you cannot discover any decay at all in the age of
the World. If Virgi^ were revived, and again upon earth, leaving the barren
theme of praising Augustus* he would break out into the admiration of our German
Emperor, and having got so rich and divine an Argument to rowse up his Muse,
he would sing,

Ille ego qui quondam gracili modulatus avena
Carmen, and effudi lauds magnae Urbis in Orbem,
Gratum opus Augustis, at nunc horrentia Martis
Arma, Virosque cano, Romae quae moenia primi
Aequavere solo, superatis Alpibus, amplos
Et de Fortuna tandem duxer^ triumphos, etc.
In lieu of the Romans he would extol the Germans, who first ransacked and
ruined Rome. But most Princely Auditors, let us not examine as much what our
Predecessors did, but how we follow their steps, and how near [our vigilance,
virtue* and valor comes to theirs: It is the practice of Providence, and the
rule of divine Majesty, not to power down all his benedictions at once, but to
reserve some of them for future ages. And Homer, as blind as he was, could
discern this, when he sings,

(...) The Gods do not shower down all their blessings at once upon mankind.
But how mightily have we profitted, what huge advantages have we now of our
Forefathers? It Is true we were once without God, because without Christ, as
all Gentiles were; but now by his ineffable grace, and immense goodness we are
his Domestiques, we are coopled and admitted to enjoy the privileges, and
rights of Children, of his Chosen; therefore it is fitting that every Christian
heart when he falls into the contemplation of this high Prerogative, should with
pious ejaculations cry out, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus Dominus Deus exercituum,
plena est omnis terra gl^ria ejus, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hosts,
all the Earth is full of his glory. Now as there be some Rivers that presently
as soon almost as they are derivd from their Fountains increase and flow with
such a force, that they can bear Ships of burden, and drive Mills; as Blavius
in this Country, and the little Loire in France hard by Orleans, which within
almost a flight shot from the Source, swells to such a stupendous fullness and
depth, that there is a Bridge with diverse arches over her: so the glorious light
of the Gospel darted from above did irradiat all Germany as it were in a
moment, it dispelld all the clouds of Paganism, and with its powerful beams
it did melt the hearts of the most frozen and remotest parts with admirable
celerity: For presently there were such pious contentions who should exceed one
another in devotion and acts of Charity, that a world of Schools, Hospitalls,
Temples, Monasteries, and Religious Houses were built, and endowed with
plentiful revenues soon after.

And such was the height and excess of piety among our Ancestors, that they
were forcd to enact Laws to restrain the disposing of Legacies for
Ecclesiastical uses: There were some Emperors, and German Princes that
bequeathd to the holy Church whole Provinces and Territories; Bishops became
equal to Kings, and Prelates fellows to Princes, and Abbots to Barons, both in
authority and dignity, in extern pomp, power, and riches: No Nation has bin
more munificent to the Church of Rome, and no Country endowd her own Churches
with larger demains: Among others, I will instance in one Abbot and his
greatness, whereby you may make a conjecture of the rest, and he is the Abbot
of Fuldo, who as Lipsius has it, supplied the Emperor at one time with
threescore thousand fighting men. And for the number of Monachicall persons you
may make a guess what a huge number there is of them, when in lower Germany
alone there are seven thousand Nunns.

But as in a most delectable Garden there are sometimes, beyond the expectation
of the Gardener, Weeds and noxious Herbs that grow up, as Tares among the best
Wheat; so where God builds his Church, Satan commonly putts up his Chapel,
superstition mingles with devotion, and men grew greedy after innovations and
changes; such deformities crepd into the German Church, that it might be well
termd an Augaean Stable; Purgatory, Exorcismes, Idolatry, Indulgences, and
other things in derogation of the merits of the Messiah were introduced. The
Church now required another Hercules to cleanse her, and she found one, a true
one, not a fabulous one, such as the Poets sing of, who strangled Giants, killd
the Erimanthaean Bore, choakd the two Snakes sent by Juno, drive away the
Stymphalian monstrous Birds, slew Busiris, took Cerberus by the throat, killd
the Nemaean Lion, suppressd the many headed Hydra: But our Hercules did more,
for he overthrew Antichrist, and with a Goose Quill did more then Hercules did
with his Iron Clubb, and Germany alone was worthy of such a Champion; I mean
Martin Luther, an Augustine Monk, who, though a man of mean birth and means
otherwise, observing the exorbitances, and excess of Churchmen, and the
Merchandise that was made of Indulgences, could endure it no longer, but armd
himself to subvert the Babylonish Empire, he rusheth against the Pope, spitts
in his face, and has shaken his Kingdom ever since very shrewdly: This happend
when the Bishop of Rome was at his highest pitch of power, when it was beleevd
that the Pope might dispense with the Writings of the Apostles, and Sanctions
of General Counsels: And this seasonable Champion made such a progress, that
not only whole Towns, Cities, and Provinces, fell from the Roman Church, but
Commonwealths and whole Kingdoms abandond Her, and among other Pasquills, this
Epigram was composed.

Roma Orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit,
Viribus Illa suis, frau^ibus iste tuis.
Quanto isto major Lutherus, major and Illa,
Illum Illamque uno qui domuit Calamo!
I nun^, Alcidem memorato Graecia mendax,
Lutheri ad Calamum, ferrea clava nihil.
Rome orecame the World, the Pope orecame Rome, She by strength, He by
cunning; but Luther is greater then either, for with his Pen he subdued both;
Let lying Greece bragg no more of her Hercules, the Quill did more atchievments
then the Club: The one knockd down the Nemaean Lion, and the other
illfavouredly knocked Leo the tenth.

In this large field of matter, if I should hunt for arguments to set forth the
glory of Germany, I should find innumerable; let the testimony of Bodin himself,
who was known to be no friend to Germany, serve for one, when he says, Nullum
illustrius est exemplum, There is not on earth so illustrious an example as
that of the Germans, who but diffring little from the wildness of Beasts, who
wandering as it were in Marshes and Moors, and being averse to all kind of
civility and literature, are become now such great proficients in both, that in
humanity they be said to surpass the Asians, in Philosophy the Graecians, in
military Discipline the Romans, in geometry the Egyptians, in Astronomy the
Chaldaeans, in Arithmetic the Phenicians, in Religion the Hebrews, and in
variety of Manufactures all other Nations whatsoever.

Here what Paulus Iovius says, a man not very well affected otherwise to us;
litterae non latinae modo, -- not only the Latin, but the Greek, and Hebrew
letters have by a fatal comigration pas'd over to Germany; who now being not
content with their old way of military Discipline, whereby they took away from
Rome her Martial Glory, invents new ones every day; besides, she may be said
to have bereft languishing Greece, and drowsy wanton Italy, not only of the
Ornaments of Peace, but also of Arts and literature: which makes Machiavill
rebuke his Countrymen, in regard they made use of Germans to survay their
Land. It is acknowledged by all people that Regiomontanus might be compared to
T^ales, Eudoxus, Calippus, or Ptolom^y himself. Nor could the Pope correct the
year, and bring it from the old Intercalation, for reducing of the Paschall
Ceremonies to set courses of the Moon without him, being sent for to Rome of
purpose for that end.

It is incredible, since the Council of Constance, how Schools and Academies
have multiplied in Germany; Witness Vienna, Prague, Frankford, Heydelberg,
Erford, Basil, Triers, Witeburg, Gripswald, Mentz, R^stoch, Regiomontana,
Dillingham, Lovain, Helmstad, Leyden, Franiker, Tubingen, with diverse other
Universities; nor is there any German Gentleman, be he never of so mean
extraction, but he has his Education in one of these, otherwise it will be
cast in his teeth as an opprobry. The Emperor Lotharius a Saxon born, when he
found the Schools in a squalid kind of condition, covered over with Barbarism
from the time of Charlemain a German born, he caus^d the dust to be swept off,
and restored them to their former luster, with restoration of public
Lectures, and Chaires for all Sciences, which did so augment the number of
knowing men, that in one University alone there were 4435. that had the
Magisteriall Laurel given them within the compass of a few years. Besides
these Academies there be diverse Monasteries that have Schools to train up
youth, as amongst the rest I will instance in the Abbacy of Fuldo, where 600.
Gentlemen's Sons in Sturmius his time were bred, and 30. Doctors reading to them
in one year. What do I speak of Noble men? there are soverain Princes which
daily become graduats in one Academy or other. John, Duke of Megalopolis would
not return to the Government of his Country, till he had studied 20. years in
Paris. Harman Prince of Hassia took the degrees of Mastership in Prague, and
was congratulated by the Emperor himself, and the chiefest Nobles of the
Kingdom of Boh^miah. Richwinces Duke of Lorain did the like: Albert Count of
(...) took the degree of Doctor of the civil Law, with others; ^ut the
examples of the Duke of Geldres is admirable. A^nold and William were Brothers,
whereof the one was learned, the other illiterat; The one was in favor with
the Pope, and all other Princes, the other was neglected for his ignorance:
which disgrace least it might be transmitted to his Posterity, William his
Brother, sent his Sons to be educated in Paris, whence they returned not till
they were both Masters of Art. Albert the 6th. Duke of Bavaria, the Founder of
Ingolstad University, did dignifie Learning with so much honor, that he
himself took the degree of Batchillor of Arts, and publicly woare the
formalities of the order up and down the Streets. But what shall we say,
Charlemagne our Compatriot, whereof Sigebert a French Author writes, that
Charlemagne was not only excellently versed in his own maternall Tongue, but in
other ^orreigne Languages; He put old barbarous Verses which spoak of the Acts
of Kings in a more refined style; he also caused the Grammar to be rendered in
the vulgar Tongue: He commanded Teutonique, or German names to be imposed upon
the months of the year, as also all the winds which he divided to twelv, being
before but four. He used to be present at School-exercises, encourag^d the
Commons to learning, and threatened a degradation to Noble men that were
illiterat. What shall I say of Otho the second, who being overcom in Greece,
and left alone, escaped because he spoak Greek so well. Frederique the second
was excellently versed in sundry Languages, and caused Aristotle's works to be
translated out of Greek, and Arabique into the common Tongue. Charles the fourth
fed the Imperial Eagle in the Muses Garden, and made a firm League twixt
Mercury and Mars. Charles the fifth had Thu^idides always with him as his
Companion in the field: He much favour^d Doctor Seldius, who after he had
voluntarily resigned the Empire to his Brother, and the rest of his Domimon to
his Son, was his individual Companion, and attending him to Flushing where he
was to embark for Spain; and the Emperor discoursing with him very late at
night he at last tolled a little Bell to call up some of his Servants, who were
all asleep, whereupon he lighted down the Doctor himself, saying, now Seldius
forget not this, that Caesar, Charles the first, who was used to be guarded
with whole Armies, has not now a Servant to wayt on him, and he who thou have
attended so many years, does now serve thee, and light thee down. How many most
signal, and glorious men has Germany produc^d? as Adrian the 4th. Io.
Brentius, Cochlaeus, Staupicius, Philip Melancthon, Zuinglius, Osiander,
Car^lestadius, Oecolam^, Cassander, Bucer, Grynaeus, Fagius, Wigandus,
Bullinger, Mathesius, (...), Mentzerus, Winckellman, Gretzer, Becanus,
Tannerus, Ursinus, H^nnius, Hondius, Gerlachius, Paraeus, Musculus, Hutterus,
Lessius, Backmeisterus, Mylius, Drexelius, Biderman, Balduin, Sigwardus,
Meisnerus, Gerardus, Finkius, Pappus, Pelargus, Scultetus, Pitiscus, Simlerus,
Flaccus, Illiricus, Thummius, and the Excellent Hafenriffus; all these were
renowned Divines, whose Works are extant, with diverse more. Now for
Politicians, and Civilians, their number is endless. There is Baron Skenckins,
Heimburgius, Henningus, G^eden, Strenius Baro, Enenchelius Baro, Camerarius,
Zasius, Zuiclemus, Everardus, Marnixius, Haloander, Mudaeus, Oldendorpius,
Pistores, Welserus, Leunclavius, who having bin employed Ambassador to the Post
to Osman, the great Turk, by the Emperor Rodolphus, did compile the Annals of
the Mahumetans, and all the History of the Oriental World. There are moreover
Iustus Lipsius, Freherus, Iunius, Reusnerus, Besoldus, Wackerius, Bocerus,
Rulandus, Godelmannus, Lechmannus, Fabrus, Herwartus, and multitudes more,
whose Works are extant for the universal good of mankind.

For Physic, there is Vesalius, Copus, Crato, Hadrianns Iunius, Guinterius,
Langius, Tragus, Dodonaeus, Vierus, Zuingerus, Sceckius, Planerus, Peucerus,
Tragus, Horstius, Sennertus, Pistorius, Philippus, Theophrastus; and abundance
more of most renowned men.

For Philosophy and Philologie, who by profound speculation of divine and
humane things, and a curious indagation of the hiddenst Closets of Nature, have
exposed to the world many mysterious Rarities: There is in the first place
Albertus Magnus, Agricola, Trithemius, Reuclinus, Nauclerus, Pirckleimerus,
Erasmus Roterodamus, whose wit Longolius preferrs before all the wealth of
France. Rhenanus, Huttenus, Celtenus, who was first that was Crowned Poet
Laureat by the Emperor Frederique the 4th. own hands. There is Cranzius,
Aventinus, Cuspinianus, Sleidanus, Lazius, Surius, Golzius, Gruterus,
Clennardus, Carrion, Scioppius, Kirkmannus, G. Agricola, who dug deeper into
the bowels of the Earth for the knowledge of Metals more then any one. Add
hereunto Cranter, Sturmius, Gesner, Xylander, Buxtorfius, B. Keckerman,
Baudius, Heinsius, Dousa, Taubmannus, Melissus, Calaminus, Meursius, Crusius,
Frisklinus, Sibcros, Sabinus, Glareanus, Stigelius, and a great many more, who
have transmitted their Names to immortality by printed Monuments.

For Mathematicians there is no Country has produced rarer men; witness
Mullerus, Regiomontanus the Son of Trapezuntius, whom after the correction of
the Calendar, the Greeks out of envy, because he was superior to them in
knowledge found a trick to poison. Let Purbachius be added hereunto, who first
revived the study of the Stars under this clyme: St^fflerus, Copernicus,
Mestlitus, Braheus, Keppler, Clavius, whom Scaliger so much esteemed, that he
said, he had rather be corrected by him, then commended by others. There is
Stadius, Reinholdus, Schonerus, both the Appians, Gemma Frisius, Vadianus,
Dyander, Stevinus, Mercator, Ortelius, Peutingerus, Dasypodius, Merula,
Cluverus, Munsterus; and many more.

For Musitions, there have bin Orlandus Lassus, Hasleros, Lechnerus, Praetorius,
with others. But oh, immortal God! besides these methinks I see before me an
Host of rare renowned Authors, who have contributed infinitely to the
Commonwealth of Learning, as if the Muses had taken up the chiefest mansion in
Germany; what a world of Books and Libraries are up and down? Insomuch, that
Book-Merchants drive a greater Trade in our Marts then any where else; therefore
those Verses of Horace may well be applied unto us.

Venimus ad summum Fortunae, pingimus, atque
Psallimus, and luctamur Achivis doctius unctis.
Avaunt hence then those base Calumniators, and Forgers of lies and scandals,
and if they have any tincture of shame left, let them away to Utopia, and there
belch out their Venom, specially that opprobrious Saying, that I Tedischi hanno
l'ingegno nelle mani, The Germans have their wit in their hands; as if they had
none in their brain. How can this be aver'd by any that has the least spark of
Ingenuity and truth in him; considering that I have already musterd up so many
Heroes in all knowledge, as well in Theology, as in Civil Policy, in Physic, in
History, in the Mathematiques, in Philosophy, Philologie, with all other kind
of knowledge, as well moral as natural; So that Germany may be without
derogation to any other Country be called the Gran School and Academy of all
Knowledge.

But most Illustrious Princes, because by our Adversaries own confessions we
have such ingenious hands, let us search a little into the ground of this
Saying. The first Broachers of it were the Italians, who were well known to be
a cunning acute Peeple, yet they give us the priority almost in every thing;
there passes never a year but they send out of Germany for Architects,
Statuaries, Limmers, Painters, Surveyors, Aqueduct makers. Aeneas Silvius had
all his Artificers hence: France also makes the same use of our men, for the
best Tapistry, Hangings, and Household-stuff, with Tables, Chaires, curious
Glass which are fetched away hence. Norimberg is admired all the Earth over for
her rare industry, and inventive faculty: The Goldsmiths of Auspurg are cried
up in every corner for Bracelets, Rings, Chains, Necklaces, and other
Curiosities, which are carried every where abroad, from the rising to the
setting Sun. Nor does Norimburg and Auspurg excel only, but every City in
Germany abounds with exquisit Opificers, though some Towns do apply themselfs
to one thing more then another. In Friburg they have an art to polish
Crystal, and make Vessels and curious Cupps thereof: Other Towns are
dextrous in making Muskets, Archibuses, and Pistolls: Ulms excells in Drapery
and weaving of Cloth, whereof she vents an incredible quantity: Other places
excel in making of Pewter, Tinn, Brass, and Copper Vessels; some in casting
of Canons, some in making of all kind of Pikes, some in exquisit sorts of dying,
some in painting of Glass, some in framing of all kind of earthen Potts, some in
devising new sorts of Wagons: But he who desires to see a Compendium of the
Manual subtilties of the German, let him beg leave to go to Dresden in Saxony,
or to Stutgard in Wirtemberg, or to Munchen in Bavaria, and there he may take a
surfeit of beholding thousands of rarities, and feed his eyes with new objects a
whole twelvmonth together.

Now what we have already spoken of high Germany, may be as well said of the
lower, who is little inferior herein to the higher, whom Thuanus avoucheth to
abound with Artificers more then any part of the earth in so narrow a compass.
It is upon record in story, that iu the year one thousand three hundred and
thirty, there were in Lovain alone, four thousand Weavers Loomes, every
Workhouse employing thirty or forty persons to prepare the Wool, to spinn and
card it; so that by this computation there must have bin an hundred and sixty
thousand souls at least did eat their bread upon this sole Manufacture. And
what credit the English Cloth has now gaind, may be attributed to the
Lovanians, and other Low Country Opificers, who brought whole Colonies into
great Britain, and made that Nation such able Workmen in this kind of comodity,
who were given altogether before to Agriculture and grasing of Cattle: for the
fury of the Duke of Alva drive many Families of Flemins thither, where they
peepled many Towns which were very thin of Inhabitauts before, as Norwich,
Colchester, Maidston, Sandwich, Canterbury, Hampton, and others, teaching them
the art of making Bays and Serges, with other such like woollen Manufactures;
yet the Belgians still florishd by this industry, and the Drapers of Wool
began to lessen among them; there was a compensation made by making Linen
cloth, wherein they are so exquisit, and herin the Batavians or Hollanders bear
the Bell, who are arrivd to that perfection of making fine Cambricks, and other
Cloth, that Holland has given the name to the thing it self, which is commonly
called Holland; and their dexterity is such herin, that their Loomes may be
compard to Arachnes webb for finenesse, as if they were woven by Pallas her own
hand; for they may be said to equal the Snow in whiteness, Lawne in
thinness, Silk in softness and value: Cambray is also famous for this, and
grows rich from what it was beyond belief: For Thuanus reports there are
30000. Clothes made in that Town alone every year, which at four pound Sterling
a piece come to a vast Sum. Flanders also excels in woven Pictures, specially
Holst, and Oudenard, fit for the Pomp of Princes; I know the Ancients have been
Admirable for the Needle, the Phrixian Gowns, the Istrian Cadowes, the
Attalicall Hangings, and the Babylonian Cutwork were very famous, according to
that of Martial.

Non ego praetulerim Babylonica picta, superbe
Texta Semiran it quae variantur acu.
But all that Curiosity by a kind of transmigration is removed to Germany: The
thing exceeds faith, no Color is wanting here, think upon what you will; The
Peacock is not adorned by nature with more gay colored Feathers, then Art
makes Tapistry here to delight the Optiques with such changable and various
Objects, insomuch that no Nation exceeds them herein, or produces more
inventive Spirits. Among others the Quintins, the Florians, the Brugelians, the
Clerians, the Brillians, the Mabuseans, the Mores, the Schoorelians, the
Hemskirkians, the Pourbusians, the Barensians, the Winghians, the Hofnalians,
are most famous, specially John Eckius, who first found out the way of mingling
Oil with Colors; And Albert Durer of Norimberg came to a wonderful height of
perfection herein, which extorted a confession from the Italians themselves,
who using his name in vain, would father their works upon him to make them
more vendible.

And now let all those Limmers, and Painters who have gained immortality by
their rare pieces, come and appear; let Apelles, Zeuxis, Protogenes,
Parrhasius, and the Theban Aristides com; let the most renowned Architects
appeer, let Ctesiphon Gnosius, who erected the Ephesian Temple to the honor of
Diana, let Dinocrates, who traced Alexandria: let Philo the famous Athenian
com, let all the choicest Sculpters, Leochares, Alcamenes, Briaxis, Scopus,
Pythis com; let the most celebrous Statuaries appeer, as Polycletus,
Praxiteles, Ctesias, Lysippus: Let the ablest Artificers and Opificers the
World ever affoorded appeer, and they shall find that Germany has their
equals, and as great Masters as they in every thing. But they will be
transported with wonder, when they meet our Albertus Magnus, who made a Statue
so near the life, that by the motion of certain wheels and ginns, latent
within, made the tongue move and prolate articular sounds; which Statue, when
Albertus had got Tho: Aquinas the Angelical Doctor into a Chamber where it
was, and making it speak with an audible voice, Aquinas being suddenly
surpised with amazement, struck it with a stick and broak it, whereupon
Albertus in as great amazement, said; Ah Thomas! what have thou done? Thou
have destroyed in a moment the work of thirty years. Could any of these old
Artists make an Eagle of wood, such a one as Regiomontanus, upon the Emperors
entrance into Norimberg, making her to fly in the Air, and welcome him to Town.

But these are trivial things, most Illustrious Auditors, they are Stars of
the least magnitude, in comparison of others that shine in this Firmament: What
think you of the invention of Gunns, and Printing, the first for Mars, the last
for Mercury; two mighty things worthy of German Inventors, whereby Arms and
Arts are so much advantaged.

The Bow, the sling, the Roman Ramms, the Scorpions, and Engines of Battery,
were nothing compard to the Canon which does such Execution, and destroys men,
and horses at such a distance: If any thing can compare with Thunder, it is the
sound of a Culverin, in noise and terriblenesse: Witness when at the three
years Siege of Osten, the report of the Canon was heard at Lovain; and when the
Duke of Guyse surpised and took Calis from the English, the noise of the great
Gunns reached as far as Antwerp, having the wind favorable for its transport;
which made Scaliger say, Pace tua dicam, Jupiter, fulmina nostra sunt
terribiliora tuis; Age, coge nubes ut tonare queas, nos etiam te tranquillo
iratum Regnum tuum faciemus. By your good leave, oh, Jove! our Thunderbolts
are more terrible then yours; Go gather Clouds, that you may thunder and tear
the Air, when you are quiet, we also can make your Kingdom angry: And
Berchtoldus Scharwarzius was the first Inventor of this Miracle, a Franciscan
Philosoper.

But the finder out of Typography, or Printing was a German Knight, John
Guttenberg of Mentz, though Winphelingus says, he projected it first at
Strasburg, and perfected it in Mentz: The greatest advantage that ever the
Commonwealth of Learning received, which made Beroaldus the Italian break out
into a kind of admiration, and this lyric Verse.

O Germania muneris Repertrix
Quo nil utilius dedit vetustas;
Libros scribere quae doces premendo.
What a toil it was to exscribe Authors before, and preserve them from the
injury of time? What a care the Emperor took to keep Tacitus, commanding him
to be written out ten times every year; yet this Golden Author had been like to
perish, had he not been found in Corbe Monastery in Westphalia, whence after
many ages silence Tacitus was brought to speak again: Besides the negligence of
Scribes in former times used to fill the Books with errors, as Cicero
witnesses in his time, Viz. That Latin books were so falsely written in his
time, and adulterated, that he knew not what to do; whereupon Christian Authors
thought it fitting that Booksellers should be sworn to divulge none but true
examind Coppies, which made Irenaeus in the end of his Work to adjure the
Transcriber by the name of Christ, and the dreadful day of Judgment, that all
coppies thereof should be examind and made concordant with the Original.
Typography may be said to cast a Bridle in Times mouth, that he may not
devour so much, and bring things under the yoke of mortality: Typography may
be called Ars memoriae, and mors oblivionis, the art of memory, and death of
Oblivion: There is no Epithet or Elogium adaequat to the worth of Typography, it
deserves such attributs as Philon the Physician gives to his compositions,
calling them Manus Dei, or as others call theirs, Manus Christi, Apostolicon,
gratiam Dei, Catholicon, Antidotum Paulinum, and such Divine Epithets: For the
Christian World owes more to Frobenius, and Oporinus of Basile, to Plantine of
Antwerp, to Aldus Manutius of Venice, to Robert and Henry Stephanus of Paris
and Geneva, which have so much promoted all kind of Sciences in such durable
Characters; I say the Christian World owes more to these Men, then to the
greatest Captains and Warriers who have enlargd the bounds of their Country:
And I hope it will not be fastidious to you, most Noble Auditors, if I recite
unto you an Epigram in praise of Aldus Manutius, made by Beza.

Didonis cecinit rogum disertus
Maro, Pompeij rogum Lucanus;
Et discite adeo hoc uterque fecit,
Ut nunc vivere judicetur Illa,
Nec jam mortuus hic putetur esse.
Imo sunt redivivi and Hic and Illa;
Ergo credere ^as erit poetas
Divos, utpote qui loquendo possint
Vitam reddere mortuis, quod ipsis
Est Divis proprium and peculiare.
Quod si fas credere Deos poetas,
Vitam reddere quod queant sublatam;
Quanto est justius aequiusque, quaeso,
Aldum Manutium Deum vocare,
Ipsis qui potuit suo labor
Vitam reddere mortuis poetis?
Virgil sung on Dido's Hearse, and Lucan on Pompeys, and they did it so well,
that neither She nor He may be said to be dead, but both do daily revive:
Therefore Poets may be termd Gods in one sense, because they can give life unto
the dead, which is proper and peculiar to the Gods: But if Poets may be taken
for Gods, because they can restore life, how much more just and equitable is it
to call Aidus Manutius a God, who could by his labor give life to so many
Divine Poets?

If therefore Typography may be called a Goddess, because she restores virtuous
men to life, may not the Germans who got Her, be termd Gods: These are the two
great beneffits which Germany has communicated to the World, and made thereby a
way to Peace and recovering of right, to virtue, and all kind of learning, to
Religion, to Heaven, and Christ himself: Boterus does also attribut to us the
first Invention of Wheel Clocks, whereby the courses and recourses of Time and
the Stars are distinguished, when he says, I Tedeschi sono stati Inventori
della stampa, dell' Artiglieria, et dell' Horologio a ruota, cose nobilissime.
The Germans have bin the Inventors of Printing, of Artillery, and Wheeld
Clocks, three most noble things. I will relate here what Scaliger writes of all
three, By the Canon we imitate Jove's anger, by the Press we make men
immortal, and by Dialls and Wheel Clocks we are made companions with time, and
go still along with him.

This noble Continent of Germany was once Townlesse, and without Cities, but
now I pray what part of the habitable Earth has more? Your Duchy of Wirtemberg
alone, most excellend Prince, has threescore, Holland in a small circuit of
ground comprehends three and thirty Cities, Gorchon Tower will show you two and
twenty. Utrecht stands betwixt fifty Cities, where of the remotest is but one
days jorney distant. Now high Germany is so thick with Cities, that they may
be said to shake one another by the hand, and all of them are most beutifull,
both for amaenity of soil, for firmness of structure, for stateliness of
Palaces, for delicacy of Fountains, for curiosity of Walks, for cleanliness
of ways, for comodity of Rivers, for Stadshouses, for Monasteries, Chappells,
and Churches.

Can there be a better fortified place then Vienna, for which it is true we are
beholden to an English King: can there be neater Cities then Harlam (who also
arrogats to her self the first Invention of Printing) then Amsterdam, then
Strasburg, then Brunswick, then Ingolstadt, then Dresden, then Lubec, then
Hamburgh, then Breme, then Magdenburg (the Metropolis of Germany) then Antwerp?
Can there be more pleasant Towns then Auspurg, Leipsic, Bern, Noremberg,
Lunsburg, Saltzburg, Basil, Leiden, and Bruges? Can there be greater Towns then
Ghent, Prage, Erford, Lovain, and Colen? With other whereof there might be made a
far larger Catalog; in diverse of these the Citizens houses look like the
Palaces of Princes. Srabo writes that the Romans went beyond the Greeks in
purity of Cities; and Boterus an Italian confesses the Germans to surpass
his Countrymen herin, Hora I Tedeschi accanzano di gran lunga I Romani: The
character which Charles the Emperor gave one of Florence in Toscany, being
ravished with her bewty, Viz. That Florence was a City to be seen upon
Festivalls, and Holydays; the same may be said of many of the German Cities;
Behold Antwerp, a place situated upon a fair navigable sweet River, a spacious
Plain, which streets and structures, for order and symmetry, for high, strong,
and spacious Walls, whereon three or four Coches may go abrest, for ways,
prospects, and an universal kind of Elegancy, there is not any can surpass
Her: if one observe all the members of her body with an unpassionat judgment, I
know he will give his suffrage with me: Let Scaliger, a branch of a German
stemm, be one of Her Judges in this Hexastic, making the City her self by way
of Prosopopoeia, speak:

Oppida quot spectant oculo me torva sinistro,
Tot nos Invidiae pallida tela petunt:
Lugdunum omnigenum est, operosa Lutetia, Roma
Ingens, Res Venetum vasta, Tolosa potens,
Omnimodae merces, Arts priscaeque novaeque:
Quorum insunt alijs singula, cuncta mihi.
Add herunto that incomparable Cittadell, built according to the true rules of
Enginry, and this slately Plain like a Campus Martius which lies twixt Her and
it. Now if a man should go to particulars, and observe the greatness of Ulm
Temple in Suevia, the bewty of Freidenstad Church in Wirtemberg, the
magnificence of the Jesuitts College in Bavaria, the neatness of Halberstadt
Church* the Mount Olivet in Spire, the Armory of Dresden, the Suburbs and
Gardens of Stutgard, the Tower of Strasburg, which is computed to be five
hundred seventy four foot high, with innumerable other singularities; I say, if
a judicious spectator should survay all these, he will acknowledge Germany to be
inferior to no Country upon the Earth.

Therefore what Tacitus writes of Germany, was taken up in trust, and from
imperfect hearsayes; nor must we take all the narrations of the Ancients for
Gospel, or Articles of Faith. What false things have they delivered of the
Country which l^eth under the torrid Zone, whom they made so parching and
scorching, that it was inhabitable? Yet it is now found by experience, and the
travells of Spaniards, English, Hollanders, French, and others, that it is a
temperat clime, that one need not throw off his Cloak for immoderat heat, nor
keep it on for cold: Indeed Joseph Acosta says, That at the Vernall
Equinoctial he found himself so cold that he went to the Sunshine to get heat
by aprication: What Aristotle and many others write of the Swan, that she
sings her own dirge before her death, we find to be false; sundry other things
the old Wisards deliver for truth, which our experience find to be false,
therefore we must not give credit to all that Tacitus writes, whom Budaeus
styles the wickedst of all Writers; Tertullian calls him lyingst, and Orosius
the flatteringst; what a simple gross error was that in him to derive the
Etymology of the Jews ( Iudaei) from the Mountain Ida in Crete? But the
Epithetts that were given him were a little too bitter, for I must confess
with Lipsius, that he may be well rankd among the prudentst and soundest of all
the Roman Historians; but there is no Pomgranet but may have some rotten grains:
Now put the case that Barbarism did once cover the face of this Country (as
it did all other at first) how marvellously is it civilizd since? Open the
Windows and look about, and where will you now find such uncouth Fenns, and
horrid Woods as Tacitus speaks of: It Is true that the Her^ynian Forest might be
once nine days jorney broad, and whose beginning after sixty days travel
none could find, as Caesar reports, but now it is otherwise, for it may be easily
survayd; and all other places are cultivated and made commodious for man's use:
This most noble Duchy of Wirtemberg may be called the marrow of Germany;
Alsatia, and those Territories upon the Rhin, may be termd the Garden of
Germany; Westphalia, Hassia, Saxony, Bavaria, Sil^sia, Thuringia, and Misnia,
may be called the Granaries of Germany: Franconia, Silesia, Thuringia, and
Tirol, the Pantry of Germany: Styria and Austria, what are they but a kind of
Paradis? What is all Germany but a Pandora's Box? There is no kind of ground,
whither sandy, fenny, or rocky, but is made useful some way or other; among
other places ^ will instance in Holland, which though by her low situation she
be nothing else but a Moore or Marsh, I pray what character Joseph Scaliger
gives of her, who sings thus to Dousa.

Ignorata tuae referam miracula Terrae,
Dousa, peregrinis non habitura fidem.
Omnia Lanicium hic lassat textrina Minerva,
Lanigeros tamen heic scimus abesse greges.
Non ca^iunt operas fabriles oppida vestra,
Nulla fabris tamen heic ligna ministrat h^mus.
Horrea triticeae rumpunt heic frugis acervi,
Pascuus heic tamen est, non Cerealis Ager.
Heic numerosa meri stipantur dolia cellis,
Quae vineta colat nulla putator habet.
Heic nulla, aut certe seges est rarissima lini,
Linifici tamen est copia major ubi?
Heic medijs habitamus aquis, quis credere posset?
Et tamen heic nullae, Dousa, bibuntur aquae.
Both Italy, and hungry Spain with diverse other Countries, taste often of the
fatness of Germany. It Is well known that some years since, the City of Rome
being reduced to such extremity, that all the Jews and Courtisans being
commanded out of the City, eight ounces of bread was allowed to every mouth,
but the Hansiatique Towns fetching a huge compass by Hercules Pillars, kept
them from starving by a Fleet of Corn Ships which they sent into the Tyber; And
the Pope did gratify the first bringer in of the news with a thousand Ducates.

Among other places, let Bern in Swizzerland show the fertility of Germany,
which though it be inferior far to Wirtemberg and Alsatia, yet is it compard to
the great Plain about Milan, which is accounted one of the best corn Countries
in Italy: According to the Proverb, Berna and il Bernese, vale Milano, and il
Milanese. And for Wine, Germany has diverse most generous sorts of her self,
which are carried to England, Poland, Moscovie, and other Regions. What Is more
delicat then that of the Rhine? What Wine's more pure then that of the Neccar!
what is stronger then that of Franconia? what is sweeter then that of Austria?
And so excellent are the German Wines, that Bacchus himself it seems desired
to be worshipped here, more then any where else; As appeers by an Altar that was
erected to him in the lower Palatinat, called Bacchara, where the choicest
Grape grows. Now the plenty of Wines seem to contend with their plesantnes:
Augustus Caesar delighted more in German Wine, then in any, so did Tiberius;
Charles the 4th. drunk no other then Backragg, and diverse Emperors have
preferred the Franconian Wines before the Falernian: And it will strike a wonder
in any man, to see what a world of huge butts there are in Wrisburg, called
Herbipolis of old, and dedicated to Diana, where she had a sumptuous Fane. Go
to Stutgard, and there you will find a Proverb among them, that they have more
Wine then water; Insomuch that the Wines of Stutgard, besides their own
Provision, may afford the value of 100000. rose Nobles in Merchandise. But if
you travel upon a wooden Horse upon the Danube, what a world of Vineyards may
you behold about Vienna, which though the Country was not com to that
perfection of industry as it is now, nor the City half so much peepled, yet
Aeneas Sylvius, near upon 200. years since speaks of her thus.

It is incredible what a world of Provision is thrust into Vienna every day;
what a company of Carts come in laden with Eggs and Crabfish, with bread, with
fish with Volatills tame and wild, yet in the Evening you shall find nothing in
the Market. The Vintage lasts here a matter of forty days, there is not a day
passes but there are 300. Carts employed laden with Wine, and some laden twice
or thrice; There are above a thousand Horses used in the Vineyards; their Caves
are of that depth, and so spacious, that the Subterranean places may compare
with those above ground, and such an exuberance of Wine there is in some places
of Germany, that they will exchange a butt of Wine for one of water; nay, they
use in some Towns to mingle Wine with their Mortar, and macerat their Lime with
it.

If you go to other drinks in Germany, you will find Sr. John Barly-corn as
well as Bacchus to be there in his Kingdom. Nay, in some places he may compare
for strength with Bacchus himself; witness the powerful beer of Rostock, of
Brunswik, of Breslaw, of Danzik, of Delph, and Paderborn. The like may be said
of Mede, which surpasses Candy wine in sweetness. And for beer the World
knows what a Medicinal virtue Lubecks beer has to heal bruises, and other
distempers. What shall I speak of the Austrian Saffron? of the Frankincense and
Myrrh of Moravia, of the Licorish of Franconia, of the Mader for Diers in
Silesia! of the Ambar of Thuringia! all which are accounted the best in that
kind that can be found any where.

For all other commodities either for pleasure, profit or necessity, what does
Germany want? what delightful Orchards are there, what large fields of Grain,
what a World of Cattle; where can you find Cowes that will yield twelve quarts
of milk every day as in Holland; where can you find better Cheese? where can
you find such Bacon as in Westphalia; a Gamon whereof is accounted so rare,
that in feasts it is served up last after all the fine courses of Foul and
Fruit. Hear what Guicciardin spoak in his times of Holland, that in Cheese and
Butter, she did vent every year above a million: and what shall we think she
does now, that her Trade is com to such a portentous increase; some think that
the benefit she makes of Milk may compare with Bourdeaeux Wines, or the spices
of Portugal.

Touching other animalls, and Horses especially, Germany yields to no other
Country, either for all kind of labors, as also for service in War, as
France knows well, who is furnished hence: what horse can carry a Cuirassier
more stoutly then a Frislander; what famous Marts are in Germany for Horses!
what choice breed! I will instance but only in one Prince of Holsteyn, a
Kinsman of ours, who at one time had above a thousand Mares for breed, and
above one hundred choice Stallions.

Now will I go to the shores of Prussia, Pomerland and Livonia, to gather Gum;
and Lord what abundance of it is found there! a curious kind of Aromatique
Ambar, which tricles down from the Fur Trees, whereof there are such huge
Forests, which serves for Merchandise all the World over.

Now for Nobleness of Rivers; what Country is comparable to Germany! We have
the Danube acknowledged by all to be King of Rivers.

Qui centum populos et magnas alluit Urbes. She waters a hundred several
people; with many mighty Cities; The Rhin is ours, The Elve is ours, the Main,
the Mossell, the Skeld, the Vistula with ten great Navigable Rivers are ours;
which for Fish and freighting of commodities and conveyance of them from place
to place run very conveniently; Guicciardin in his time made a supputation that
the Fishing of the Low Countries alone came to above two millions a year. Now
in High Germany there are some Fish, who of themselves are so savoury and sweet
that they need no sauce: and in Prague he is held to have but a very dull taste
who uses any sauce with some sorts of fish. Now for salt pits, what numbers
are there in Luneburg, in Saxony, in Suabland, Austria, and other places? What
variety of Baths and Medicinal waters have we? whose virtue proceeds from
Mineralls, whereof there are such plenty; What curious Marble is dig'd up in
Limburg, and Namur! you have there Marble of all colors, white, black, red,
gray, which may vie with Crystal for luster and brightness. Germany has her
Mines also of Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin and Iron; The German Dollars
furnishd all the Mints of Europe, before the Mines of Mexico and Potosi were
discovered in America. And it is wonderful how the plenty of Gold and Silver
is encreasd in Germany these two last ages which has enhancd the price of all
things. Yet the Helvetians scarce made any use, or had any esteem of Gold and
Silver, till they gave that fatal overthrow to Charles the Hardy nere
Granson, where they carried away their Cap-fulls of Gold and Silver, which
since is extremely multiplied amongst them by the salary the Kings of France
have given them both for their attendance about his person, by way of guard as
also for their service in the War against the House of Austria; The Swisse
herby being come to the apprehension of the value of Gold and Silver, with
other Nations have mightily approvd their stock since that time. In so much
that they proud often very useful to France and other people in great sommes
of money. And as Germany abounds thus with Gold and Silver, so the bowels of
her earth is also full of Mettalls in diverse places; Tirol above other
Provinces of Europe has plenty of Mettalls: the Elve, Edera with other Rivers
afford Gold; Corbachi in Westphalia has also some, Steinheid in Franconia and
other places. Cellerfiela in Saxony has Mines of Silver, as also Friburg,
Marieburg, Anneberg, and Sneberg; Ioachims vale, Cotteberg and other Soyles in
Bohemia have much Silver. Schonback also, and Beraun in Bohemia has quantity
of Quicksilver. Melibot and Carpat abound with Copper. Aldeberg and
Irberesdort in Misena, likewise have great store of white Lead, and the
Mountain Ramel in Saxony has black, and Ashcolour Lead: There are innumerable
places where Iron is found, the best in Sorland, Gishubel, and Lavestein. In
this affluence of all earthly commodities, Germany has often relievd her
Neighbors, and supplied them with necessaries according to the rule of
Charity, the Germans being observd to be least given to the base vice of
covetousness, They have been hospitable in the highest degree, making no
difference twixt Native and stranger herin, as Tacitus himself confesses; And
to this in most places we retain that Primitive Virtue.

But because by giving still, and not receiving, the (...) might draw scarcity
upon her self, therefore the mystery of Marchandizing was found out, and
permitted to be exercisd by way of Commutative Justice, for bartering
Commodities by way of Exchange, or else by taking reasonable prices for them*
In so much, that any under the degree of a Gentleman might export superfluous
Wares out of Germany, and make a return of others in their steed, which custom
tended both to public and private benefit, and nombers hereby have raysd
their families to be great and rich. And as high Germany is full of such
gallant Merchants, so the lower Germans exceed all other in the feat and
mystery of comerce, where Women as well as men do exercise the trade, and beat
bargains in their Husbands absence* And the advantageous situation of their
Country seems to invite them hereunto. And if any doubt this, let him look
upon the multitude of Ships that lie in every Port, so that take bottoms of
all sorts, they have more that sail upon salt water then all Christendom
besides: witness else that number which the King of Denmark did stay of theirs at
one time in the Baltique Sea, which were 600 for offering an affront to his
Ambassadors. In Amsterdam alone there go in and out as many Vessels of all
sorts one day with another as there be days in the year, either for England,
Scotland, France, Spain, Italy, Turkey, Egypt, Norway, Russia, and the East or
West Indies. What a thing was Antwerp before the revolt of the Low Countries?
there usd to be more Mercantile businesses transacted there in one month, then a
whole year in Venice, there being no less then 300 families of Spaniards there
at one time, besides other Nations; she erected the first Burse in Christendom,
where twice a day many thousand negociators use to meet, and upon the River of
Skeld before the City two thousand five hundred Vessels have rid at anchor at
one time, one tide bringing in sometimes four hundred sails, and two hundred
Wagons going out and coming in. Nor do we include in this number, the Country
Carmen, which were reckond in one week to have been ten thousand: So that by
this vicissitude, and perpetual exercise of Comerce, five hundred millions of
Crowns were computed to have been received and paid by buying and selling at
home and abroad upon the account of this sole City. And when the Spaniards
fell one time to pillage that City, the booty they made was estimated at two
millions of Crowns: I do not put in this account the plate and Jewels they
took, nor the brave houses which were burnt: The common Gregarian Soldiers
were so much enrichd hereby, that it was observd, one of them lost in one day
near upon ten thousand Crowns in the exchange, where public tables were
erected of purpose for gaming. They made hilts for their Swords, and Daggers
some of massy Gold, some of Silver, yea Corslets and Helmets were made of the
same metal; but because they would not have it discovered when they went out
of Town, they causd them to be varnishd over with some other color; but
therein the Artificers and Gold Smiths were too hard for them, for they mingled
copper with the Gold, and Tin with the Silver, whereby they redeemed some of
their Wealth again from Free-booters. Yet Negotiation did not quite depart from
this glorious City, but she flourisht awhile afterward in the midst of the
furies of Mars; Insomuch, that at one time there were a great many valued at
millions of Crowns a piece, and some worth three millions, some more. But I
will make a step hence to high Germany; how many famous Mercantile Cities have
you there, besides the sixty and odd Hans Towns? There is Frankfort upon the
Main, the Mistress of all the Marts of Europe, where one may meet with all
sorts of Nations, and any kind of imaginable Comodity; And there is such
excellent order usd to secure their passage, that it is a most rare thing to
hear of a Robbery. And as, most Illustrious Duke, your renowned Ancestor
Everard, the first Duke of Wirtemberg, called Barbatus (because going young and
beardlesse to the Holy Land against the common Enemy of Christ, he after many
exploits came back with a great Beard which he had got there, and never cut it
off afterward) was usd to say, that when he went amongst his Citizens, or
Tenants abroad, he might sleep securely in any one of their lapps, and his men
might carry home his Rents in the palms of their hands; So is it universally
up and down Germany, where there are fewer Robbers then any where else: For
innated probity and downright dealing the German is cried up more then any, as
also for his fidelity and trust; which has causd diverse great Emperors and
Kings to put their lives in their Custody. Augustus Caesar, Tiberius, and other
Emperors till Galba's time, had a Guard of Germans next their persons; but
Galba, as Suetonius records, dissolved this most faithful and valiant Guard,
whose fidelity had bin tried so many years: yet other Emperors took them
afterward; nay, Herodes King of Iudaea sent for a Guard of them: And they
continue to have this high honor to this very day; for not only the late
Caesar's, but the Pope, the Kings of Spain, France, and Sarmatia, together with
the Gran Duke of Toscany, with diverse other sovereign Princes, committ the
custody of their lives and persons to this stout and honest Nation; insomuch
that we may glory with the Frizland Legions, not only in Pompeys Theater, as
Tacitus has it, but all the World over, Nullos mortalium armis, aut fide ante
Germanos esse, There are no kind of Mortals superior to the Dutch in Arms,
and trust; nor shall you seee a true German ever beat his Servant, or clap in
Prison any of his Tenants for non - payment of Rent, but either defalk
something out of the wages of the one, and amercing the other to some small
Heriot.

And as the probity of our Nation is like a great flourishing Tree, whose
branches shoot every where, so the German Chastity is very remarkable; which as
Egidius the Fraciscan said, is like a clear crystal Glass which may be
darkened by the breath only: And where does this Chastity look more clear, and
shine more bright then in Germany. For one to have knowledge of a woman there
before year twenty, is held a great turpitude, and a disgraceful thing: Let
Caesar be heard herein: The German lust is care, every one is contented with
his own wife, so that adultery is rare among them, and it is not as much the
punishment as the public shame that deterrs them from it. And Thuanus says,
that no Nation observes the honests of conjugall honesty according to Gods holy
Praecept more then they; Insomuch that the Verses of the Lirique may be applied
to them.

Nullis polluitur casta domus stupris,
Mos and lex maculosum edomuit nefas,
Laudantur simili prole puerperae:
Culpam poe na premit comes.
Which causes a strict Law against Bastards, which are rendered incapable of all
Promotions; which was the reason that Mary Queen of Hungary, Sister to Charles
the 5th. could never be entreated by the Emperor to pardon one of her prime
Noblemen, who had deflower'd one of her Maids of honor, though much
importuned thereto. To this virtue of Chastity we may add the strength of
conjugall love, which is found in Germany; and hereof there be many signal
examples. Among other, let that in the reign of the Emperor Conradus the
third take place here, who having in your Town of Writsberg in Writemberg,
straightly blocked up Guelpho of Bavaria, and reduced the place to extreme
Exigents, at the cries and importunity of the women of the Town, he published a
Diploma, or imperial Placart, wherein he indulged all women this privilege,
that they might freely depart from the Town, but not carry any luggage with
them, but what they could bear upon their own backs. Hereupon the Duchess
took Guelpho her Husband on her sholders, and all the women else following her
example, came out of the Gates laden with men and youths. The Emperor being
much taken with this witty Stratageme, forgave Guelpho the Duke with all his
Adherents. Lorenzo de Medicis, Duke of Toscany reading this Story, was
transported with so much joy and pleasure, that being sick of an indisposition,
whereof all his Physicians could not cure him, recovered his health hereby, as
Bodin relates.

Let us proceed now to another Virtue, which is signal and shining in the
German, and that is Modesty. Can there be a greater example then that of
Charles the fifth? who being yet in a vigorous state of body, voluntarily
resignd the German Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, and all his spacious
Dominions to his Son Philip; though as some malevolent spirits reported
afterward, that the next after his resignments was the first day of his
repentance.

But now I will speak something of the heroik Valor and Fortitude of our
Nation, whereby Europe has stood unshaken so many ages: And truly to dilate
this, my words must needs com short of the matter; and herein it was the
disadvantage of Germany to be destitute of Writers; for our Progenitors were
more for the Pike then the Pen; bipennem, non pennam tractabant: And it was
enough for other Nations to extol their own feats, not ours, so that it may be
said of the Children of this Noble Continent,

Vixere Fortes ante Agamemnona
Multi; sed omnes illachrymabiles
Urgentur, ignotique longa
Nocte, Carent quia Vate sacro.
The memory of Dido had rotted with her body in her Grave, had not Maro
preservd it; so had Ulisses without Homer: Mecaenas, had it not bin for Horace,
Lucilius without Seneca, and diverse other Heroes, whose names were made
indelible and immortal by the quil: Therefore as Bodin says, one of the
greatest motives that inducd the Scythians and Goths to burn Libraries, was,
because the fame of other Nations, as well as their own reproaches might
perish. Yet those fragments of stones which are found up and down in our
Archives, show well what heroique Spirits this Clime has bredd, and what
Martial men; in comparison of whose Preliations and Fights, those of the
Greeks were but Combats twixt Froggs and Mice. I will not go so far as Tuisco,
Mannus, Ingavo, Istaevon, Hermion, Marsus, Gambrivius, Suevus, and Vandalus;
But I will come nearer our times, it is enough we are Germans, ergo All men,
and manfull according to the etymon of the word. Tacitus says, it was an
infamous Crime among us, to leave our Colors behind in the field, or to com
thence alive, the Prince being killd; For it was held a kind of Religion to
protect, and defend his Person, as also to assign the glory of all exploits to
him: So terrible we were to our Neighbors the Gauls, that the very name of a
German was a Scarecrow unto them; for Gallia lay always open to us, though
they never took foot of ground in Germany. How did Andirestus trounce them,
making them fly to Julius Caesar, and implore aid so pitifully, or at least
his intercession, to make peace twixt them and the Teutoniques. Hereupon Julius
Caesar employing some Ambassadors to Ariovistus then in Suabland, that he
would appoint an indifferent place for a Parley: He answered, that if Caesar had
any business with him, he might com to him accordingly, at he would do if he
had any business with Caesar; Hereupon a War was denouncd: but certain
Travelers, and Merchants telling the Gauls, what huge mighty men both for
stature and spirit the Germans were, and how habituated to Arms being abroad
in the fields, without houses; such apprehensions of fear and terror did seize
upon that Army of Gauls which Caesar had levied against Ariovistus, that they
durst advance no further, but retire; such was the high valor of the Suevians
at that time, which made Caesar himself break out into this confession: Suevis
ne Deos quidem immortales pares esse posse, reliquum quidem in Terris esse
neminem quem non superare possint; Galli vero paulatim assuefacti superari,
multisque victi praelijs, ne se quidem ipsi cum Germanis virtute comparabant.
The immortal Gods are not like the Swablanders; there are none upon earth but
they are able to overcom them, but the Gauls being accustomed to be beaten,
and discomfited in many Encounters, did not hold themselfs by their own
confession equal to the Germans.

When Iccius and Ambrogius came Ambassadors to Caesar, among other things they
told him that the Belgians were the valiantst of all the Gauls, who were
descended of the Germans, who had crossd the Rhine to settle themselfs there
for more commodiousnesse by the expulsion of the Gauls, which Country was
called for distinction sake, Ci^-Rhenana Germania, which is now called the
Netherlands, or Belgium, the Inhabitants whereof have Dutch for their natural
language; therefore they were usd to call Germany, Magnam patriam, their Great
Country. Now as Cities use by degrees to grow greater, and have outwalls and
Suburbs; and as great Rivers do not tie themselfs to one direct even Channel,
but oftentimes inound, and gain ground; so Kingdoms have their fate: It is not
therefore the Rhin, the Danube and Vistula that confines Germany, though they
run like great veins of blood through her body, but beyond them she has
Belgium, the Swisserland, the Grisons, and Alps, Styria, Carniola, Carinthia,
Austria, a great part of Sarmatia, Denmark, Swethland, Norway, Finmark, with
other most potent and patent Regions, who glory in the name and language of
Germans: Moreover touching the Gauls, the Germans may be termd their Fathers,
as well as their Conquerors; for Ammianus Marcellinus says, In Galliam vacuam
populos quosdam ab insulis extremis, and tractibus trans-Rhenanis crebritate
bellorum and alluvione fervidi maris sedibus expulsos. Some peeple from the
outward Islands and Territories beyond the Rhin, by the fury of War and the
encroachments of the tumbling Sea were driven to Gallia: and whence can this
be, but from Germany?

Nor was a great part of Gallia alone, but Great Britany also was Colonizd by
Germans; witness the words of Caesar, who says, Germanos si non patres,
tamen Britannorum Avos esse. The Germans, if they were not the Fathers, yet
they were Grandfathers to the Britains. And as the hither parts of Gallia, so
the southerly parts also toward the Pyreneys and Spain were Colonizd by
Germans, I mean Languedoc: and this is plain argumento ducto ab Etymologia, the
word Languedoc being derivd from Langue de Goth, though some would foolishly
draw it from Langue d' ovg, or Languedoc. But let us go nearer to work, and
with more certainty; I pray whence has France her last and present
appellation, but from the Franconians in Germany? Hear what a famous Author
writes. Francos, Francos nostros sequamur, Gentem omnium quotquot magna illa
and vasta Germania tulit generosissimam, acerrimos libertatis propugnatores.
Let us follow the French, the French one of the most generous peeple that huge
Germany ever bore, and the greatest propugnators of their liberties. And this
revolution or transmigration happend upon the decay of the Roman Empire, in the
time of Valerianus and Gallienus, the one being taken Captif by the Persian,
the other eclipsing the Empire with Luxury and sloth; so Pharamond the German
rushd into France (then Gallia) and his Successor establishd there a Monarchy
which has continued in three races of Kings above these twelve hundred years;
It Is true, the whole Country was not all reducd at once by the Franks, but by
degrees, and being once settled, nothing could resist their valor, but they
still got more ground: Whence that Proverb has its rise from Valentinianus
Augustus, (...) Have the Frank, or the Frenchman for thy friend, not for thy
Neighbor. And the name of Frank, or French grew so renownd, that Justinian the
Emperor called himself Francicum, whereat Theudebert King of France took
exception, because he was neither born there, nor got one foot of the
Country. And now the fame of the Franks, like a bright flame of fire flew
higher and higher, and at last it grew so high, that in Charlemaynes time all
Gallia, and all Germany that extended from the Rhin to Illyrium, was called
France, nay the name of Freink or Frence came to be of such a huge extent and
latitude, that all Christians, among the Turks, and up and down Asia, of what
Nation soever they were, were called Freinks; yea the Christian Affricans in
Ethiopia, called the Habissines, called all the Europaeans Alfrangues, and the
Country Frankia.

Herby, most noble Princes, by our fortitude and constancy we became twice the
Fathers of Gallia, and so we may be said to be also twice the Fathers of the
Britains: For the Saxons (which some would derive from the Saci, a renowned
peeple in Asia, but wrongfully) being, as Zosimus says, for their magnitude
of spirit, strength of body, and patience in labor, grown famous and feared by
the Romans, as Marcellinus has it: The Saxons, I say, were sent for by the
Britons, to help them against the incursions of the Picts and Scots, where
being arrivd, after many vicissitudes, they settled there a Monarchy, so that
by some it was called Transmarina Saxonia: nor have the ancient Britons, Irish,
and Scotts, any other name for an English man to this day, but Sasson: Nor was
the English Language any thing else at first but a mere dialect of the German,
so that all their Towns terminant in Dutch, either in Ham, thorp, which, burg,
berg, sted, heim, stadt, etc.

Now I pray were not the ancient Kings of Spain, before the House of Austria,
all Germans, with the principallst Families of Spain, who to this day take it a
glory to be descended of the Goths? Now it is observd that whersoever the
German and Goth took footing, they never forsook the place, but multiplied
there exceedingly; nor is there any Nation so fruitful and prolificall as the
Germans; witness these examples, though something prodigious. Margaret
Florence, the fourth Count of Hollands Daughter, and Wife to the Earl of
Henneberg, being about two and forty years old, about nine a clock in the
morning was brought to Bed of an Almanac of Children, Viz. three hundred sixty
five, as many as there be days in the year, whom Guido the Suffragan Bishop of
Utrecht christened all alive, being brought all to Church in a great Basin, and
being half Boys and half Girls, the Males were called John's, and the Females
Elizabeth's, but they all expird with their Mother in one day, which was Anno
1276. Another Margaret, Wife to a Count of Holsten some thirty years after
brought forth so many. But these were unusual abortive weak Issues, Germany
needs, and daily produces stronger broods: I pray observe that nere Tubinga
there is a Castle called Entringh Castle, which for the serenity of the air, the
sweetness of soil, and amaenity of walks, is a place most delectable; there
livd within these few years in this Castle five Gentlemen with their Wifes, in
a rare harmony of affection, who got a hundred Children, who livd to be all Men
and Women. Consider the Countess of Dalburg, who saw her numerous Issue to the
third degree, of whom this Distic was made:

Matter ait natae, dic natae, filia, natam
Ut moneat natae plangere filiolam.
Rise up Daughter and go to thy Daughter, for thy Daughters Daughter has a
Daughter. The story is notable of Babo Count of Abeneberg, who of Wifes had two
and thirty Sonns and eight Daughters, whom he gave the choicest education unto
that could be; this Count being invited one day to Hunt with the Emperor Hen:
the second, took opportunity to bring his Troup of Sonns well horsd, and in
gallant Equippage, and making a present of them to the Emperor, he took them
all with much grace and contentment to his service, and married them very
nobly, insomuch that many Illustrious Families sprung from their loins. And
the Emperor was bound to do this according to Law, for whosoever in Germany
getts seven Sonns together, the Emperor is to maintain them all; and though
the German Continent be very vast, yet is it full of people, so that as Boterus
has it, there was a cense of ten Millions of souls who breathd there at one
time; but he corrected himself afterward, and averrs, Veggo che quella
amplissima provincia passa 19. millioni d'anime senza comprendervi I Regni di
Danemarca and di Boemia: I find that that huge Province besides Denmark and
Bohemia has nineteen millions of souls within it. Therefore though an Army of
two hundred thousand Soldiers should be carried out of Germany, there would be no
miss at all of them.

What shall we say of the Normans in France, who establishd a Monarchy both in
England and Sicilie by their mere prowess; and having subjugated that fertile
Province in France, called Normandy ever since, they did so infest the rest of
that spacious Kingdom, that it was a part of their Letany, a Furore Normanorum
libera nos Domine. From the Norman Fury the Lord deliver us.

At last Charles the simple was forcd to give Rollo their Duke, his Daughter
Gista to wife, with that whole Province; and when at that Ceremony Rollo was
advisd by his Nobles to kiss the Kings foot; answered no, by God, which is the
cause that the Normans are called By-gods to this day. Roger Hoveden speaks thus
of the Normans, Audax Francia Normannorum Militiam experta est, ferox Anglia
captiva succubuit, dives Apulia sortit aestoruit, Heirosolyma famosa, and
insignis Antiochia se utraque suppoluit. Bold France felt the Norman Discipline,
fierce England yielded her self as Captive, rich Apulia receavd them, and
flourishd; holy Jerusalem, and famous Antioch subjected themselfs both unto
him. What a man of men was Tancred, who going as a Martial Adventurer abroad
with many goodly young Princes, his Sons did perform many exploits in Italy,
chasd the Saracens out of Sicilie, and did sundry brave feats in the Holy Land:
And to this day the Sicilians acknowledge that it was by his valor they enjoy
their own Country, that they live free, and became all Christians again.
Tacitus himself, though no great Friend to our Nation, confesses that the
Germans cut the Romans more work to do, then either the Samnites, the
Carthaginians, the Spaniards, or French and Parthians; For what can the Orient,
as he says, bragg of, but that they conquered and killd our General Crassus,
and Pacorus? But the Germans did not only rout five Roman Armies in the
Consulship of Carbo, Cassius, Scaurus, Aurelius, Servilius, Cepo, and Manlius,
but they took away Varus with three Legions besides; And this happened when
Rome was at her highest point of strength. It was cried up for a Triumph that
Caligula brought and put in the Capitol of Rome, certain Cockle shells that he
had gathered upon the Costs of Holland. Augustus Caesar himself who was called
happy to a Proverb, yet he receavd two overthrowes by the Germans, called
Lolliana, and Variana Clades: Julius Caesar conquered the Gauls by the help of
Germans, and in the Pharsalian fields they performd the prime Service. Then the
Romans, because they could not do much upon Germany by strength and valor,
they went another way to work, they found means to raise and foment divisins
among the Germans themselfs, and did more that way then they could by Arms:
Which policy also Charles the fifth, a German himself, did put in practice to
break the strength of the Lutherans. But that I may return a little to the old
times, what shall I say of that German Legion, which in Spain gave the
denomination to the Kingdom of Legio, now called Leon. What shall I say of the
Exploites of the Vandales, who gave name to Andalusia? Of the Longobards, who
denominated Lombardy in Italy, and occupied it two hundred years?? What of the
Goths, who did lead a dance through all Europe? All these were Birds of our
Feathers: And Charles the quint was usd to say, that the prime Nobility of
Christendom descended from the Gothique race, and that there was no one more
entire body upon Earth then Germany, if united.

But to go from less to great, what a Mirroir of men was our Charlemagne, who
first* translated the Roman Empire to Germany, where it has continued above
eight ages. By these rivulets you may guess at the greatness of the River; by
these sparks you may conjecture what the flame is, and by these Rays you may
know something of the Sun. Indeed in Germany Caesar sits like the Sun himself
in the Zodiac, surrounded with seven Planets; that is, the Septemvirat of
Electors, with multitudes of other refulgent Stars: And this Caesarean dignity
is now so rooted in Germany, that it is a Fundamental Law, Ne quis exterus,
and non Germanus in Imperatorem eligatur, That no Forrener, that is no German
be chosen Emperor. And why should we seek for any abroad, when there are so
many Imperial Families at home? Now, the Imperial Majesty is without a
fellow; Caesar of any mortal is next to God, and deserves Veneration all the
world over, his Dignity being supereminent, and his power should be
transcendent. Athalaricus the Goth could say so much, that the Emperor is
doubtless an earthly God, and whosoever does heave up his arm against him, he
is guilty of his own blood. By Baldus words he is Summus superior, Dominusque
Orientis, Occidentis, Meridiei and septentrionis. He is the highest Superior,
and Lord of all the four Cardinal corners of the World; He is the Supreme
Judge, from whom there is no appeal, the prime Arbiter. It is he who in sign of
excellence wears a triple Crown on his head; He is Creator of Kings, the chief
source of honor, and Fountain whence all greatness flows. Nay, the common and
Capital Enemy of Christendom, the Turk, gives his Ambassadors more honor then
to any other Potentate. As among others, there is one pregnant example; for when
David Ungnadius was Ambassador for the Emperor in Constantinople, and went to
take his leave of the grand Turk, and the Persian Ambassador being com to the
Duana before him, and taken the Chair before him, he was going away without
saluting the Sultan, but the gran Vizier, the (...), or chief Minister of State
perceaving that, causd the Persian Ambassador, though a Mahumetan, to take a
lower Seat. Another time upon the Celebration of Mahomet the third's
Circumcision, which lasted forty days and nights continually, there being in
Constantinople the Legates of the greatest Monarchs upon earth, yet he who was
Ambassador then in the Port for Rodulphus the second, had always the first
place.

Now, as the Emperor himself is the prime Potentat, so the Princes and Nobles
of Germany are the best descended of any other; and whereas diverse German
Princes bore great sway abroad, it is probable that they left there much of
their Offspring. But in Germany there are no foreign extractions; Germany reducd
and ruld other Countries, but none ruld Germany but her own Children; swarms
of Germans have gone abroad to Italy and other Provinces for Governors, but no
strangers have swayd in Germany. It Is true, that Captives of all Nations have
been brought thither from Italy and other places; and among those Captives there
might be happily some Princely Stemms: As now in Westphalia among the Boors there
are some found who derive themselfs from the Caesarean, and Consulary Families
in Rome, but in Rome her self there are very few of them left, having bin
ravished and ransackt so often. There are none left of the publicolae, of the
Iunij, of the Fabij, of the Valerij, of the Manlij, of the Cassij, of the
Cincinnati, of the Menucij, of the Papirij, of the Bruti, of the Fulvij, of the
Sempronij, of the Tullij, of the Hortensij, of the Aurelij, of the Tarquinij,
Hostilij, Licinij, Sempronij, Caecilij, Crassi; and multitudes of other
Illustrious Families of Rome they are all extinct, only the Lakes of Venice
has preservd some upon the inundation of the Goths. Therefore says Aeneas
Sylvius, Ita agamus, ut nos potius Germani quam Itali nuncupemur, etc. Let us
carry the business so, that we may be called Germans rather then Italians; for
there the purest and certainst, ancientst Nobility upon earth does yet flourish.
And indeed most of the Nobles of Italy that now are of German extraction
originally, as the Lords of Colalta, Della Scala, di castle Barco, della
Rovere, della Beccaria, del caretto, di monte feltro, di porcia, Fazzoni, and
Arogari, Carrafi, Bolchetti, Rossi, Landriani, Gonraghi, Gabrieli, Palavicini,
Savorgnani Farnesi, Bentivogli, Soardi, etc. All which acknowledge themselfs to
have had their first extraction from Germany. The Pole in magnifying their
Sigismunds, the Dane in extolling their Christians, the Sweds in glorying of
their Gustavus Adolphus, do all this while commend Germany; whence they first
descended. Let England also boast of their Nobility and Gentry, and in so doing
they praise Germany and Normandy. Let Spain vaunt of their King, and who knows
not but he is a German two ways, by the Gothique and Austrian Family, with the
best Stemms of Spain besides, where he is accounted but an upstart Nobleman,
that is not derivd de la sangre de les Godos, of Gothic Blood. Let France stand
as high a tiptoe as she will, to vaunt of her twelve hundred years Monarks, and
she will confess her three race of Kings, Merovengians, Carlovingians, and
Capevingians, whence Lewis the fourteenth now regnant is descended, came all
primarily of the German race.

But let us com to Germany her self, and you will find that she is like the
Firmament, spangled and glistring with so many coruscant Stars, I mean so many
illustrious Families. I will begin with those of the Order of Knighthood, which
being so many in number, I dare not adventure to nominat one without naming
all, for fear of offense; let it suffice that there are in Germany her self,
besides her annexed Regions, above six hundred Knights, who according to the
Laws of the Emperor Henricus Auceps (the Faulconer) do train up themselfs in
noble exercises, disdaining any kind of mechanique Trade, or to marry any but a
Gentlewoman by descent. Now, touching Counts and Barons, their number is
incredible: I will instance in the chiefest. You have in Germany the
Illustrious Families of the Barbij, the Bronkhorstij, the Castelli, the
Cimbrij, the Eberstenij, the Erbachij, the Falkenstenij, the Furstenbergij, the
Gerobrekij, the Gleichij, the Hannovij, the Helfenstenij, the Hohenloi, the
Isenburgij, Leimnigij, the Leonstenij, the Limpurgij, the Lippij, the
Mansfeldij, the Monfortij, the Nassovij, the Oldenburgij, the Ortenburgij, the
Oestfrislandij, the Oettingij, the Rappolstenij, the Rhenigravij, the Reussij,
the Salmij, the Schaunburgij, the Swaertenburgij, the Solmij, the Stolbergij,
the Sulzij, the Tubingij, the Waldburgij, the Waldbeccij, the Wirdij, the
Witgenstenij, the Zollerij, and diverse more. I put down here the names of the
Trees only, whereof every one has multitude of branches; And some of these
have such Prerogatives and Royalties, that countervaile some Sovereign Princes
elsewhere. But to look upon the high Classis of Nobility, how many Imperial
and Regal Families are there? Guilielmus Brussius says, that as Italy excels
in Palaces, and Monuments of Antiquity, as France in Soldiers, as Spain with
Bishops, as England with Yeomen, as Poland with Nobles, so Germany abounds with
Princes. Brussius herein said true; but besides the last, he may also find all
the rest in Germany; I will instance first in your Princely Family, my Cosen
Frederique Achilles; how famous was Ulric the seventh for his Amability? Prince
Lewis for his probity? Prince Georg for his Hospitality, Ulric the ninth; the
first, second, third, and fourth Eberhards for their Fortitude, and your Father
Frederique for his Magnanimity? What a signal Prince was Eberhard the first,
whom the Italians seemd to adore, being inflamd with the Rays of his Virtues;
So that Maximilian the first, passing by this Tomb, said, There lies a
Prince that not left his fellow in the whole Empire, of whose sage counsels I
made mighty advantages. What a Grandee was the Lord Christopher, whom Catharina
de Medicis Queen Regent of France sent Rascalon unto, desiring his assistance
and advise, during those tumultuary times, and intricat War of the Ligue; he
at such a high Ladies request went accordingly, but with a guard of three
thousand Horse and Foot, which did notable service.

So you, my noble Cozen Ioachim Ernest, a branch of the Illustrious and regal
House of Holsteyn, do shine with many splendid titles, whose virtues not all
Denmark, Norway, Gothland, or the Kingdom of the Vandals, nor Holsasia,
Dictsmarsh and Sleswic, nor Oldenberg and Delmenhorst can equal; the immortal
memory of your Oncle Frederique the second, of your Granfathers, Christians the
second and third, of your great Granfather Christian the first, does so
illustrat and ennoble; O the high felicity of the great Witikind, whose renown
after so many centuries of years is yet fresh and fragrant.

I will be modest in speaking of my Saxonian Family, twice Electorall, and in
the setting forth of the magnitud of their merit; he made the greatest
oppositions against Henry the sixth, who by indirect means was Emperor a
while, but afterward he forcd him to quitt it; an exploit to be preferrd
before other tropheys and triumphs, because he thereby did vindicat the liberty
of Germany. I could run into a larg field to display the princely virtues and
merits of this Family -- Sed Cynthius aurem vellit. Apollo plucks me by the
ear, telling me that this copious Theme is fitter for another then my self.

Of the Anhaltin Family, nere allied to the Saxonian, how many Heroes have bin?
Sigismund, Wolfangus, Rodolphus, Ioachimus, Ioannes, Ernest, were renowned both
for feats of arms, and acts of Peace.

In the Badensian Family there have bin some Stars of the greatest magnitude,
which have bin so refulgent for high achievments, prowess, and justice: I will
instance in James Duke of Baden, who kept his Territories so free and safe,
that if any one was robbed upon the high way, he would command him to be satisfied
out of his own Tresure, upon good Affidavit made.

In Brunswic Princely Family, how many Worthies have flourisht; Cardinal
Conradus, Henricus Leo, Albertus Magnus: Henry the Peaceable, William the
Victorious, Henricus Julius sago and toga illustris, famous for the Gown, and
the Gun.

In the stemm of Mechelburg how many high-top Trees have flourisht; as Henry of
Jerusalem, Albert the first, Casimirus the second, Ericus the first, all mighty
men in merit.

In the Pomerla^d Family Suantipiorus, Suantipotius, Busglavus, were
supereminent with diverse more.

In the Hassian Family, Henry Ironside, Lewis the meek, who refusd the Empire,
with sundry more were famous,: As Hermannus Archbishop of Colen, Philip the
thunderbolt of War, and Morris the Darling of the Muses.

In the Brandeburgian Family, there was Albertus called the German Hector for
his Exploits; Johannes for his Eloquence called the German Cicero, with others
most celebrous for their Piety, their Prowess, their Benignity, and Justice.

Touching the Family of the Bavarian Palatin, wheresoever I cast my eyes upon
any part of Europe, I find most parts echo forth their Glory: For out of this
Family as out of a Trojan Horse, there have issued out nombers of venturous and
magnanimous Princes. Othowitelsbachius, who merely for his high worth receavd
Bavariae from Frederique the first, Lodwick the first, and second, both
Electors: Lodwick and Rupert both Emperors, Wolfangus Bipontinus, who with
five thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse, penetrated the very heart of
France, and from the banks of the Rhin advancd as far as Aquitane, insomuch
that the very name of Deuxponts is grown famous and dreadful in France to this
day. What shall I say of Albert the third, who being offered the Kingdom of
Bohemia, by a very splendid Embassy of the chiefest Nobles, utterly refusd it:
Maximilian the present Duke of Bavaria is accounted a Prince of consummated
wisdom, his Authority and Esteem being so great throughout the whole Empire:
With what prudence, prowess, and prosperous success did he take Prague, when
there was an Army twice greatet in number that stood in his way! How glorious is
the memory of Philip Palatin of Bavaria, who made the great Soliman to break
his Vow, whereof he had made three, the one to finish that huge Aquaeduct of
bringing water into the City of Constantinople from the Danube: The second to
erect two Bridges in a Creek of the Hellespont, the third the reducing of
Vienna in Austria; though he finished the two first, yet he fayld in the
performance of his last Vow, chiefly by the Valor of the foresayed Bavarian
Philip, who forcd him to quit the Siege with tears in his eyes, and to go back
with his three hundred thousand men, for his Army consisted of so many, though
the Defendants in the Town were not sixteen thousand, who repelld them after
twenty times storming.

But I ascend to the cumble of all Renown and glory, the house of Austria; and
now although I had a brazen breast, a hundred toungs, and so many throats, as
the Poet once wishd, I should not be able to set forth the Majesty of this
Imperial Stemm: Nay, if all the green leafs that wag in the Hercynian Forest
were turned to toungs, I should not be able to expand the glory of this Heroique
Family. I may truly apply thereunto that of the Lyrik,

-- Micat inter omnes
Austrium sydus, velut inter ignes
Luna minores.
Let all Posterity learn, and all Annals have it upon Record, and ruminat
upon it, that there were never so many Crowns, Scepters, and Empires, fell so
suddenly upon any Race: and I pray what could we do.

Niforet Austriacis Germania fulta columnis? If Germany were not supported with
Austrian Pillars, she would quickly torter. Antiquity in former times did deifie
many of their brave men, as Jove, Mercury, Hercules and others, raising them
up, and fixing them in the Firmament. But I dare say, there have bin diverse of
this divine Progeny, that merit to be stellified more then they; I could muster
up thirteen Emperors who have bin successively of this house: and indeed who
is fitter and abler to make head, and preserve us from the common Enemy, from
the fury of the Ottoman Emperor, then the Austrians? considering that they
have their hereditary Territories upon the Frontires of Turkey: How many
Saint-like persons have bin of this house, as well as great Captains, and
notable Politicians? What shall I say more my noble Auditors? I have read that
when Timanthes would have drawn Iphigenia standing at the Altar, and ready to be
Sacrificed, together with the standers by, he painted them in a Picture of deep
Melancholy, specially her Oncle; but being come to her Father, all his fancy
being spent, he coverd him with a Veil: So must I do at this time, pass over
this Semidean Family with silence: for having spent my Fancy in displaying the
high Virtues of other German Princes, I want both imagination and words to set
forth the glory of this. And now most judicious and noble gallant Princes, what
think you of Germany? may not she expect the highest room among the Kingdoms
of Europe? Yes surely, being the seat of the Empire, the Source of such a
Nobility, and having so many advantages besides. For my own particular, as we
read that Plato gave Nature thanks for three things; viz. That he was born a
man, and not a woman, a Greek, and not a Barbarian, an Athenian, and not a
Theban, specially in Socrates his time: So I render most hearty thanks to the
divine Majesty for three things likewise, that he has made me a man, a
Christian, and a German, and that I live in the Reign of the most glorious
Emperor Ferdinand, ever August, whom Heaven conserve.

THE ORATION OF THE LORD JOHN GULIELM OF RETWITZ: AGAINST GERMANY.
Most Excellent President, and Illustrious Princess,
TO be a good Patriot, and to love his Country, discovers a noble mind in any
man; for my own part I am so wholly possessd with an inhaerent, and true natural
affection unto her, that did necessity require, I would not only employ all the
limbs of my body, and faculties of my brain to do Her service, but I would
hazard the purest arteriall blood which lies in the best ventricle of my heart,
for her incolumity, honor, and welfare; but now there is a business of
another nature incumbent upon me, which is touching the Excellence and
Prerogative of Germany, in relation to the rest of the Provinces of Europe; and
this task I must discharge impartially, measuring her according to her merit,
not according to blind affection. It is far from the rules of Justice, and
incongruous to reason we should exalt our own, by depressing other Countries, or
Dares like, triumph before Victory. We Germans do not see that Wallet that
dangles behind us, which I will endeaver now to shake off with a gentle hand:
And by the favor of this high and honorable Assembly, and your patience, most
illustrious Duke of Saxony, I will make it my business to make some inquiries
into the extravagances, the manners and vices of our own Country, which when I
have displayed unto you, I believe you will revoke your former Opinion of
ascribing the Principality to Germany.

Now, touching the Vices of Germany, as Cardinal Bellarmin says of the
Bishop of Rome, Tantam esse papae amplitudinem and Majestatem, ut perquam
difficile sit illam definiri, The Amplitude and Majesty of the Pope is such,
that it is a hard matter to define it; so by a kind of Antithesis I may say,
the ill manners, and customs of Germany are so large and lothsom, that it is a
very difficult task to describe them. And where shall I begin this task? I will
take my rise at the power and Dominions of Germany, which I find to faint, and
languish every day more then other. O immortal God! What Diminutions has she
receavd? how many potent and flourishing States have fallen away from her? The
Venetian, the Milanois, the Florentine, the Genoways, the Luqueses, have quite
shaken off her Yoke: Nay, Rome her self has played the Fugitif, and ran away
from her. Witness the Emperor Charles the fourth, who being to make his
entrance into Rome, was let in, but limited to this condition by the Cardinal
of Ostia, Ut neque Romae, neque in Italia diu moraretur, That he should not
sojourn long in Rome, nor Italy, as Nauclerus has it. Nay, all the
Jurisdiction of the Roman Emperor is almost quite vanished in Italy; Insomuch
that Caesar cannot restore any of the Popes Subjects to his Birthright, either
in point of Title or Possession, without the Popes consent, which if it be
wanting, the decree of legitimation is invalid: Nay, the Pope does not only
interdict him in his, but he will not permit the Emperor to exercise absolute
power in his own Territories: Witness that Act of Sixtus Quintus, who
glorified himself to be of an Illustrious House, meaning a small Cottage,
which for want of Roof took in always the luster of the Solar Beams. In this
Sixtus his Pontificat, it chancd that the Count Pepili possessd some Manners
beyond the River of Po; Cardinal Salviatus questioning his Title, in that the
said Count came from the Race of some Banditi; he producd the Emperors grant,
but this would not serve the turn, for the said Cardinal causd him to be
apprehended in his own Palace, and sending for a Ghostly Father to confess
him, he causd him to be presently strangled.

The Lorrainers, Burgundians, and Belgians; I mean the united Provinces are
also revolted, who in regard they have by their Arms shaken off the Spaniard,
alledg they have also at the same time freed themselfs from any Homage to
Caesar. So have also the Helvetians, or Swisses, whom Aeneas Sylvius calls
Flagellum principum, ac nobilium; Homines natura superbos, qui ipsam sibi
Iustitiam famulari volunt, justumque id putant quod eorum phantasticis est
conform capitibus. The Swisses are a scourge of Princes and Nobles, men
naturally proud, and who would make Justice her self to attend them in quality
of a servile handmaid, thinking that only to be just, which conformes with
their caprichious heads. Hereof there was a late example, for being summond upon
a Process of a high nature to the Imperial Chamber at Spire, they sent their
rough-hewn Ambassadors, who told the Council, Domini confaederati Helvetij vos
vicinos suos salvere jubent, mirantur vero quod tam crebris citationibus, etc.
The Lords Confederats of Swisserland do greet you their Neighbors, but they
wonder that by your so often Citations you would disquiet them, therefore they
pray and exhort you that you would no longer molest them.

So also there are very spacious Countries Northward, who have fallen quite away
from our German Emperor; among others, some part of the Livonians Country, who
when they were summond to obedience by Charles the fifth, otherwise he would
reduce them by force, they answered in a geering manner, That they knew his
Horse would be tired before he could reach the skirts of Livonia, as Thuanus
has it. Good Lord, whersoever I turn my eyes, I behold Nations revolted from
Caesar, which makes the Imperial Eagle so thinn of Feathers, and almost stark
naked. From the reign of Rodolph the first, which is not much beyond the memory
of man, I could instance in two hundred States and Princes who have unmembred
and emancipated themselfs from our German Emperor, who were usd to obey his
summons, and make appearance accordingly: All the Hansiatique Towns are now
grown petty Republiques, whereas they did once owe Vassallage to the Empire.
The Emperor Charles the fifth, though a glorious Prince, yet he made in his
time such a pitiful complaint to Pope Adrian, that Germany was reducd to that
penury and indigence, that she was not only not able to bear up against the
incursions of the common Enemy, but she was not able to suppress Domestique
insolences, and maintain Peace and Justice within her own doors; This
Goldustus has upon Record; nay Scioppius goes further, that Germany was grown
so beggarly, that there were some of her best born Children, some of Regal
extraction, who had not three hundred Crowns a year for their whole
subsistence, insomuch that many of them went habited rather like Poets then
Princes; but this indeed is too much, it is a mere Scioppian Chymera, and
indeed there was not since the creation of man, a more lying and base
licentious toungd fellow then Scioppius.

Now, our very Foes can tell us our defects in Government, and in what a
deplorable condition Germany stands, as will appeer by this example. When
Maximilian the second was chosen Emperor, it chanced that Ibraim, Solimans
Ambassador was then at Frankefort, who having bin a spectator of the Show, and
observd what great Princes did attend the Emperor that day, and being told
that some of them could raise an Army of themselfs against the Turk, the
Ambassador smiling, said, That he doubted not of the strength of Germany, but
that the minds, the counsels, and actions of the Germans, were like a Beast
with many Heads and tails, who being in case of necessity to pass through a
Hedge, and every head seeking to find a particular hole to pass through, they
were a hindrance one to another, every head drawing after his own fancy, and so
hazarded the destruction both of all the heads and tails; but the Empire of
Solomon his great Master, was like a Beast with many tails, yet she had but
one head, which head getting through, or over any passage, withour confusion of
fancy and dispute of any other, all the tails and the whole body followed him
accordingly; well said the Turk, and very wisely, and I am sorry that we find
it so by woeful experience.

There is another mighty soloecism in the German Government, which is the
confusion and differences that uses to be in Diets, which made. Aeneas Sylvius
to give us a tart reprehension when he says; Omnes Germanorum Dietas esse
faecundas, et quamlibet in ventre habere alteram; Ac credibile est quia
faemineum sit nomen, libenter impraegnari, Pietas est parturire. All the German
Diets or Assemblies are fruitful, so that every one has another commonly in
her belly; And it is credible that Diets, because they are of the Faeminine
Gender, are willing to become pregnant and bring forth. The Emperor Charles
the fifth could also say to the same purpose, That the German Iuntas, and
Iudicatories and Diets were like Vipers, for as these destroy their Dam, so the
latter decrees of Diets destroy the former. Now what a lame imperfect power the
Emperor himself has in these Imperial Chambers or Diets we well know: Indeed
as one said, the name of Caesar remains, but the Majesty is gone. The thing it
self is vanishd, and the shadow remains. O degenerous times! O deplorable poor
Germany: In former times the greatest Kings of Europ and Asia, and Afrique,
thought it no disparagement to submit to Caesar, and now not only Kings, but
every mean Count does scorn to stoop to him; And indeed it does not tend much
to the reputation of our Ancestors, that in less then three hundred years nine
German Emperors should be destroyed, besides those that were deposed, and
abdicated. It grieves me to remember here the improbous saying of Gerardus
Bishop of Mentz, who having with diverse others conspird against. Albert the
first, and intending to elect another, the said Gerardus having a hunting horn
about him, and being a potent popular man, in so much that he was called propola
imperij, the Huckster of the Empire, he belchd out these words: In hoc Cornu
complures gesto Caesares, I carry many Caesar's in this Horn; But the Albert by
the special benedictions of Heaven was quit with them all at last, that he
made them carry Dogs so many miles, which is accounted in Germany the most
opprobrious and disgracefullest punishment that can be inflicted upon a
Nobleman or Gentleman; whereas a Plebean is bound according to the quality of
the offense, to carry a Chair from one County to another. So we read that
Frederique Barbarossa made Hermannus, Count Palatin of the Rhin, and ten Counts
more, to carry Dogs above a whole German mile, for the praedations and
insolences they had committed, while he was in Italy. But whereas this kind of
punishment is grown obsolet, I could wish it were still in force, we should not
then have so many treasons, and transgressions of Imperial sanctions, the
Majesty of Caesar, the balance of Dollars, the decrees of Diets would be more
regarded, and Justice would not be so frequently baffled, and affronted.

It is an odd character that Velleius Paterculus gives of our Countrymen; Esse
Homines qui nihil praeter vocem et membra haberent hominum, in summa feritate
versutissimi, natumque mendacio genus. The Germans were men who had nothing but
the voices, and Members of men, yet they had a great deal of wiliness in
their wildnes, a Race born for lies. Witness their perfidious carriage in Great
Britany toward the old Inhabitants thereof, when at a solemn meeting and Treaty
they carried Knifes hid in their Stockins, wherewith in the midst of their
salutations they murdered the ancient nobility of the Britons, who had come
armeles into the field according to the Capitulations of agreement between
them, that none should bring with him any offensive or defensive Weapon. Then
when those Saxons, which were true Germans, for they came from the lower circuit
of Saxony, and to this day are called Saxons by the Welsh and Irish, had taken
firm footing in Britain, what a World of spoils and devastations did they
commit both by Land and Sea: In so much that Sidonius complains of them, Quot
remiges videris Saxones, totidem decernere putes Archipiratas, Ita simul omnes
imperant, parent, docent, discunt latrocinari. Hostis est omni host
truculentior; est ijs quaedam cum discriminibus pelagi non notitia solum, sed
familiaritas -- As many Rowers you see of the Saxons, you discern so many
Rovers and Arch-pirats: They all command, and obey, they learn, and teach how
to robb; An enemy more truculent then any enemy, They have not only knowledge,
but a familiarity with the sea etc. I believe there is none here who is ignorant
of the story of Hatto the first Archbishop of Mentz, who so basely betrayed
Albertus Bishop of Bamberg, who had casually slain Conradus the Emperors
brother, who having besiegd him in Therussa castle, the said Albert was
persuaded by Hatto to go and submitt himself to the Emperor, and he promised
to bring him safe back to his Castle, which he did: but Albert had his hand
tied behind, and so as soon as he returned his head was chopd off; but Hatto
said, to excuse himself, that he had only promisd to bring him back to the
place from which he had fetchd him, and no more. What a horrible story is there
of another Hatto, an Archbishop also of Mentz, who was devoured and eaten up
alive by rats for his uncharitableness to the poor in a year of famine, whom
he had lodgd in a great barn, and putting fire thereunto in the dead of night
he burnt them all, saying, that those were the rats which devourd his corn; And
that this story may be upon perpetual record, the castle where he was eaten,
is called Rat castle to this day, being situated in the middle of the Rhin,
whither the Rats swomm after him, and never left him till they had bin the
executioners of divine vengeance upon him.

Another such a horrid story as this was that of the devil who appeerd at
Hamelen in the shape of pied piper, which town being very much infested with
rats, the said piper did covenant with the Burgers to free them of that Vermin
for such a reward, which he was to receave a year after they saw themselfs
freed; Hereupon the Piper playing upon a kind of bagpipes that he had, all the
rats followed him to a great lough hard by, where he drowned them all: but
returning at the years end for his reward, the Burgers would put him off with a
small matter; thereupon playing upon his pipes one evening, all the children of
the town followed him to the mouth of a hill, where he and the children
vanished; There is a great stone pillar stands in that place, whereon there is
mention hereof, and the people of the town to this day in all their public
writings draw their Epoches and computation of years from the going out of
their children. And as the devil appeerd here in the shape of a piper; so nere
Bremen he got into a Butcher, who being enraged one day with his wife that was
bigg with child, he took her into a stable and ripping up her belly took out
the embryon; and there being a sow hard by big with pigs, he killd the sow also,
and taking out the piggs, he sowed them up in his wifes belly, and the child
in the sow's. Can the wit of man run upon a more nefandous thing? But Germany
is full of these bloody stories. And whereas you know we have a custom when any
notorious thief is hanged to stick so many pegs in the gibbet as he had killd
men, it is ordinary to find in Moravia, and other places such gibbets some with
twenty, some with thirty, and I heard lately of one that had sixty three peggs
stuck into it, denoting so many murders by one man. Now, if we descend to Low
Germany, we shall find her little inferior to the Higher in strange kinds of
immanities. What an inhuman thing was that in Gant, when the father and the son
being condemnd to die for one Fact, it was adjudged they should draw lotts
whither the father should hang the son, or the son the father, and it fell to
the son, who accordingly thrust out of the world him who brought him in. But
now I speak of the City of Gant, which is held to be one of the most
mutinous and inconstant Cities of Christendom (and therefore no wonder that she
has so many windmills within her walls) what nation, I say, has showed more
arguments of instability then Allmain; Go first to Religion, since that
Shaveling Monk Luther fell in love with the Abadesse, to enjoy which he made
Religion his bawd, I pray you how many new Sects have crept in since? John
Calvin came apace after him, he usherd in the Anabaptists, then what a swarm of
Swenkfeldians, Osiandrians, Huberians, Oecolampadians, and Arminians have we;
and if you desire more, you may go to Amsterdam, Where you shall find as many
sorts as there be of Venice glasses in Murano. What a scandal to the German
Nation was John of Leyden, that frantique Rascal? what an opprobry to
Christianity is that Amsterdam, where such a confusion of Religions is allowed!
and no wonder, for she is one of the nearest to Hell of any town upon earth.
And as in the reign of Nimrod there fell a curse upon those that would dwell so
high by a confusion of tongues, so a confusion of beliefs is fallen upon these
men by dwelling too low, and cosening the fish of their inheritance, for indeed
the Fish should inhabit that Country which they have forced out of the jaws of
the Sea, and thereby may be called true Usurpers.

But touching religion, the French fancy was never so greedy after new fashions
in apparel, as we Germans high and low do thirst after new fangling opinions
in matters appertaining to Christian Doctrine and discipline: It was a notable
saying of Queen Katherin de Medici when she was Regent of France, that the two
greatest Heretics which Europe produced were Luther and Machiavil (her
Country man) the one in matters of piety, the other of policy. But we Germans
being commonly of a higher stature then other Nations, we are compard to Houses
of five or six stories high, wherein the upper rooms are worst furnished,
meaning the cells of our brains; as if the largenes of members should lessen the
strength of the mind, according to that of Seneca, Nimio robore membrorum vigor
mentis hebescit, quasi abnuente natura vtriusque boni largitionem, ne supra
mortalem sit felicitatem eundem et valentissimum esse, et sapientissimum. The
vigor of the mind grows dull by too great strength and boysterousness of the
body; Nature denying as it were such a double bounty, it being beyond humane
felicity for the same man to be most valiant and most wise. It is the saying of
Bartolus, that Longi Homines sunt raro sapientes, Tall men* are seldom wi^e:
And as Helvetia is so sterill that she cannot feed her self; Hassia so swelling
with barren Hills that sometimes she is ready to starve; As the Marquisat of
Brandenburg and Westphalia are choak^d with sand, as other places up and down
Germany are full of ill aird fenns and marshes that hinders the fertility of
the Country, and impaires the health of the people; and as in some rank grounds
weeds get up so fast that the corn cannot grow, so in our German natures there
is still some obstacle or other that choakes the growth and tapring up of virtue.

I confess that our Compatriotts are cried up generally for continence, but
truly I do not think they deserve it so much as the world thinks, for how many
Baths (or rather Brothell Houses of lust) have you up and down Germany, where
shirts and smocks promiscuously meet, whence some Ladies that came Penelop^s
thither, go away Helens* Poggius writes a book entitled de schola Epicureae
factionis quae regnat in Teutonia; Of the school of Epicurism which reigns in
Germany, meaning the Baths of Boden and others; He says Nulla in orb
Terrarum balnea ad faecunditatem mulierum magis esse accommodata* innumerabilem
multitudinem nobilium et Ignobilium ducenta millia passuum eo venire, non tam
Valetudinis quam voluptatis gratia* Omnes Amatores, Omnes Procos quibus in
deliciis vita est posita, eo concurerere ut fruantur rebus concupitis, multas
faminas simulare corporum aegritudines cum animo laborent, omnibus unam mentem
esse tristitiam fugare, quaerere hilaritatem, non de communi dividundo agere,
sed de communicando divisa. There are no bathes so accommodated for the
fruitfulness of women as the Germans, an innumerable company of nobles and
ignobles come thither two hundred miles off, not so much for health as
pleasure; All amorous men, all suitors, all servants of ladies who delight in
delicacies flock thither, many women go thither to cure the sickness of the
mind rather then of the body; they com thither not to treat of dividing the
Common, but of communicating what are divided: What says the Monk of Ulmes
of his own Country women? he says, Omnia aliarum Regionum lupanaria habent
foeminas de Suevia, sic etiam omnia poene monasteria procul existentia habent
virgins Suevigenas; et dilectae et utiles Monasteriis sunt plus quam aliae
propter bonam naturae dispositionem. The Bordells almost of all Countrey^ have
some women of Suevi, and also all Monasteries though a good distance off have
Suevian Nuns, for they are loving, and prove more useful then others for
their good natural dispositions; Among other examples let this serve to show
the impudicity of our German ladies in the person of Barbara Count Hermans
daughter, and wife to the Emperor Sigismund, who having tried the metal of
the strongest backs in her husbands time, was after his death admonished by her
ghostly father to live chaste and like the turtle, whereunto she answered, If you,
Father Confessor, would have me imitat birds, why shall I not the life of a
sparrow rather then of a turtle? -- Now, Frederique the brother of this Barbara
was as bad as she; who having murtherd his wife for the love of his concubine,
and being dehorted by a pious friend from his damnable dissolut courses,
specially now being ninety years of age, and to think on his Grave, Yes, I
will, said he, and I intend to have these lines insculpd upon it. Haec mihi
porta est ad Inferos, quid illic reperiam nescio, scio quae reliqui: abundavi
bonis omnibus, ex quibus nihil fero mecum, nec quod bibi, atque edi, quodque
inexplebilis voluptas exhausit. This is my passage to Hell, I know not what I
shall find there, I know what I left: I abounded with all things, whereof I
carry nothing with me, neither of what I ate or drunk or exhausted in
insatiable pleasure. The example of Henry Duke of Brunswik is very signal, who
being desperately in love with Eva Tottina, a young damsel, (daughter to a
gentleman of good quality) that kept his Duchess company, he plotted that she
should make ^emblance to go to visit her friends, at such a castle, whither being
com, she faind her self sick over night, and so her women who were her
accomplices, gave out she was dead of the plague in the morning; so having got a
wooden statue in a chest of purpose, they coffind the statue and sent it to be
buried, so the Duke did satiat his ^ust and got seven children of her. What
shall I say of the kings of Denmark? is it not a common thing for them to keep
concubines in their Courts, which are attended upon like Queens; It is well
known how many bastards Maurice Prince of Orange left behind him, who being
advised by a reverend Divine upon his deathbed to marry that woman of whom he
had most of his sons, and thereby he might preserve her reputation from being a
whore, and his children from being bastards: but being pressed to it, he
answered, No, I will not wrong my brother Harry so much, who was to be his Heir.
Albertus the Archduke it seems preferrd the pleasure of his body before that of
his soul, when he shook off his Toledo miter, and Cardinals capp, to ma^ry the
Infanta of Spain.

Touching Intemperance, especially the vice of ebriety and excess of drinking*
where has it such a vogue as in Germany? it is her bosom peculiar sin, and she
has infected all other Nations with it; The Belgian complains that the
immoderat u^e of wine came tumbling down upon him from high Germany, like snow
rushing down the Alpian Hills, whence it found passage over with wind in poop
to England, which are good at it, being of a German race, and therefore apt to
take. Nay, as they say, the English are good Inventis addere, to improve any
new Invention, so they go beyond us; for whereas the Dutch does pelt the brain
with small shot, the Englishman does storm it with whole canons and huge
carowses; for he when he is at it does not sipp and drink by halfs, or demurr
upon it by some discourse as the German does, or eat some salt quelchose
between, but he deals in shire liquor, and is quickly at the bottom of his cupp
without any intervening discourse. Yet the Dutch bears the bell away both from
Him and all others; Hereupon they use to characterize a Dutchman to be an
Animal that can drink more then he can carry, as also one who uses to barrel
up more then he can broch, that understands more, then he can utter: It Is he who
drinks cum mensura, but absque modo, according to measure, but without a mean.
I heard of four old men in the upper Saxony, that having met at a clubb, they
did not stir til they had drunk as many healths as they had years betwixt them;
all which came to above three hundred. I heard of another company who at a
match of drinking upon the Texells side in Amsterdam, tippled so long looking
out of a casement, that they thought they were at sea in a tempest; therefore
to lighten the shipp they began to throw tables and stools with other luggage
out of the windows, thinking they were in danger of shippwrack. But he was not
so intemperat a Drinker, who used to drink according to the gamuth, Vt, Re, Mi,
Fa, sol, la, tossing up one carouse to every one, saying it was,

Vt Re-levet Mi-serum Fa-tum, So-litosque La-bores. Aeneas Silvius has a story
of the Count of Gorits, that to try whether his children were legitimat or no,
he used to give them wine; and if they grew sick upon it, he concluded them to
be bastards, and none of his. But he was a witty soul, and deservd to drink
wine of the best, who comprehended the laws and causes of drinking in these
verses.

Si been quid memini, causae sunt quinque bibendi.
1 Hospitis adventus. 2 Praesens sitis, atque 3 Futura, 4 Et Vini bonitas. 5
Vel quaelibet altera causa.
To Drink there may five causes be at least.
1. For to entertain a Newcom guest. 2. To quench the present thirst. 3.
Prevent the next. 4. The goodness of the Wine. 5. Or any text.
The Jesuit has a geerupon the German that he forsook the Communion of the
Church of Rome, because laymen have not the Cup at the Sacrament.

Now, to draw toward a conclusion, it cannot be denied but heretofore the
Germans were appoved men for military glory, but, Helas, they are now much
eclipsd; The knights of Rhodes dissuading Soliman the Great Turk to war
against Europe, especially against Germany, He answered, I esteem the arms of
the Germans less, then of any others, and that for four causes. Quia sunt
discordes, et quemadmodum sui quinque digiti, it a illi nanquam in unum
coalescant; Quia laborum sunt impatientes, et prae aliis Germani sunt
helluones, Potatores, qui in castris scortorum turbam foveant, Ducesque belli
plumis potius, quam armis militaribus gaudeant, quia temere. -- I value not the
Germans much, because they are at discord, nor can they be ever made one, no
more then my five fingers; They are impatient of labor, and above all others
they are gluttons, and drinkers, fit to march in a Field of Whores, and they
take more pride in their feathers then their arms.

But Germany glories much that she was the first Inventresse of gunpowder, and
printing, of Artillery and Typography; whereof, contrary to the Genius and
function of the men, a Friar found out the first, and a soldier the second; But
if we may give credit to Maffeius, and Paulus Iovius, and Boterus, three
serious and sober Authors, They will tell you the contrary; and they were first
invented and practiced in China, the most Oriental Country upon this part of
the Hemisphear. Hear I pray you his words, Aenea tormenta conflare, litteras
imaginesque subjectis praelo typis excudere ( quibus Cmomentis Europa
recentibus adeo gloriatur) vetustissimo in usu apud Sinas compertum est -- To
cast brass gunns, or imprint characters by way of stamp has bin of very
ancient use in China, though Europe arrogate the inventions to her self;
Besides the moulding of Canons, they have a way to make them loose in parts,
which may be carried upon a porters back, or a beasts to any place without
carriages; Then for printing, their characters are longer then ours, nor do
their lines extend from left to right as Greek and Latins, or from the right
hand to the left, as the Hebrew and all her dialects, but perpendicularly from
top to bottom; There be books hereof both in the Vatican, and the Escuriall.
Boterus says, sono piu di mill anni ehe I Chinesi vsano la stampa. It is
above a thousand years that the Chinese use Typography. And Paulus Iovius
affirms, Maxim mirandum videtur apud Sinas esse Typographos artifices qui
libros, Historias, et sacrorum ceremonias more nostro imprimant, quorum
longissima folia introrsus quadrata serie complicentur, cujus generis volumen a
Rege Lusitaniae cum Elephante dono missum Leo pontifex humaniter nobis
ostendit, ut hinc facile credamus ejus artis exe^pla antequam Lusitani in
Indiam penetrarint, per Scythas et Moscos adincomparabile literarum praesidium
ad nos pervenisse. It seems very strange that there should be typographical
Artificers in China who used to print books and the ceremonies of their law,
whose longest leaves were folded fowerfold innerly. Pope Leo did us the
civility as to show us such a volume, which was sent him for a gift, with an
Elephant, whence we may well think that long before the navigation of the
Portugalls to the East Indies this Art of typography might be brought to Europe
by way of Scythia or Moscovy. But, put case that Germany was first foundress of
these two Inventions, truly I do not think she has thereby deservd any thing
well of Europe: Touching gunns, they may be called things forgd in Hell, and
cast in Belzebubs furnace, for they destroy the Valiant with the Coward; And
for Printing, truly I think it has bin the greatest cause of all the heresies,
odd opinions and schisms that have swarmd ever since in the Christian Church.

To conclude, in regard that the wallet that Germany carries behind her is so
full of Vices, which cast such a shadow that obscures all her Virtues, I
cannot give a full suffrage that she may merit the principality of Europe, but
rather vote for Italy, whence all Imperial Majesty was first derivd unto Her.

THE ORATION OF PRINCE IO ACHIM ERNEST, Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswik, etc.
For France.
Most Heroique Princes,
THe Emperor Maximilian the first, who may be said to have deserved that name
for the magnitude of his merits, his singular wisdom, his incomparable spirit,
as well as from the sacred Font of Regeneration, in some familiar discourses
with his Domestique Lords about the Kingdom of France, is said to have broken
out into this high commendation thereof. If it could stand with the order of
Nature that any mortal man might be a God here among the Elements, and I were
He, I would so dispose in my Will (quantum ad familiae herciscundae judicium)
touching the division of my estate, that my eldest son should be God after me,
(absit proptana men's) but my second should be King of France. This saying or
excess of speech must be interpreted with a sane judgment; for hereby the
noble Emperor meant nothing else then to intimate his opinion touching that
potent, populous, and opulent Kingdom of France, and that no one Country under
the Sun is preferrable to it. I use this preface, most excellent Princes, for
preparing your attentions; and if peradventure I be transported too far with
the elogie of France, I may have the suffrage of so noble an Emperor and a
Countreyman of our own, to apologize for me; And truly though I owe my vitals
to Germany and all that I have, being my most dear native soil, yet let me not
be thought to degenerate a jot from the nature of a German, if in my subsequent
discourse I hold France to have the advantage of Germany in diverse things; as
also of any Europaean Country besides; which while I endeavor to assert and
prove, I humbly desire this most Noble Auditory that the same gale of favor and
candor may blow upon me all along as I go, which did on that Illustrious Prince
who spoke before me.

And now will I endeavor to take a survey of France, which noble Monarchy
whosoever will behold with a judicious and impartial eye, will acknowledge that
first for her position and site she has the advantage of any other Country
being placed in the Center of Europe, having Italy, Spain, Germany, and Great
Britain round about Her; She enjoyes a most delicate temper of clime, for she
needs not either the stoves of Germany to preserve her children from the
inclemency of the Heavens in point of cold, or the subterranean caves in other
Countries to refresh her in point of heat, nor is she much infected with
unwholsom aguish and infectious aires which in other Countries produce such a
legion of diseases. Now, that which adds much to the advantage of her situation
is, that she lies accessible and open to all mankind for Commerce and
negotiation both by Land and Sea, and being seated so in the midst she is the
fittest to be Arbitresse, and to give law to the rest of Christendom, as being
able to divide, hinder, or unite the Forces of Europe when she pleases; She
stands commodiously to restrain the growing and unproportionable greatness of
some, as also to releeve the weaker, that they be not oppressed by the
stronger: She bridles Great Britany backward; On the right hand she checks
Spain, on the left hand Germany both high and low. The Ocean and Mediterranean
wash both her sides, the Alps fence her from Italy, and the Pyrenean Mountains
from Spain, those huge hills serving her as trenches of Circumvallations
against both; And where nature fayles, she secures her self by art, by
Fortresses, Cittadels, and Castles.

To this Strength of hers may be added her plenty, and indeed she may be called
a Copia Cornu, or a Pandora's box of all things for necessity or pleasure, and
she uses to give such largess of her luxuriant fortune abroad, that she is a
Creditor to all other peeple, but a Debtor to none; Those commodities which use
to enrich other Countries singly are here all conjunct, and what is exotique or
strange in other Countries is here domestique and common; Which Italy, who
uses to be sparing of other's praises, and prodigal of her own, does
acknowledge, for Boterus says, that those things which are found but in some
places of Italy, are found every where in France. Therefore the character which
Pliny gave in times past to Province, and Salvianus gave to Aquitania in
particular, may be applied to France in general. Narbonensis Provincia agrorum
cultu, etc. The Country of Narbon says Pliny is not to be postpos'd to any
other either for Agriculture, for foecundity of soil, for universality of
wealth, for Nobles and Gentry, etc. And Salvianus says, that Aquitania is not
only a fat Country, and full of marrow, but she has as much jucundity as
fertility, as much real pleasure as outward beauty: Nam Illic omnis admodum
Regio aut intertexta est Vineis, aut florulenta pratis, aut irrigata fontibus,
aut interfusa fluminibus, aut distincta culturis, aut consita pomis, aut
amaenata lucis, aut crinita messibus, Ut vere possessores ac Domini illius
terrae non tam soli istius portionem quam Paradisi imaginem possidere
Videantur. There every place is either interwoven with Vines, or flowr'd with
Meadows, or set with Orchards, or cut by Corn fields, or peepled with Trees,
and Woods, or refreshed with Fountains, or inchanel'd with Rivers, or
periwigg'd with all sorts of grain; In so much that the Inhabitants of that
Country may be said to have a piece of Paradise rather then a portion of the
Common Earth.

But the four Cardinal Commodities of France may be said to be Corn, Wine,
Hemp, and Salt, which Boterus calls Galliae Magnetes, the four Loadstones of
France: For as the loadstone, especially the blew and Ethiopian, is more
precious in weight then silver, and has an attractive Virtue to draw, and
embrace iron with other metals, so these French Loadstones which are so far
more noble then the Ethiopians, as the climes are in temper, and nobleness, do
draw unto them all the silver and gold of their neighbors; so that France may
be called the Exchequer of Europe.

Touching French Corn there is no question but it is the perfect'st of all other,
Solinus, and Pomponius Mela expatiate themselves very far in the French fields,
and speak much of their fatness and foecundity; Nor was Cicero himself silent,
but he speaks of vast proportions of Corn which were exported from the Gauls
of France; And Pliny, one of Natures Protonotaries, bears witness that the
Gallic corn was nitidissimi grani. and plus panis reddere quam far aliud; it
was of a neat grain, and yielded more bread then other Wheat: Who knows not
but Spain might starve without French Corn, which is transmuted to Indian
silver and gold; Insomuch that the Spaniard may be said to have the dominion of
the Mines of Mexico, but the French reap the benefit thereof.

Now, touching the French Wines we may well say they need no bush; for by
bartring of useful rich Commodities, and great sums of Money, the English,
the Scots, the Flemins, Hollanders, Germans, Danes, Swedes, and other bibacious
Northern Nations fetch away Vast quantities by Sea, and by Land; Bodin speaks
of one Laud a Merchant of Cambray who bought and brought in Carts 33000.
barrels of French Wines in one year. Now, as the grape streptos according to
Pliny does turn about with the Sun, so the French nectar conforming it self to
the course of the Sun, does refresh as it were with a golden shower all the
circumjacent Countries. What shall I say of the excellent stomach Wines of
Bourdeaux, the full bodied Wines of Orleans, which by an express Edict are
prohibited from the Kings Cellers by reason of their strength; the neat Whites
of Aix, the rich Frontiniak and most pleasant Wines of Province and Languedoc
fit to feast the gods withal? In some places of Burgundy there are Wine Vessels
as big as some Houses in altitude, little inferior to the Vast vessels of
Heydel^erg, Tubinga and Groninghen.

Now I come to Hemp the third loadstone of France, and indeed it is more
precious then any Gem or jewel: who would think that such a contemptible
Vegetal scarce a yard high should be able to remove Egypt to Italy? for we read
that Galerius in 6. days sailed from Sicily to Alexandria, Babilius in six,
that can bring Naples to Hercules pillars, and the Baltic Sea to the
Hellespont: a poor Vegetal that can remove this upper part of the Hemisphere to
the Antipodes, for the Navigators into the East Indies do so. A vegetal that
can resist Eolus, and overmaster Neptune himself both winds and waves,
notwithstanding the impetuous whirlwinds of the one, and the tumblings of the
other; a Vegetal that can join East and West, North and South together, and to
interchange mutual offices of humanity and friendship. Now where does this so
useful Vegetal grow more copiously then in France? She furnishes all her
Neighbors with Sails for their Ships, and shirts for their backs.

I come now to the Salt which savours all things, how much are all Countries
obliged to France for this wholesome commodity? I have heard there are rocks of
Salt in Ormus, that in Carra in Arabia they make walls and houses of massy
salt. In Hungary they have Mines of Salt, but both Sea and Land makes France
abound with Salt wherewith she preserves from stinking, those huge Regions of
the North, where, as Catullus says,

Vix in tam magno corpore mica salis. What millions of bushels of Salt are
expended, and exported out of France every year? how does salt fill the Kings
Coffers with treasure? In so much that in the last computation that was made,
it appeer'd that the French King had 20. millions of Franks from this sole
commodity which is two millions of pounds sterling.

It Is true, Spain has Salt, but it is more corroding, and acrimonious;
Therefore in Charles the fifths time, when for the vent of the Spanish Salt he
had put out a Placart prohibiting that no French salt should be used in the Low
Countries, the Country was like to mutiny for this tart proclamation, because
the Spanish salt was nothing so vigorous and sweet as the French.

To these riches of France you may add Oil, Figs, Orenges, Cytrons, Saffron;
with all sorts of Fruit and most excellent Cydre. There are not such delightful
fields on the surface of the whole Earth, such Herds of Cattle, and abundance
of cloth and stuffs made, which makes le drap de Berry so famous, such swarms
of bees, such hosts of Deer, and other wild beasts you will hardly find any
where: Nor do there want horses of all sorts, with other animals necessary for
the use of man, about Orleans they have 4000. breeding Mares perpetually: Their
numbers of Forests, Chaces and Parks, Woods and Groves* every where is
infinite. In fine, France is universally fertile in every corner, nor is there
one acre of ground which produces not something or other for need or pleasure,
which they who made the perambulation and tour of France have found to be true.
There are great number of large deep ponds. The Country is covered in many
places with delightful Woods and Lawnes, which, besides the pleasure the Gentry
are permitted to have without injury done to the peason, afford not only fire
for the Kitchen, but instruments for war by Sea and land: Pliny was not
deceived when he said that France was full of yew Trees, which though it be
poisonous if one sleeps or eats under them, (whence may be inferred that toxica
came first from taxica or taxus,) yet there is a remedy found out, that if one
does beat into the yew a brass nayl, it takes away the force of any poison.

Hitherto most Princely Auditors I, have showed the face and outward purple of
our French Helen, I will now discover unto you her belly and inward parts,
whereof she is pregnant, as iron the best and worst instrument of life, for
herewith we manure the Earth, we lopp trees, we prune Vineyards, we build
Houses and Ships, we arm our selves against the Enemy, which makes the Indians
to prefer it before all metals, and when any Ships arrive to their Havens, the
first thing they cry out for is Iron, Iron. But we use it also to pernicious
uses, as killing and slaying, we give it wings to do mischief, etc. And nature
has furnished the bowels of France with this metal more then ordinary that
she might defend herself, and arm her courageous sons: There is good store also
of other metals, and although Diodorus seems to undervalue France because she
has no Mines of silver, he is deceived; for though by a casual fire that
happened among the Shepherds on the Pyreney hills, which searched the very
bowels of the Earth, and melted the Mines of gold and silver; yet Dominicus
Bertinus affirms, that if we would go to the pains, there might be as much
gold dig'd out of that part of the Pyrenean hills which look upon France, as is
found in Peru. But the virtue of France looks upward toward heaven; for since
the upper parts of her earth affords all things that may satisfy humane desire
and appetite, even Apidicus himself, why should we tear the bowels of so kind
and benign a Mother? The Pagan Poet could complain of this,

-- Itum est in viscera Terrae,
Quasque abscondiderat, stygijsque admoverat Umbris,
Effodiuntur opes irritamenta malorum.
Now for habitation, Nature has provided stones of all kind, Marbles of all
colors, with white specious free stone, wherewith the Burgundian, and Pyrenean
Hills abound; Now as her upper parts abound with Woods, Fruits and Grounds, her
bowels with Mines and Marble, so her veins, I mean her Rivers, are full of
fish, and some extraordinary ones; there is observed to be in the River Arari a
great fish called Clupea, which in the increase of the Moon is white, and in
the wane grows black, therefore sure those that eat of it must be inconstant
peeple, having such a sympathy with the Moon; This fish growing too great is
killed by his own finns, and in his head there is a stone taken out which is
good against quartan Agues, being tied to the left side of the body in the
decrease of the Moon: There is a lake in Bonvalle in Burgundy that abounds with
sundry sorts of strange fish, which lake has a trick to hide her self for a
while in the caverns of the Earth, and then to appeer again.

Nor is there any Country so conveniently watered not only with rare Sources,
and Rivulets, but with great Navigable Rivers which makes one Province
communicable to another; for all the great Towns of France are situated upon
mercantil Rivers that will bear Ships and Boats, whereby there is a very
commodious way for intercourse of trade; And in some of these Rivers there are
found out small ingots of gold, as in Tagus in Spain, the Po in Italy, Pactolus
in Asia, and Ganges in India. Among others the Sein is observed to be the most
delectable, and gentlest River, never subject to inundations, and to have her
banks mended, by her windings and maeanders she seems to visit and salute every
place as she runs; for in some places which are distant one from another but
six miles by Land, there is thirty miles distance by the River: This is that
River which embraces France in her arms; France, whom Josephus calls the
source of beatitude, Cicero the nurse of plenty, and Procopius prefers her in
power before all the Regions of Europe; O unspeakable indulgency of nature, O
most delicate and divine part of the Earthly globe, surely that character which
was given of thee does well be fit thee, La France est le petit aeil, et la
perle du monde. France is the little ey and perl of the World.

I come now to the Inhabitants of France, who are a gallant peeple and deserve
such a dwelling, but both for quality and quantity, for their Virtues and
nombers I shall not be able to set them forth to any perfection: In a multitude
of peeple lies the Kings dignity, and in the paucity his shame, says Solomon;
which was the cause that God Almighty purposing to exalt Abraham, promised him
that his posterity should so multiply, that their number should be like the
Stars in the Firmament, or like the sands on the Sea shore; Now what Region
under the Cope of Heaven is more repleted with peeple then France? There can be
no vacuum found there, no desert corner, or any part of the air but is breathed
in by men; so that, as One said, France may be said to be but one great City
distinguished by passages, and ways: And as it is observed in the Ant's Common
Wealth (the Emblem of industry) that every one is a doing something, so is this
stirring peeple.

There are in France 102. Episcopal Cities, whereof 14. are Metropolitan, with
an incredible number of other Towns: There are nere upon 30. thousand Parishes,
what myriads of souls shall we think then may breath under those roofs? What
was spoken of old of Narbo among the Romans, may well be spoken of France in
general.

Salve Narbo potens salubritate,
Urbe et Rure simul bonus videri,
Muniris, civibus, ambitu, tabernis,
Porto, porticibus, foro, theatro,
Delubris, capitolijs, monetis,
Thermis, arcubus, horreis, macellis,
Pratis, fontibus, insulis, salinis,
Stagnis, flumine, merce, ponte, ponto,
Unus qui venerere jure Divos
Lenaeum, Cererem, Palem, Minervam,
Spicis, palmite, pascuis, trapetis
Solis fise viris, nec expetito
Naturae auxilio procul relictis,
Promens montibus altius cacumen,
Non te fossa patens, nec hispidum
Objecti sudium coronat Agger etc.
Quid quod Caesaribus ferax creandis,
Felix prole Virum semul dedicti
Nates cum genitore Principantes?
Now to com to the Cities of France, it were an infinite task to speak of them
all, I will instance in a few, behold Nismes, where more antiquities, as Fanes,
Palaces, Amphitheater with other monuments are to be seen, then in any one Town
of Italy except Rome. Take a survay of Monpelier, a most ancient seat of the
Muses, and incomparable for simples and the study of Physi^, whither the
Saracens when they were expelled from Spain came with some Arabian Doctors
disciples to Avicen, Averroes and others, who left their rare knowledge there
behind them. Now, Paris may be called a little world of it self; hear what
Boterus speaks of her, Parigi Citta che di popolo et di abondanza dogni cosa
avanza di gran lunga tutte laltre Citta di Christianita. The City of Paris far
exceeds all others of Christendom for peeple, and plenty of all things; Charles
the 5th said, that Paris was not to be ranked among Cities but Provinces, for
her amplitude and affluence of all things; Nor was Prince Christopher your
Granfather, most noble Duke of Wirtemberg much out of his account, when he
affirmed that there were more souls in Paris then in all the Territories of
Wirtemberg; Who will believe this that has not seen Paris, and who will not
believe it that has seen her! It is a place of such infinite provision, that
Mons. Vigner said, if he were to invite the greatest Feasters among the
Romans, were they alive, as Apicius, Lucullus, Pompey, with a dozen more, he
would desire but a days warning to do it, and they should be so treated, that
they should confess they never found the like in Rome.

Among others Henry the 4th. did contribute much to the glory of Paris, he
desired to survive but two Wishes, the one to perfect the Louure, the other to
encompasse the Suburbs of St. Germain with a wall; Then for Court and City he
would compare with all the Potentates upon Earth: He would not suffer any new
tax to be imposed upon the Parisians, Insomuch that the Provost of the City
desiring his Majesty would be pleased to give way that there might a small
imposition be laid upon the water pipes toward the defraying the charges of
the Helvetian Ambassadors, he answered very pleasantly, that there was need of
an other invention, for it belonged only to Jesus Christ to turn Water into
Wine.

But to proceed further in this theme, as of all the visible works of nature
the Firmament is the fairest, so of all Earthly Continents France is the most
flourishing, and fullest of the most vigorous Gentry, nor does the gentleness
of the Country effeminat their spirits, or the indulgence of the Heavens
soften their courage, but they are all of high heroical dispositions; And as
virtue dwells commonly in free minds, so France is the freest peeple upon
Earth, Insomuch that it is a Rule, Servi peregrini ut primum Galliaef^nes
penetraverint liberi sunto, as Bodin has it; Strange servants as soon as they
breath French air let them be free: I will produce one Example. A Merchant came
to Toulouse and brought with him a slave whom he had bought in Spain, the slave
being told of the Constitutions of France, came and told his Master, Sir, I
have served you hitherto in quality of a slave, but I am now a Freeeman, yet I
am content to serve you still, but as a free attendant according to the custom
of this noble Country. The like thing happened at the siege of Mets, where a
servant had played the fugitive and ran away with his Master Don Luis de
Avila's horse, who was Master of the horse to the Emperor, Don Luis sent to
the Duke of Guyse a Trompetor for his man and his horse; The Duke understanding
that the horse was sold caused the money to be sent the Spaniard, but for the
servant he sent him word, That his servant had entered into the inner parts of
France, where the Law is, that if any of a servile condition puts his foot
once, he instantly recovers his liberty, which custom being so consonant to
reason, and agreeable to Christianity, he could not nor would not violat.

Touching the magnanimity and valor of the French there are infinite Examples
all the World over; Alexander the great hearing of their valor sent to know of
them what they feared most? They answered, Ne coelum rueret, Least the heaven
should fall. It Is true, Gallia became a Province to the Romans, but presently
after the death of Julius Caesar she was declared free: And Rome called the
Gauls in their public writings by the appellation of friends. It Is well known
what footing the Gauls took in Italy, for the best part of Lombardy was called
Gallia Cisalpina; We read in Caesar that the time was cum Germanos Galli
virtute superarent, that the Gauls were superior to the Germans in valor,
that they had conquered much of the Country about the Hercynian Forest: Are
not the Britains of the Gaulic or Wallic race? are not diverse Provinces in
Spain and Portingal descended from Them? Afterward in revolution of time the
German Franconians, and Gauls, being neighbors, came by coalition to be one
Nation, and they have continued so above these 12 Ages. The Kings of Sicily
descend from Tanered the Norman; so do the Kings of England from William the
Conqueror and the Plantagenets; The Kings of Cyprus, Syria, and Greece, com
from Guy of Lusignan; nay Constantinople was held awhile by Gallic Emperors:
What glorious Expeditions have bin made to the Holy Land by 5. French Kings in
person; Me thinks I see Godefroy of B^llion having sold his Duchy to that
purpose marching with a huge Army through Germany, Hungary, and Greece, and so
passing to Asia and Syria to encounter the Forces of Soliman the Ottoman
Emperor, and Chalypha the Sultan of Egypt with other Barbarian Kings whom he
put all to flight, making himself Master of Nice, of Antioch, and Hieresulam
her self with the holy Sepulcher of Christ; Me thinks I see him when he was to
be crowned King of Jerusalem throwing away a Crown of gold, and taking one of
thorns in imitation of his Savior: Me thinks I see all the tributary Princes
therabouts bringing offerings unto him, and he clad in the habit of a common
Gregarian Soldier, whereat they being astonished, some of them, as the Archbishop
of Tire said, How is it that so great a King, so admirable a Conqueror, who
coming from the West has shaken all the Eastern World should go so plain and
homely? But to step back a little, look upon Brennus ransacking Rome with an
Army of Gauls: look upon Charles Martel who was called Conservator of the
Christian World, which was then upon point of ruin, and to fall under the yoke
of Infidels and Saracens. Look upon Pepin who chased the Long^bards out of
Italy; upon Bertrand who deprived Peter King of Castile of his Kingdom for his
tyranny; I could instance in a great number who have their names engraven, and
their Ensigns hung up in the Temple of immortality. Moreover for Cavalleers and
horsemen it is granted by all Nations that the French are the prime. It is
recorded in good, how in the African War 30. French repulsed 2000. Moors: But
to come nearer home, In the siege of Mets where the fifth himself commanded in
chief, What resolute Sallies did the French make out of the Town, causing the
Emperor at last to trusse up his bagg and baggage and go away by torchlight;
Inso much that the Town of Mets being then kept by a French Garrison put the
last bounds to the Conquests of that Great Captain, as a Poet could tell him,

Si metam nescis, Urls est quae Meta vocatur. Now to go from the Sword to the
Crosier, What brave Prelates, and Champions against haeresie has France bred?
St. Hilary the queller of the Arrian heresy, St. Hierom* Pontius Paulinus
Bishop of Nola, Rusticus, Phaebadius, Prosper, ^cditius, Avitus, Mamertus
Archbishop of Vienna, Sidonius Apollinaris, Lupus, Germanus, Salvianus,
Remigius Archbishop of Rheims, with multitudes more all of them most pio^s, and
learned Prelates, whose Monuments show them to be so to this day; And so well
devoted were the French always to the Church of God, that they thought nothing
too dear and precious to endow her withal, witness those mighty revenues the
Gallican Church possesses: For in the late Reign of Charles the 9. there was a
cense brought in of the demains of the Church, and they amounted to 12
millions, and 300. thousand Franks in annual rent besides voluntary oblations.

Now touching Learning and Eloquence Lucius Plotius a Gaul was the first began
to read Latin Lectures at Rome, and Cicero being then a boy, and finding such a
great confluence of Auditors to flock every day to hear him, he grieved that he
could not do the like, as Suetonius has left it upon record; Marcus Antonius
Gnipho a Gaul did then flourish also at Rome, a man of singular Elocution, and a
prodigious Memory, he delivered praecepts in Greek and Latin; and among others
Cicero himself when he was Praetor used to be his Auditor. Marseilles was very
renowned for great learned men, having bin so many ages a Greek Colony; so was
Lions also a special seat of the Muses, as it is now for Merchants of all
Nations, of whom the Kings of France have borrowed Millions of money to supply
their sudden necessities: Valence was also famous for Philosophers and Poets,
witness Athenaeus, as also Vienne where Latin was so vulgar, according to that
signal Epigram of Martial,

Fertur habere meos si vera est fama (...)
Inter delicias pulchra Vienna suas;
Me legit omnis ibi Senior, Iuvenisque puerque,
Et coram tetrico cast a puella viro,
Hoc ego maluerim quam si mea carmina cantent
Qui nilum ex ipso protinus ore bibunt;
Quam Meus Hispano si me Tagus impleat auro,
Pascat et Hybla meas, pascat Hymettos apes. etc.
And questionless no Country florish'd with Learning more then France in
those days, witness St. Hierom when he writ, Sola Gallia monstra non habuit,
etc. France alone had no Monsters, but abounded still with most valiant, and
eloquent men; And elsewhere, post studia Galliarum quae vel florentissima sunt
misit Romam, etc. After he had finished his studies in Gallia where they are
most flourishing, he sent him to Rome, sparing no cost that he might season the
copiousnesse and neatness of the French speech with the Roman gravity.

Moreover in the Constitutions of the Emperors Valens and Gratianus there is
mention made that France was full of Philosophers, Rhetoricians, and
Grammarians, who excelled both in the Attique and Roman Learning. To this tribe
of learned men are to be referred the Druyds, the Eubages and Bards, among whom
Votienus Montanus, Domitius, After, Gabinianus, M. Aper, Iul. Florus, Iul.
Secundus, Nazarius, and Nazarius daughter Eunomia, Eumenides, Terentius Varro,
Phavorinus, Pacatus, Rutilius Numatianus, Ausonius Gratian, and Valentinians
Schoolmaster, were most famous.

Now touching the Lutetian Academy in Paris, she is acknowledged to be the
Mother of all the rest, one of the brightest eyes of all Europe, the great
number of Masters in all faculties there make all the World to make their
addresses thither for instruction. Pope Innocent the third gave this character
of Paris, that Studium Parisiense erat fundamentum Ecclesiae. There have bin
known to be in Paris at one time 20000. Students, and sometimes 30000. until the
Emissaries of the Roman Capitol, the Jesuits did draw away and allure the chief
flower of our youth to their Colleges. What a brave masculin spirit was Robert
of Sorbon, a man of high reason, and an invincible Disputant, who was born in a
convenient time to vindicat his Country from the Encroachments of the Papal
power, and keep it within its own channel so that it should not mound, and
overwhelm the Prerogatives of the Gallican Monarchy, whereof the College of
Sorbon may be said to be one of the chiefest props. Besides Paris there are 15.
great Seminaries of learning, and seats of Muses, whence as from never drieng
sources all scientifical knowledge do flow, and disperse it self every where.
What great lights of Learning were Io. Gerson, Peter Lombard, Gentianus
Hervetus, who was so much admired in the Tridentine Council; What Giants of
Erudition were Vatablus, Io. Mercerus, Genebrardus, Calvin, Beza, Sedelius,
Ducaeus, as also Monsieur du Plessis among the Nobility or Laytie: What a man
of men was Cardinal Perron; with great nombers of other besides?

Moreover for the Civil Law France is acknowledged to have bred the acutest
wits of the World; witness Duarenus, Aemarus Rinconetus, Michael Hospitalis,
who underwent all the offices of the gown, and was observed to resemble
Aristotle in physiognomy, as in all other profounndesse of learning, and
quickness of spirit; There have bin other great Legislators, as Car. (...)
whose lucubrations serve for lanterns to direct any in the study of the Law,
an, for the decision of all crabbed points; let Baptista Menilius com in next,
whd for rectitude of opinion was accounted an Oracle: Bonus Broveus was famous
also for his orthodox judgment, and moving flexanimous Eloquence. To these may
be added Gulielmus Budaeus whom Erasmus calls the prodigy of France,
Olivarius, Fabrus, Hottoman, Conanus, and Contius, Puteanus, Bellonus, Bodinus*
Choppinus, Bonifidius, and Iacobus Cuiaccius who was called the Papinian of his
time.

Now, touching Physic what shall I say of Fernelius, Hollenus, Charondas,
Gorreus, Dalechampius, and Quercetanus, Foxius Candala, Orontius Finus, Io.
P^na, Montareus, P. Ramus, Nostradamus, all most acute Mathematitians,
specially Francis Vieta, as also Lescotus the greatest Architect that Europe
ever had since the time of Vitruvius, who was the first tracer of that
stupendous Castle of the Louure, which in Elegancy, in vastness of Symmetry,
and exactness of proportion when it is finished, may compare with any fabrique
upon Earth.

Augustus Thuanus may now take place for the most Methodical, and judicious
Historian that ever put pen to paper, or committed any thing to the Archives of
truth; As also the Sammarthans brother who were Auxiliaries to Thuanus in his
collections; And we desire and advise Puteanus, and Rigaltius to expose to
public light those pieces that were committed to their trust by Thuanus, and
not frustrat the Common Wealth of learning of the sight of them by any longer
procrastination.

Now for heavenly inspired Poets let Ronsard appeer first, the excellentest
that has bin since Augustus his egresse out of this World; Let Bellay come
next him, and Bellaqua be in the third place; But we may well add a fourth to
these three, which is Auratus; And for a fifth let Salust Du Bartas carry the
place, who has described the Creation of the World so lively and elegantly,
that he merits the praise and admiration of the whole World of wit; Witness that
modest opinion and applause which Ronsard himself gave him, who being asked
what he thought of Dubartas his Works? answered no less ingeniously then
ingenuously, Mons. Du Bartas afait plus en vne semaine que je nayfait en (...)
ma vie, Monsieur Du Bartas has don more in one Week, then I have don all the
days of my life.

Now, for Philosophers let Turnebus, and Montanus com in the Van, men of rare
Erudition and probity; Let Ant. Muret, and Passeratius accompany them; let
Causabon also com in the same file of Worthies, a man versed in omni ( cibili,
in all knowledge as well as Criticismes; Let Joseph Scaliger bring up the rear
and be Dictator of all Literature, who

-- Eruditione
Idumaeus Arabs, Syrusque et Indus,
Chaldaeus simul, Aethiopsque Civis,
Quemque Achemenii suum Vocarent,
Pelasgus simul, et simul Latinus,
Et Graius Vetus, et Quotidianus,
Et Thuscus simul, et simul Britannus,
Et quod altera secula obstupescant,
Hispanus simul, et simul Batavus.
Now, let it be observed that the French tongue has a great advantage in
couching any kind of knowledge as well for the copiousnesse, as the lenity and
smoothness of speech, wherein neither her mother the Latin, or her two sisters
the Italian and Spanish can contend with her, nor our Teutonique also which is
so sinewy and masculine a language being so knotted with consonants* Nor is
there any kind of science or knowledge but you shall find it in the French tongue,
so that if all other toungs were perished, there might be an instauration, and
consummation made of all arts and learning in the French alone; Therefore
Charles the Emperor the compleatest Prince of his time was overheard to tell
his Son Philip in a private discourse that he held it a signal honor, that by
his grandmother Mary of Valois he was extracted of the illustrious progeny of
France, and that he could speak that language, which was very frequent in his
Court among his domestiques. Now, it cannot be denied but this French tongue
has many Dialects, and in these dialects there are as is found in all other
languages certain (...), but the prime and purest property of idiotisms seems
as it were to dwell upon the banks of the Loire, and principally in Blois, and
Orleans; Insomuch that as the Attique was esteemed the choicest dialect among
the Greeks, so the Aurelian is by the French.

Now for language, virtue and learning the French have perfected all three with
a marvailous dexterity and promptitude of nature, and a rare vigor of all the
senses inward and outward; which makes Julius Scaliger to break out thus into
their praises. I find there is a fiery kind of vigor, and mature celerity in
the French which other Nations have not: To whatsoever they apply themselves
they become notable proficients, and arrive to a perfection in a short time,
whether it be in the mystery of Marchandising, in letters, arms or Arts;
Paulus Me^ula gives this testimony of them, I have observed, and became
astonished, that among the French some will argue and discourse extempore of
any problem, and that with such an admirable method as if they had studied the
theme many days before: Therefore sure Servius was deceav'd in the French, when
he says they are pigrioris Ingenii; so was Julius Firmicus, wheen he calls
them stolidos, foolish; so was Iulianus, when he terms them stupidos et
rusticitatis amantes, blockheads, and lovers of homeliness; so was likewise
Polybius where he says, that doctrinae et artibus operam non dant, they apply
themselves neither to Learning nor Arts; I know Diodorus, Athenaus, and Clemens
Alexandrinus say, that they are faithless, and given to gluttony and
drunkenes; Livie brands them to be light and effeminat; Mela accuses them to
be greedy after gold, proud, and superstitious; Solinus calls them
vainglorious; Plutark writes they are insatiable of money, and Cicero says,
Gallos minime vlla Religione moveri, The Gauls are not moved at all by any
Religion: Surely these Writers took all these reports a far off, and upon
trust. For they who have had intimacy with the French and studied the nation in
general, will say otherwise of them.

But that which is most noble in France, and which elevats Her above all other
Empires is the Majesty of her Kings, whereof there have bin so many brave
heroique Monarks who have don such exploits, that one may speak more of them in
telling truth, then can be spoken of Others in vapouring out hyperboles and
lies. Pope Gregory writing to Childebert King of France, Quanto caeteros
homines Regia dignitas antecellit, tanto caeterarum gentium regna Regni vestri
culmen excellit. As much as Kings excel other men, so far does the glory of
yours exceed the Kingdoms of other Nations. Honorius the third said, that the
Kingdom of France was the unexpugnable wall of Christendom. Urban the fourth
says, that the King of France is the morning Star in the midst of the Western
clouds, He is an Earthly God in his own Kingdom, he is above all Kings; Ejusque
umbra totus mundus regitur, and all the World is governed by his shadow, says
Baldus. Nay St. Thomas says, that he who prays for the King of France has
100. days indulgence granted by Pope Clement, and 10. added by Innocent the
fourth.

Moreover France is not subject to the distaff as other Kingdoms are, but the
Salique Law proclaims aloud,

Gallorum Imperii Successor masculus esto. For this is not only consentaneous
to reason, but has a congruity with nature her self, Because that in man the
mind, the body, the voice and all things else are more strong and strenuous,
They are fitter for action, and attract more awe and reverence unto them; In
the female all things are softer and lighter, which may attract more affection,
but there is a kind of contempt that mingles with it; In the one, authority and
Majesty appeers, in the other fears, and jealousy: And how preposterous is it
to the law of nature, for man to be a vassal to that sex which should be under
him? The Pagan Epigrammatist can tell you in oeconomical government.

Inferior maetrona suo sit, Prisce, marito,
Non aliter fuerint foemina Virque pares.
I cannot deny but there may be examples produced of some notable Heroique
Queens, as Zenobia, Pulcheria, Semiramis, Isabella of Castile, and of Elizabeth
Queen of England, a Lady that was prudent beyond her sex, and adored with
literature, she understood Greek and Spanish indifferently well, but for Latin,
French, Italian, English, and the old British she spoak them familiarly, which
made Pope sixtus the fifth break out into this wish, that he had a greater
desire to see one woman, and one man, then all the race of mankind besides, and
they were Queen Elizabeth of England, and Henry of Navar^; to whom, were they
not tainted with heresy, he had things of mighty consequence to communicate;
But we may not forget what kind of Queens other women have bin, as Athaliah,
Cleopatra, Messalina, Faustina, Jane of Naples, and Fredegunda of France, which
made Eumolpus or Porphyrius under Constantine to break out into this harsh
tetrastique

Creed ratem Ventis, animum ne creed puellis,
namque est faemin^a tutior vnda fide.
Faemina nulla bona est, et si bona contigit ulla,
nescio quo fato res mala facta bona est.
There is another prerogative that the Kings of France are said to have, which
is never to die, whereupon Maria de Medicis being struck with a consternation
when she heard of the death of her husband Henry the fourth, and cryeng out
Helas, that the King is dead; No, answered the Chancellor, the Kings of France
never die; And the reason that they die not is, because they are born Kings,
and perpetuat themselves so in their own blood; And as in all successions
according to the mode of speaking in France, le mort saisit le vif, so in an
hereditary Kingdom

-- Uno avulso non deficit Alter,
Surculus --
The next a kin succeeds though a thousand degrees off by right of blood. Which
course does not only foment and increase affections 'twixt the Prince and his
peeple, but it prevents all tempests of ambition, and pretenses that may happen
during the vacancy or interregnum, and propps the Crown with columns of
eternity. But in Elections, what expectations, and stirrs! what sidings and
factions do use to happen; Besides what Prince will care for another man's, as
much as for his own inheritance, which he is assured will descend upon his own
issue and blood: Moreover in Elective States what a nundination, what a buying
and selling of suffrages is there? The Roman Empire presently after Claudius,
who was the first Caesar that was chosen by the Soldiers whose allegiance he
bought with rewards, did fall upon vile and base heads by that kind of Election
or rather by that kind of Emption for it may be said that the Empire lay under
the spear exposed to public sale; What contestations happened 'twixt the
Senate and the Legions? In so much that every Province might be said to have
their several Emperors; And when Zenobia was Empress there were reckoned 30.
at one time.

In our Germany, how many Interregnums have we had by this way of Election? How
many years did she appeer as a Monster without a head after the death of
Frederic the second? What a world of confusion, and exorbitances, of fraud, and
depraedations did she fall into? What a base plot had Charles the fourth, as
also Vuenceslaus who would have prostituted the Empire for money? They did so
deplume the Eagle that she became contemptible to all other Creatures; These
were they whom Maximilian the first called the stepfathers or rather the two
pests of the Empire. The same Maximilian also in the Council of Constance
protested that he had raised 100. tonnes of gold out of his own patrimonial
demeanes to support the sacred Roman Empire, and all that while he had not
received from the States of the Empire 40000. florins.

Now, because my discourse has transported me so far, I cannot but extremely
groan, and deplore the state of the Empire, and to what a pitiful low ebb it is
fallen unto; For whereas in the time of Frederic the first, (and the strength of
the Empire was then much attenuated) the annual revenues came to 60000. tonnes
of gold, which amounts to about 6. millions sterling, the exility of the rents
of Caesar which he gets by the Empire are scarce able, as Schneiderin a famous
Civil Lawyer does assert, to maintain the domestic expenses of the Imperial
Court, nor those neither unless Caesar did contribut much thereunto out of his
own patrimonial inheritances, which made Cardinal Granvil to affirm aloud in
the time of Charles the 5. ex Imperio ne tantillum Emolumenti habere Caesarem,
that Caesar had no Emolument at all from the Empire, and we know no King in
Christendom was reduced to that tenuity.

But France is not subject to those Comitial diseases or Diets of the Empire,
being secure by the succession and prerogatives of her Kings, who have a
transcendent and absolut authority not derived at all from their subjects;
whereby Caesar himself may be said to be inferior in point of power, though not
in precedence to Caesar himself, though as Bartolus averrs, Haeretici sunt
pronunciandi quicunque Imperatorem Germanicum universi terrarum Orbis Dominum
esse negant, They are to be pronounced Heretics who deny the Romans German
Emperor to be Lord Paramount of all the Univers; And he grounds this right
upon the answer of the Emperor Antoninus to Eudaemon of Nicodemia, (...), Ego
quidem Mundi Dominus, lex autem maris; I am Lord of the World, and the Law of
the Sea: He urges also another argument from the words of the holy Evangelist,
when he says, There issued forth a Decree from Augustus, that the whole world
should be taxed. But France acknowledges no such superiority; for when L.
Madrutius was employed by Ferdinand the Emperor to Francis the second, for the
restitution of Toul, and Verdun, with other feathers which he had plucked from
the Eagle, Franciscus Olivarius the Chancellor answered, that they deserved
capital punishment who would advise the King to such a surrendry, or held that
the most Christian King and first son of the Church was any ways inferior to
Caesar: Herupon we know that the doctrine of the Imperial Laws are prohibited
in Paris by this Edict and Caveat, Ne quis public profiteretur Romanas leges
in Academia Parisiensi, neve quem Scholasticos ejus disciplina ad gradus
auderet provehere, That none should make profession of the Roman Laws in the
University of Paris, or dare to advance the Students thereof to any degree of
dignity. Herupon Hospitalius Charles the ninth's Chancellor in presence of the
King himself and the assembly of the three Estates procured it to be enacted,
that the Kings of France the very same moment that they entered into the 14th
year of their age should be pronounced capable to reign, and to be out of his
minority, and so govern inchoative. Now for the Imperial Laws, their reason
and equity may be happily made use of in other Dominions, but not their authority
and sanction; No more could the Romans in times past be said to be any way
under the Greeks, because they borrowed, and made use of some Laws of theirs.
No more can the Turks be said to be any way subject to the Romans because they
have the Justinian Code translated into their vulgar language, and that their
Cadies make use of them to rectify sometimes natural reason.

Furthermore the supereminent royalties of the Kings of France appeer
manifestly, in that they have the sole power to indict war, or establish peace,
to make leagues and confederacies, to enact Laws, to creat Magistrates of the
gown and the sword, to give pardon for lives, to stamp money, to give letters
of denization, to impose taxes, and make pecuniary levies at pleasure. Now, the
Kingdom of France is like a most fertile and flourishing meadow, whereon infinite
flocks of sheep do feed and bear golden fleeces, which may be shorn when the
shepherd pleases; yet I will except here the province of Languedoc where the
King cannot exact any subsidiary contributions, without the express
consentment of the three Estates of that Country.

For administration of Civil Justice, France comes short of no other Region,
whose charge it is to preserve the Kings prerogatives, as well as the privilege
of the subject; To which end there be 8. Courts of Parliament whose names are
known to any that have traveled France; Among these that of Paris is the most
praedominant in regard the Parliament of Peers is always there residing, which
high Court uses to verify (not confirm) all the Kings Edicts to make them the
more plausible, and for form sake only. Now, as France is the beauty of Europe,
so that Parliament is the eye of France, and the Parliament of Peers is the apple
of that eye; Nor do there want examples how other Foreign Kings and Princes have
referred themselves to this Court of Parliament, as a high consistory of reason,
and Justice, as being Astrea's noblest tribunal. The Emperor Frederick the
second referred the controversies 'twixt him and Pope Innocent the fourth,
touching the Kingdom of Naples to the decision of this Court: So the Count of
Namur in a difference 'twixt Charles of Valois and him touching the County of
Namur put himself upon the verdict of this Court, and he thereby carried his
business. Philip Prince of Tarentum overcame the Duke of Burgundy in this
Court, touching some expenses made in recovering the Greek Empire; The Dukes of
Lorain have in diverse things referred themselves to the judgment of this Court;
They of Cambray who are a free peeple have bin willing to be tried by it: The
confederacy also 'twixt the Kingdom of Castile and Portugal were confirmed by
this Court, Nor is there any admitted to this Soverain Court but persons either
priviledg'd by their birth, or men of exquisit knowledge, erudition, and
integrity. When Henry the second King of France by the eager importunity of a
great Princess had recommended one of the long Robe to this Court, and being
rejected, he spoke merrily, je pensois que parmy tant de chevaux d'espagne un
asne pourroit bien passer, I thought that among so many Spanish ginets one Ass
might have well passed.

Now for the Oppidan Government of Paris there is such special circumspection
had, that never any is entrusted with the chiefest office in the City called
the Provost of the Merchants, unless he be a man of eminent parts, probity and
prudence, and generally esteemed so; so that it is used as a common saying to
their Children if they commit any absurd or base thing, Tu ne seras point
prevost des Marchands, Thou shall never be Provost of the Merchants.

And among others the providence and prudence of Lewis the twelfth was notable,
who had always by him a catalogue of the discreetest, and best qualified
Citizens upon whom he used to confer offices of Magistracy accordingly.

And the time was when the Kings of France used to sit upon the tribunal
themselves to determine causes, Charles the eight devoted two days every week
to that purpose, and St. Lewis three; Nor are there any Kings so obvious and
accessible as those of France. For as the Sun when he is up in the Orient
displayes his beams upon all alike, upon the Prince as well as the peasan,
upon the shrub as well as the Cedar; so the Kings of France behold all their
Subjects with like humanity and grace; They are benign and affable to all both
in speech, countenance and gesture, and seldom are any of them revengeful.

As there is a memorable passage of Lewis the twelfth, who while he was Duke of
Orleans fell in some disgrace with Charles the eight; herupon diverse great men
and others seeing him clowded in the Kings favor, did him sundry ill offices,
Charles being dead and he succeeding in the throne, a Courtier to get some boon
of him, told him of such and such who had bin no friends of his in his
predecessors time, and so wished his Majesty to question, and punish them; The
King answered, Tu vero aliud a me pete, and meritis tuis gratia erit, Nam Rex
Galliae non exequitur injurias Ducis Aurelianensis: Propose some other thing
unto me, and I will prefer thee, for the King of France is not to revenge the
injuries of the Duke of Orleans.

And as the Kings of France are remarkable for their freedom, mildness and
mansuetude to their subjects, so is the affection of the French always in an
intense degree toward their King.

Nor was there ever a more pregnant example hereof then at the death of Henry
the fourth the report where of struck such an Earthquake into the hearts of many
thousands, that some Ladies miscarried in childbirth before their time, others
died suddenly upon the news: Every one up and down the streets both men, women
and children damned the Assassin to a thousand hells both his soul and body;
Every one scruing up his wit how to devise some exquisit lasting torment for
Ravillac.

Now if all matters were weighed in an impartial balance of justice, who can
deny but the most Christian King of France is preferrable before all other
Earthly Potentates: For although the Emperor by an old custom be the Prime of
Princes, yet the King of France appeers in more glorious Robes then He, He has
a far more numerous guard then He; The King of France is the first Son of the
holy Church; and well they may deserve it for their sanctity, and munificence
to the Temple of God; and so many Voyages they made abroad to redeem the
Sepulcher of Christ, and the Country which he did bless with his feet, from
the slavery of Infidels.

Now as Homer and Virgil are called The Poets (...) by Excellency; As the Pope
is called the Bishop; so is the King of France The King: It Is he that by a
special benediction from Heaven does cure the Struma or the Kings Evil, and to
that end His Court is frequently strewn with sick patients of all Nations, and
with Spaniards as much as any other who clammer over the Pyreneans Hills, and
make a kind of pilgrimage unto him, and he does it with that modesty that he
always entitles the cure upon God, according to his speech in performance of
the Act, Le Roy te touch, Dieu te guerisse. The King touches thee, God heal
thee.

Therefore were it but for this virtue alone, and for his title, the most
Christian King, with his antiquity being the elder Son of the Church, the
Spaniard has no reason to dispute precedence with him; which made Mendoza in
the Council of Trent to say somewhat modestly, Se nolle quide^ anteire, tamen
cogi non posse ut Francorum Legatos sequeretur. He would not go before, yet he
could not be compelled to follow the French Ambassadors.

I should enter into a field that had no horizon, if I should attempt here to
conine morat the heroique achievments and trophy's of the French Kings, Merovee
quelled Attila's pride in the Catalonian fields: Childebert Almaricu^ the
Gothic tyrant being slain subdued a great part of Spain; Clota^ius tamed the
dauntlesse Saxons: Pipin protected the Roman Church against Astulphus the
Longobard, and erected the Exarchatship of Ravenna: Charles the Great above all
reestablished the Roman Empire, freed Italy from their Invaders, and made the
Kings of Galicia and Scotland his tributaries: Lodovicus Pius 40* days before
he died fed upon nothing but the holy host; Lewis the gros chased Henry the
fifth into Germany, and gave Sanctuary to four Popes, Paschal the second,
Calixtus the second, Honorius the second, and Innocent the second, when Italy
was too hot for them: Philip Augustus threw his Crown upon the ground before
his Nobles, and invited any one to take it up; St. Lewis ravished the very
Barbarians with the admiration of his piety: Charles the fifth did wrest again
from the English what they had taken in France. Charles the eight kept Italy
under subjection almost five months; Lewis the twelfth kept all Lombardy for
the time. Francis the first the new Apollo of the Muses overthrew the
Helvetians in a memorable fight. Henry the fourth was inferior to none of
these, for Virtue and Fortune did contend which should entitle him Henry the
Great, They both strived for mastery in him, and which should overcom, whereas
indeed he may be said to have subdued both; He was Conqueror in four pitched
battles, in 35. hot skirmiges, and above 100. personal encounters, with the
siege of 300. several places wherein he proved always Victorious. His memory is
still fresh in France, and takes impression successively from father to child
to make it eternal. There is scarce any considerable Town but has his statue in
brass or marble, and pictures innumerable, Insomuch as one said, Una Henrici
oblivio e^ Humani generis Occasus, the memory of Henry the great will not
perish but with the world. But for a true Character of him I will insert what
is here engraven upon the belly of his Brazen horse on the new bridge in sight
of his most royal Castle of the Louure in Paris.

Ie suis Henry, grand honneur de la Terre,
L' Astre de paix, et foudre de la guerre
L' Amor des Bons, la Cranite des Pervers,
Don't les Vertus meritoient L'Univers.
Henry I am, The Glory of Mankind,
The Star of Peace, and Thunderbolt of War,
The spurr of Virtue, scourge of Vice, a Mind
That merited to sway more Scepters far.
We com now to Lewis the 13th. his son, Lewis the Just, who though Nature was a
stepmother to him, by reason of some bodily imperfections, yet Fortune was
mightily indulgent and favorable to him; He began to bear Arms almost when he
was no higher then a sword: for in his bassage he repressed two ill-favored
Commotions in Poitou and Britany; He was a Victor all his life time, nor did he
know how to be beaten; He banged all his neighbors round about; He clammer'd
twice over the Alps, and came back having done his business. He clammer'd over
the Pyreneys, and established a French Vice Roy in Catalonia; He crossed over
the Meuse and made many ill-favored hacks in the Ragged staff; His Armies
flew over the Rhin, and helped to cuff the Eagle in the German Air: And lastly,
he foully foyld the English at the I Will of Re. At home also he did marvailous
things, He debell'd the Huguenots and left them not one cautionary Town to
stand upon their guard; An Exploit which his five immediate predecessors could
not do, though they attempted it many ways: And by Sea he improved the power
of France* more then ever.

Therefore, most excellent President, and you no less Illustrious Princes, I do
not see but France and her Monarks, if we respect the freedom, the fertility,
the fairness and self-sufficiency of the one, And the glorious Exploits
against Infidels both in Europe, Asia, and Afrique, of the other, with their
absolut power, their ordinary gards being greater then any one Potentat's in
Christendom, If we consider the manner of their anointing, and what a divine
prerogative they have to be Physicians in curing the Struma, I say, under the
favor of this Judicious Assembly, that France may well stand in competition for
priority with any Country of Europe.

THE ORATION OF RODOLPHUS MAXIMILIAN Duke of Saxony, of Angaria and Westphalia,
etc. Against France.
Most Splendid and Illustrious Auditory,
WE read that Actius Syncerus Sarmazarius a most Ingenious Poet, who was next
Maro for his muse and Monument, -- Musa proximus et tumulo, being buried hard
by Virgil, when he had made that famous Hexastic, Viderat Hadriacis Venetam,
etc. in honor, and to the glory of the City of Venice, the Senate for every
verse gave him in lieu of reward 100. Zecchins of gold: Now, if Sarmazarius
merited such a gift, what guerdon do you deserve my Illustrious Cosen Prince
Ioachim Ernest, who have given France so gallant Elogiums? for whatsoever may
be laudable or glorious you have conferred it upon that Country with such a
prodigality of affection, and high strains of Eloquence: surely you merit no
less then to be Peer or high Constable of France for it. But under favor you
have omitted one thing which Bodin reports to have Aristotle speak of France,
his words are, Neque tamen verum est quod Aristoteles scribit, nullos in Gastia
Hispanis proxima reperiri asinos -- that there are no asses found in France
though next to Spain; Indeed Aristotle was much misinformed therein; for if he
lived now, and made the tour of France, he would find more asses there then in
all Europe besides, for all the common peeple and poor peasans of France are
all made asses of, by the insupportable burdens they bear of so many
impositions and tallies: But whereas Bodin among other extravagancies falls a
praising the asses of his Country, that distic may be not impertinently
applied unto him.

Dum laudas Asinos Patriae, Bodine, quid Erras? Ignotumne tibi (...) erat? But
whereas, noble Cosen, you have extolled France so highly, and suffered your self
to be transported so far with her praises, it is true she may be outwardly fair,
but she is foul within, take off the gay saddle you have put upon the horse,
and you will find his back all gaull'd; take off those paintings you have with
so much art put upon France, and I believe she will look but very homely.

Monsieur de la Noue one of her own children will tell you, that as a rapid
torrent never stops her furious course till she be swallowed in the Sea; so the
French being snatched away by the torrent of their Enormous vices, will never
rest till they find their graves in the gulf of perdition. The same Author
will whisper you in the Ear, that France is possessed with 3. furies, viz. with
Impiety, Injustice, and Corruption of discipline, the first gnawes the
conscience, the second gauls the Cominalty, and the third reigns among the
Gentry.

For Impiety, let that horrid massacre on St. Bartholomew's bear witness, at
which time brother did butcher brother, the son the father, and children their
mothers; Is it possible that a race of peeple adoring one God, born in one
Country, fellow subjects to one King? Is it possible that a Christian peeple
trusting in the same Redeemer, governed by the same Laws, eating the same
bread, breathing the same air, should prove such tigers? Thuanus President of
the Parliament in Paris abhors the very memory of it, applying most appositly
those Verses of Papinius, and cryeng out,

Excidat illa dies aevo, nec postera credant
Saecula, nos certe taceamus, (...) obruta multa
Nocte tegi propriae patiamur crimina gentis.
Let that black day be razed out of our Calender for ever, that it may die with
us, and never com to the knowledge of our Nephews. And, which does aggravat the
thing* what a horrid thing was it that Charles the ninth should give way that
this butchery should be done at the Nuptials of his own Sister the Lady Margaret
of Valois, and Henry of Bourbon King of Navarr. In so much that, as one said,
there was more blood spilt, then wine drunk at that wedding; Nor did this
effusion of innocent blood end in Paris, but it went all the Kingdom over; And
among others that had a hand in tracing this massacre, there was a woman that
was chief, and where women are in any conspiracy there must be blood, and this
was Katherine de Medicis: a certain Poet does descant wittily upon the humor of
that Queen.

Tres Erebi Furias ne posthac credit Vates;
Addita nam quarta est nunc Catharina tribus:
Quod si tres Furias a se dimitteret Orcus,
Haec Catharina foret pro tribus una satis.
Speak of Three Furies now no more in Hell,
Katherin does make Them four, and bears the bell,
But if all Three were thence dismissed, this One
Would be enough for Pluto's Realm alone.
About this time France did swarm with Magicians, insomuch that Trisalcanus
their ringleader being condemned therefore to suffer death, confessed that there
were above 30000. of his Camerades in the Kingdom; and 'twas observed that
Queen Katherine would often confer with some of them: It Is observable what
Theodore Beza says of a new Star that appeer'd the November next after this
massacre in the Asterisme of Cassiopaea so refulgent, that it went beyond
Jupiter in his perigaeum for brightness, and Gemma Frisius affirms, that since
the birth of Christ, and that Herod murdered the children, there was never such
a phenomenon seen, whether you respect the sublimity of the sign with the
splendour and diuturnity of the Star; Among these sanguinary assassinats old
Coligni the Admiral was pistoll'd, with Telinius his son in law, with diverse
Noblemen mor; Peter Ramus also was dispatched, having no fallacy in all his new
logique to escape death, and above 20000. more: Nor had the King any remorse of
sorrow for these murders, but he was so far from it, that he caused new medals
to be made in memory of the day, after the custom of the Roman Emperors, with
this Motto engraven, Virtus in Rebels, et Pietas excitavit justitiam* Carolus
nonus Rebellium domitor, Valor and piety excited Justice against Rebels,
Charles the ninth the Tamer of Rebels; besides, the Parliament of Paris did
inorder that there should be an anniversary celebration of the day.

And as Charles the ninth was branded for this massacre, (and died a little
after a young and lusty man, which was held a judgment fallen upon him from the
text that says, the bloody man shall not live half his days) so his
Successor did do a most unchristian and ignoble act, for to bear up against the
House of Austria he introduced the common Enemy of Christendom the Turk into
her bowels, by a solemn league struck betwixt both, and what a world of
mischief did Ahenobarbus Solymans General in many parts of Italy by virtue of
this confederacy: And this league must be countenanced and confirmed by
public writing and examples; How A^a King of the Jews, sought help of the
King of Syria against the Israelites; How David who was so great a Prophet as
well as King, being ill entreated by Saul, fled to Achis for to succor an
Idolater; How Constantine the Great made use of the Goths, and Narsetes of the
Longobards; how Henry and Frederic Kings of Castile made the Sarracens their
Auxiliaries, And that other Christian Princes employed Pagans and Heathens and
took them in pay; What a rabble of rogues did follow Monsieur Monluc, the very
scumm of the peeple, so that it grew to be a Proverb, that a pack of raskals
were called les Laquais de Monluc; And he was used to say, tha^ one may make
arrows of any tree against the Enemy, and if he could he would evoke and employ
all the infernal legions of devils for the destruction of him of whom he was in
danger; but a little after his conscience troubled him for that profane
speech, saying, Dieu me le pardonne. Confessing that since that confarreation
'twixt Christians and Mahumetans matters went from bad to worse with France*
And indeed Antoine du Pre who then was Chancellor, refused to subscribe the
transactions which passed 'twixt Francis and Solomon, it would prove so great a
scandal to Christianity, and an indeleble blemish to France; And matters
succeeded accordingly, for this ignominious League did not only turn to the
dishonor but detriment of France afterward, for she lost all she had in Italy,
sand it proved so ominous, that Henry Francis his son was immaturely and
unluckily killed at a tournement, leaving the Crown most deeply laden with
debt, and two young Sons under the tutele of the forementioned Katherin, who
descending from the House of Medici could make philtres as well as compound
potions for whom she listed; And Henry's two Successors as they were short
lived, so they came far short in virtue and gallantry of other Kings of France;
Then come's Henry the third, having stolen away surreptitiously out of Poland,
else he had bin sent away, for they had had too much of him. This King spent the
public treasure in voluptuousness and vanities, his very dogs and hawks
stood him in an incredible sum, he was the first who had his table rayl'd
about when he did Eat; He had so profusely exhausted the public demeanes that
in an Assembly of the 3. Estates at Blois, he desired them to advise of some
means to acquit his Crown which was engaged in above a hundred millions of gold.

A little after this that horrid Hydra, that mystical and many headed Monster
the Ligue began to rage, this hideous Monster did not only like your Indian
Serpents, as Pliny reports, swallow up bulls and beasts, but it destroyed whole
Provinces: Good God in what a fearful and frantique condition was poor France
at this time, as if all the Furies of hell had bin let loose to distract and
torment her; There were base Mercenary preachers set on work to power oil upon
the fire, to increase it, rather then water to quench it; Among others, Gul.
Rose, Hamilton, Bernard, Christin, with diverse more did bellow out nothing but
war, and belch out blood; Nay the College of Sorbon which will be an
everlasting reproach unto it, did pass a solemn decree, that the Kings name,
and the prayers that were appointed for him in the Canon of the Mass should be
expunged: At last the French madness being com to the highest cumble of
wickedness, the Parisians sent a young cutthroat, a couled Friar to murder
their anointed lawful King, his name was Friar Iacques Clement, whereof there was
this pertinent Anagram made, c'est l'enfer qui m'a cr^e, it is Hell that created
me: But he did his business, and butchered the King with a long knife he carried
in his sleeve so dexterously, as if he had bin brought up to the trade, but he
was instantly hacked to pieces. Thus the Valesian line extinguished; And
remarquable it is, what a vision the King had in his dream not long before, for
he thought that he was torn by Lions, whereupon he commanded the next day, this
dream having made such a deep impression in him, that those Lions and young
Cubbs which were in the Louure should be presently killed, which was done
accordingly. There was an Epitaph put upon this Henry, which I think it not
impertinent to impart unto this Ingenious Auditory.

Adsta Viator, et dole Regum vicem,
Cor Regis isto conditum est sub marmore,
Qui jura Gallis, jura Sarmatis dedit*
Tectus cucullo hunc abstulit sicarius
Cum magno potens Agmine cinctus fuit,
Abi Viator, et dole Regum Vicem.
Paraphrastically thus in English,

Whether thy choice or chance thee hither brings,
Stay passenger, and wayle the fate of Kings,
This little stone a great Kings heart does hold
Who ruled the fickle French, and Polaques bold,
Whom with a mighty warlike host attended
With fatal steel a couled Monster ended.
So frayl are even the highest earthly things,
Go passenger, and wayle the happ of Kings.
Now, though that nefarious conjuration of the Ligue was partly dissipated by
the fortitud and felicity of Henry the 4th. yet this inundation settling it
self so long upon the fair continent of France, left a great deal of scruffy
odd dreggish stuff behind it, as it happens often when the pestilence cease,
the infection may a long time continue in beds and clothes; For though it
happened 22. years after, yet it was by one who was impelled by the Genius of
the old Ligue, (and he must needs go whom the devil drives) that Henry the
fourth was killed by Ravillac; so in revolution of not much above half an age
there were 3. Henry's all Kings of France died violently, two by knifes, and the
first by the splinter of a Lance, all contemptible instruments; the first was
killed on horseback, the second in his closet, the third in his coach. Now, as
all is not gold that glisters, no more was the last Henry so Peerles a Prince
as he is cried up to be; we know well how he shrunk from that Religion he had
professed nere upon forty years, how it was his common practice to lie 'twixt
other men's sheets, what a number of known natural children he left behind,
besides those that were fathered by others; We know how he repudiated his first
wife of better Extraction then himself, and being all gray married a young
Princess to whom he might have bin a granfather for age: We know also how he
wrought Birons head to be chopped off, and others who were the chief that put
the French Crown upon his head; How he broke with Queen Elizabeth of England in
the performance of many promises, who had done him such signal courtesies, etc.
I will conclude this period of my discourse with a proverb worth the knowledge*

Quand Italy sera sans poison,
Angleterre sans trahison,
Et la France sans guerre,
Lors sera le monde sans Terre.
When Italy does poison want,
And Traitors are in England scant,
When France is of Commotions free,
The World without an Earth shall be.
I com now most noble Auditors, to the third Ery^nis or Fury of France*
Injustice* Injustice, and this fury compared to the first may change places
with her, and take the precedence; there is nothing so great an opposite, and
professed enemy to the Queen of Virtues as Injustice, she is covetous,
revengeful* and ambitious in the superlatif degree, yet she goes commonly under
the holy, and wholesome name of Justice wherewith she does vayl and varnish all
her actions, and yet while she palliats her proceedings she does perpetrat a
world of mischiefs, of rapine, of tyrannical exactions, and extorsions, with a
thousand villainies more, she spares the nocent, and so wrongs the innocent; nay
she spils the blood of the guiltless oftentimes, and swallows bribes by
gobbets; Her brain is always at work to find new Monopolies, new projects, new
devices to rack and rend money, to grind the face and excoriat the poor peasan
that she leaves him neither eyes to bewayl, nor tongue to bemoan his misery;
This Henry the 4th found to be true, for he observed that there was a double
tribute used to be paid, one to the King, the other to his Officers, but the
first was made intolerable by the second; so that it was impossible but that
both Prince and peeple ^hold be abused: whereof in the last civil wars there was
a notable instance happened in a president of Normandy, who being inordred to
raise 30000. Crowns upon the Reformists, it was discovered that he had levied
300 thousand crowns in lieu of the 30.

But among other ocasions and bayts of Injustice in France, the nundination and
sale of Judiciary offices which lie prostant for him who gives most, is one of
the greatest and dishonorablest, for it is lawful for him who buys to sell
again, Insomuch that it often falls out that they who buy by detayl do sell
again in gross: Others clean contrary do buy in gross and sell by detayl, as
Butchers use to do in buying a beast for the slaughter* whom they afterward
cut into parts, and happily make one quarter to pay for the whole. It is recorded
by a modest Author, that in the compass of 20. years there came to the Kings
coffers above 26. millions of crowns this way; And they would justify this by
the example of the Venetians, who to support the war they had against Lewis the
twelfth, they raised 5. millions by selling Offices by outcry under a spear to
the highest bidder, and by this way they were said to have levied 100. millions
since to preserve S. Marks bank from breaking: But the rate of Offices in
France is mounted now to its highest pitch, La vente des Offices aujourdhuy est
montes a sa periode. A President's or Attorney Generals place is valued at
about 20000. franks, 2000. l. sterling, which the poor client in a short time
pays treble again.

It was a brave law of Theodosius and Valentinian, that none should be promoted
to public honors, or Magistracies for money, but for merit, and that the
party advanced should be liable to an oath that he came to his place with clean
hands* without gratuity, price or compromise directly or indirectly. Now as
Covetousness is sedulous* so she is ingenious, as appeers by the Edict of the
Paulette, whereby it is enacted, that if the Officer does not transmit it to
another 40. days before he dies* the Office returns to the King* therefore to
be free of this casualty they either give the more at first, or they give an
annual pension whereby most of the places of Judicature in France are not only
vendible, but hereditary. This was the device of one Monsieur Paulet at first,
therefore when one has bought an office he uses to say, j'ay Paulette, or j'ay
pay la Paulette.

Besides this institory and marchandising way of handling Justice, it is
incredible what multitudes of gown'd cormorants there are in France, as
Advocates, Proctors, Scribes, Clerks, Solliciters, who prey upon the poor
Client, and suck his vital spirits, they are called the souris de Palais, the
mice of the Court, and the Judges the ratts, they are as thick as gnats, and
able to corrupt ten worlds: Stephen Paschasius records, and he was a man of
great ingenuity and integrity, that the King of France might raise an Army of
200 thousand Scribes or Chicanears as they term common Barretors, and Clerks,
and VVolfangas Prisbachius thinks there are more of those in Paris alone, then
in all Germany, which is estimated to be two parts in three larger then France:
there is not a word, syllable, or letter of the Law, but they will draw you
arguments of strife from them, for the propagation of Pleas.

Nor is Justice less abused there by the multitude of Laws which is beyond
belief, which the subtle capacities and working brains of that peeple use to
wrest, and distort as they please, making thereof a nose of wax; As also the
revocation of Ordinances and Arrests, which is so frequent among them; In so
much that as Baudius observes, the high supreme Court of France whose authority
was held so sacred, does retain little of its pristin ancient Majesty, the King
Edicts which they verify being so commonly repealed.

Now, as in a working tempestuous Sea there is not a drop of water stable and
quiet, but one wave struggles, and thrusts one another forward and backward, Or
as a Shipp under sail wrestleth as she makes her way with the tumbling
billows, so France may be said to be overwhelmed with an Ocean of confusion.

And as France at home is so subject to acts of oppression and injustice, so
whenever she has taken footing in any Country abroad, her children show
themselves what they are, and who was their mother, by there insolences, and
extortions; They corrupt the manners of all Nations where they com, with their
fashions and levity; They do not only corrupt the mind, but they infect the
body with their foul disease, and leave stigmatizations behind them.

Had the French administered justice in Sicily, or had they comported themselves
with that humanity, prudence, rectitude and moderation they should have done,
the Sicilian Vespres had never happened, when the Natives patience so often
abused turned to fury, and made a solemn conjuration to free themselves of them
for their tyranny, violation of virgins, scortation, ravishments, stupration,
and insupportable taxes, whereupon by a national unanimous consent, and at the
sounding of a bell they dispatched 8000. French into the other World, not
sparing the pregnant wombs and embryos, there was such a mortal hatred generally
conceived of the Nation, Having pitifully complained to the Pope Nicolas the
third a little before, imploring him that he would cast out of Sicily that ill
spirit wherewith she was so miserably possessed; so Charles Duke of Anjou
brother to St. Lewis, having tyrannized in Sicily 17. years was suddenly put
out of his new Kingdom, and the society of mankind all at once, with all his
proling Countrymen; And he was ejected the same way as he entered, which was by
blood, for when King Manfredus was defunct, a young Prince Conradinus, the
lawful Heir descended of the Imperial stemm of the Hohenstauffens was to
succeed, but he was betrayed by a Fisherman and surpised; and together with
the Austrian Duke Frederique he was barbarously butchered. Which made an
Italian Author express himself pathetically, Veramente di sasso sarebbe coluy
che non fosse -- Truly he should be made of stone that would not be moved at such
a cruel tragaedy, that so hopeful a young King descending from so many Caesar's,
with such a valorus Duke being both but youths, should be so basely made away,
and that by the council of a Pope Clement the fourth, which aggravat's the
business much.

There is another pregnant example how the State of the United Provinces having
made a voluntary election of the Duke of Anjou for their Governor, being
induced thereunto by the Letters of the Queen of England, how unjustly,
perfidiously, and ingratefully the said Duke did carry himself with his train
of ruffling French, by attempting in a proditorious way to make himself
absolute and independent, but the cocatrice was crushed in the shell, and his
design frustrated, yet for his person and domestiques he was suffered to depart
civilly, and peaceably, though ingloriously in point of reputation to himself
and his Country; This was the reward the French gave the Belgians,
notwithstanding that among many other demonstrations of confidence, affection
and trust, they had made him Duke of Brabant, and given him the title of
Governor, which titles he would not desert, but would have them to his death,
which happened a little after; such are the humors, such the ambition of the
French, which made Henry Fits Allen Earl of Arundel, who first introduced the
use of Coaches into England, dissuade Queen Elizabeth from matching with the
said Duke of Alencon, because he had had sufficient experience of the
inconstancy, arrogance and levity of the French, and that few of them had
upright and just hearts.

Nor do the Kings of France pay the debts, or hold themselves bound to perform
the promises of their immediate predecessors, for they say that they come to the
Crown not as much by Hereditary as Kingly right; as appeers by the answer which
Lewis the 12. gave the Parisians, who humbly petitioning for some Arms and
Canons which they had lent Charles the 8. he told them that he was not Charles
his Heir, much less his Administrator: So the Swisses demanding of Francis the
second, a return of those large sommes which they had lent his father, received
this short injust answer, that he was not tied to the solution of any man's
debts.

Nor do the French where they com bestow the Indian disease, and infect the
blood of their Neighbors; but in one part of France they have another disease
as bad and more ugly, which is the leprosy, for in the South parts toward the
Pyrency Hills in the Country of Bearn and other places, there is a despicable
kind of peeple called the Capots; and in another dialect Gahets, most of them
being Carpenters, Coupers, Tinkers, or of such mean mechanique trades, whose
society all men do shun and abominat, because they use to infect others with
their leprosy, therefore they are not permitted to enter into any Towns, and
hardly to live in the Suburbs, they have distinct stations apart in Churches;
when any dye they can leave no lands but only their movables to their
Children, scarce having the same privileges in their own Country, that Jews
have in Italy and Germany.

But to resume the thread of my discourse a little before, if the Kings of
France be not tied to pay the debts and legacies of their parents and
predecessors, what law of honesty do we think can bind the vassals of France to
do so? Caesar and Tacitus had felt the pulse of this Nation sufficiently, when
they call them Levissimum hominum genus, a most light race of peeple, that they
have more of imagination then judgment, more words then common honesty. Yet
Francis the first could vapor, as Lipsius has it of him, Etiamsi fides toto
Orb exularet -- although Faith should be banished from among mortals, yet she
should be found among Kings, who should be tied to performance by her alone, and
not by fear. You pleased to say, Noble Cosen Ernest, that the Kings of France
never die; shall they be eternal, and their faith so mortal? I am not ignorant
that Bodin goes very far in the commendation of the French, being transported
with passion more then judgment, and therein he shows himself to be of a true
French humor; And he thinks to do her right by wronging her neighbors,
specially the Empire and Germany; He calls the Germans stupidos et rusticos,
plus roboris quam rationis habentes, leves, suavitatem orationis et Veneres
respuentes, etc. I say he calls the Germans doltish and stupid, having more
strength then reason, they are light, and averse to sweetness and elegancy of
speech, that the German Princes are feudatary to France, and their Emperor to
the Turk, with such like calumnies; Bodinus herein showed himself a base, and
ignorant sciolist, and his lies are so notorious, that they are not worth the
answering, nor worthy of the indignation of a German Prince; for my self I hold
them to be like a brute beast besmattring a Traveller upon the high way with
dirt, for which the Passenger is not angry, nor does he respect it coming from
an irrational animal, and such a beast may Bodinus be in aspersing the Germans
as he does.

The third Fury which possesses France is her temerity and unadvisednesse
most commonly seen in her Actions, which as Caesar, who was not only a
Travellor, but a Conqueror, and dweller there, says, Gallorum Genti temeritas
est innata, Rashness is innated in the French Nation: And as we read of moving
Islands, so the French is not only stirred, but tossed perpetually with the
waves of Temerity and lightness; especially when the Circian or Southern wind
blows; Augustus made his vow unto the Gods that it should not blow upon them;
For the French have a whirlwind in their brains, they have quicksands in their
breasts, which tosseth their Councels, and cogitations to and fro.

The Physicians dispute whether the Worms that are engendered in man out of
putrefaction proceed from the stomach or the belly; but I am of opinion that in
French bodies those Magotts are generated in the brain, rather then any place
of the microcosm besides. To confirm which tenet I will produce one of their
own Authors and Countrymen who should be best acquainted with their Genius, It
is Alexander Pontamarinus in his description of the French Nobility; and no
Limmer could put them out more to the life, when he says, La jeuno Noblesse
de France est d'un estrange humeur, elle ne se plaist que d'une especce de
mignotise, ou elle rend plus preu^e de laschete que de valeur; Elle est
tellement imbue de je ne scay quel Esprit de mespris, que tout son maintien
n'est qu'un continuel desduin; Elle a plus de mouuement aux espaules, plus de
bricolles aux pieds, plus de singeries aux mains, et de tournoyement en la
test qu'il n'y a de gout d'eau en la Seine; Elle se contrefait, elle se
deguise, elle begaye au lieu de parles* Elle pantalonne a cheval, et se
comporte en toutes ses actions si ridiculement, qu'vn Penitre ne scauroit auec
plus d'artifice esbaucher la d'un figure fol que ce ce pouure gentilhomme
Francois en done tesmoignage; Et piu^ oyes le discourir, c'est luy qui ne
craint person, et na iamais appris de se fair Craindre, c'est luy qui bat
tout le monde, et il ignore le moyen de se defendre, C'est luy qui est bien a
cheval, et il ne scait pas tenir la bride; C'est luy qui scait bien Entretenir
les dames, et les fiiles de chamber se mocquent de ses discourse; Bref, c'est
luy mesme qui est la fable du peuple, l'ordinaire, pity des honestes gens, et
le scandale de sa lignee; Va-il par la rue il ne fait pas vne demarche qu'il ne
negarde en arriere pour se glorifier en l^ suite de ses valets; Chasque fois
qu'il aura les yeux sur ses souliers, il postera la main sur le collet de sa
chemise, Homme sot et miserable: This character of a French Gentleman is
rendered as wittily in Latin. Nobilis Gallus in delicias et inertiam quam
magnanimitatem est proclivior, cum perpetuo rerum Omnium fastidio, ubicumque in
inimicis pedum, manuumque gesticulationibus, scapularum motationibus, capitis
vibrationibus prodigiose frequens; I^cessu, vestitu, Sermon, et in omnibus
actionibus ita ridiculus, et histrio, vt omnem consummatissimi Fatui indolem,
et personam exact representet; Si coll^quii res sit hic ille est qui
prosternit omnes, sed qui modum se defendendi ignorant; Ille est qui omnium
optime regit equum, sed qui frenos moderari adhuc nescit; Ille est qui Ginecaei
applausum sibi vendicat, sed quem a tergo s^mularem multa ciconia pinsit;
Summa, Ille est fabula vulgi, bonorum miseratio, ordinis sui macula; si vero
deambulationibus per vrbem indulgeat, sine stultitiae scen^ id n^n facit, modo
vno vix gradu promoto ad pedissequos oculos rejicit gloriosule se praedican^*
mod^ in calceis mir acula quaerit, modo indusii collare manibus terit,
Homostolidus, (...) publicis Christianorum supplicationibus includendus.

The French Gentleman is a thing of an odd humor, he pleases himself in a
kind of fantastiquenesse, which discovers more of softness, then manhood, he
has ever and anon such a slighting way, that all his carriage is but a kind
of perpetual disdain; He has more stirrings about his sholders, he fetches
such strokes with his feet, he has such apish motions in his hands, he has
such windings of his head, that there is no member at rest about him; He
counterfeits, he disguiseth, he gapes and lisps instead of speaking; He does so
pantonolize it on horseback, and comports himself in all his actions so
ridiculously, That an expert Painter cannot draw a fool with more artifice then
this poor French Gentleman does it really and to the life: Hear him discourse
and he will tell you that he fears no body, yet never learnt any body or boy to
fear him; It is he who could beat all the world, yet knows not how to defend
himself against a pigmey; It is he who is the only man on horseback, yet happily
he knows not how to hold his bridle: It is he who is the only entertainer of
Ladies, and yet the Chambermaids make mowes at him. In fine, it is he who can
hold excellent discourse, yet he is the byword of the peeple, the pity of
honest men, and the reproach of his family: Does he march in the streets, he
scarce makes two steps, but he looks back to behold his Laquay strutting behind
him, he has his hands often upon his locks, and his eyes upon his shoes; O
poor sot, fit to be prayed for in all Churches that he recover his wits.

Thus Pontamarius in his Protean Academy does describe and characterise a true
Monsieur, though he was one himself: Among their liberal Sciences dicing and
carding are two whereunto they are excessively addicted, and many of them hereby
bring a milpost to a thwittle, and a noble to less then ninepence: A
Physitian's son, when I was in Paris, lost in one night above 60. thousand
Crowns; nor do young gallants only, but Scholars, Lawyers, and Merchants of
all sorts frequent this school of fortune. One Jonas kept a gaming house in the
Suburbs of St. Germain, that some days and nights he had above 1000 franks to
his box. And as the French are thus extremely given to gaming, so in the
Academy of Venus they are the greatest practitioners of any peeple, the other
used to wast their estates, but this consumes their bodies, and commonly there
is no French Gentleman but is a Surgeon himself of the Venerean disease, which
makes him carry his salve box and implements always about him for fear he get
a clapp. Some parts of France have bin proverbially infamous for this kind of
turpitude; among other, Marseilles in Province is one, whereof the Greeks have a
saying, (...), sail to Marseilles if you desire your choice of whores; They
used also there (...), to make use of boys, but this nefandous custom they had
from the soft Greeks* who had a colony there so many ages, and infected their
neighbors with it; Indeed there is no Country where Venus keeps so great a
Court, and where they go sooner to it, so that some women cannot tell when they
were mayds: And as the French are observed to be thus extraordinarily
salacious, and given to this kind of lux, and wantones with such a strong
propensity of nature; so is their language fit for such effeminacies and soft
plesures, which language is but squama latini Sermonis, et rubigo trivialium
barbarismorum, she is but the scales of the Latin, and rust of other old
toungs. I know that many distinguish thus among languages, that it is fittest
to speak to God in Spanish for the Majesty of it, to Princes in Italian for
the gravity of it, to the enemy in Dutch for the manfulnes of it, to women in
French for the softnes of it. There is a tale of a German Ambassador to Charles
the fifth, who being ordered to deliver his Embassy in high Dutch, a Spanish
Don being attending the Emperor, and then at the audience, observing the
strength and severity of the language, said in a kind of passion, Voto al'
Antichristo -- I swear by Antichrist I think it was high Dutch that God
Almighty spoak when h^ ejected Adam out of Paradise, and caused an Angel with a
flaming formidable sword to be Porter that none should re-enter: Whereunto the
German acutely answered, that he esteemed the Spanish language for her subtlety
to be that which the devil used when he seduced our poor granmother Eve; There
is another story of Langas sent Ambassador from Ferdinand the first, to Poland,
who conversed much with Don Pedro Ruyz a Spaniard, and privy Councellor to
Caesar, and being both one day at dinner, and the said Don Pedro hearing Dutch
much spoken in a dispute at the table, and listening to the high though harsh
accents and pronuntiation of it, broke out into this speech, Me thinks the
Germans do not speak but thunder, etc. But let us still love our maternal
Language, and not be allured by those loose lascivious toungs of Spain, Italy,
and France especially which serves chiefly to make wanton loves and
complements, to compose amorous sonnets, and attract femal bewty, or frame such
odd Romances, and hyperbolical stories, as Amadis de Gaul, and such like; what
a world of wanton books are there in French which tend chiefly to amuse the
understanding with vicious thoughts, and to corrupt manners? what stories they
have of adulterious loves, of unbridled lusts, what stratagems do they relate
of such things? teaching that Vows made by the goddess Venus are not
obligatory, according to the Poet when he gave Council to one that was
desperately in love,

Nec jurare time, Veneris perjuria Venti
Irrita per terras, et freta longa ferunt.
Such books are fitter to be made a sacrifice to Vulcan, then kept in
Gentlemen's studies, or to be transported to Sicilie, where parents are put to a
perpetual kind of watching to preserve their daughters from being stolen away,
and suborned; The Lacedaemonians by a virtuous law caused the works of
Archilochus, though a very ingenious and great Poet, to be banished from their
City, because the reading thereof might deprave the pudicity of their youth,
least more hurt might com by the wantonness, then good by the wittiness of the
verse. O most prudent and provident act! but how few such Lacedemonian Patriots
are found now a days, specially in France? But the French Venus is not only a
smooth prattling gossip, but she is also profuse and luxurious. I pray hear what
Ammianus Marcellinus speaks long since of the French, Vini avidum genus,
affectans ad vini similitudinem multiplices potus -- A race of peeple greedy of
wine, and affecting according to the similitude of the wine multiplicity of
compotations, they are quickly transported with excess this way; I will
produce one example of a notable wine-bibber, which was Rablais, who though he
was very well instructed both in the Greek and Latin toungs, and an excellent
Physician, with other choice parts, yet at last leaving all other serious
studies, he did totally inslave himself to Epicurisme, to gluttony, and
drunkenness, in which humors he belched out that Atheistical kind of book
which goes under his name though under pleasant notions able to turn every
Reader thereof to a Democritus: As I have instanced in a man (whereof there might
be produced thousands in this kind) so I will bring before you a woman a rich
widow who lived hard by Bourdeaux, who was got with child while she was in a
deep drunken sleep, who beginning to swell thought it was only a tympany, but
her Physicians told her she was with child* whereupon she caused it to be openly
published in the Church of the Parish, that if he who got her with child would
confess it, she would take him for her husband herupon; Herupon a young Vineyard
man who was used to frequent her house, did confess that he had done it as she
slept in a chair one night by the fire side, having drunk much wine upon such a
holiday, so she married him, and he thanked Bacchus for it. It Is true, that
Virgins use not to drink wine in France, it being a great dishonor if they
should, only they give sometimes a tincture to a glass of water with some few
drops of claret, but Bacchus goes down smoothly the married women's throats.

And as for drinking, so for eating also the French are inferior to none in
point of excess, and indeed they seldom make sacrifices to Bacchus, but they
have Ceres with it; Bishop Reginald Belney a man renowned for eloquence and
learning, used to eat at every 4. hours end night and day, which was six times
every natural day: And indeed they hold it no disparagement in France among the
best sorts of Ladies, to be always eating something or other as they go along
the streets in their Coaches: And it is a common saying in France* Com lets go
to dinner quickly, that we may have time enough for a collation in the
afternoon, and so go in a seasonable hour to supper, to take afterward a
nuntion, and so go to bed betimes, that we may rise early in the morning to
breakfast.

Other Nations eat, and chew their meat, but diverse of the French do devour and
swallow it up whole, and after they have eaten their pottage, it is common
among some to lick the dish and their fingers afterward. I com now from their
diet to their clothing; good Lord, was there ever any Nation so mimical, so
fantastique, and variable in their vestments? I know they are greedy of change,
and gaping after novelty in all things, but for their apparel, nor Proteus,
nor Vertumnus, nor the Camelaeon was so transformable; In the Kings Court the
fashion of the suit you put on in the morning grows obsolet in the evening,
and their brains are at labor in the night to find some new mode for the next
day. But this alteration and variety of fashions though it impoverisheth
private men, yet it tends much to the Kings emolument; for Thuanus avoucheth
that this liberty of vestments brings the King in above 300 thousand crowns
yearly, by those stuffs that are brought in from Italy, and other places; yet
there have bin Edicts and sumptuary laws enacted often touching apparel, but
such is the humor of the Nation, and their elboes so itch ever and anon for new
fashions, that no laws were ever observed long; nor is this to be soly imputed
to a desire of change, as much as to an innated National pride which raigns in
the French. Then came up to foment this pride, sale of honors and offices, nay,
the highest dignity of all, which is St. Michaels order, was prostant for
money, which made Tiercelin a Knight of very ancient Extraction to say, that
the Conchyliatus torques, the order of St. Michael was become a collar now for
every ass.

To raise this pride higher, the use of Coches was introduced in the reign of
Francis the first, by Iean de laval a Gentleman of noble extraction, who being
of a corpulent and unweldy constitution, was the first who had one made for
him; yet we read, that in Henry the seconds time which was a good while after*
there were but two Coches in all Paris, one for the Queen, and another for his
base daughter. But now their number is so monstrously increased, that one may
say there be as many Coches in Paris, as there are Gondolas in Venice, and indeed
no place wants them more, Paris being one of the dirtiest Towns in
Christendom, nor is it an ordinary but an indeleble oily coagulated dirt whose
spots cannot be washed off with any soap, and the sent of it so strong, that
one may smell the dirt of Paris 10 miles before he comes at her if the wind be
in his face.

Moreover as the French grow quickly in love with any thing, so are they sooner
cloyed therewith then any other; And for their affections one to another and
toward strangers they are soon hot, and soon cold; they will take a pet at any
thing, and pepper in the nose though their bodies be not pepper proof all over;
An inquiet Nation, and enemies to tranquillity, impatient of peace until they
have recovered the ruins of war, lovers of stirrs and motion, which makes his
next neighbor the Flemin to have this proverb of him, Quand le Francois dort,
le diable le berse: When the Frenchman sleeps, the devil rocks the cradle. There
is not a more sanguinary and barbarous rabble in the World then in France, it is
an ordinary thing to digg one out of his grave and dragg him up and down in
pieces, as among others they did the Marquis of Ancre, whose death and the
manner of it redounds infinitely to the dishonor both of King and peeple. The
King having commanded him to be killed in his own House the Louure, whose walls
were besprinkled with his blood, and King^ Courts should be sacred places, and
then a thing which proved ridiculous to all the world his process was made after
his death: Nor were any of that base rascality punished who broke into the
Church, and into his mortuary, whence they pulled him out and dragged him like
a dog up and down the channels, and then hanging him to a gibet by the heels,
they hacked his body in mamocks, notwithstanding that he was neither arraigned,
convicted or condemned, but death is not sufficient to satiat the French
malice: What an inhuman thing was it? an act that a Wild Arab would never have
don* to roast a man alive in the market place at Bourdeaux without any form of
law. Gaspar Coligni writ in a letter of his to Charles the ninth, C'est le
naturel de Francois. It is given by nature to the French, that if they cannot
find an enemy abroad they will make one at home; They seldom rob but they kill;
and it is safer to fall into the hands of any then into a French pyrat's, for
there is no mercy with them, but all must overboard; what horrid barbarismes
have they committed at the plundring of Towns? how have they ravished Nunns at
the altar, not sparing any sex, as Tillemont of late years can bear testimony;
Nor are there any peeple so contentious, so quarelsom, so malicious and bloody
among themselves at home and abroad. It is the saying of Montagne, Mettez trois
Francois aux deserts de Libye ils ne seront pas un mois ensemble sans se
harceler, et esgratigner, put three Frenchmen in the deserts of Lybie, they
will not be a month together but they will scratch one another; nay the least
ocasion in the World will make them thirst after one another life: For upon
the least affront or surmize of affront, ca Ca, they must presently to the
Field and seek one another hearts blood: And there be more monomachyes and
duels fought in one year in France, then in 20. years all Christendom over; St.
Lewis had damned this fury of single combat to Hell, but Philip de Valois
fetched her out again. There have bin 20. Edicts of late years against it, but
the French are possessed with such spirits, that they care not for body or soul
to preserve a little puntillo of supposed honor. But Francis the first brought
monomachy to be very frequent by his Example, when he defied Charles the
Emperor in the Consistory at Rome for giving him the lie to a duel, insomuch
that the lie has bin ever since a mortal word; It being the principle of that
King, that he could not be a good man who returned not the lie with his sword.

But, most noble and highborn Cosens, some may happily admire that I should
perstringe the French peeple thus sharply, considering that they are extracted
from Us, and branches of the great German Tree. It Is true they are so, but as
the Poets sing of Circe, that she transformed men to beasts, so the clime of
that Country has quite metamorphos'd, perverted and quite alienated their
primitive natures and dispositions, Gallia has proved a Circe to Germany
herin; Or as there be some Fountains in Italy and elsewhere, which have that
quality as to turn stone to iron, so have the Germans which went to France
degenerated from themselves by a strange kind of transmutation of nature.

You may please to hear what one of themselves confesses in these words, Les
Francois passans le Rhin ne cesserent de tourmenter les Gauls, jusques a ce
que les Francois les ayans tous sinon chesse du moins appaise les vns, et
forcer les autres a fair jo^g, y establirent en fin leur domination; lesquels
reprenans, comme par droit de legitime succession avec les Commoditez du pays
le bien et le mal, tant de l'insuffifance, que de la pen discrete legerete de
ces peuples anciens, n'ont este moins signatez pour un semblable naturel
guerrier, que pour les grands troubles, et trop animeuses divisions les quelles
ont assez souuent approach l'estat de sa ruin.

This a pure Frenchman acknowledges; The French passing the Rhin did not cease
to torment the Gauls, until the French having if not chased away, yet at
least induced some, and forced others to the German yoke, they established there
at last their domination --

To travel a little further in France they, say, Se Clementissimo aere frui,
ne^ ulla caeli gravitate flagellari, they say that they enjoy a most mild air,
nor are beaten by any inclemency of heaven. Sure this cannot be true, for
Claudian says, that Gallia is nive ferox, that France has fierce snowes;
Petronius has a proverb, gallica nive frigidior, colder then French snow;
Diodorus says, that the French frost is so strong and contumacious, that
Rivers have bin pervious for whole Armies to pass over dry foot both for
Cavalry and Infantry. Nay of late years in the siege hefore Amiens it was so
bitterly cold, that the wines did freeze in the cask, and was sold in cakes and
by weight unto the Soldiers.

And for the wholsomnesse of that clime, sure it cannot be so far, it is found
by experience, that the French both men and women are more subject to vermin,
to the itch and scabs then any other peeple.

But the greatest thing they glory of, is, that France is so fertile and
exuberant a soil that it may be called a Copia Cornu of all things (I confess
indeed there are in France of horns) and that there is not any part that is
altogether barren; but in point of fertility. This cannot be so generally true;
for in Burgundy not far off, there is a Town called Orgelet, whereof there is a
proverb, that there are there fields without grass, rivers without fish, and
hills without groves: betwixt Bourdeaux and Bayon you traverse such a tract of
sandy ground, that one would think he passes through the deserts of Arabia,
when he goes over les lands de Gascoigne, for so they are called vulgarly;
there are diverse large tracts of gronnd which are as bad, In so much that Bodin
ingenuously confesses, Exploratum est deserta et inculta loca si aquas et vias
iis adjungamus duos Galliae trientes auferre; It is is found and explored, that
the desert and untilled places, if we add to them waters and ways, make up two
thirds of France; Then he confesses that there is such a scarcity of great
timber trees, that not only for building of Ships, but for erecting of ordinary
houses they must be beholden to other Nations.

Is this that incomparable fertility of France you speak of, Cosen? is this
that land of promise? what a bragging do the Bourdelois keep of their grove of
Cypres for the honor of which it was a custom that no ship should go out of the
Port with wine till the Magistrate had given him a branch of Cypres tree, for
which he was to pay such a gabel; yet this Grove whereof they vaunt is scarce
seven acres in all.

But Salt is the great staple Commodity of France, yet I pray be pleased to
hear what Lemnius speaks thereof, Majores nostri salem confecerunt uberrimo
sane questu, non ex aqua marina solis ardore in salem concreta atque indurata,
qualem ex Hispaniis and Galliis ad nos perfertur, sed ex maritimis glebis
exusti atque in cinerem redactis quem infusa aqua minutatim in salem reducebant
splendidum ac nitentem nec alio salis genere tota Belgica ad nostram usque
memoriam usa est. Qui conficiendi salis modus cum inducto externo inolesceret
excogitatus est alius non minus quaestuosus, scilicet advecto ex Hispaniis
atque Aquitanico sin^ rudi ac nigricante sordidoque sale, exempto limo,
excoctisque sordibus candidissimum id nostrates efficient rebus conservandis
ap^issimum. Sed alter ille modus facile in usum revocari potest, si externus
sal hostili odio denegetur, aut ex quavis alia causa copiam nobis deesse
contingat.

Our Ancestors made Salt with much profit, not of Sea water crusted by the heat
of the Sun and so obdurated, such as is brought us from Spain and France, but
out of maritime glebes burnt, and reduced to Cindres, which pouring therinto a
small portion of water by drops, they brought to be splendid and pure Salt, nor
did all Belgium use any other Salt until our memory* Which mode of making when
it grew out of use, a new extern way being introduced, there was another no
less gainful way invented; Which was that a rude and blackish sordid kind of
salt being brought over from Spain, or Aquitane Coasts, the dreggs and filth
being excocted, we brought it by our art and industry to be candid and
beautiful, and most fit to conserve things; but the the other way may be revived
again very easily, if foreign salt should be denied us in case of enmity or
otherwise.

Now although it is confessed, that France abounds with Salt, and in that point
may be said to be a sweet Country, yet the Inhabitants pay dear for it, for
the King makes near upon 20. millions of Franks every year of the gabel of salt
(as it was spoken before) which are two millions sterling; In so much that
although France have such plenty of Salt, yet it is cheaper in any other
Country. For it is found that the Merchant has it at lower rates on the Sea
side then the Peasan in the Country, which makes the Hollander oftentimes
bring thither French Salt back again and gain by it. One shall see sometimes the
poor Roturier or yeoman to go from the market with his pockets crammed with salt
to avoid paying the gabel, and women steal it home in their purses.

Now touching such an affluence of all things in France, besides which you
insist upon, my Noble Cosen, it may be so, but then surely there is the worst
kind of government there upon earth, and the most unproportionablest divident
made of that plenty, for I dare avouch France does abound with beggars more
then any Country under the Sun. One cannot ride upon the high way but he shall
have swarms of little mendicants sing before his horse head, as also when he
remounts the next day; The poor Vigneron, and Husbandman go in their wooden
shoes and canvas breeches to Church upon Sundays, and if their wifes have a
buckram petticot she is brave. Therefore whereas you say that France is the
freest and frankest Country in the World, and that she draws her etymology
thence, she may be so to strangers and passengers, but for the Natives I
believe they are the arrand'st slaves upon earth, they are of a mere asinin
condition, not only in relation to the King who so grinds their faces with
taxes, but they are villains also to their Lords: I will produce one example
for all; The Lord of Chasteauroux or red Castle in Berry had a Tenant, that by
his industry became Bourgesse of Paris, Le seigneur vendica son serf, qui
s'estoi^ retire et obtint la provision, the Lord in open Court demands his
slave, which the Court could not deny, and so passed sentence accordingly.

You say, noble Cosen, that France is adorned with all virtues, truly I do not
see how virtue can cohabit where such furies do tyrannize; I am sure that
Scaliger speaks of some parts of France, quae ab omni humanita^e et literis
vasta est, ubi librorum et bonorum hominum maxima solitudo est. Some parts which
are void of all humanity and literature, where there is a kind of solitude and
wilderness both of books and good men.

Touching the magnanimity and prwoesse of the French, it is true they did achieve
some brave things while the German blood continued fresh in them, and untainted;
Cicero says, that Caius Marius by his divine virtue and valor, influentes in
Italiam Gallorum Copias repressit, that he repressed those swarms of French
who rushed into Italy, but Caesar, who was a better Historian then Cicero
says, they were Cimbri and Teutones both which are High Dutch, as also those
which Brennus brought to sack Rome, and afterward took Delphos from the Greeks.

Touching the French courage we know the trite proverb, that the French are at
the first onset more then men, and afterward les then women; Indeed Florus
says, Habent eorum corpora quiddam simile cum suis nivibus, quae mox vt
caluers pugna statim in sudorem eunt, et levi motu quasi sole laxantur; The
French bodies bear some analogy with their snowes, for as soon as they are
heated in fight they vapor into sweat, and they are as it were thawed by the
Sun at the least motion.

But your Highness seems to extol mightily the power of the French King,
indeed it is an old saying, that Gallum in suo sterquilinio plurimum posse, The
cock ( Gallus) can do much upon his own dunghill. But this power is not so
superlatif if we descend into the truth of things, for touching the demeanes of
the Crown, the King cannot alienat one acre thereof without the consent of the
three Estates, as there is a pregnant example hereof in the Assembly of Blois,
where Bodin lost the favor of Henry the third about this debate: For the
French King is by the law but an Usufructuary of the Crown possession; nor
could any of them be sold for the redemption of King John in England though it
was then proposed, nor of King Francis in Spain, though this was the greatest
necessity that could be. We well know how often the Parliament of Paris has
clash'd with the King, and rejected his Edicts; Nor is the single testimony of
the King valid enough in France to take away any ones life, there was a notable
example hereof in Henry the seconds reign, who when he had commanded an Italian
servant to be clapped in prison, and had solemnly sworn that he had found him in
a most foul offense, yet the Kings affidavit could not prevail with the Judges,
but they released the prisoner. But now the integrity and stoutnesse of those
brave ancient Legislators and Judges in times past is much diminished, because
Kings do use to lend their ears to Parasits, Sycophants, and Buffons rather
then to Helvidius Priscus, Monsieur Lavacre, or such Sages. There is a tale of
Bajazet the first, that he had an Ethiop born in India about him, and having
upon a march one day his tent pitched nere a high tree, he called the Ethiop
and said, Dre Areb, if thou love me go up to the top of that tree, the
Indian scambled up presently, so the Emperor sent presently for some to hew
down the tree, the poor Ethiop begging his life all the while, and that his
Counselors would intercede for him, but nothing prevailing, the Ethiop pulled
down his breeches, and with his Excrements and Urine did so beray the hewers,
that they gave over work, and in the interim the Ethiop gets down, telling the
Turks Counselors, Would all such Privy Counselors as you were so beray'd,
whose oouncel cannot do as much as my Excrements. The French Kings use to have
many such weak Counselors.

Touching the unlimited power the French Kings have to make pecuniary Levies
and lay taxes, I pray hear what Philip Comines says, one of Lewis the xi.
chiefest Counselors of State, and whom he employed in the most intricat and
arduous ocasions, Nemo omnium est Principum qui jus habeat vel teruncium vnum
exigendi a suis praeter constitutum annuum censum nisi populus assentiatur,
sunt quidem principes quibus hoc frequens est in Sermon vt dicant habere se
privilegia vt quantum velint exigant a populo, Galliarum vero Rex omnium minime
causam habet vt istud de se jactet, nec enim vel ipsi vel cui vis alii licet.
There is no Prince that has right to raise the least farthing of his subjects
besides his settled revenues, without the peeples consent; It Is true, there are
some Kings who have it frequently in their mouths, that they have such
praerogatives to impose what they please, but the King of France has the least
cause to vaunt thus of himself.

The Exorbitancies of the French Kings this way has bin the ground of all the
wars that were waged pour le Bien public, for the common good which have
harassed France so often; Charles the Gross herby came to such an extreme
exigence that being overcom by Arnosplus he begged his bread of him to preserve
him from starving, and so obtained of him a small pension in Germany.
Nevertheless, though a clowd of examples of this kind could be produced, the
Kings of France do still use to flay their sheep, instead of shearing them;
witness the last King who assumed to himself the Epithet of Just, and God
knows he least deserved it of any, having exacted more of his people by
extrajudicial ways then any of his predecessors ever did, to maintain a
groundless war against the Spaniard by the advice of an ambitious and bloody
Cardinal, whose heart was as red as his habit, and of a deeper sanguine die.
Now as we read of a Town in Spain that was undermined by Coneys, of another in
Thrace that was undermined by Mol^e of another in Greece ranvers'd by Frogs,
another in Germany that was subverted by Rats, so I believe that there are in
France many such Cunnies, Moles, Froggs and Rats, I mean ambitious and sandy
brained sycophants, that will undermine, ranverse and tumble to destruction
their own dear Country; and Pope Gregory could prophecy so much of Richelieu
when he came to confirmed Bishop of Lucon to Rome at 20. years old, of whom he
said when he had perceived his genius by his discourse, This man will overturn
the World; nor is this Cardinal inferior unto him awhit, but his head and his
hat are altogerher as red; He treads directly in his stepps, and so does the
Queen in her husbands against her only Brother: In so much that truly, if I
apprehend any thing, one may see France running post to her own destruction.

Whereas you alledg that the Kings of France are such divine Physicians in
curing the Struma, I pray be pleased to hear what Petrus Crescentius a famous
French Doctor affirms, Multoties se vidisse Reges pro more tangere strumosos,
sed qui inde sanatus fuerit, vidisse neminem; He had seen often some of the
strumatical disease touched by Kings, but he saw not any cured merely by the
touch: I am of opinion there be waters in Moravia that can do the cure better,
being of a saltish, bituminous, chalchanthian vein, and it is more probable that
God and Nature should infuse more virtue to those mineral Waters, then to a man's
fingers.

All these things being unpassionatly considered and well pondered, I do not
see how the Country of France or her King, considering the slavery and poverty
of the peeple, the unequal distribution of the public weal and blessings of the
land, with sundry other reasons and solaecismes in Government before mentioned,
I say, I do not see what hopes or reason France may have to expect and demand
the pre-eminence of the rest of the Europaean Provinces.

Dixi.
THE ORATION OF MAGNUS Duke of VVIRTEMBERG, AND TECCIA Earl of MONTPELGARD,
etc. Lord of HEIDENHAM, etc. For SPAIN.
Most Illustrious Princes, etc.
THe Province I have undertaken, and the task that is imposed on me, is to
speak something of that most Ancient, and noble Country of Spain; therefore
while I put my self under that hot Clime, I humbly desire the heat of your
Affections, and accustomed candor may go along with me.

The Emperor Charles the V. a Prince of approved judgment, although he was
born, and bred in Germany, (for he entitled himself Citizen of Gant) yet he
loved Spain with a more profuse love then any other Region, making his
residence there most commonly when he was not engaged in the French; German,
and African Wars; In so much that when he had transmitted, and made a voluntary
resignment of all his Kingdoms, he reserved that Country for his last
randevous; And as it is curiously observed by diverse Caesarean Writers, when he
hois'd sail from Sudeburg with Eleonor Queen of France, and Mary Queen of
Hungary his two sisters, and with propitious gales had landed in Spain, he fell
down prostrat upon the first ground he trod, and kissing it, brake out into
these words: Salve mihi optatissima Tellus, nudus ex utero matris exivi, nudus
ad te tanquam alteram matrem redeo, and quod unum possum, pro tam multis in me
meritis corpusculum hoc, and ossa mea do dedicoque. Hail O most wished
Country, I came naked out of my mothers ^womb, and I return naked to thee as to
another mother. And, which is the only thing I can do now, I give up and
dedicate to thee this body and bones of mine, for so many benefits I have
received from thee. Now there be many eminent arguments for the high
prerogatives of Spain, -- Adeo sunt multa loquacem Ut lassare queant Fabium;
They are so numerous that they would tire the best Orator, but I will end eavour
to wind all up upon a small bottom.

Spain has bin reputed from the beginning a most considerable Country, witness
the Roman by whom she was prima tentata, and ultima subacta; first attempted,
and last subdued: For the old Romans, as now the Ecclesiastique Lords of Rome,
sought most after those places where the plenty and pleasure of the soil might
strive with their desire to make them happy, as it is now the humor of our new
Iasons (the Jesuits) to plant themselfs there where there are fat and golden
returns. But there be other extraordinary conveniences in Spain, the subtle and
clear temper of the air, the salubrity of the soil, and the constancy of one
sort of weather a long time, in so much that Homer and other Authors have
placed there the Elisian Fields.

There are no gross caliginous vapors rising up there out of any Fenns, gorsy
grounds or loughs. There are most delicat breezes that blow from the Sea, and
penetrating the circumambient Air, use to refresh both man, and all sorts of
brute animalls, attenuating and chasing away all dull terrestrial meteors;
Nay, Navigators when they sail along the Sea, do come to know when they are
nere the coasts of Spain, by the fragrant odor which Rosemary and other
aromatique Vegetalls, that grow there up and down the fields do usually
transmit and cast into the Air; Spain is neither parched with so violent a Sun
as Afrique is, nor disquietted with such impetuous winds as France, or shaken
with such Earthquakes as Italy, or benumbed with excessive cold as other Regions
are, but she partakes of all these in a middle kind of temperature. Spain does
not only furnish Europe, but the Indian also with most generous Wines, most
perfect Oil, most pure Salt, excellent gauls, the best fruits, as Almonds,
Figgs, Raisins, Orenges, Lemons, Pomgrannets; and all other kind of Vegitals,
as Roots, Herbs and flowers, which are there in a greater perfection then in
other Countries.

The bowels of Spain abound also with excellent mettalls, what Iron, what
Steel goes beyond that of Biscay? What Quicksilver comparable to that of
Medina? What gold purer then that which is found in Tagus? What Silk better
then that of Granada and Valentia? What Flax so good as that of Murcia? What
wool primer then that of Segovia? witness the testimony of Martial,

Vellera nativo pallent ibi flava metallo,
Et linit Hesperium bractea viva pecus.
The Pasture, and soil in some places is so exuberant, that the milk cannot turn
to whey, nor can Cheese be made unless you intermingle water with the milk it is
so creamy and thick, and this is observed about Cales and other parts.

Now for Horses, that generous animal, Spain is well known to excel all other
Countries, read Boterus, or Quinqueranus and they will tell you that the
Cordovan Ginetts in fierceness surpass those of Turkey, in swiftness those of
Barbary, in bewty those of Italy, some of those Ginets are sold for above 1000.
Ducats a piece, they are so daintily limm'd, as if they were made of wax; The
Ginets of Asturia called Asturcones, are also brave mettall'd animals. They go
so wantonly, as if they danced all the way, their feet moving in a kind of
regular glomeration, as Martial has it,

Hic brevis ad numerum rapidos qui colligit ungues,
Venit ab Auriferis gentibus Astur equus.
For Marble, and other curious Stones, for Architecture, Spain is known to have
Variety and what may seem miraculous; Not far from Barcelona, there is a
Mountain called Mondivi, and by the ancients Mons Iovis, wherein there is an
inexhausted quarrey of useful stones for structure, for although great
quantities are hewn out of the body of the hill every day, yet let the place
rest but a while, and nature will quickly heal the Ulcers, and fill the place
again as if it had never bi^ touched. The Monastery of Saint Laurence nere the
Escurial can witness what dainty Marble, and Free stone Spain abounds withal, a
stupendous fabrique, an egregious and Imperial piece, which stood Philip the
2. in more then 20. millions of Gold; Let Egypt bragg as long as she will of
her Pyramids, Greece of her Fanes and Temples, Rome of her Amphitheaters, and
Palaces, Babylon of her Walls, France of her Louvre, Venice of her Arsenal,
Milan of her Citadel, Turkey of her Baths, This Monastery and Royal Palace
does exceed them all far, for matter and form; It harbors and maintains 100.
Friars, whereof every one is allowed his Man and his Mule, with great nombers of
Officers; besides there is a stately Edifice annexed homogeneous to the rest
(which is part of Saint Laurence's Grideiron) that may lodge four Kings, and
every one have a capacious quarter. It Is incredible to think how many hundred
weight the very keys of the Monastery weigh. For delicate Orchyards, curious
Aqueducts and Fountains, for Grotts and Groves, for Galleries and Ambulatories,
for neatnes and amaenity of all things, you would be so transported, that you
would think your self to be in some earthly Paradis. And if He who will take an
exact survay of this stately structure must go above 33. miles, passing from
room to room, from quadrangle to quadrangle, with other places annexed, judge
you thereby of the magnitude and vastnes of the whole. He may be said to carry
a Pompion in his breast in lieu of a Heart, that would not be inflamed with a
desire to see this eighth wonder of the world.

Now for Cities I pray who will dare to make any comparison with Sevill in
point of Wealth, where diverse Fleets com yearly from the Indies laden with
ingots of Gold, and balasted with bars of Silver, as also with Gemms, and
other rich Commodities, in so much that Sevill alone pays the King in duties,
and imports above a Million every year; therefore that proverb is not ill
grounded, which says, Quien no ha visto Sevilla, non ha visto Mar avilla, Qui
no ha visto Lisb^a, no ha visto cosa boa; I will now pass from Sevill to
Ulissipolis the City of Ulissis or Leisbon, the very name tells her antiquity;
for largenes, and commerce, she vayles to no City under the Sun, she was the
first happy discoveresse of the East Indies, whence she has a world of Spices,
and Jewels that her Caraks bring yearly, and which she dispenses up and down
the world; What a delicat City is Granada, what a glorious piece is her
Allhambra which may be called a City of it self, rather then a royal Castle
or Palace, for it is of such an amplitud that it will hold 40. thousand Men;
What Town is more renowned then Toledo? where 17. General Counsels have bin
kept, and no City can say so much: what a Heavenly Temple is there? What a
stately ancient Palace where the Gothic Kings resided? What a rich
Archbishopric has she, worth 300. thousand Crowns in annual rent? What a
Noble Aqueduct will you find there of the workmanship of Ianelli Turiano of
Cremona, who was so famous for invention of hidraulique fabriques; In this
ancient City there be above 10000. Souls, that earn their living by spinning,
twisting, and weaving of Wool and Silk; What place can compare with Vallodolid
for a large Market place 700. paces compass? The Royal City of Leon has the
Sepulchers of ^7. Kings: Where can you find a more industrious people then in
Segovia, where a beggar is held a Monster; For salubrity of air what town is
like Madrid, the greatest Village in the World, and the most Populous, made so
by the residence merely of his Catholic Majesty, and his Counsels, in so
much that at one time there was a cense made there of near upon a Million of
souls. Charles the Emperor removed hither of purpose to be cured of a quartan
Ague, and he recovered, which made it first so famous: What a beuteous brave
built City is Valentia, where there is a kind of spring all the year long? The
only place to make a stranger forget his own Country; The brute Animalls,
there make themselfs beds of Rosemary and other Aromatique flowers; This City
affoorded lately two Popes of the Family of Borgia, Calixtus the 3. and
Alexander the 6. When Queen Margaret, Philip the 3. wife passed through that
City, the pomp of her entertainment amounted to 300. thousand Crowns. What a
commodious place for negotiation is Bilbo or Flaviobriga, whence above 50.
Ships are laden with Wools every year, and transported to other Regions? What
a stately thing is Barcelona, situated so commodiously upon the Mediterranean,
and to be an Arsenall for the Kings galleys? What a Rendevous for Devotion is
Compostella, where there is such a frequency of Pilgrims to visit the body of
Saint James the Apostle? Pompey the Great in his Trophyes which he erected on
the Pyrenean Hills, makes mention of 946. Towns thence to the furthest part of
Spain; There is nere Antiquera a choice kind of Mortar called Tarra, which is
far more solid and lasting then the plaster of Paris, and makes a more firm
incrustation upon walls. Nere Corunna there be quarrys whence Jaspers are hewn
out; But I will pass now to Minneralls, Pliny in his natural History affirms
that Spain had great plenty of Lead, Iron, Brass, Silver, Gold, Marble, and of
speculares lapides, a certain kind of specular stones which being cut thin will
be as clear as Crystal, wherewith in former times windows were usd to be
glazed; In so much that Possidonius says, Pluto the God of riches dwelt in some
of the subteranean parts of Spain. Moreover George Agricola avers, that among
those Regions where metals were dug, Spain was the first, Thrace the
second, Great Britain the third, France the fourth, Greece the fifth. In
Biscay where the antient'st Inhabitans of Spain dwell, there be such rich veins
of Steel and Iron, that Vulcan was said to have his chiefest Forge there, and
Mars his Armory; Pliny speaks of a whole mountain in Cantabria (now Biscay)
which is all of Iron, whereunto Martial alludes,

Auro Bilbilis, and superba ferro. It Is wonderful what is read in the Roman
story, that about Carthagena there were 40. thousand Men that dug in the
Mines of Silver, which affoorded 25000. Drachmas every day, amounting according
to Budaeus his calcule to 2500. Crowns; This no meaner man then Strabo
affirms: He goes further and says, that Hannibal had begun a mine which
affoorded 3000. Crowns every day. It is well known what Diodorus writes of the
Pyreny mountains, that they were once very thick of Gold and Silver mines, that
the Phaenicians the first traders by Sea of any people upon earth came often
thither for tresure; If we will give credit to Livie (and what Historian I pray
is more Magisteriall?) He will tell us, that the spoils which the Romans in a
few years brought from Spain came to 600. thousand weight of Silver, and 10000.
of Gold; so that Spain was then to Rome, what America is now to Spain. Nay, some
are of opinion that Tortosa in Spain, was that Tharsis whether Solomon sent his
fleet for treasure, and they ground the probability of this opinion upon the
frequent Navigation of the Tyrians and Phenicians then into Spain.

But shall we pass with a dry foot the waters of Spain? Strabo, Pomponius
Mela, and Ptolomy assimilat Spain to an Ox hide stretched upon the ground,
whose sides are all washed with the circumfluent Sea, the North side with the
Cantabrian, the West with the Atlantique, the South with the Herculean or
Balearique Sea, but the neck of the hide lying Westward is bound by the Pyreny
Hills, where the distance twixt the Cantabrian, and Meditterranean Seas is so
small in some places, that John Vaseus leaves it upon Records, that when he
traveled through Biscay he might from the top of Mount Adrian, see both the
Seas. Besides these various Seas that like so many Laundresses wash the skirts
of Spain, there are 150. Rivers that water the Continent up and down, and upon
those Rivers there are about 600. Bridges; besides some ponds, lakes, baths and
Fountains; In the field of Xerezcher are above 1500. Springs. Among other
Rivers there is Guadiana which plays bopiepe with passengers, for she suddenly
steals away out of sight, and runs above 20. Miles in subterrenean Caverns
under ground, and then she popps up again to the ey of the beholder at Villa
Harta; Whereupon when the Spaniards speak of their miracles they say there is a
bridge in Spain whereon many thousand herds of Cattle do usually feed. There are
some Spanish Rivers, where they fish for gold sane, in so much that the
Portugals do glory, that their Crown is made of their own gold, viz. of the
sands of Tagus, then which no oar is purer.

There are variety of things more that might be produced for the glory of Spain,
which made Claudian to break out into this Elogium.

Quod dignum memorare tuis, Hispania, Terris
Vox humana valet? primo lavat aequore solemn
India, tu fessos exacta luce Iugales
Proluis, inque tuo respirant sydera fluctu,
Dives equis, frugum facilis, pretiosa Metallis.
Pacatus though a Frenchman gives this Encomium of Spain, Hispania terris
omnibus terra foelicior cui excolendae, etc. Spain a Country more happy then
all Countries, whom the Supreme Fabricator of the world has indulged
extraordinarily in point of agriculture and riches: she is not obnoxious to
faint Southern heats, or fierce Northern blasts, but she is favored with the
temper of both the Poles; And being walled in by the Pyreneans, with the gentle
waves of three or four Seas, she may be said to be a little world of her self*
What a number of noble Cities shine up and down? she has golden streams,
rocks of Jewels, mines of all Metals, etc.

But (most noble Auditors) having expatiated my self thus up and down the
Country, let me speak something of the Inhabitants; And who knows not but the
Spaniard has bin ever reputed and felt to be a stout magnanimous people,
contemners of death, and mighty conservators of liberty? we may believe Lilius
herin, where he sings

Prodiga geris animi, and properare facillima mortem;
Namque ubi transcendit florentes viribus annos,
Impatiens aevi spernit novisse senectae,
Et fati modus in dextra est.
The patience of the Spaniard is admirable, there are a world of examples
hereof; Justin speaks of a boy, that having bin revenged of his Master, did
exult and laugh in the midst of torment: and when Augustus Caesar had debell'd
the Bislayners, they write that most of them rather then become slaves to a
Forrener, made themselfs away either by Fire, the Sword, or Poison: Mothers
slew their children, and children their Fathers.

Cantaber ante omnes hyemisque, aestusque famisque
Invictus --
Besides the Spaniards did much glory to die in the field, for the incolumity
of their Country, and rather perish by Famine, then yield up their Fortresses.
Witness the siege of Sagunto called now Morviedre in Valentia, who when the
people of the town could no longer repel the punique arms, and the strength
and stratagems of Hannibal, they brought all their Jewels, Tresure and Wealth
to the Market place, together with their wifes and children, and made a
bonefire of themselfs, and all the rest, rather then by a base succumbency to
yeald themselfs slaves to an African. So that Hannibal in taking Sagunto might
be said not to have taken the City of Sagunto, but the tomb of the Saguntins.
What shall I speak of Numantia beleagerd no less then 14. years, though she
had no walls or bastion but the bodies of the Inhabitants, no stones but humane
bones, to defend her self against a furious Enemy, she had but 4000. men
against 40000. Romans. At last when the fatal destroyer of Cities, Scipio
Africanus, had taken her, he found rather a large Sepulcher of dead men then a
City, for the Numantines held out so long till they devoured one another, and
when the bodies of the dead were rifled, they found in their bosoms joints of
human bodies, which they had killed for food, in so much that it was not in the
Roman force, but Famine that took Numantia.

For their fidelity the Spaniards have bin very signal in all ages, which
induced Julius Caesar to have a guard of them, and Augustus Caesar a band of
Biscayners or Cantabrians. But how far the virtue and valor of the Spaniards
prevailed against the Romans let Paterculus be heard to speak, Per ducentos
annos in Hispanis multo mutuoque certatum est sanguine -- For the space of 200.
years, there were so many and mutual conflicts of blood, that many of the Roman
Emperors, and Armies being lost, much reproach, and sometimes great danger
resulted to Rome; How many of their Scipios were destroyed there? how VIRIATUS
for ten years together did shake them? what a disgraceful truce Pompey made,
and Mancinus a more disgraceful. In all Sertorius his time it was doubtful
whether Spain should be tributary to Rome, or Rome to Spain.

But why do I fly to Pagan instances, when there are so many Christian Examples
at hand? Sancho King of Castile (I pray listen attentively to this stupendous
story) I say Sancho King of Castile took Tariffa from the Moors, but he being
anxious and doubtful whether he should keep it or no, by reason of the vicinity
of the enemy, and the great expenses that it would put him to, Alfonso Perez
rise up and told the King that he would undertake to secure and keep the place:
Thereupon the Moore by the help of the King of Morocco came with a numerous
Army before the Town, and Alphonso's Son being taken prisoner at a sallie, the
General of the Moors desiring a parley upon the walls with Alfonso, he showed
him his Son, protesting unto him that he would torture and slay his Son, unless
he would yield up the place: Alphonso being not a whit abashed, told him, that
if he had a hundred Sons, he would prefer his honor and Country before all;
so the Moor having barbarously killed young Alphonso, They of the Town made
such a resolut sallie the next day, that they utterly routed the Moors, and
took so many prisoners, that he offered 100. Moors for a Victime for his son.
To this Alonso the Family of the illustrious Dukes of Medina Sidonia ow their
rise.

The Spaniards are admirable for their military discipline, being exactly
obedient to their Comanders, and less subject to mutiny then any peeple. They
are always true to their trust, witness that Spanish Sentinel who was found
dead in the morning in a Tower upon the Citadel of Antwerp with his Musket in
his hand in a defensive posture, and standing on his legs all frozen. Moreover
there is no people so mutually charitable and careful of their national honor
then the Spaniards.

For their modern exploits the name of Alvaro Sandeo is terrible to this day
among the Moors, for having invaded Barbary with 4000. Spaniards, and beat
before him above 16. miles, 20000 Moors, with but 800. of his own: The memory
of the 2000. Spaniards, is irksome to the French to this day, who routed and
quite discomfited Gaston de Foix who had quintuple the number: Gonzalo, called
the great Captain (...), is much spoken of amongst them to this day, for having
with such admirable fortitude taken away the Kingdom of Naples from Lewis the
12. and being returned to Spain, the King took off a Gold chain from off his
own neck and hanged it about his; Antonio de Leiva was a stout and sedulous
Commander, so was the Count de Fuentes Don Pedro Encques, who did not only
defend, but extend the boundaries of Belgium for the King his Master, and in
the midst of a double war took such Towns, that might be in the wish but not
in the hope of the Flemish. The Italians do yet tremble at the name of Don
Fernand Alvarez Duke of Alva and his ghost, who would not take Rome when he
could. He who terrified France, secured Hungary, subdued Afrique, and appeased
both Germans high and low; He who chastis'd Spain, He who first after the death
of Don Sebastian told King Philip, that it was fitting he should see the rites
of burial to be performed in Lisbon for King Sebastian. Then Henry being dead,
in less then 50. days space he entered, survay'd, and subjugated all
Portugal; And it was said se regnum Lusitanieum eo modo, quo regnum caelorum
acquiritur, cepisse, etc. That he had taken the Kingdom of Portugal in the
same manner as the Kingdom of Heaven is got, that is, by eating bread and
drinking water, and abstaining from other men's goods. And this was said,
because his Soldiers lived upon their allowance only, having no benefit of
booty in any Towns as they passed, such a regular and strict Order was observed
in his Army. We Germans do yet contemplat with admiration the exploit that a
band of Spanish Soldiers did perform in the Saxon war, when stripping
themselfs naked, they leaped into the Elve with their Swords in their mouths,
and swimming to the other side did fight for new clothes, and did notable
feats afterward; Don Christopher Mandragon did do things in the low Countries
beyond belief. I could produce here a long scrowle of other late notable
Spanish Commanders: therefore all things well pondered it may be justly said
Hispania Rerum potitur in Europa. The Spaniards are the men of Europe, and
their King the considerablest Monark, for he has not only all Spain united
under him, and reduced to one Empire, but he has taken footing both in Germany
and France by the House of Burgandy; He possesses above half Italy by having
the Duchy of Milan with the Kingdoms of Naples and Calabria, the first is the
heart of Lombardy, and the second the very marrow of Italy; Then has he
Sicily, Sardinia, the Baleares, and all the Islands in the Mediterranean. He
has Piombino in Toscany, Port Hercules, Telamon, Orbitello, Porto Longone, all
which bind the Italians to their good behavior toward him. Genoa is as it
were under his protection, like a Partridge under a Faulcons wings, who can
seize upon the prey when he lift* That City being his scale for conveyance of
his tresure is grown infinitely rich by his money, and tied to him by an
indissoluble knot: Nay, Rome her self, by making some of the Cardinals his
Pensioneries, is much at his devotion; The Spaniard has don more then
Alexander the Great, for he has not only got much of the old world, but
conquered a new one, for which the Greek sighed so much. And if we believe the
Civil Lawyers he has don this justly, for it is the sentence of the Almighty,
Quicquid calcaverit pes tuus -- Wheresoever thou shall tread with thy foot,
shall be thine, the Heavens is the Lords, but he has given the Earth among the
Sonns of Men. Moreover Reason dictats unto us, that men who live like brute
Animalls, or wild Beasts, should be reduced to civility, and to the knowledge of
the true God. Besides, it is the Law of Nations, Quae bona nullius sunt ea
fieri Occupantium, Those goods which are no bodies, may be any ones if he
venture for them.

The Portingals have by their painful discoveries made all the best ports of
Afrique as it were their own by way of commerce, as also the maritime coasts of
Asia, they found a way by the Cape of good Hope to the Oriental Indies.
Francisco Almeyde did dissipat Campsen with his Egiptian Fleet, and Alphonso
Alburquerque did subdue Goa, and placed there a Vice Roy: then he reduced
Malaca, and erected a Castle at Calecut, and brought the Inhabitants from
worshipping the Devil, to adore the true God, and this he did when thousands of
Infidells were armed against so many hundreds of Christians.

O immortal God, what glorious exploits did Fernando Cortez achieve in the
Occidental Indies, indeed they were rather miracles then exploits; And as Lupus
Suarez, Sequera, Meneses, Vascus Gama, Gratia^ Norogna, Iuan de Castro, by
foyling the Emperor of Cambaia did establish unto the Crown of Portugal the
East Indies, and some part of the Antipodes, on the other Hemispher, so did
Christopher Columbus (who though an Italian, yet his fleet was Spanish)
Americus Vesputius, Iuan de Puente, Ferdinand Magellan, Fernandez Cortez, de
Vargas, and Pizarro, reduce and settle the new world to the Crown of Spain;
They civilized the Savage Inhabitans, and Coloniz'd the Country with
Christians, subjugated so many Heathenish Emperors, and introduced Religion and
virtue; And I pray what Heroes can be compared to those Worthies of Spain who
performed all this? what Age ever produced the like? when had Envy more matter
to work upon? Let the fable of the Argonauts be now exploded, let Bacchus and
Hercules descend from Heaven, and let Spaniards take their room; Let that so
much cried up Argo come down from among the celestial bodies, for she made but
a small short voyage through the Pontique Sea, and let that glorious galeon
which conducted Magellan to the discovery of a new world, let that happy
vessel be fixed among the Stars, and make a new Constellation, let her Pilot
Iuan Sebastian Canoaa Mountaneer of Spain, a most excellent Navigator make also
another asterisme.

But, most noble Princes, me thinks I see a kind of amazement in your
countenances at these mighty exploits of the Spaniards from the Rising Sun to
his Setting; But it is a hard question to determine whether the Indians reaped
more benefit by the Europaeans, or Europe by them: but if a judicious soul
enter into a true contemplation of the business, he will make it no question at
all; It Is true that we have received from the Indies gemms and gold which I
confess are the most precious productions of nature; but what did the Indians
receave from us by way of barter? They received Christianity, and virtue,
civility and knowledge, government and Policy; All these benedictions the
Viracochas, for so the Savage call the Christians, the Spaniards brought among
them. It was the Spanish Navigation, who first confuted that gross opinion and
heretical tenet (for there was a Bishop imprisoned in Rome for holding the
contrary) that there were no Antipodes; Therefore the rest of Europe, and indeed
of Asia and Afrique also should veil unto the Spaniard, and respect him more
then any Nation for this blessing of discovery, which it seems the God of
Nature had reserved for him from the beginning; and a mighty blessing it was,
and we must needs acknowledge it so, if we descend into the true speculation of
the thing, for thereby there was as much of the terrestrial globe discovered, as
for extent and amplitude did equal the old world. But what a world of dangers
and difficulties did they overcom? on the one side the incertitude of the
thing, and the perils of the vast confused Ocean did offer themselfs, on the
other the expenses of the voyage, and the despair of more provision when the
old store was spent, and in case they should discover and take footing on a new
Earth, the Savages might prove stranger then they. It Is true, that such thoughts
as these did possess and puzzle them a while, but at last their courage and
magnanimity was such, that it broak through all these difficulties: and as a
wild Boar being taken within the toils does try all ways, turn about and
struggle how to get out, at last when all will not serve, he lies down betwixt
quietness and despair, putting himself upon the mercy of the Huntsman, so that
American fortune being tied to that fear which possessed it, at last does
prostrat her self at the feet of the Spanish virtue, tying her self thereunto by
a perpetual tribut; she brings her afterward golden mines, and mountains, yea
Rivers running with gold, Seas full of Perl, some parts of the earth laboring
with gems with all kind of arromatick Spices, sweet woods, with new Species of
birds, beasts, plants and fishes; All these things did India afford the
Spaniard for a grateful return of his indefatigable and hazardous pains in
coming to visit her: The mines of Potosi in Peru yield 30000. Crowns every day
in good gold ore, The Mines of Mexico much more in Silver. But what exchanges
did Spain make to Amenia for this tresure? Mary she afforded her a far more
precious thing, even Christian Religion; and what a world of pains did the
Spaniards take to plant that among them at first? It is recorded by Borerus
that one Franciscan Friar did Christen 400000. Americans in the Sacred Laver of
regeneration; In so much that the Spaniards may term themselfs with arrogance
the Apostles of the new world: They were the first who cultivated that
Vineyard, the first that brought light out of darkness; and as the Friars in the
West, so did the Jesuits in the East Indies take infinite pains in planting
Christianity, and their piety and diligence has succeeded so well that it is
got into the Court of the great Emperor of China. What brave atchievments are
these to conquer and subdu Souls, which is more then to subjugat the body?
Certainly the Spaniards may be called the Grandees of these times above any
other people.

Now although there be a kind of proverbiall saying, Espanam las Armas, Italia
la pluma, Spain is for the Pike, and not so proper for the pen; for the Sword,
not for Sciences, which the Italians are more apt unto; Though some Authors do
brand them to be somewhat idle and Phlegmatique, yet I could muster up here a
whole Regiment of acute and learned wits in all faculties: And first for
Theology; I pray what great lights of the Church were Vigilantius, Aquilius,
Severus, Prudentius, Osius, Avitus Presbyter, Marcianus, Paulus Orosius,
Pacianus and Dexter his Son, Audentius, Isiodorus, Justinian, Leander,
Martinus, Fulgentius, Eladius, Eutropius; To whom may be added, though of a
Judaicall adventitious tribe and sect, yet great learned men in their way,
Rabbi Abenezra, Rabbi Moses, Rabbi David Chimchi, Moses of Corduba, Rabbi
Camora.

Franciscus Ximenez Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo employed 60. thousand
Crowns, for the Editions of the Complutensian Bible, a great Spirit certainly,
and born under a happy Star, for these times and for the ornament of Spain, for
he incited others to works of virtue; Franciscus de Sancta Aelia composed an
useful Ecclesiastique Dictionary; But what a number of renound Bishops both
for piety and erudition has Spain had? what shall I speak of Hierom Osorius,
Andrew Resendius, Benedictus Arius Montanus, who by a rare and most singular
benignity, and for a great example to posterity, entertained Lipsius, not only
for a friend, but as a Son, and invited him to Spain, and as he continued to
make him his Associat in his life time, so he made him his successor at his
death: What eminent men have the Dominicans produced? Lewis of Granada was born
for the advancement of Piety: what credit did Franciscus Forerius pourchase in
the Tridentine Council, though he died a violent death?

Now, touching the Fathers of the Society, the Jesuits, what saintlike men were
Hieronimus Pradus, Villalpandus, Tunianus Pererius, Tolletus, who was first of
that Order that was coopted by Clement the 8. into the College of Cardinals?
What a man was Maldonatus? what a bright Star he was both for candor of Manners,
for quicknes of wit, for profound speculations in Philosophy and Theology, and
for singular piety, who studying ten years together in Clermont College in
Paris, brought the French to have a better opinion of the Jesuits by his
example, whereas before they were so much hated: What rare Commentaries has he
upon the four Evangelists, published by the care and charge of Puteanus, who
was of the same Society? which Comentaries never the less it is thought by the
judgment of the learned men, had bin better and purer if they had com out in
his life time. But what shall I instance in particular men, go to the whole
Order of Jesuits first founded by a Spaniard, and you shall find in the new and
old world above three hundred and fifty Colleges of their Society, the greatest
Seminaries for institution of youth, and a rigid practice of piety that are in
the Christian world, but specially for the propagation of Christianity among
Infidels: in the Kingdom of Iaponia alone, it is credibly reported that they
converted two hundred thousand of Souls, among whom were three Iaponian Kings,
who made a pilgrimage to Rome to the amazement of all the world. Henry the
Great of France came to have such an opinion of this so pious and prudent
order, that he conferred Mountains of favors upon them, for he gave them not
only one of his best palaces in his life time, but he bequeathed them his heart
after his death; Certainly the Jesuits are men of extraordinary talents, They
are said to be Timothies in their Houses, Chrysostomes in the Pulpit, and
Augustins in the Chair; Being excited by their example, Sancta Teresia a woman
of a Masculine spirit rise up, and did mighty and miraculous things, for being
a little stepped in years, she took a Monastical life upon her, where she
lived with such austerity, that is wonderful and transcending the frail sex
of women; she was the foundresse and Instauratrix of a new Order of reclus'd
Virgins, and 'twere mervailous to relate what increase this order received not
only in Spain, but in both the Indies, and other parts of Christendom, being
encouraged by the countenance of Pope Sixtus quintus and Clement the 8.

Now for great Doctors and eminent men in the Civil Laws, Spain has bred as
profound as any, witness Calixtus the third. Fortunius Garzia, Coraviva
Aspilcueta the Navarrin a man of celebrous integrity as well as of knowledge:
For when Caranca Archbishop of Toledo, was by the permission of Philip the
second, summoned and brought to Rome for suspicion of being a Sectarian, Doctor
Aspilcueta being his old friend, and having 80. years on his back went
purposely to Rome, and defended the Archbishop with such strenuous arguments,
that he brought him off clear. He also made good the title of the Kingdom of
Navarre to Charles the Emperor, when it was litigated, to the satisfaction of
all rational men; To him may be added Ferd: Vasquius Pinellus, the two
Vergaras, Emanuel Soarez, Villalobos, Alvarus Valascus, Gutierez, and Goveanus,
whom Cujaeius consesseth to be the truest Justinian interpreter that ever was.

For Physicians, what part of the Univers has produced more famous men then
Spain? as Averroes of Cordova, Rasis Almansor, Messahallath, Avicenna of
Sevill, Nonius, Amatus, Christopher a Vega, Garcias ab Horto, Franciscus
Valessus, with diverse other, able to make a whole College of Physicians of
themselfs.

Now for Philosophers, Rhetoritians and Poets, Spain has produced many
masculine births also that way, what a Man of Men was Seneca the Philosopher?
who in precepts of morality outwent and excelled (...), not only all his
contemporaries, but all that went before him or came behind him; Next to the
Philosopher I will bring in Seneca the Rhetor, of whom among other rarities it is
written, that there being two thousand names told him, he presently repeated
them all exactly in his Oration; Lucan shall enter next, then Silius Italicus,
after him Martial Collumella, Fabius Quintilianus, Pomponius Mela, Trogus
Pompeius, Justinius the Great, Alphonso King of Castile. Henry Infant of
Portugal, Arnoldus Villanovanus, Raymundus Lullius, Ludovicus Vives, Nonius,
Salinus, Antperez, Morales, Surita, Geomecius, and Barosius the best compiler
of the Indian History; all these by their works have deserved infinitely much
of all the Commonwealth of Learning: To these may be added that miracle of
women-kind, Aloysia Sigea, who was practically versed in 5. several languages,
as Latin Greek, Hebrew, Syriaque, and Chaldaique, in so much that the letters
are yet extant which Paul the third writ to this Toledo Virgin: I could muster
here great nombers of learned men more whom Spain has bred.

Quos aget penna metuente solvi
Fama superstes.
What therefore Ausonius sung to Augustus Caesar in poetical amplifications, I
will now mention in part unto you, it being so proper for the subject.

Bellandi, Fandique potens Hispania honorem
Bis meret, ut geminos titulos, qui praelia musis
Temperat and Geti^um moderatur Apolline Martem,
Arma inter quantum cessat de tempore belli,
Indulget Clariis tantum inter castra Camaenis.
I com now to the vastnes of the Spanish Monarchy, and certainly without
controlment it is the greatest that has been since the Creation, considering
all things; It may be said take all the Members thereof together, to be ten
times bigger then the Ottoman Empire, although he has in Europe the better
part of Hungary, Bosnia, Servia, Bulgaria, Macedon, Epire, Greece, Peloponesus,
Thrace, and the Isles in the Archipelago: All though he can go from Buda in
Hungary, nere to Tauris and all in his own Territories; Nay it is of more
extent then the Roman Empire was, when she was mounted to the highest pitch of
power, and Spaciousness; for the Domininions of Philip now King of Spain
expand themselfs further. The Sun does perpetually shine upon some part of the
Phillippean Monarchy, for if it sets in one clime, it then rises in another.
He has dominion on both the Hemisphers, and none of all the four Monarchies
could say so much, nor any Potentat now living but himself; Therefore he may
well join the Sphere of the world to his arms, and better share Empires with
Jove then Augustus Caesar could; his Scepter points at the four Cardinal
corners of the world, East, West, North and South, for of those 360. degrees in
the Aequinoctiall, Portugal alone is said to occupy 200.

Jupiter in coelis, in Terra regnat Iberus. Most Illustrious Auditors, you have
hitherto heard the magnitude of the Spanish Monarchy, but that which tends most
to the glory of Spain, is her policy and prudence in governing so many distinct
Regions, so many squandred Kingdoms, so many millions of people of differing
humors, customs and constitutions. To be able to Rule so many Nations is more
then to reign over them; the one is imputed to the outward strength of bodies,
the other to the Sagacity of the brain; but for Spain her self there is that
sweet harmony twixt the Prince and peeple, the one in obeying, the other in
bearing rule, that it is admirable, and here the Spanish King has the
advantage of all other Imperando and parendo. He is neither King of Asses as
the French is, nor the King of Devils as the English is, nor the King of Kings
as the Emperor glories to be, but the King of Spain is Rex Hominum, the King
of Men: he may also be termed the King of Princes, according to the Character
which Claudian gives Spain, that she was Principibus faecunda piis --

There also as he signs -- Fruges, aera^ia, Miles
Vndique convenient totoque ex orb leguntur*
Haec generat qui cuncta regunt --
Therefore let Candy the Cradle of Jove, let Thebes the Mother of Hercules, and
Delos the nurse of two Gods yield to Spain. It was she who brought forth Trajan
to the world, who was as good as Augustus was happy; she gave Hadrian the
Emperor, she gave Theodosius the first, and the first of Emperors for
Morality and Virtue, who raised and reared up again the Roman Monarchy when she
was tottering; Ferdinand the first, who was an Infant of Spain, a Prince who
for liberty and justice, for mansuetude and munificence, for assiduity and
vigilance, for piety and peace was inferior to none of his progenitors, and to
this day they keep in Spain the Cradle, and Rattles he used when he was a child
in Complutum where he was born, which Town enjoyes to this day some special
immunities for his Nativity there.

But Spain gave all these Princes to other Nations; how many has she affoorded
her self? she gave Ferdinand of Aragon a Prince of incomparable piety and
prowess who first laid the foundation of the Spanish Monarchy, by matching
with Donam Isabella Queen of Castile, a heavenly Princess, she gave Philip the
second, called the prudent, and so he was, to a proverb; how cautious was he in
administration of Justice? how circumspect in distribution of Offices? how
judicious in rewarding of Men? etc. how wary in conferring of honors? for he
was used to say, that honors conferred upon an unworthy man, was like sound
Meat cast into a corrupt Stomach; What a great example of Parsimony was he? yet
Magnificent to a miracle, witness the eighth wonder of the world, the Escuriall,
which stupendous fabric he not only saw all finished before his death, though
the building continued many years, but he enjoyed it himself twelve years, and
carried his own bones to be buried in the Pantheon he had built there. He was
so choice in the election of his Servants, that he had no Barber for his
Ambassador, nor Tailor for his Herald, nor Physician for his Chancellor, as we
read of Lewis the XI. of France, nor a Faukner to his chief Favorit as the last
French King had. But that which was signal in this wise K. was, that he never
attempted any great business but he would first refer it to the Council of
Conscience; And before the Acquisition of Portugal he showed a notable example
hereof; For King Sebastian being slain in a rash War against the Moors, and
Henry dying a little after, there were many Candidates and pretenders for the
Lusitanian Crown, first Philip himself, then Philibert Duke of Savoy, after him
Farnessius Duke of Parma, then John Duke of Bragansa, and lastly Katherine de
Medici; King Philip, though it was in vain to compass this busines^ by
Legations, therefore he did it with his Legions; yet he paused long upon the
business, referring it to the debate of the learned Theologues, and Civil
Doctors, where it was eventilated, and canvas'd to and fro with all the wit and
arguments the brain of man could afford pro and con; At last the title and
right being adjudg'd for him, and having fairly demanded it in a peaceable way,
and being put off, he raises an Army answerable to the greatness of the work,
and yet being advanced to the borders he made a halt, and summons again both
Divines and Civillians to deliver their knowledge and consciences herin,
conjuring them by God and the sacred Faith to do it with integrity, and
freedom; Herupon they all unanimously concurred in the confirmation of their
former judgment, as Ripsius does testify; After this great transaction, he
sends the Duke of Alva with an army to take possession of his right, wherein he
was so prosperous that he invaded, survay'd, and subjugated the whole Kingdom
of Portugal in a very short time, utterly defeating Don Antonio, whom though
King Philip might have surpised a good while before lurking in a Monastery,
yet he would not do it; Besides, he caused the Duke of Bragansa's Son, being
Captif among the Moors, to be redeemed at his own charge, and when he could
have detained him, yet he suffered him to go where he would: Now having
debell'd and absolutely reduced the Kingdom of Portugal, among many others who
were his Opposers, the Doctors of Conimbria were most busy, yet he sent them
not only a general pardon, but increased the exhibitions of the University;
This mighty King was also a great Lover of his Country, preferring the public
incolumity thereof before his own blood; his only Son Charles, who being a
youngman of a restles ambitious spirit, and being weary of the compliance he
owed his Father, was used to carry Pistolls ready cocked about him in the day,
and put them under his pillow in the night; He confessed to his ghostly Father,
that he had a purpose to kill a Man, and being denied absolution from him, he
desired that he would give him unconsecrated bread before the Congregation to
avoid public offense; King Philip being told of this confined his Son, and put
him over to the Council of the Inquisition; The Council delivered their
opinion, and humbly thought that since his Majesty could pardon those whom he
hated most, he might well pardon him whom he loved most; And so made instance
in Charles the Great, who pardoned his Son Pepin for a conjuration against his
person, and having attempted it the second time, only committed him to a
Monastery; The King herupon answered, that by the Law of Nature he was to love
his Son, but he loved Spain better: thereupon he put a question to them, whether
the pardon he should give his Son would not prove a Sin rather then an Act of
Mercy, considering the public calamities that might thence ensue, therefore he
asked them which was to be preferred the peoples good or his Son's? They
answered certainly, the peoples; So he transmitted him to that Council,
conjuring them in his name, who is to judge the Angels one day, and will make
no distinction twixt Kings and Cobblers to do justice herin; So the young Prince
was adjudg'd, and Sentence of Death passed upon him; Good God! what passions
did struggle in the Father, when he was to sign the Sentence? and it is his
paternall affection to the chair of Justice: he was a Father, therefore his
affections could not grow to such a hatred, but they might return to their own
nature; But after many such conflicts, he chose rather to be Pater Patriae,
then Pater Caroli, to be Father of Spain then Father of a Son, and make
natural respects yield to prudentiall; So the young Prince dyed, yet not by
the Executioners hand, but as 'twas rumor'd by Poison; Thus to the
consternation of all the world the Phosphorus of Spain fell to the West, and
suddenly set and diverse of his Favorites with him, if you desire to know the
year this Cronogram will tell you.

fILIUs ante DIeM patrIos InqUIrIt In annes. This Phillip was also famous for
his Piety as well as Justice, which made Gregory the 13. to break out in these
words, The prolongation of my life can little avail the Catholic Church, but
pray for the health of King Philip, for his life concerns her more. He was
wonderfully constant to himself, he was always without passion, and sometimes
above them, of a marvailous Equanimity, and Longanimity, witness his patience
in his sicknesses, whereof he had many, but that which brought him to his grave
was the Pediculary disease, which though nasty and ghastly, yet he endured it
with invincible patience. When he found his glass almost run out, he sent for
his Son and Daughter, and upon his deathbed told them, In this small afflicted
body you see to how small a thread the pomp and splendour of all Earthly
Magnitude does hang, my Mortal life is upon departing, the care of my
Sepulcher, and rites of exequies, I commend unto you with my blessing. Among
many other there is one remarkable passage in this Kings life; when the Duke of
Alva was upon point of going to Portugal, he had a great desire to kiss the
Kings hand, but to the amazement of all the world, he was denied at that time,
which made the Duke to say, that his Master had sent him to conquer Kingdoms,
being tied with chains and fetters.

His Son Philip the second, did equal him in Piety, and in nothing else, we
know what a Saint-like man he was, having his Beads always either about his
neck, or in his hands.

I will hold you no longer, only I will tell you that the Kings of Spain more
then any other have don miraculous and immortal things; For as God almighty
when he builds, creates no less then a world, When he is angry, sends no less
then an universal deluge; When he conferrs grace to mankind, sends no less
then his own Son; When he rewards, gives no less then Paradise; when he wars,
employs no less then Legions of Angels and makes the Elements to fight, the
Sea to open, and the Sun to stand; so if finite things may bear any proportion
with infinity, the Kings of Spain are borne to do no petty things, but mighty
matters; When they build; they erect no less then an Escuriall; If they are
angry, they drive forth whole Nations, as the Moors and the Jews; If they
reflect upon the public good, they sacrifice no less then their own Sons; If
they desire to oblige any, they restore Kings as Muleasses to Tunis, and make
Popes of their Schoolmasters; when they take arms, then they conquer not only
whole Kingdoms, but new Worlds.

Therefore my dearest Brother, Frederique Achilles, and you most Illustrious
Cosens and Auditors, I think I shall derogat from no other Region, if taking
King and Country together, I prefer the Spaniard for glory and amplitude of
Dominions, for fulgor of Majesty, for the longest armed Monark, for Men and
Mines, for Isles and Continents, I say I do no wrong to any, if I prefer him
before any other Prince or Potentat upon the earthly Globe.

DIXI.
THE ORATION OF The Lord GEORGE FREDERIQUE, Baron of LIMBURG, and Hereditary
Officer to the Sacred Roman Empire, and always Free. Against SPAIN.
Most Illustrious Prince and President, etc.
WE have hitherto delivered sundry opinions, whereon there have been many learned
and Rhetorical descants; I observe also there are some divorcements and
discrepancies in the said opinions; But for my particular suffrage, I will
prefer France before any Province of the Europaean world; and if I should
attempt to speak more then has bin presented by that highborn Prince Duke
Ioachim Ernest upon this subject, it would be an argument of rashness in me, and
so I should incurr no small hazard of my reputation: Me thinks I see Ciceno
before me, and saying, Illam Orationem solum populus Gallicus parem Imperio suo
habet, France has that Oration alone, equal to her Empire. But though there
was much spoken of Spain by that noble Prince, Duke Magnus of Wirtemberg, yet I
will endeavor to show that Spain does not deserve either the Elogium or love
of so great a Prince in so high a degree; For as shadows use to make bodies
bigger then they are really in bulk, so it seems his affection has made Spain
more then she is in intrinsique value. For truly unless I be stark blind, I
find Spain to be the most unhusbanded, and the sterillest Country of Europe,
the thinnest of peeple, the fullest of fruitless Hills, which they call
Sierras, and are indeed no better then Wildernesses: In so much that though she
be so scant of Inhabitants, yet has she not Bread enough to put into the
mouths of the sixth part of them: So that unless she be very ungrateful and
impudent, she must acknowledge Germany and France to be her Nources, and Sicily
her Barn, as she was sometimes to the Romans. And among these there was a
computation made once of four millions of tresure that France received that
year from Spain for Corn in Pistolls and Patacoons, which made Henry the fourth
say that the great store of tresure which Spain has, discovers her necessity
as well as her plenty, because she cannot keep her money at home, which she
might well do, if she had Corn as well as Wine. For our Wheat is scarce grown
ripe, but the Spaniard is gaping for it at our Ports, or some other Nation for
them.

In Portugal, if a Vessel com and cries Traygo^trigo, I bring Corn, he may
turn it to present Silver, and carry it away in the palm of his hand, which is
not permitted for any other commodity but Frumentarian: Which makes Frossard
report that those English which went for the succor of Spain under the Duke of
Lancaster to Portugal cry out that they would be loath to return to Spain, where
they found such rough Craggs which could not be eaten with Verjuyce, a feverish
Air, troubled Waters, indigent peeple, nasty and ill clothed. But there is no
man can judge of Spain but he who has traveled the Country, where his Mule
and he must lodge together in some places, and happily the Mule may fare better
then the Master* yet there is not any that can dissemble Saturity as much as the
Spaniard, who uses to stroke his beard and breast from crumms, and pick his
teeth with that state, as if he had bin at a feast in Germany. Therefore it was
charitably spoken by one, Beati qui sterilitatem non viderunt, sed crediderunt,
They are happy who have not seen the sterility of Spain, but believe it. For
whosoever does purpose to see Spain, must resolve beforehand to undergo
hardshipps of all sorts, to have oftentimes the lower Region of the Air for his
Canopie, Hunger for his food, and Thirst for his drink; he must resolve to fast
perpetually, and if he lights by chance upon some edible things, as root, fruit,
an ounce of flesh, or the like, it is a question whether he eats or fasts; yet
one shall be sure to stay there as much for such little modicums, as one should do
in France or Germaay at a Crown Ordinary.

Frederique the II. Count Palatine of the Rhine going to Spain to visit the
Emperor Charles the V. came to a Town called Cervera upon Corpus Christi Eve,
and thinking to rest there the next day being a Holy Day for the refreshment of
himself, his Train and Horses, the Corregidor or chief Magistrate of the Town
sent to him, desiring him to depart the place, for fear of enhancing the rates
of things. The next day going to Gomorrha, a Town of the second Classis in
Spain, and sending his Caterer to market to buy some Butter, where being asked
how much he would have? answered twenty or thirty pound: the Shopkeeper crossed
himself, and said, You cannot find such a proportion in all this Town, you must
go to Estremadura, where there is good store of Oxen and Cowes. At last he
brought him a Kids bladder full of Butter, as if he went to grease the wheel
of a Cart.

But this scarcity brings one comodity with it, that Spain is not so subject to
be overrun by any foreign force, for an Army would quickly starve there for want
of aliment. Which inconvenience diverted Murat the great Turk once from
invading Spain. Yet of late years there is a better accommonation for passengers
in some of the chief Towns, but they are strangers that do it. Most of their
Opificers are also Forreners, specially French, insomuch that in Valentia alone
there were reckond at one time above ten thousand Artists. For indeed the
Spaniard himself is of a flothfull, and stately nature; he puts his Sword by
his side, his great Ruff about his neck, and only goes with his Ass to the
market to buy him bread, with other necessities, which strangers use to provide
for him.

Now, since the expulsion of the Moriscos, which were a laborious peeple, and
would grubb up Corn from among those craggy hills, Spain is poorer then she was,
and would be more poor, were it not for those swarms of Gascons that cross the
Pyreneys thither for love of their money.

And as the Country of Spain is so indigent, so the Inhabitants are poor in
point of Virtue, but rich for sundry sorts of Vices. They use to make use of
Religion for a mantle to palliat their designs; They rap out sometimes horrid
blasphemies, and there is an Author (but he is a Frenchman) who relates that a
King of Spain having had diverse ill successes, fell into that impatience, that
he swore he would be revenged, therefore he commanded that none of his Subjects
should adore God, or believe in him, or speak of him for so long a time. What
shall I say of the Portugalls, which are called the new Christians, whereas they
are for the most part Jews in their hearts. It is recorded, that in the
battle where Don Sebastian was killd in Barbary, there were above 1500.
Renegado Christians of Andaluzia that were in the Army of Moley Molue King of
Morocco.

It Is true, that they have planted Christianity in both the Indies, raysd up the
Standard of the Cross, and taught Sauvages the way to heaven; But those Pagans
may say as Robert Duke of Normandy said when he was going to the holy
Sepulcher, who being met by one of his own Subjects, as he was mounted upon a
great Sarracens back, and being much tyrd, he said, Commend me to all in
Normandy, and tell them I am going to Heaven upon the Devils back. So the
converted Infidels may be said to go to Heaven upon the Spanish Iesuitts backs.

But now that I have touched upon the Jesuits, who are a true Spanish ospring,
and the most intimat Confidents of the Catholic King, I will enlarge my self a
little on this subject, for by laying open these men, you will better discover
the humor of the Spaniard. It was the saying of a Burgundian Nobleman, That a
Spaniard without his Jesuit, is like a Partridg without an Orange. Un Espagnol
sans son Jesuit, est come un Perdrix sans Orange. These Jesuitts have turned
all the world topsitervy; they have bin the Inceadiaries of all the
differences, the firebrarnds of all the Wars, the fomenters of all the
Rebellions that have bin in Christendom ever since they had a Bull to establish
their Society by Pope Teatin from whom they bear the name. And indeed it must
be confessd, that they have bin very thankful to the Pope for it, for they
have bin the greatest supporters of his Chair ever since: in regard that all
their consultations tend principally to depresse the power of Kings, and
enhance the prerogative of the Pope, whom they hold to be the universal Lord
Paramount of the Universe among men, and the highest Viceroy of God Allmighty
in this elementary world. They take him for a speaking Scripture, and that
Heresy is nothing else but a Tenet in the points of Faith, contrary to the
decision of the Pope. They hold he can absolve any from his Allegiance and
fidelity to his natural lawful Prince, excommunicat any earthly Monark, and
not only so, but tumble him out of his throne, yea into hell both Soul and Body
by the thunderbolts of Excommunication. They hold he can dispense with Subjects
to levy arms against their sovereign Prince, to meet him in the field and
murder him, insomuch that the verses of the Prince of Pagan Poets may be most
fitly applied to these kind of Christians.

Tu potes unanimes armare in praelia Fratres,
Atque odiis versare domos, Tu verbera tectis
Funereasque infer faces, tibi nomina mill
Mill nocendi arts --
Moreover it is their tenet that the holy Father cannot only depose any earthly
potentat, but dispose of his dominions to any other. And if a new Country be
discovered, the party cannot possess it, till he receive it as a gift from
him, wherein the King of Spain did so far comply with him, that as soon as he
had discovered and conquered America, the first thing he thought upon, was to
make his humble addresses to his Holiness for investiture.

But the sages of the Parliament of Paris, and the most acute learned Doctors of
the College of Sorbon detested such Doctrines, therefore by a solemn arrest of
that high Court abetted by those great Divines, caused the Institutions of
Mariana the Arch-Jesuit, who broached such tenets and exposed them to the
world, to be made a Sacrifice to Vulcan by the hand of the common Executioner,
with another entitled de temporali potestate Papae adversus Gulielmum
Barclaium, and that under pain of committing High Treason, none should keep,
communicate, print or vend any of those damnable books.

The Venetians, the prudentst and politiquest Republic that ever was, as we may
infer by the constancy of her government, and longaevity, did show France the
way of using the Jesuits in this manner, but that grave Senate went a rounder
way to work, for they did not only burn their pages, but banish their persons
eternally from the Republic of Venice and all her Territories. And although
Henry the 4. did earnestly mediat for their readmission, yet all would not do,
for there was a double inconvenience in it, first, a hazard of disreputation,
and opinion of rashness upon the Senate for revoking so solemn a Decree, which
was debated and determined with such mature deliberation contrary to their
custom; And secondly, there would be a continual increase of danger to the
Republique, for admitting such strangers into her bosom, For they were not
ignorant that whersoever they live, or what Country soever they are in, They
are the Subjects of another Prince, viz. the Popes.

Furthermore the Jesuits have another dangerous doctrine prejudicial to all
sovereign Princes, de confessione non detegenda, ne in causa quidem Majestatis,
and presenti Regis ac regni periculo, That the confession of a penitentiary
must not be revealed, no though it reflect upon Majesty, and to the danger both
of King and Kingdom; this is an Appendix of the Hildebrandine Jesuitical
Doctrine. The English Cronicle makes mention that Father Garnet the Jesuit
being interrogated by the Earl of Notingham if any one would confess unto him
in the morning, that he had a purpose to murder the King the next evening,
whether he was bound in conscience to reveal it? Garnet answered no. Which
opinion Binetus the Jesuit confirmed to Causabon in these words, praestare
Reges omnes perire quam si vel semel Confessionis Sigillum violaretur, Regem
enim ait humani juris Imperium esse, Confessionem Iuris divini; It were better
that Kings should perish then that the seal of confession should be broken, for
the power of Kings is by humane right, Confession by Divine. Moreover another
Jesuit in France did dare openly to affirm, si Dominus noster Jesus Christus in
terris versaretur morti obnoxious, and aliquis sibi in confessione dixisset
velle se illum occidere prius quam confessionem revelaret, passurum se ut
Christus occidatur, If our Lord Jesus Christ were himself again upon Earth
subject to death, and one under the seal of confession should tell him that he
had a purpose to kill him, before he would reveal the confession he would
suffer that Christ should be slain. Henricus Henriques also another furious
Jesuit averrs that the Holy seal of Confession must not be broken for any cause
whatsoever; and the said Spanish Jesuit says thus, Quamvis se ageretur totius
Orbis salus; aut ipsius paenitentis utilitas, nec pro vitando ullo damno
gravissimo Innocentis, aut quod esset totius orbis conflagratio, aut perversio
Religionis; and omnium sacramentorum intentata demolitio. Although it tended to
the salvation of the whole world, or the utility of the penitentiary, or that
some Innocent might escape some grievous danger, or that the conflagration of the
whole world depended upon it, or the perversion of Religion, and the utter
overthrow of all the Sacraments, All these would not be causes sufficient to
impell the Ghostly Father to break the seal of Confession. All this Isaac
Cansabon does averr to be true in his works to Fronton Pucaeus, and Cardinal
Perronius. For such a high and most venerable opinion they have of auricular
Confession, that what the penitentiary poures in the Priests breast, is put up
in the Closet of God Almighty, and so it must be kept with sacred silence. This
may be one of the reasons that more penitentiaries make their addresses to the
Jesuits then to any other Order, and it may be a reason also why other
Monasticalls do so much Envy them, some Malign them, others detest them. Those
which formerly were mentioned, are the tenets of the Jesuits, touching private
Auricular confession, if Causabon may be believed, who ('it is true) was a
professed enemy of theirs, yet the positions are maintained but by the rigidst
sort of Teatins not generally as some affirm; By these means of Confession,
they open the Cabinets of Princes, and know more of State-matters then any: For
there are none who have sooner and surer intelligence then they from all parts,
and their correspondencie is admirable for the punctuality of it. There are no
Ecclesiastiques so frequent in Princes Courts, and Noble men's Palaces, then
they, which makes them have more Legacies given them then any other.

They have also another way besides secrecy of confession to oblige the
Nobility by instructing their Children gratis, and they have a rare method of
Education that way, it cannot be denied. But in Spain her self, though the
Jesuits have a powerful hand over the King himself, and in the Council of the
Inquisition, as also a great stroke among the Nobility and Gentry, yet the
common peeple malign and hate them generally, as appeers by the Libel which was
made in the Court of Spain which I think worthy the relating here.

Los mandamientes de los Teatinos Mas Humanos son que Divinos.
1. Adquirir mucho diuero, 2. Sugetar todo el mundo, 3. Buen Capon, y buen
Carnero, 4. Comprar Barato, y vender car^ 5. Con el blanco aguar el tinto, 6.
Tener siempre el lomo en siesto; 7. Guardarse bien del sereno, 8. Obrar lo suyo
y lo ageno, 9. Hazer del Penitente esclav^ 10. Mesclarse en cosas d'estado.
Estos diez Mandamientes se encierran en dos.
Todo para Mi, y nada para vos.
The Commandments of the Teatine Are more humane then Divine.
1. To rake up much riches, 2. To subjugat all the world, 3. Good Capons, and
good Mutton, 4. To sell dear and buy cheap 5. To water red Wine with White. 6.
To lie warm and easy 7. To take heed of the serenes, and ill ayr^s, 8. To do
his own business and others, 9. To make their Penitentiaries slaves. 10. To be
busy in matters of State.
All these ten may be made two:
All for my self and nothing for you.
Thus you see though some hug, yet diverse hate the Jesuit in Spain it self.

Alexander Hayes a Jesuit himself gives this character of them, Iesuita est
omnis Homo, A Jesuit is every man; That is in their subtle and nimble way of
negotiation, wherein they will represent, and personat the humor of any man;
They are the great Architects of all politic designs which tend to enrich
themselfs, and enhance the omnipotency of the Pope, For the wisest men are of
opinion, that had it not bin for this pragmaticall order, Saint Peter's chair
might have tumbled down ere this, his bark sunk, and his keys lost. When they
first negotiated to take footing in the Academy of Paris, they were asked
whether they were Seculars or Regulars, they answered, they were Tales Quales,
they were such and such; herupon the Parisian Students brought up this
character of them, that the Jesuits were Tales Quales, and are nicked so to
this day; herupon one applied this Distic unto them.

Vestra datis cum verba datis, nam (...) Vestrum est,
Et cum verba datis nil nisi vestra datis.
In England it was their equivocations that caused the clause without Mental
reservation to be inserted in the Oath of Supremacy.

One compares them to those little Animals that Seneca speaks of, qui mordent
and non sentiuntur, that bite and are not felt, only the swelling shows they
are bitten; so this subtle sort of Ghostly Fathers by insensible encroachments
damnifie where they nestle, though the party knows not where he is hurt.

When they were first to be introduced to France, the Parliament of Paris
desired the opinion of Sorbon College composed of the acutest Theologues in
France, which they delivered thus as it stands upon Record. Novem hanc
societatem appellatione insolita Jesus nomen sibi vindicantem praebere
occasionem -- This new society arrogating to themselfs by an unusual
appellation, the name of Jesus, does administer occasion of Schism in the
Church, they subtract the obedience that is due to Prelates, they deprive
Ecclesiastic Lords and others of their rights, They induce much perturbation
both in civil and sacred administrations, they usher in quarrels,
contentions, debates, emulations, and diverse scissures into the Church,
therefore they held them to be dangerous instruments in the business of Religion,
as such that would disturb the peace of the Church, overthrow Monastical
Discipline, and that their Order tended more to Destruction then Edification;
yet by the power of the Guysian faction, they were admitted, but the Parliament
would demur upon it a little before, Herupon Stephen Paschasius an eminent
Doctor, did sharply argue against them* sectam eam ambitiosam and fucatae
Religionis plebem appellans, in Hispania natam -- He called them an ambitious
sect, fellows of a counterfeit Religion, born in Spain, but fostered in Paris,
strengthened in Rome, who under the specious show of a gratuitous institution of
children, cheat and exhaust many families, infusing pernicious principles into
the brains of youths -- Then he went on with high exaggerations, and said, that
their Provincial was always chosen by the King of Spain, to which
Provincial, they yield an unquestionable blind obedience, -- Therefore he
concludes, that if these new sectaries were admitted, they would introduce a
Trojan horse into the bowels of the Kingdom full of armed Enemies, and that
France should repent her of her credulity when it would be too late, for these
men by their subtilties, and superstition, by their praestigiatiory kind of
artifices, would distract the settlement and tranquillity of the whole Kingdom.
Herupon while this business was in agitation, King Henry the IV. was thrust in
lieu of his breast into the Mouth by a young Jesuit, with the loss of one
tooth, the King having escaped so great danger, said pleasingly; falloit il
que les Jesuits fussent convaincus par ma bouche? Was it needful then that
the Jesuits should be convinced by my mouth? Herupon by a solemn arrest of the
Court of Parliament, they were utterly exterminated, and commanded to quit the
Kingdom by such a day under great penalties; There was also in the sentence an
interdictory clause, that none should send their children abroad to be
instructed by the Jesuits under pain of trea son.

Herupon there was a new Gallows of Stone erected before the Palace gate, to
execute the transgressors of this decree; But the King finding that his life
could never be safe while he stood out with the Jesuits, rather out of fear
then affection, connived for the non-execution of the Sentence, causing the
said Gallows to be taken down, herupon one sung wittily to the King,

Sire, si vous voulez du tout a l'adenir
De l'Assassin Chastel oster le souvenir,
Ostant la Pyramide, and l'Arrest qui la touch,
Quon vous remitte donc une dent dans la bouche.
Sir, If you will for the future extinguish the remembrance of Chastel, take
down the Jesuits Pyramid and Sentence, then let them put in a new tooth into
your mouth. Elizabeth Queen of England had so ill a conceit of this order, that
by the credit the great Turk gave to her Ambassador, and by her advise he
banished them out of Pera on the Asian shore, over against Constantinople where
he had permitted them formerly to reside.

But you will say Jesuits are a great advantage to a State, because they
propagate learning, and instruct youth so dexterously; it is true, they instruct
them, but they infuse into them besides, most dangerous principles of
equivocation and cunnning, you will say they are the greatest and most
masculine propugnators of the Roman Church; it is true, but they are great
weakners of the power of temporal Princes; They have planted the standard of
the Cross in the Indies, and are the greatest propagators of Christian Faith
among Infidells. It Is true, but they do it as much for extending the Spanish
Monarchy; for as they are the chiefest Agents of the Pope's where e're they
come, so are they Factors also for the King of Spain, the bent of all their
projects being to enlarge the power of the one, and establish the omnipotency
of the other; That Prince or peeple are in a dangerous condition, when any
censures from Rome come against them, if there be Jesuits there, who are the
punctuallest executioners of the Papal excommunication; such respects the
Spaniards give them, that they are called Apostles in America, and Disciples in
Portugal; But finding at first that they were malign'd for assuming the name
of Jesuits, they did moderat it, and called themselfs socios Jesus, the
companions of Jesus: Now, in the Holy Scriptures we read but of one that was
called the companion of Christ, and that was Judas.

But, most Noble Princes, be pleased to excuse me that I have bin so tedious
and tart in displaying this new Ignatian Order, the reason is, that being to
speak of Spain, it was pertinent to speak also of them, who are so great
Votaries of that Crown.

I will give you now a little touch of the Spanish Inquisition, which is, that
if any be found to doubt or dispute any thing of the Roman Church, he is
answered with a syllogism of fire or hemp, which concludes more strongly then
a syllogism in Barbara. But such kind of arguing is fitter for Butchers,
Hangmen and Devils, then for the Doctors of the Christian Church. Now, as we
read that Heliogabalus the scandal of Emperors, would have had the Vestall
fyres extinguished, with all religious invocations and victimes, and the name
of Heliogabalus to be only adored, so the Spaniard endeavors to extinguish all
other orders and government, to set up the Jesuit (his chief chaplain) and the
Inquisition.

Now this proceeds from the ignorance of the Spaniard, who reads no Authors
commonly but his own Contrymen, because he understands no Language but his
own, which in the Spanish Academies and Schools, sways more then Latin, though
the fourth part of the Language be mere Morisco, and patched up of Arabic
words.

But I wonder, my noble Cosen Magnus, that in the Catalog you give of the
learned men of Spain, you extol Raymundus Lullius so much, a man foolishly
subtle, who scarce understanding the Latin tongue, which he mingled with his
own, yet he dared expose some things to the world, but involved in darkness, such
obscurities that few of his Readers understand him. For my part, I hold his
Philosophers stone; and his Learning to be all one, but mere imaginary things,
in so much that one may say;

Qui Lulli Lapidem quaerit, quem quaerere nulli
Profuit, haud Lullus; sed mihi nullus erit.
Now for the nature of the Spaniards, they are most made up of Imagination, and
a kind of fantastique gravity, under which is cloak'd a great deal of pride:
They believe more what they fancy, then what they do. Nor does the Portugais
deny it, when he confesses that he acts according to that which he thinks
himself to be, then what he really is. Portugalli dictitant se niti eo potius
quod se esse putant, quam eo quod reverasunt.

Now for Portugal, it is made up most of Slaves, for the number of them in some
places are almost equal to the Inhabitants; and there are few Countries where
there is less distinction made twixt men and beasts, for they are both sold in
the market for money alike. Now for the state of the Spaniard, you shall have
him march gravely; with a crowd of servants or slaves, two before him, another
holds his hat upon occasion, another his cloak if it does rain, another carries
a clout to wipe the dust off his Shoos, another a cloth to rub his Ginet while
he hears Mass, another a Currycomb to keem his mane, and all these when they
come home will be content happily with a loaf and a radish a piece for their
dinner. It is admirable and indeed hateful to see with what a Tympany of
self-conceitednes the Spaniard uses to swell, and how a common fellow will
stand a tipto pulling out his Mustachos, and saying, Voto a tal jo soy tan
buen^ como el Rey don Felipe, I vow by Hercules that I am as good as King
Philip: They mightily puff themselfs up with hopes of preferment, aiming more
at the honor of the thing then the profit. Among many others I will instance in
Antonio de Leyva, who from a Gregarian common Soldier came to be a General to
Charles the V. and coming to attend the Emperor, he was permitted to sit
down, because he was troubled with the gout, but the Emperor being told that
he verily believed he should be a Knight of the golden fleece, or one of the
Grandees of Spain, and complaining of his gout one day, the Emperor said, I
believe you are more indisposed in your brain then in your feet. Barclay in his
Euphormio has a story of a Spanish woman that coming with three of her Sons a
begging to a French Shomaker one day, he told her, good woman, I will ease thee
of one part of thy charge, for if thou leave one of thy children with me, I
will breed him up in my trade, whereby he may by his labor be able to live like
a man; O Sir, God forbid I should cast away my child to a stranger, and to so
Mechanic a trade, for who knows but he may be Viceroy of Naples or Mexico?
One Matheo Serran a Spaniard, was Governor of the Sluice, in the time of
Marquess Spinola, who asking him what provision and defense he had in the
place, and advising to be careful of furnishing it, he rapt out a great
Rodomontado, saying, Marquess look you to your siege at Ostend, I know well
what belongs to the conservation of the Sluice without a Monitor; for if the
enemy should com with fifty thousand Devils after him to besiege the place, he
shall not thrust me out: yet for all this vanity this Captain lost the Sluice
afterward; And this fancy of pride reigns in the Spaniard more then any
other, for if one should go to a Casa de Locos, a Bedlam house in Spain, and
observe the humors of the Prisoners; he will find that one will say he is an
Emperor, another that he is King of such a Country, another that he is Pope,
and so he shall observe that there will be more of this kind of madness then of
any other distemper.

Now as the Spaniards are bladder'd up generally with this arrogance, and
altitude of mind, so they care not how they com by their wealth though they
take it from another by violence to support it; nor how little they work to
get a subsistence, for they are sloathfull and idle to a proverb, unless it be
in the Wars; This makes them to be cried up for such thieves, Herupon Charles
the V. their own King, being accompanied with many Spanish Dons, as he passed
in Germany by a great Inn, where diverse were a drinking and merry* he asked
his Dons, are not the Germans personable proper men, well complexion'd and
limm'd? This cannot be denied, the Spaniards answered, but they are excessively
given to drinking; the Emperor replied, it is true, but do you know what vices
the Spaniards are guilty of? for as these are greedy of Wine, so are the
Spaniards greedy of another man's wealth, and so to interdict the German his
wine were the same as to prohibit the Spaniard he should not robb, which was one
of the ten Commandments of God Almighty, where you shall not find any against
drinking.

And as the peeple of Spain are such robbers, so the Kings of Spain are the
greatest of all; They are Robbers of whole Kingdoms, and Countries, they are
the Harpies of the earth, for whersoever they confine, they cast about how to
devour their Neighbors, using all artifices, and picking any quarrel to that
end, in so much that those Virgilian Verses may very well quadrat with their
practices.

Armati Terram exercent, semperque resentes
Convectare juvat praedas, and vivere rapto.
The greatness of this Nation is but Modern and upstart, when the fortune of
France was a little wayning, Spain began to shine, first under Ferdinand King
of Aragon Grandfather to Charles the V. so that as one said, Ubi Galli
desierunt Rerum potiri, ibi Hispani inceperunt. This Ferdinand, the first
Catholic King, veiled and varnished all his Enprizes with the plausible
pretext of advancing Religion, yet were his pen and his tongue double in doing
this, he carried oftentimes two faces under one hood, and played with a staff
of two ends in his greatest negotiations, specially in the performance of
Articles 'twixt him and the French King Lewis the XII. about the division of
the Kingdom of Naples, that he should have Calaba and Apulia, and the French
Naples, and Campania; But afterward he sent his great Captain Gonsalvo who
conquered both. He got also the Kingdom of Navarr by a trick, for when an
English Army who was sent from Hen. the 8. of England for his assistance, was
to pass from Spain to Aquitain, and the King of Navarr (who it is true was then
under Excommunication, together with the King of France) desiring his English
son-in-lawes Forces leave to pass through his Country, Ferdinand took his
advantage hereby, with the help of the English, to seize upon the Kingdom of
Navar, and thrust out John Labretan, who was then lawful King. And to make his
cause more specious, and pretend some right, he insisted upon the censure of the
Pope, saying, That they who were enemies to the Holy Father, might be assaulted
by any Christian King, and that his Holiness was to give the Country to the
first Conqueror.

Now touching the East and West Indies, the Spanish title is unquestionable
there you will say, but let us examine the business a little. The right which the
Spaniards pretend to these two Indies, is Right of Discovery; For the East
Indies, it has been so celebrated by ancient Pagan Writers, that to hold the
Spaniard to be the first De tector thereof, were to maintain the grossest
paradox that ever was; For Pliny relates how Hanno the Carthaginian being
carried about from the feet of Gibraltar to the farthest end of Arabia was the
first discoverer of India, by twice crossing the Equinoctial; And it is easy
to find in ancient Authors, that Malacca was called Aurea Cherchonesus, and
that huge Island Sumatra was known formerly by the name of Tatrobana; what is he
who is never so little versed in Antiquity but has read the Oriental Brachman
Philosophers, and of the Sinenses the peeple of China? Touching the West
Indies, they were not unknown to Plato, for whereas he places Atlantidis at
the mouth of the Gaditan Frete, which is the mouth of the Mediterranean, he
says, (...). There is from Atlantidis a passage to other Islands, and from them
to a great opposite Continent -- What does he intimat herby but the great
Canarie with other Islands in the Atlantique Sea, and by the other Islands Cuba,
and Hispaniola, and by the opposite Continent Peru and Mexico. Moreover the
Spaniards themselfs confess that in a valley called Cautis in the Province of
Chyli, they found among the Sauvages many pictures and forms of two-headed
Eagles in midst of their houses, therefore the Spaniards call that part of
AMERICA The Imperial Province to this day, because the Arms of the Roman
Empire were found there.

There is a greater evidence then this that the Spaniards were not the first
discoverers of America, for there was a Welsh Epitaph found there upon Madoc a
British Prince, who it seems flying from the fury of the Saxons in England, put
himself in some Bark to the fortune of the Sea, and landed in America. And that
the old Britains or Welsh were there, it may be confirmd further, in regard
there are diverse British words found amongst them to this day.

But what shall we wander so far in the Indies? We will come nearer home. We
know well that Solomon the Turk denied Charles the V. the title of Roman
Emperor, alleging that he himself was the true successor of Constantin the
Great, who was Emperor of East and West; And that consequently the City of
Rome belongd to the Ottoman Empire, and Selim, Solymans son urgd such an
argument when he took Cypres from the Venetians, for he said that the said
I Will appertained to the Soldans of Egypt which was now under his dominion.

But the Apostolical concession and bounty of Pope Alexandor the VI. entitles
the King of Spain to America; touching that I pray here what Attabalipa a wild
Pagan King said, when he heard that his Kingdom was given by the Pope, to the
Spanish King; surely, said he, that Pope must be (...) (...) fo^l, or some
injust and impudent Tyrant that will undertake to bestow other men's possessions
so freely.

But his title may be just, you will say, for the propagation of Christian
Religion: yet Christ enacted no such Law, that any free peeple should be made
slaves, much less murdered, and tortured, either for refusing the Gospel, or
continuing in their former Religion, there was not any of the Apostles claym'd a
Kingdom for his preaching; Saint Paul preaching to the Romans, did not demand
the Empire; Our Savior said, Go and preach the Gospel to all Nations, The
Spaniard's lesson is, Go and preach the Roman Religion, and the Spanish Empire
to all Nations, and keep under you, or kill whosoever shall resist: For the
first Doctrine which the Spaniards were used to vent in any place was* Vos
Indiani hujus loci -- Ye* Indians of this place, we make known unto you All*
that there is but one God, one Pope, one King of Spain, which you must all
obey. Thus Motezuna King of Mexico, and Atabalipa Emperor of Peru were brought
under the yoke, though they gave a house full of Gold for their ransom. But
the Indians did more upon the Spaniards, then the Spaniards could do upon them;
for they brought more Spaniards to adore the Indian Gold, then the Spaniards
brought Indians to adore Christ; Herupon a company of Indians being ready to
fall into the Spaniards hands carried some Gold into the Market place, saying*
This is the Spaniards God, lets dance about him, and worship him, for so he may
command the Spaniards not to be ^oruell unto us. There is not far from Conimbria
in Spain, a Well called (...), which swallows any thing that's cast into it,
and yet she is never full as it is found by experience, it seems the Spaniards
have an Analogy with that Well, in reference to Gold which they have swallowed
in the Indies, and yet are never satisfied:

And as the Spaniard is covetous, so is he extremely cruel, for how many
millions of men has he made away in America? Bartholome de Casa affirms, that
in 45. years, there were above ten millions of humane souls (though Savage)
killed in the new world as they call it, in so much that the Indian Husbands
forbore to lie with their wives for fear they should prove with child, and
bring more slaves for the Spaniards. These millions before mentioned were
killed out right, and if we add to them those who have died of working in the
mines, of doing the offices of Asses, Oxen, and Mules, to what a number do you
think will they accrue? some of them carry burdens upon their back of 160.
pound weight, and that above 300. Miles. How many of these poor wretches have
perished by water as well as by land, being forced to dive so many fadomes deep
for the fishing of Perl, and to stay there sometimes half an hour under water
panting and drawing in the same breath all the while, and being fed of purpose
with corse biscuit and dry things to be longwinded for that work. And if what is
reported be true, they hunt the poor Indians with dogs to find them sport:
whereupon there goes a tale of a Spaniard, who to exercise his dog and make
himself some sport with an old Woman, made show as if he sent her with a letter
to the Governor of the next town hard by, the poor woman being gone a flight
shot off, he let slip his dog after her, which being com near, she fell down on
her knees, saying, Senior dog, Senior dog, do not kill me, for I am going with
letters from your Master to the Governor: the dog it seems was moved with
compassion, and so only lift up his leg and pissed upon her.

One may easily imagine how detestable the Spaniards became to these poor
Pagans for these cruelties, there is a tale of Hathu Cacico a stout Indian, who
being to dye, was persuaded by a Franciscan Friar to turn Christian, then he
should go to Heaven, Cacico asked whether there were any Spaniards in Heaven? yes
said the Friar, it is full of them, Nay then said he, I had rather go to Hell
then have their company.

But how has the Indian discovery prosper'd? or what profit has it brought to
Europe? It cannot be denied but we brought among them all slavery and cruelty,
and I believe more vices and infirmities then we found, we brought them the
small Pox, the gastliest disease that can befall a humane body, and in exchange
they gave us the Venerean Pox; Touching the tresure that has been transported
thence, it has fomented all the Wars of Europe ever since, upon this a French
Poet descants wittily.

Par Toy, superbe Espagne, and lo'r de tes doublons
Toute la pouvre France insensez nous troublons,
Et si de tes doublons qui causent tant de troubles
Il ne nous rest rien a la fin que de doubles.
Plutarch speaks of Attinius Asiaticus who brought Gold first into
Peloponnesus, but it was found that it became an instrument of corruption,
therefore Attinius was accounted a public enemy to his Country; the Indian
Gold in Europe has not bin only the cause of corruption, but of the effusion
of an Ocean of blood; Nor has it much prosper'd with the Spaniard, for
although such a Mass of tresure has been transported from time to time, yet
Spain has the least of it, for the common coin there is copper and no country
fuller of it; Moreover Spain may be said to furnish all the world, yea the
great Turk, with tresure to fight against her self, and the rest of Christendom.

This Indian tresure has wrought another disadvantage to the Spanish King, for
it has puffed him up with a pride and an ambition that has no horizon, it
makes him flatter himself that he shall be at last Monark of the Western world,
which draws upon him not only the Emulation, but the hatred of all his
Neighbors, who are ready ever and anon to confederat and bandy against him,
for fear he should swallow them up one after another to satiat his ambition; It
was a witty saying of King James, when he was only King of Scotland, when he
received a caveat from his Godmother Queen Elizabeth of England, to take heed
of the Spanish fleet, He answered, Se non aliud ab Hispano beneficium expectare
quam quod Ulyssi Polyphemus promiserat, scilicit ut aliis devoratis postremus
degluriretur, For his part he desired but one request of the Spaniard, such a
one that Polyphemus had promised Ulysses, that when he had devoured others, he
would swallow him last of all.

Now as among those poor Pagan Indians, the cruelty of the Spaniard was so much
discovered, so was it here in Europe among Christians, witness else the Tyranny
of the Duke of Alva, who may be called the sponge of Belgian blood, for he
bragged that he had dispatched to the other world above 18000. Belgians, either
by Fire, Water, the Rack, or the Axe, his principles being, that a Rebel must
be used like a madd dog, for whom there is no cure but to be knocked in the
head, and we know mortui non mordent.

Now touching the Gigantik power of the Catholic King, if it be well weighed
in the balance of a knowing judgment, is not so great as we conceive it to be,
the unsociable distance of his territories, the infinite sommes he owes to the
Genowayes and others, the vigilance and Emulation, with the apprehensions they
have of his still growing greatness; the Universal dis-affection, and a kind of
antipathy that all Nations have to the peeple themselfs, is a great weakness to
him one way, as his riches and power another way; For matter of Justice, who is
the Queen of Virtues, I believe she raigns as little in Spain as among any
peeple, unless it be among themselfs, nor universally among themselfs, but
only the Castilians may have her with more ease, and less expenses then their
Conterraneans and the rest of their Fellow Subjects; I will produce an example
of an Arragonez who having a suit there long depending which put him to mighty
expense and attendance, at last he came to the King himself, Philip the second,
who, opening his business unto him, gave him this absolute Answer, There Is
nothing that you have proposed can be granted; Sir, answered the Aragones, I
thank you, that you have refuted the lies of threescore Ministers of yours in
so few words, who with much expense of time and tresure did put me still in
hopes that my business was just, and it would take effect, but had I known it, I
would have come to your Majesty at first, and then I had been wiser then I was,
and a better Husband; Now for Forreners it is as easy to redeem a damned soul
out of Hell as almost to recover any thing if they have got it once among their
clutches: did not Philip the second break, and make himself an absolute
bankrupt with many thousand besides, when he altered the intrinseque value of
coins and hois'd it higher, and found out some Puntillios to pay the Genoways
their interest, which was cried up to be a high point of injustice: How many
hundred suits have strangers had there, wherein the processall charges
countervail often times the value of the thing?

Now for the power of the Spanish Monarchy, I must tell you that her Castillia
her head is grown almost bald; Portugal which was no other then a waxen Nose
to her is melted off; her Aragonian eyes have still some defluctions falling
into them for their privileges; Navarr one of her Arms begins to have a
Gangreen, which none but French Surgeons can cure; her golden bowels of Peru
begin to be exulcerated, and so does the Duodenum of Mexico: Her hipps in Italy
fear they have a symptom of the Sciatica, and her feet in Belgium are
pitifully sick of the Gout, to cure which, she has often applied Playsters
made over with Elixir of Indian Gold, which has cost her more then Belgium is
worth ten times over, if it were to be sold in the Market.

Now for true real innated and personal valor, how few Spaniards shall you
find indu'd with it! It is a rare thing to hear of a Duel in an age there,
though every Cobbler wear a Sword by his side; If they have received affronts
by any, they use to show their courage, and draw their Swords one upon another
in the Marketplace, where they are sure to be parted, and commonly the Minister
of Justice takes away both their weapons for the time, and so makes them
friends; The Spaniards have a saying of the French, that al primer impetu son
mas que hombres, y despises menos que mugeres, The French at first is more then
a man, and afterward less then a woman; but the French have an illfavour'd
saying of them, that the Spaniards in point of true active courage are bearded
Women. It Is true in the conquest of the new world, they did exploits, but it was
against men who had scarce any defensive Arms, they had neither Horse, Steel,
Iron or Gunpowder, they had no coats of Males, they were poor naked inermous
creatures, and so simple that they thought the horse and the man was but one
animal, and a kind of Monster or Devil, therefore 10. Horsemen only were able
to profligat, and make their party good against many thousand Indians, for they
thought they had a conceit they were not borne after the ordinary course of
humane nature, but rather of some infernal fiends, which bugbeare opinion
scared the ignorant American away more then the Spanish valor.

Where was the Spanish manhood in Afrique, when Sebastian was slain, and the
Moor got so signal a victory? Where was it at Goleta nere Tunis which was so
shamefully lost? which important place, Sinan Bassa got, by the pride as much
as the pusillanimity of the Spaniard, for Pedro Carera the Castellan thinking
to have the glory of preserving that place himself with his Spaniards, would
not admit of 500. Italians, who offered themselfs for the service; so the
Spaniards were thrust out of Afrique in less then 30. days, and besides the
Castle they took 500. piece of Ordnance in the place, which armed Algier and
Tunis ever since, and brought them to be such Pirates; And it was confidently
reported that Captain Carrera during the furious siege and storming of the
Castle was underground in a Vaut all the while, so that when the news was
brought to Rome, that Goleta was lost, and consequently the whole Kingdom of
Tunis, there was a pasquill went up and down that Carrera's cowardice, the Duke
Sesa's gout, Don John of Austria's Codpish, and Cardinal Granvills (then
Viceroy of Naples) his Breeches had lost the Guleta. Yet your Thrasonicall
Castillians will say that un Espannol vale quatro Tudescos, tres Franceses, y
dos Italianos, That one Spaniard is worth four Germans, three Frenchmen* and
two Italians.

Now touching this vainglorious foolish humor of raunting, it is more peculiar
to the Spaniard, then to any other peeple: witness this following Rodomontado of
a Castillian Captain, which goes far beyond that of Pirgopolinices in Plautus.

Quando yo pienso en mi mesmo demi terribilissima terrible terribilidad, de tal
manera me espanto que no puedo caber en mi mesmo, pienso que 22. mill maestros
de guarismo no podrian contar en tres annos has hazannas que ha hecho esta
espada Durindana, Castiga Vellacos, pobladora de ciminteries; Viene megana de
reyr todas y quantas vezes, que yo me acuerdo que el gran Turco estando al
pique de perder su Imperio contra el Sophy, me embiava llamar, yo por no ser
acustumbrad, de matar canalla can baxa l'embiava mi ritrato hecho por manos de
quinientos Pintores los quales todos murieron haziendo los (...) d'este rostro
Basilisco, y como el Gran Turco lo vio cayo enfiermo de una Calentura que le
durava tres annos y mas, y embiandolo despues al campo luego que los ^nemiguos
lo miravan con la mayor presteza del mando alearon el cerco con perdida de
quarenta mill y ochenta soldados los quales todos perecieron mirando este mi
espantable rostro; Tengol^s calcones llenos de barbas -- When I descend into my
self, and contemplat my most terrible horrible terribility, I can hardly hold
my self within my self; I believe that all the public Notaries of Biscay are
able in three years to cast up an account of those miraculous achievments which
this Toledo blade, this Durindana, this scourge of Lutherans, this converter of
Pagans, this peepler of Churchyards has performd: I cannot choose but smile
when I call to mind how the great Turk sending for me once, to preserve his
Empire, which was ready to be swallowed up by the Sophy, I, scorning to bath my
hands in the blood of such infidells, sent him only my picture. But the gran
Signor, as soon as he looked upon it, out of pure fear he fell into such a
loosenes, which lasted him diverse Months, that it had like to have cost him his
life, and sending it afterward to the army, the enemies at sight thereof, ran
away like so many hares, when they beheld the Basiliscan eyes of this
Physiognomy of mine* These Breeches I wear, are stuffed with Captains beards,
and the Mustachos of French Generals, the pillow I lay my head upon, is filled
with Amazonian hair, my Cushion is made of a Turban took off from the Sultans
head, my Coverlet is the skin of that Nemean Lion which Hercules killed, my
Courtains are made up of colors and Ensigns taken in diverse battles, when I
march into the field I commonly carry two drumms as pendants at my ears, I am
lul'd asleep by noise of trumpets, and brass kettles, and Perillus bull
stretched along, serves me for a pillow. The month and day of my Nativity was
Mars, who was then the predominant Planet and my Ascendant; I came into the
world about break of day, Sol himself then suffered an Eclypse, Saturn stood
astonished and dull, Jove and Mercury hid themselfs, and Cynthia took in her
horns for fear, but Mars and Venus did cast benign influences being then in
Conjunction, yet that morning it rained blood, the streams of the greatest
River turned redd, Mongibel and strombola belched out more fire then ordinary,
terrible Earthquakes happened in diverse places, Eolus blew very furious, which
raised such impetuous storms, that made Neptune to tumble and swell very high;
Nere the place which I was nursed in, there was a den of Lions that I might be
inured to their roaring, and one time my Mother caused a young cubb to be slain
of purpose to feed me with the blood thereof; To conclude, I am that
Invincible, transcendent great Captain Basilisco, Espheramonte, Generalissimo
of all the Melitia of Europe, I am he who uses to swallow mountains, to breath
out whirlwinds, to spit Targets, and sweat Quicksilver -- By this Rodomontado
you may give a guess at the vanity, and extravagant humor of the Spaniard,
who though he be not so big, yet he looks higher then any other Nation in his
own conceit, which makes them have that vapouring saying of themselfs in point
of valor, that Tres espanoles son quatro diables en Francia, three Spaniards
are four Devils in France.

When Mendoza was Ambassador in France, he would break out often into this
profane Ostentation, Dios es poderoso en el Cielo, y Don Felipe en Tierra,
Gods power is in Heaven, and King Philips on earth, he can command both Sea and
Land, with all the Elements to serve him. When the English Drake swomme to
Santo Domingo, and plundered the place, there was a Pyramid erected in the
Marketplace, whereon was engraven this arrogant Motto, -- Non sufficit Orbis,
one world will not suffice Don Philip, yet that Philip, that invincible Philip,
was overcom at last by a Regiment of poor contemptible things, for Herod-like,
he went out of the world by the pediculary disease, which made no mean modern
Poet to sing,

-- Rex Ille Philippus
Tot populis Terrisque potens, lateque Tyrannus
Occiditu a faedo rosus grege Vermieulorum,
Carnificesque suos miserando corpore pavit
Vivens, atque Videns, and propria funera planxit.
Some imputed this foul ghastly kind of death to his lasciviousnes and lust; some
gave out it was a judgment upon him for doing away his Son Don Carlos; others
gave out that he suffered for Alva's Tyranny in Flanders; some gave out it was
for bereaving Portugal of her right Heir; But most affirmed it was a visible
judgment from Heaven, because the blood of so many hundred thousands of poor
American souls did cry for vengeance, who for their Gold and Silver were made
away, and extinguished by so many kinds of deaths, according to the Italian
proverb, La coda condanna spesso la volpe alla morte per esser troppo lunga.
The Foxes tail condemns him to death, because it is too long. How far further
could I enlarge my self on this subject? but I will grate the ears of so
princely an auditory no longer, therefore I will conclude with a character which
a most ingenuous Poet gives of one part of Spain, when he sayld thence to
France.

Iejuna misera tesqua Lusitaniae
Gebaeque tantum fertiles penuriae,
Valeta longum, At tu beata Gallia
Salve bonarum blanda nutrix Artium,
Caelo Salubri fertili frugum solo,
Umbrosa colles pampini molli coma,
Pecorosa saltus, rigna Valles fontibus,
Prati virentis picta campos floribus
Velifera longis Amnium decursibus
Piscosa stagni, rivulis, lacubus, mari,
Et hinc and illinc portoso littore
Orb receptans hospitem, atque Orbi tuas
Opes vicissim non avara impertiens,
Amaena Villis, tuta muris, turribus;
Superba, testis lauta, culta, splendida,
Victu modesta, moribus non aspera.
Sermon comis, patria gentium Omnium
Communis, animis fida, pace florida,
Iucunda, facilis, Mart terrifico minax,
Invicta, rebus non secundis Insolens,
Nec sort dubia fracta, cultrix numinis
Syncera, ritum in exterum non degener,
Nescit calores laenis aestas torridos
Frangit rigores bruma flammis asperos,
Non pestilentis pallet Austri spiritu
Autumnus aequis temperatus flatibus.
Non ver solutis amnium repagulis
Inundat agros, and labores elicit,
Ni Patrio te Amore diligam, and colam
Dum vivo, rursus non recuso visere.
Iejuna miserae tesqua Lusitaniae
Glebaeque tantum fertiles penuriae
Valete longum --
Thus the Scottish Poet descants upon France, making Portugal a foyl to her,
and so he might have made his own Country as well.

And now, most Highborn Princes, I hope there is not any of this Auditory that
will wrong his judgment so far as to think that Spain for any respects should
carry away the Palm, and claim precedencie of the rest of the Provinces of
Europe.

DIXI.
THE REPLY OF Prince GEORGE, Baron of Studenberg, etc. in behalf of SPAIN.
Most Illustrious Auditors, --
THis Oration of the excellent Baron of Limburg, though flowing with powerful
eloquence, has not, under favor, wrought so much in me, as that gallant
Encomium of yours, Prince Magnus, in the behalf of Spain, therefore I concur
still with you in opinion that she may deserve the primacy, and if the
comparison that Strabo makes be admitted, that Europe is like an Eagle whose
head is Spain, the neck France, Germany the back and breast, Italy and England
the two Arms, the thighs and legs those huge tracts of Earth Northward, I say
if this Simile be allowed, there is no question but Spain may challenge the
priority and head-ship. But my noble Cofen of Limburg, I much wonder what came
into your mind, to throw so much dirt into the face of Spain and her children;
If you were now in the Escuriall, and made such a speech before Philip the
fourth, I believe we should hear no more of you, but you should be buried alive
in the Inquisition all your life time.

But is Spain so hungry as you say, that she must eat grass? Is she so weak
that she needs Crutches? Is she so abandond to Vice, that she has quite shaken
off all Virtue, and a good Conscience? Surely no; Touching the first, she may be
called the Exchequer of all Christendom for Money, and I pray what can he want
who has Money? unless he make such a foolish wish as Mydas did, that
whatsoever he touched might turn to gold, for so he might starve medias inter
opes inops. There is a proverb in Spain, that Don sin dinero, no es Don si no
Donayre, A man without money, is no man but a babble, but a man with money
commands the world, according to those witty verses of Petronius Arbiter,

Quisquis habet nummos, secura naviget Aura,
Fortunamque suo temperet arbitrio;
Uxorem ducat Danaen, ipsumque licebit
Arisium jubeat credere quod Danaen,
Carmina componat, declamet, concremet omnes
Et peragat causas, sitque Catone prior.
Iurisconsultus paret, non paret, habeto,
Atque esto quicquid Servius and Labeo.
Multa loquor, quidvis nummis praesentibus opta
Et Veniet; Clausum possidet Arca Iovem.
I confess it may be the Catholic King may be plunged in a gulf of debt,
having always his Sword drawn, and being in perpetual hostility with the
common enemy of Christendom (to his great glory) as also in actual War with
some of the Princes of Europe, who if they would let him be quiet, he might
quickly subdue all Mauritania the opposite shore to Spain, yet for all there is
never any the least appearance of want in the Catholic Court, nor the least
show that Spain is in war or want, but all things flourish as if he did not ow
penny, or as if he were in peace with all the world. It makes me think upon
Glareanus a great learned man but much in debt, who being asked by a friend of
his how he lived? He answered, I lead the life of Kings and Princes, for I
drink, I eet, and indulge my genius, I game and have money always in my purse,
yet I am in arrears to all; so it may be said of the King of Spain; But it is
brave security the Spanish King gives to his Creditors, no less then
assignments upon his occidentall Fleet, which weigh all circumstances well, is
one of the greatest glories that ever Monarch had. Fortune her self may be
called the King of Spaines wife, who has brought with her such a bottomless
tresure for her dowry; His closet is that punctum so often wished by
Archimedes, whence he moves the whole Globe of the Earth; He has more Kingdoms
then the French King has Provinces, more Fleets then the French has Ships,
more Nations then the French has Cities, more Viceroys then he has Marshals,
and more Captains by Land and Sea then he has Common-Soldiers. It is day, It
is Spring perpetually with him in one part or other of his dominions. Strabo
writes of one who had such a strong and piercing perspicuity of sight, that he
could discern an object 135. miles off, for from Lilybaeum a promontory in
Sicily he could discern and dinumerat the Ships that went out of Carthage
road; But the Catholic King has stronger Optiques, for from his Council
Chamber he can see what is a doing in the Seralio at Constantinople* in the
Louvre in France, at White Hall in England, at Vienna in Austria, in the
Consistory at Rome; his sight is so sharp that he can penetrat the very
Cabinet-Chambers of Kings far and near, and pry into their intrinsecallst and
secretst Counsels. All other Princes and States stand to him in the light, and
he in the dark to them.

But whereas you say that the Spaniard is irreconcilable unto the Reformed
Religion, let me tell you although the Theologues there do sometimes inveigh
against Luther, and Calvin, alleging that the God of the Calvinists is the
Author of sin, Deum Calvinistarum esse Authorem peccati, as may be inferred out
of John Calvin's own words, yet you must not count the Spaniard an Antichrist
for this; Nor although he will rant it out sometimes, that he will go armed to
Paradis, and rapp out other Rodomontado's; It Is true, the Spanish Soldiers, are
great Libertines, but not Atheists; nay some of them have good Consciences and
capable of Repentance; As there is a true and memorable story of a Spanish
Captain who would have ravished a Lawyers daughter in Flanders, 1578. who was of
an alluring beauty, but struggling with her she took his own dagger and mortally
wounded him to preserve her pudicity; The Spaniard thus wounded was taken away,
and he sending for a Surgeon, 'twas told him he could not escape death many
hours, thereupon he called for his ghostly father; to whom having confessed and
showed great Evidences of repentance he was absolved from the attempt, but this
is not sufficient said he, the party whom I would have wronged must pardon me:
hereupon the young Virgin came, to whom he said in rathfull terms, I am here
upon my deaths bed, therefore I desire you would pardon my rash attempt, and for
your pardon and the expiation of the offense, I bequeath unto you all my
Estate, provided that you will give me rites of burial, and assume hereafter
the name of my wife. The young maid melting into tears, did do all the Testator
desired accordingly.

But my noble Cousin George Frederique, I find 'twas not enough for you to
bespatter the Spaniard, and tax him of pride, prophanes and many other Vices,
but you bereave him of the glory for discovering the new World, and of the
right of that Discovery; Seneca the Spanish Tragaedian was as much Prophet as
Poet, he was a true Vates when he sung,

-- Venient annis
Saecula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula Rerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat Tellus; Typhisque novos
Detegat Orbs, nec sit terris
Ultima Thule.
Late years shall bring an Age wherein the Ocean shall slacken the ligaments of
nature, a mighty tract of Earth shall appear, and Neptune shall discover new
Worlds, so that Thule or Island will not be the furthest part of the Earth.
Now, his Countrymen made Scneca a true Prophet herein, to whom that mighty
blessing of discovery and dominion was reserved; In so much that both the
Prophet of this new tract of Earth, and the propagators thereof were Spaniards.

So most humbly thanking this noble Auditory for this privilege of reply, I
desire you most noble Cosen and illustrious Baron of Limburg, to have a more
charitable and just opinion of Spain.

DIXI.
THE ORATION OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LORD EUBESWALD, etc. FOR GREAT BRITAIN.
Most Honorable and Heroique Princes,
IF any one of this Illustrious convention would set forth the glory of some
great City, which flowed with plenty of all things that were requisite, either
for necessity or pleasure* exceeding therein the very wishes of the
Inhabitants, a City which had also impregnable fortifications, and strength
both by art and nature, with arms of all kinds, such propugnacles, such
advantages by land and water both to defend her self, and destroy the enemy;
Who had a grave way of administration of Justice, whose Inhabitants did flourish
with all sorts of manufactures, with all kind of virtue, invention, and
elegance, and shining with all kind of pulchritude, I believe there is not any
of this Princely Assembly but would passionatly desire to see that rare
renowned City; But, most excellent President, I have taken in hand to describe
unto you not such a narrow thing as one City, or one Country either, but a
little world of it self, wherein many Kingdoms are conjoind in one, and under
one Monarch, which little world does swell with affluence of all things
desirable; those blessings which are found single in other parts of Europe are
found conjunctly here; yet this is no other portion of the earth then an Island,
but such an Island that before I have done with you, you will acknowledge that
this Island may stand in competition for pre-eminence with any of those noble
Regions that you have displayed hitherto in most learned and eloquent Orations;
And this is Great Britain, the Queen of Isles, the minion of Neptun, the darling
of Ceres, Incomparable Britain; for so the Greek Poet will tell you;

-- (...),
No I Will did ever dare
With Britain yet compare.
Which I Will being disjoined from many other potent Neighbors, and rich
Countries, but by a small distance, lies very commodious to receive into her
bosom by way of Navigation and Negotiation the wealth of all the world, and to
make others happy with Hers; she lies very apposit to comfort, and relieve
those that come near her coasts, if they be in any danger by distress of
weather, or want of any thing that is needful for vessel or men.

The air is there so temperat that a well disposed body may pass there
without either stoves in Winter, or shades in Summer; There be gentle breezes
that blow from the circumjacent Sea, which refresh all kind of animalls both
brute, and rational, the clouds there drop fatnes, dissolving into silver
wholesome showers to soften and fertilize her glebes; she uses to have in
December and January frost enough to knit the joints of the earth, and so
corroborat them; in February she has snow enough to fill her dikes, and like a
coverlet to keep her plowd fields warm. And whereas the seas of Spain and Italy
are barren of fish, Hers have them by whole shoales, and in such variety that
it is incredible. Her Forests and woods have no birds or beasts of rapine, and
noxious animalls, but harmeles (though wild) creatures, as the Stagg, the Hind,
and the Heart, which serve for pleasure and hospitality. The bowels of her
soil, and hills are pregnant with mineralls, or fuel; The Sun which scorcheth
Spain and Naples, does gently warm Britain with his rays; The air is nothing
so thick and dull as in other climes, but attenuated and cleerd with refreshing
and gentle blasts ever and anon; nor is her earth subject to agues, to quaking
and trepidation as other places are, but always firm and sure. For store and
superfluity of corn, in the Romans time she was called the barn and granary of
the western part of the Empire, in so much that Zosimus reports, that they used
to lade eight hundred vessels with British corn for many years to supply their
army upon the frontiers of Germany. These ensueing verses of a Forrener do hint
a little upon the happiness of this Country.

Anglia Terra ferax, tibi pax secura quietem,
Multiplicem luxum merx opulenta dedit.
Tu nimio nec stricta gelu, nec sydere fervens,
Clementi coelo, temperieque places.
Cum pareret natura parens, variasque favore
Divideret dotes omnibus una locis,
Seposuit potioratibi, matremque professa,
Insulasis foelix, plenaque pacis, ait.
Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat usus,
Ex te provemet, vel aliunde tibi.
Eumenius in the famous panegyric he made to Constantin melts thus into her
praises. O fortunata and omnibus beatior terris Britannia, quae Constantinum
Caesarem prima vidisti; Merito te omnibus coeli ac soli dotibus natura donavit,
in qua nec hyemis est nimius rigor, nec aestatis ardor, in qua segetum tanta
faecunditas ut muneribus utriusque sufficiat and Cereris and Liberi; In qua
nemora sine immanibus bestijs, terra sine serpentibus noxijs; contra pecorum
mitium innumerabilis multitudo lacte distenta, and onusta velleribus, certe
quidem quod propter vitam diligitur, longissimae dies, and nullae sine aliqua
luce noctes, dum illa littorum extrema planities non attollit umbras, noctisque
metam coeli and syderum transit aspectus, ut sol ipse qui nobis videtur
occidere, ibi appareat solummodo praeterire. O most fortunat Britain, (says
Eumenius) more blessed then any other Country, which did first see
Constantin! Nature has deservedly endowed thee with all gifts both of heaven
and earth. In thee neither the excessive cold of winter, or ardent heat of
summer does offend the inhabitant: thou swellest with such a faecundity of all
kind of corn, that thou may be called the Favorit of Ceres and Bacchus; Thy
groves are without savage rapacious beasts, and thy heaths without poisonous
serpents, thy fields are covered with innumerable multitudes of mild creatures
laboring with exuberance of milk, and laden with rich fleeces; For
delightfullnesse or life, thy days are very long, and no night but has some
glimpses of light. The glorious Sun which sets and goes down in other
Countries, seems only but to pass by the Coasts. That salt ditch which girds
Britain about, renders her invincible; I mean the circumambient sea, which
opens and shuts, and embosoms himself into her at diverse commodious creeks.
This Sea is so high and turgid oftentimes, that some Authors record it rises
80. Fadoms at a springtide in diverse places. He sometimes salutes and covers
the inviting soil, then he departs, but to come again. He does cast up
sometimes and leaves upon the shore huge fishes, of strange shapes, as the
Lyric sings.

-- belluosus qui remoris
Obstrepit Oceanus Britannis.
Rejoice therefore O Britain, and triumph, that Dame Nature has cast such a
mote about thee, which no Engine of Man can choke, no reach of wit or labor
can dry up. Let the Flemish secure Ostend with new dikes, Anwerp with a strong
Citadel, let Milan glory for her inexpugnable Castle, let the Venetians bragg
of their Palma, The Hungarians of Iavarin and Comorra, The Turks theirs of
Goleta, Savoy hers of Monmelian, The French theirs of Baion, where none must
enter but the King himself, or the blood Royal; Let the Spaniard brag of his
Havana, the Pole of Smolenksco, The Austrian of Vienna, The Bavarian of
Ingolstad, The Dane of Croneburg, Let Brandeburg brag of Castreni, Silesia of
Breslaw, the Franconians of Norimberg, the Swed of Stockholm, and let other
Kings and Countries glory never so much of their strong holds, Motes and
Fortifications; but to compare them to that Dike which is cast about great
Britain, were to compare a purl, or small rivulet of water to the Archipelago,
or a small tuft of Earth to Mount Adrian.

Nor does this huge Mote give security alone to the Inhabitants, but it brings
them many other inestimable benefits; it animates by virtue of the saltwaters
the heat of the contiguous Earth, it nourishes the air with pregnant vapors,
to make wholesome showers for the irrigation and refreshment of the Earth; it
takes in and lets out many brave Rivers for navigation, which are replenished
with all store of Fish. Among other kind, the benefit that is made of Herrings
is beyond belief, which swim in huge shoales like Mountains about the Island.
Toward the Summer Solstice, they seek the Coasts of Scotland, then toward
Autumn they retire to the English, and it is incredible what huge quantities
are taken twixt Scarborough and the Thames mouth from the month of August to
September: then they move more Southward to the British Sea, and find matter
for fishing till Christmas; then having as it were fetched a compass about
Britain, they seek the Western Sea, and the Irish Coast, where they keep till
June, and then set forward for Britain again, when they are grown fat, and
numerous by multiplication.

Thus Britany, like a Microcosm of her self, is seated in the midst of a
turbulent and working Sea; yet she within is still quiet, serene and safe. And
now I will take a survay of this Noble Island, as one would do of some stately
Castle: and to do that exactly, one must not only view the Trenches and
outworks which are about, but pry into the recesses and rooms within, and
observe what fashion of men they are that keep it; therefore I will make a
progress into the Center and bowels of Britain. Touching the people who
inhabit Her, they are the wellfavourdest, and best complexion'd people of any
upon the surface of the Earth: they have excellent Intellectuals, sucking
Capacities, and spacious Understandings; they add unto, and perfect any
invention that is brought them. And truly, we Germans should be very
ungrateful, unless we should acknowledge to have received great benefit by
them: for in point of Religion and literature they have been Doctors and
Parents unto us. They brought Christ and the Standard of the Cross first
amongst us, they dispelled the black clouds of Faganism and ignorance from
amongst us, and let in the sweet rays of piety and knowledge to enlighten us.
This, unless we brand our selfs with the ugly mark of ingratitude, we must
ingeniously confess.

Now, it is observed that the Britans were always by a special instinct very
much addicted to Religion; And as in the Discipline of the Druyds, whose
founders they are held to be, they antecell'd all others, (for Caesar records
that the Gauls went over to be instructed by the British Druyds) so when the
name of Christ was known among them, with flagrant desires, and fervent
affections they embraced that belief with a wonderful ready devotion; and as
the glorious Sun when he culminates and appears in the East, does as it were in
a moment illustrate the whole Hemisphear; so the beams of Christianity
displayed themselves with mavelous celerity all the Hand over. But this had
very good helps to advance this work, for in the infancy of the Church, as
Baronius does assert, Joseph of Arimathea a Noble Decurion arrived there, and
Claudia Rufina, Wife to Aulus Pudens the Roman; of whom the Poet Martial, nay
Saint Paul himself makes honorable mention. Simon Zelotes having made a hot
progress through Barbary, died in Britain. Nay, some say that Saint Paul being
freed from Nero's shackles, increased the propagation of grace there.

Hereupon the Britains having had the advantage of such great lights, applied
themselves to erect Oratories and Churches for the public exercise of
devotion; wherein they grew so zealous, that Lucius a British King left his
Crown, with all earthly pomp, and made a spontaneous pilgrimage to Rome in the
time of Eleutherius, the year 150. after the Incarnation, and spent the rest of
his life in holy Meditations, and practices of piety. Now, what a glory it is
for Britain to have had the first Christian King that ever was; Nay, the first
Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great. And to speak truth, no Region
produced more constant professors of Christianity then Britain did, and more
fincere Propagators thereof, which will appear if we look into the Catologe of
Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors. In so much that in lieu of that malicious
character which Porphyrie gives of her (who hated her for being such a zealous
Christian) by calling her feracem tyrannorum provinciam, a Country fruitful for
Tyrants; she may more deservedly be called Regio sanctorum faecundissima, a
Region most abounding with Saints. Nor were the Britans such Zelots only at
home, but they crossed the Seas to disperse the beams of Christian Knowledge
abroad; and their pains proved very successful herein. Germany was beholden to
Winfridus, and Willebrod that she was converted. France was beholden to Alcuin
for establishing the Academy of Paris, though Paschasius, a cavilling Author,
denies it. Touching us Germans, among other testimonies of gratitude to
Britain, let this of an excellent Almain Poet serve for one.

Haec tamen Arctois laus est eterna Britannis,
Quod post Pannonicis vastatum incursibus Orbem
Illa bonas Arts, and Graiae munera linguae,
Stellarumque vias, and magni sidera caeli
Observans, iterum turbatis intulit oris,
Quin se Relligio multum debere Britannis
Servata, and late circum dispersa fatetur.
Quis nomen Winfride tuum, quis munera nes^cit?
Te Duce Germanis pietas se vera, Fidesque
Infinuans, caepit ritus abolere prophanos.
Quid non Alcuino facunda Lutetia debet!
Instaurare bonas ibi qui faeliciter Arts,
Barbariemque procul solus dispellere caepit.
To these British Champions of Christianity we may add Bid, who has the
Epithet (by the consent of the universal Christian Church) of Venerable given
him. I will bring upon the stage next Io. Dunscotus, who was so supereminent in
Divinity, and the spiny art of Logique, that he was called by the whole
commonwealth of learning Subtilis Doctor, and he was a man of such large
esteem, that he founded a sect who are called Scotistae to this day: he also
was called lima veritatis, the file of truth: He was so great a man, that as
many Cities contended for the Nativity of Homer, so did many Kingdoms strive
for him, Ireland, Scotland, England, and France; yet, what a strange destiny
befell this famous Doctor? for being surpised by an apoplexy, and given for
dead, he was buried alive, for it was found that he breathed his last in the
Grave. After him I may instance in John Wicklif, a great Artist and Theolog;
next to him I rank William Ockam, patrem Nominalium, who establishd a sect
called the Nominalls, but both these were strong enemies to Rome, as appeers yet
by their penns; There was another great Doctor called Doctor Resolutus by the
Italians for his acute way of disputation, and he was Io: Baconthorp, one of
the deepest clerks of his time. What a rare man and of heavenly speculations
was Io: de sacro bosco, the Author of the sphaere, which remains yet engraven
upon his tomb in Paris? some ages after these, the world of learned men did
much esteem Reginald Poole, John Colet, William Lilly, Linacre, Pace,
Cardinal Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas More, Latimer, Tindall,
Baleus, Tunstall, men inferior to none, as well for sanctimony of life, as for
rare erudition and knowledge; Toby Matthew Archbishop of York, another
Chrysostom, Thomas Stapleton, Nic. Wotton, Jewel, Cheek, Humphreys, Grindall,
Whitgift, Plowden, Ascham, Cook, Smyth, Whitaker, Perkins, Mountagu, those
great speculative Lords Baeon and Herbert, Andrews, Usher that rare Primat,
Seldom, who knows as much as both the Scaligers, Camden the English Strabo,
Owen another Martial, with diverse excellent Dramatique Poets, and it is a
great wrong to the Commonwealth of learning that their works are not made
intelligible in a larger tongue then that Insulary Dialect; Add hereunto, that
for Physicians and Lawyers, both Civil and Common there are as profound
spirits there as any on earth.

And as for learning, so for prowess and magnanimity the Inhabitants of Great
Britain have been and are still very celebrous; And though there has been
always an innated kind of enmity twixt the French and the English, yet they
have extorted praises out of their enemies mouths: witness Comines, Froissard,
and Bodin, who write so much in honor of the English; Nor do they herein
complement or flatter a whit. What a bold Britain was Brennus (who lived long
before the English took footing there) what notable feats did he perform in
Italy, Greece, and Asia? so that the old Britains, or Welsh in honor of that
Hero call a King after his name to this day viz. Brennin, and there is a
Castle in Wales of his name to this day. How manfully did the ancient Britains
tugg with the Romans, who received fowler defeats there then in any other
Region? which one of their Poets seems to confess, when he says,

-- Invictos Romano Mart Britannos. The Silures who are a peeple but of a few
small shires in Wales, viz. Monmouth, Brecknock and others, being animated by
the courage of their King Cataracus, and provoked by the menaces of the
Emperor Claudius, who threatened to extinguish the very names of them, met his
army in open field, and cutting off an auxiliary Regiment which was going to
recreut the Emperor under Marius Valens, they utterly routed him: In so much
that Ostorius the propraetor of Britanny for the Romans resenting this dishonor
died out of a sense of grief. Charles the Great had to do with them in three
battles, wherein there was such a slaughter of his men, that he cried, Si vel
semel tantum cum illis adhuc depugnandum foret, ne unum quidem militem sibi
superfuturum, If he were to encounter the Britains but once more, he should not
have a soldier left him: a saying proceeding from such a man as Charlemain,
that tends much to the reputation of the Britains. But the Gauls are they whom
the Britains galld, having in so many victories left their arrows in their
thighs, in their breasts, and some sticking in their hearts; which makes Bodin
complain, Gallos ab Anglis in ipsa Gallia clades accepisse, ac pene Imperium
amisisse -- That the French received many overthrowes in France herself by the
English, and had almost lost their Kingdom, whereupon the Poet sings wittily,

Anglorum semper virtutem Gallia sensit,
Ad Galli cantum non fugit iste Leo.
For how often have the French Kings with their Nobles been routed, defeated
and discomfited by the English Gray-goose-wing? how often has it pierced the
very center of the Kingdom? what notable rich returns have the English made
from France? And what pitiful looks must France have, when Edward the fourth
got such a glorious victory at Cressy, where above thirty thousand perished,
among whom the King of Bohemia was found among the dead bodies, ten Princes,
eighty Barons, twelve hundred Gentlemen, and the flower of the French fell that
day, and King Philip of Valois did hardly escape himself to a small town, which
being asked at the gate who he was, qui va la? answered, la Fortune de France,
the Fortune of France. This made France wear black a long time. But in another
battle she had as ill luck, wherein her King John, and David King of Scots
where taken prisoners, and attended the prince of Wales to England: yet such
was the modesty of that prince, though conqueror, that he waited upon King
John bareheaded at table; this was such a passage as happened in King Edgars
reign, who had four Kings to row him upon the river Dee hard by Westchester,
viz. Kennad Kind of the Scots, Malcolm King of Cumberland; Maconus King of Man,
and another Welsh King. The English reduced France to such a poverty at that
time, that she was forced to coin leather money. In diverse other battles in
the reigns of Charles the fifth, sixth, and seventh, and Lewis the elevenths
time, the English did often foyl the French, until the war pour le bien public
begun by the Duke of Burgundy. Such a large livery and seifin the English had
taken in France, that for three hundred and fifty years they were masters of
Aquitain and Normandy; Nay Henry the sixth of England was crowned King of France
in Paris. And so formidable were the English, in France, that the Duke of
Britany, when he was to encounter the French army in the field, thought it a
policy to cloth a whole Regiment of his soldiers after the English mode, to
make them more terrible to the French.

What shall I say of that notable Virago Queen Elizabeth, who did such exploits
again Spain, by taking the united provinces of the Low Countries under her
protection? How did she ply the Spaniard, and bayt him by Sea and Land, how did
she in a manner make him a Bankrupt, by making him lose his credit in all the
banks of Europe! And all that while Spain could do England no harm at all;
touching the strength of which Kingdom you may please to hear what a judicious
Italian speaks of it, Il Regno d'Ingliterra non ha bisogno d'altri per la
propria difesa, anzi non solo e difficile, ma si puo dir impossible se non e
divisione nel Regno che per via de force possa esser conquistato. The Kingdom
of England stands in no need of any other for her own defense; so that it is
not only difficult, but a thing impossible, unless there be some intestin
division, to make a conquest of that Country. Philip offered very fairly for
her in the year eighty eight, when he thought to have swallowed her with his
Invincible Fleet, which was a preparing three years: she consisted of above
150. sail, 8000. Mariners, 20000. foot, besides volunteers, she carried 1600.
Canons of brass, 1000. of iron, and a hundred and twenty thousand granados of
all sorts. The Fleet stood the King in every day thirty thousand Ducats;
insomuch that Bernardin Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador in France, being in a
private conference one day with King Henry the fourth, assured him, that viis
and modis, that Fleet had stood his Master in above ten Millions first and
last, from the time that she set sail from Lisbon. This Fleet looked like a
huge Forest at Sea as she made her way. Good Lord how notably did that
Masculine Queen bestirre her self, in viewing her Armies, in visiting her Men
of War, and Ships Royal, in having her Castles and Ports well fortified, in
riding about, and in the head of the Army her self, in discharging the Office
of a true Pallas, wearing a Hat and Feather in lieu of a Helmet. Henry the
fourth of France sent her seasonable notice hereof, so that most of the Roman
Catholics up and down were commanded to retire to the I Will of Ely, a fenney
place; and others were secured in Bishops houses till this horrid cloud which
did threaten the destruction of England should be overblown. But this
prodigious Fleet being come to the British seas, how did the little English
vessels pelt those huge Gigantick Galeons of Spain? whereof those few which
were left (for all the rest perished) were forced to fetch a compass almost as
far as Norway in 62. degrees, and so got to Spain to bring the sad tidings what
became of the rest.

There were Triumphs for this not only in England, but all the United
Provinces over, where a Medal was coined bearing this Inscription on the one
side, Classis Hispanica, The Spanish Fleet; on the other side, Venit, ^vit,
fuit, She came, she went, she was: But had the Duke of Parma come out of
Flanders with his Land Army, then it might have proved a black day to England;
and herein Holland did a piece of Knight Service to England, for she kept him
from coming forth with a squadron of Men of War. How gallantly did the
English take Cales, the Key of Spain, and brought home such rich plunder? How
did they infest the Indies, and what a mass of Treasure did Drake (that
English Dragon) bring home thence? he made his Sails of Silk, and his Anchors
of Silver.

Most noble Princes, you have heard something, though not the tyth that might
be said of the early Piety and Devotion, of the exquisite Knowledge, and
Learning, of the Manhood and Prowess of Great Britain; but these praises that
I give her is but a bucket of water cast into her Seas. Now touching both King
and people, it is observed that there is such a reciprocation of love betwixt
them, that it is wonderful; the one swayes, the other submits, obeyes, and
contributes to the necessities and preservation of the honor and majesty of
the King, for which he receives protection and security.

Touching the Regal Authority, and absolute Power and Prerogatives of the
Kings of Great Britain, it is as high and supreme as any Monarchs upon Earth:
They acknowledge no Superior but God himself, they are not feudetary or
homageable to any, they admit no foreign jurisdiction within the bounds of
their Kingdoms, and herein they have the advantage of the Kings of France and
Spain, yea of the Emperor himself, who is in a kind of vassalage to the Pope,
and may be said to divide authority with him in their own Dominions. No, they
have long time shaken off that servitude, and manumitted the Crown from those
immense sums which were erogated and ported from England to pay for First
fruits, for Indulgences, for Appeals, Palls, and Dispensations, and such
merchandises of Rome. How many hundred of years did England pay Tribute, though
it went under the name of Peterpence, to Rome, think you? no less than near
upon a thousand, from the reign of King Inas the Saxon to Henry the eighth.

From the Power of the Kings of Great Britain, let us go to their Justice, let
us descend from the Throne to the Tribunal. Now, such is the Divinity of the
Kings of Great Britain, that they cannot do any Injustice; it is a Canon of
their Common Law that the King can do no wrong; if any be done, it is the
Kings Minister, the Judge, Magistrate, or Officer does do it, and so is
punishable accordingly: such a high regard the English have of the honor of
their King; and such a special care the Kings of England have used to take for
punishing of Injustice and corruption; such a care as King Edgar had to free
the Island from Wolves (and corrupt Officers are no better than Wolves) which he
did by a Tribute that he imposed upon a Welsh Prince for his ranson, which was,
to bring him in three hundred skins of Wolves every year: this produced ^o
good effects, that the whole race of Wolves was extirpated in a short time, so
that it is as rare a thing to see a Wolf now in England, as a Horse in Venice.

Touching the care that the Kings of England used to have to enrich their
subjects, has been used to be very great, and to improve the common stock:
Edward the third (that Gallorum malleus, the hammer of the French, he quelled
them so) was the first who introduced the art of making of Cloth into England,
whereby the Exchequer, with the public and private wealth of the Kingdom did
receive a mighty increment; for Wool is the Golden Fleece of England, and the
prime Staple-commodity, which is the cause, that by an old custom, the Judges,
Masters of the Rolls, and Secretaries of State in Parliament time do use to
sit upon Woolsacks in the House, that commodum lanarum and ovium non
negligendum esse, Parliamentum moneatur, that they put the Parliament in mind
that the commodity of Wool and Sheep be not neglected. The Swede, the Dane, the
Pole, the German, the Russe, the Turk, and indeed all Nations do highly esteem
the English cloth. The time was that Antwerp her self did buy and vend two
hundred thousand English cloths yearly, as Camden has it. And great and
ancient are the privileges that the English have in Belgium; for since the
year 1338, which is above three hundred years ago, when Lewis Malan Earl of
Flanders gave them very ample immunities in the Town of Bruges, since which
time it is incredible how all kind of commerce and merchantile affair did
flourish among the Flemins, for which they were first obliged to the English;
for the English Wool has been a Golden Fleece also to the Flemins, as well as
the English themselves, because it was one of the principal causes of enlarging
their Trade, whereunto the Duke of Burgundy related, when he established the
order of the Golden Fleece Guicciardin makes a computation, that the Traffic
and Intercourse betwixt England and Flanders amounted to twelve millions
yearly, where of five was for woollen manufactures.

What an Heroique incomparable Princess was Queen Elizabeth, who wore the
English Crown, and swayed the Scepter as politiquely, prudently, and stoutly as
any of those Kings which wore swords before her, or after her; she reigned four
and forty years in a mavelous course of prosperity, and all the world, yea
her enemies did confess that there was never such a Virgin and a Virago upon
earth. Her subjects loved her as their most indulgent Mother, her foes feared
her as a just Revengresse; her Neighbor Princes and States did attribute their
safety to her, and all Europe, yea the great Turk, and the Emperor of Russia
(to whom she first opened the way of commerce) did behold her, though a far
off, with the eyes of admiration. They esteemed her as a great Heroina, and the
Arbitresse of Christendom; for she might as well as her Father have taken that
Motto, cui adhaereo, praeest; He, whom I sti^k to, prevails. Nay, she did more
truly verify that saying of her Father's, Galliam and Hispaniam esse quasi
lances in Europae libra, and Angliam esse lingula^, sive libripendem; That
France and Spain were like the Beams of the great balance of Christendom, and
England was the handle of that balance.

Touching the observance and fidelity which the English used to bear toward
their Sovereign Prince, it has been used to be rare and exemplary. They
reverence him in his absence, as well as when he is present; for whersoever the
Chair of State stands, all go uncovered, they honor his very shadow, they
serve him upon the knee. The Preacher makes three profound reverences in the
Pulpit before he begins his Sermon. They pray for him five times in the
public Liturgy, and for his Queen, the Heir apparent, by name, with the rest
of his children; which I believe is not done so often to any Christian Prince.
Their fidelity, and affectionate Allegiance is also very remarkable, and may
serve for a pattern to all subjects; when the Spaniard by internunciall
negotiation and secret practices did treat with the Duke of Norfolk, and the
Earl of Ormond, that the one in England, the other in Ireland, should rise
against Queen Elizabeth; the people were so eager in the cause, especially on
the Sea side, that it is wonderful how they flocked to all the Ports
voluntarily of themselves, to prevent an Invasion, insomuch that there came a
command to restrain such confluences of people, and that every one should
retire home to his dwelling and business till there were occasion.

When Prince Charles returned from Spain in safety, what exultations of joy was
in every corner of the Kingdom, specially in the great City of London, what
huge Bonefires, some of big massy timber, were up and down streets, which made
them as lightsome in the night as if it had been noon; insomuch, as one said,
the flames of the fires might be seen as far as Spain; what barrels of Beer,
Ale, and Wine were brought out to drink carouses to his health?

But most Illustrious Princes, in regard this Island is so delicate a piece of
Earth, I Will take her into parcels, and present her to your view. I will begin
with the Southernst part, with Cornwall, a Province which abounds with
diversity of necessary commodities, whereof Spain has every year a good share,
being the nearest part of the Island toward Her; here besides Gold and Silver,
and Marble, there is great store of Tin dug out, which is so pure and
white, that it may pass for Silver when it is hammered into Vessels. This
commodity is transported and dispersed into all parts of the World, and rich
returns made of it. Then they have a savory Fish called Pilchards, which
Spaniards call Sardinas, which is found in incredible quantities in the Sea
near that Coast; whereof there be huge Cargasars carried to Spain, and Italy
every year, and for barter they will give you Silk, Wine, Oil, Cotton, and
the best Commodities they have. About November this Fish is taken, and they
shape the course of their Voyages so, that they may be in Spain and Italy a
little before Lent, which is the convenientest for their Market, because in
those Catholic Countries, that season is observed so strictly. There is in
this Province of Cornwall a wonderful thing, and it is a great famous Stone
called Mainamber, a little distant from a small Market Town called Pensans.
That stone though it be as bigg as a little Rock, and that a multitude of men
cannot carry it away, yet you may stir and move it sensibly with your little
finger. Prince Arthur, one of the 9. Worthies, was born there, who is so much
celebrated through the World, and by such a number of Authors, among other
things, for his round Table which was made of stone, about which a selected
number of Chivalrous Kinghts were used to sit with him, and they had special
Orders and Laws made among themselves, which they were bound to observe
punctually. Good Lord, what a Hero was this Arthur, being an old Britain born!
he overcame the Saxons in twelve several battles. In so much that an ingenious
Poet sung of him thus.

Prisca parem nescit, aequalem postera nullum
Exhibitura dies, Reges supereminet omnes,
Solus praeteritis melior, majorque futuris.
From Cornwall I pass to Devonshire, where there is also quantity of choice
Tin, not inferior in purity to that of Cornwall; there is a place there also,
where Loadstone is found. Winfrid, who was the Apostle of the Germans, was
borne there at Kirton, who converted the Thuringians and Friselanders to
Christianity. I will leave Exeter the Provincial Town, Neat, Rich, and large,
and will go to Plymouth, a most comodious and safe well frequented Port. Here
Sir Francis Drake was born, for Naval glory and skill the ablest that any age
has afforded; he did circumnavigate and compass the World, I mean the Globe
of the Earth, he saild further into the Southern Seas, into mare pacificum then
any other; where stars are so scant to guide one's course by: for there are
but three of the first magnitude to be seen there. He gave part of America a
new name, called new Albion. Among other prizes he took from the Spaniard, the
Ship Caga fuego was one, which had seventy pound weight of Gold in her,
thirteen great Chests crammed with Patacoons, and a huge quantity of bars and
sowes of silver which served for Ballast. This rich ship this English Jason
brought with him to England with his own ship the Publican in safety. But the
Spanish Captain broke this jest for all the loss of his treasure, that his
ship and Drakes ship should change their names, and that his should be called
Caga plata, and Drakes Caga fuego. Thus this English Drake swom like the great
Leviathan to the new and old World; of whom that most ingenious Epigrammatist
Owen has this Hexastic.

Drake, pererrati quem novit terminus Orbis,
Quemque semel mundi vidit utrumque latus,
Si taceant homines, facient Te sidera notum,
Atque loqui de Te discet uterque polus.
Plus ultra Herculeas inscribas Drake columnas,
Et Magno dicas Hercule Mayor Ego.
I pass now to Dorsetshire, which Province were it commendable for no other
benefit, as it is for many, yet Biertport does make it singular for the great
plenty of Hemp which grows there, whereof Cable and Ropes for shipping are
made. But Somersetshire what a beautiful blessed County it is, wherein the City
of Bristol shines as a jewel in the bosse of a ring, for indeed that City
affords plenty of Diamonds; a great Merchantile Town situate upon the Avon, who
not far off disgorgeth her self into the Severn: In the craggy Rocks of this
Avon, Diamonds are cut out in that plenty, that they are carried away by pecks
full; and on the other side there is an extraordinary hard kind of flintstones
found, which are fetched for other Countries. Wiltshire is famous for the
martial courage of her Children, who in times passed did repress the fury and
stop the progress of the Danes, that they should pass no further Southward
that way. There Warder Castle stands, made famous by the Noble Baron John
Arundel, who receives his Title of honor from it, for having performed such
noble exploits against the sworn Enemy of Christendom the Great Turk; for which
the Emperor Rodulphus did put a deserved mark of honor upon him, by making him
a Count of the Empire, and the merit of the cause is thus mentioned in his
Patent. Quod fortiter and strenue se gessisset in apert is praeliis, and in
Civitatum and Castrorum oppugnationibus, and spectato fortitudinis exemplo in
expugnatione oppidi aquatici juxta Strigonium, vexillum Turcis sua manu
eripuit, Ipsum, omnesque and singulos liberos haeredes and posteros, and
descendentes legitimos vtriusque sexus natos, aeternaque serie nascituros,
veros sacri Imperii Comites and Comitissas Creavimus, fecimus, and nominavimus,
tituloque, honor and dignitate comitatus Imperialis auximus, and insignivimus.
Because the foresaid John Arundel had comported him magnanimously and stoutly
in open fieldfights, as also in the oppugnation and beleagrings of Cities and
Castles, and for that notable example of fortitude in storming and subduing a
Town hard by Strigonium in Hungary, where he took with his own hand the Turks
colors; We therefore have created, made and nominated the said John Arundel,
himself, and all and every of his Children, Heirs, and Posterity of both sexes
lawfully descended, or shall by eternal propogation issue thence, to be Counts
and Countesses of the sacred Empire, and do dignifie and adorn them with honor
and title accordingly.

Hampshire is remarkable for many things, specially for the pretty Port Town
Southhampton, where King Canutus the Dane did a memorable Act: for one day
having many Parasits and Temporizers about him, who did magnify his Power, and
in a manner Idolize, by calling him Great Monarch of Land, of Sea, and men; The
King listening unto them with silence upon the Seashore, caused his Chair of
state to be brought thither, wherein being sat in Majesty upon the Sands, it
being flowing water, he made a speech unto the Sea, saying, Tu meae ditionis
es, and Terra in qua sedeo mea est; nec fuit qui meo resisteret Imperio. Impero
igitur tibi ne in Terram meam ascendas, nec vestes, nec membra Dominatoris tui
madefacias. Mare vero de more conscendens Pedes Regis sine reverentia
madefecit, Ille igitur resiliens ait, sciant omnes habitantes Orbem, vanam and
frivolam esse Regum potentiam, nec Regis quempiam nomine dignum praeter eum
cujus nutui Caelum, Terram, Mare legibus obediunt aeternis: nec unquam postea
coronam sibi imposuit. O Sea thou belongst to my dominions, and the Earth
whereon I sit is mine, nor has there any yet resisted my commands unpunished;
I command thee therefore that thou come not up to my ground, nor presume to wet
the Vest, members of thy Lord. But the Sea still rising, began to bespatter and
wet the Kings feet, which making him recoyl backward. He said again, Know ye
all the Inhabitants of the Earth, that the power of Kings is vain and
frivolous, and none deserves the name of a King, but he at whose nod Heaven,
Earth, and Sea obey his eternal Laws. So Canutus would never wear the Crown
again. Odia must not be passed over with silence, proud for a Royal Palace,
where David the Scots King passed some part of his Captivity. Thirteen English
defended this place against Lewis of France most courageously for 15. days.
How many memorable things occur in Barkshire; Reading can show the ashes of
Henry the 1. and Matilda his Queen, Daughter to the Emperor Henry the 4. This
witty Epitaph is put upon Her.

Ortu magna, viro major, sed maxima prole,
Heic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa, Parens.
She was Daughter, Wife and Mother to three Henry's. But the most stately
Castle of Winsore deserves a kind of admiration; a most delicate and pompous
Palace, which has been the cradle and Sepulcher of many Kings. Among others;
Edward the third (that thunderbolt of War) was born there, who to excite
military virtue with splendour and rewards, erected a noble society of Knights
called the Knights of Saint George; Whereinto many Emperors, Kings, and foreign
Princes held it a great honor to be coopted. In the Province of Surrey there be
many Royal Palaces, there is Nonsuch house, where the amaenity and sweetness
of the soil and fite does contend with the rare artifice and curiosity of the
structure for priority.

Sussex is a strong piece of Earth, for her bowels are full of Iron; whereof
there be huge proportions made and dispersed to other Shires.

I come now to Kent, a very noble portion of Great Britany, abounding with
Pasturage, with Meadows and fields of extraordinary fatness and fertility; for
any kind of cattle, though never so meager, do thrive when they come to feed on
Kentish Grass. This County is very plentiful for all sorts of fruit, specially
for Cherries, and it is a pleasure to behold the Orchards when they are ripe.
This delicate fruit was brought to Rome by Lucullus from Pontus 600. years
after the founding of the City, and by the Romans brought to Britany, and it is
remarkable how the vein of Earth and genius of that soil does agree with that
fruit. This Noble County enjoyes greater privileges then any other, for Kent
was never conquered by the Norman, but by way of treaty; she conformed upon
such conditions: By her shores lie all the Arsenals, and Docks, where the royal
Ships are built. There is Canterbury an ancient City, the Metropolitan seat of
the Archbishop and primate of all England; called by Urban the 2. the Patriarch
of the other World. There stands Dover with a stupendous high Castle, which
seems to menace France, that stands opposite and in sight of it. We will leave
Kent and go to the Severn, on whose banks the gentle City of Gloucester, built
first by Claudius Caesar, does stand, with diverse other very jolly rich Towns,
as Worcester, Shrewsbury, Bridgnorth, Teuxbury; and that Noble River of Severn
does part England from the ancient Country of Wales. In so much that He, who is
master of the Severn, may be said to be master of the 3d. part of England in
point of Power. I have a great mind now to come to Oxford, a little Earthly
Paradise for situation, salubrity of air, and sweetness of soil, most daintily
watered, and crested about with hills a convenient distance off; because she
might have a freer respiration. But the prime thing which graceth this
delightful City, is, that renowned University which is founded there: she is
ranked among the 4. principal Academies of Europe for antiquity, for number of
Colleges, for large exhibitions to students; for a Library they may compare
with the Vatican. The story relates that in the reign of Edward the first,
there were thirty thousand students in Oxford, which did homage to the Muses.
Hear what Lipsius says, Unum Oxoniense Collegium december Belgica: One Oxford
College is worth ten Flemish. Richard the first, called the Lionhearted, for
the vastness of his spirit, was born here, He who built the walls of Vienna at
his Victorious return from Palestine: It is a great pleasure to pass from
Oxford to Buckinghamshire, to see those numerous herds of sheep which graze
there, and bear excellent Wool. Bedfordshire among other things has such
large fields of Beans and Pease, that it is a great delight to behold them,
for they make the very air redolent, and perfume it with a kind of fragrancy.
The County of Hartford has all Commodities in it. Verolam stands there, famous
for the Protomartyr of Britany, Saint Albons. Middlesex comes next, wherein
there are many memorable places, but that which illustrates all the rest, and
indeed the whole Island, is the potent, and populous vast city of London,
Englands Imperial Chamber; one of the greatest eyes of Christendom. There you
have as proud, and as deep a Navigable River as ever made her bed between
banks, you have an ancient inexpugnable Tower, you have two exchanges, old and
new, of most curious structure, you have the largest Hall at Westminster for
tribunals of Justice of any in the World. The King has diverse Royal Palaces
there: There is a Bridge of ninteen large high Arches over the rapid profound
River of Thames, which would astonish you to behold, and indeed it may be
called one of the wonders of the World, all circumstances considered; you have
in the heart of the City, and the highest piece of ground, the ancient Church
of Saint Paul, one of the stateliest piles of stone that ever was reard: this
stately Temple is founded upon Faith; for underneath there is another
subterranean Parish Church, which is a rarity that no other I know of has
through all the Christian World. There is Westward a large Abbey, the sight
whereof would strike devotion into the beholder, and a most curious Chapel
annexed thereunto, called Henry the sevenths Chapel, which, as Leland says,
may be called Orbis miraculum. And judge you if London in the time of William
the Conqueror could send out forty thousand foot, and twenty thousand horse, as
the Annals have it, how many would she be able to set forth now that she is
more opulent, more peopled, and greater in all dimensions by the 6d. part; for
her Suburbs are of more extent then her self, so that some have compared her to
a narrow crowned hat with broad brimms. There are more parish Churches there
then in Rome, viz. 122. There are diverse Hospitals, both for Orphans, which
come to above 600. and other poor people of both sexes above 1200. in so much
that one may say that poverty is no where better housed and fed then there.

I go now from London to Essex, a most fruitful and well hedged Country:
among other things she is famous for John Hawknood, whom the Italians, among
whom he was so well known, call Aucutho; nor was he more known than honored by
them; for in regard of the rare documents he gave for Military discipline, the
Senate of Florence raised a Statue and Tomb for him. There is old Walden in
that Country, where excellent Saffron grows; there is Colchester, where the
best Oysters are, and Dunmow, which has the proverb for the best Bacon. I pass
to Suffolk, a spritefull pleasant Country; and Doctor Despotino, an Italian
Physician, affirmed that the healthfullest air under heaven, is that which
moves over Saint Edmondsberry. That famous Navigator, Sir Thomas Cavendish, who
sailed about the World, makes this Country famous for his Nativity there.
Norfolk lies next, a County full of acute wits, and abounding with Lawyers;
Norwich is the Metropolis, a large City, and full of Artisans; for there are
hardly found so many Loomes any where. Now comes in Cambridgeshire, a
self-sufficient County, where the ancient Academy of Cambridge stands still
flourishing with scientificall wits, and rare acute capacities in all
professions, in all faculties and knowledge, and reputed all the world over for
a most learned University: and she must needs be so, being so near allied to
Oxford, as to be her only Sister, and having such stately seats for the Muses,
though the circumjacent soil, and site on Camus banks be not so pleasant as
that which stands on Isis. Huntingdonshire her neighbor is famous for rural
Philosophy; upon a time the Town of Gormonchester entertained the King, in a
kind of pomp, with ninescore Ploughs. Northampton is full of noble Towns,
Villages, and Churches, whereof most are of a Danish built; for you shall
behold at once in some places, thirty holy Pyramids or Steeples as you pass
along, and the field covered all over with sheep. Leicestershire does benefit
all her neighbors, and warm them with her Cole-mines, which she distributes up
and down. Lincoln was used to be a well devoted County; for in her chief Town
there are half a hundred of Churches, whereof the Minster or Cathedral Church
is one of the most conspicuous and visiblest Church in the World. Notingham for
delightful prospects has not her fellow; there you have true Troglodits, as
on the Mountains of the Moon in Ethiopia, that hew their houses out of Rocks.
This Country is singular for Liquorish. Derby lies next, famous for the best
Ale; on the West parts her bowels are pregnant with excellent lead, in so much
that the Chemists say that the Planet Saturn, who presides over Lead, is more
benign to the English than to the French. Warwick excels for Fabrarian
inventions, for Smiths work. Worcester for Salt Pits, and delicate Sider; for
Pears and Apples grow there, as also in Gloucestershire, up and down the Hedges
and Highwayes. Among other Fish which the Severn, which waters her soil, does
afford, Salmon is one, and it is the best in the world, which the Romans
confessed. The Trent, called so for thirty species of Fishes that she breeds,
does make Staffordshire of extraordinary account; others will have that River
called so, because that thirty other Rivers do pay her tribute, and disemboke
into her. There is in this County a Lake of an admirable nature, that no beast
will enter into, though pursued never so close by dogs; for they will rather
dye than go in: and as Necham has it, this Lake is Prophetique; for when her
waters roar, it is a presage of some ill.

Rugitu lacus est eventus praeco futuri,
Cujus aquis fera se credere nulla solet:
Instet odora canum virtus, mors instet acerba,
Non tamen intrabit exagitata lacum.
Shropshire for amenity of soil, and neatness of well paved streets, yields to
none; She is a Peninsula, compassed about every where with the Severn, except
one little neck of land, so that she bears the form of a horshooe. Cheshire
her neighbor is the Shire of men; she affords also good store of salt; there
is no Shire that is fuller of Gentry. Hereford is a delicate little County,
very frugiferous; for passengers as they go along the highwayes may pluck
Apples, Pears, and Plums off the trees without offense; she has good store of
Marble, and her Lemsters ore, or wool, yields nothing in finess to the Spanish,
or that of Apulia and Tarentum; and judge you of the salubrity and wholsomnesse
of this County, when in the Town of Hereford, there was a Morrisdance of ten
men taken up on the Welsh side, that made above a thousand years betwixt them,
the one supplying what the other wanted of a hundred; and one Philip Squire the
Tabourer, and Bess Gwin the Maidmarian, were above a hundred a piece.
Caermarthan, old Maridunum, the Court of the British Kings, is a gentile
County. Giraldus speaks of a Well there that in imitation of the sea does ebb
and flow every four and twenty hours. Then you have Pembrockshire, where there
are many Families of the Flemish race, that were sent to colonize there by King
Henry, for bridling of the Welsh. This Country is called little England beyond
Wales, because the English tongue is so frequent among them: This County is
also celebrous for Milford Haven, the most comodious and capacious Port in the
world; for a thousand sails of Ships may ride at Anchor there in several
Creeks, and one not in sight of the other; and from hence she takes her
denomination. She has also an ancient stately Temple at Saint David's, called
Menevia, the seat of an Archbishop in times past: it stands in a solitary
by-corner of the whole Isle, a place fittest for contemplation, and for
sequestring the spirits for holy exercises of any upon the earth. Next is
Cardiganshire, which has the River Towy, that affords rare Salmon, which fish
thirsting after fresh water, does use to put himself in a circle, and by a
natural slight taking his tail in his mouth, will spring and leap up three
cubits high over Wears into the fresh water, whence he cannot go back, as
Ausonius has very elegantly.

Nec te puniceo rutilantem vis^cre salmo,
Transierim, latae cujus vaga verbera caudae
Gurgite de medio summas referuntur in undas.
M^n gomery shire has good Horses, Merioneth shire has a famous Lake called
Pimble meare, which the River Deva runs through, and goes out of the same
bigness as she enters; but that which is wonderful, is that there is a Fish
called Guiniad, which the Lake breeds, and cannot abide the river, and the
river has Salmons that cannot abide the Lake water, which Leland describes
very hansomly;

Illud habet certe lacus admirabile dictu,
Quantumvis magna pluvia non aestuat, atqui
Aere turbato, si ventus murmura tollat,
Excrescit subito rapidis violentior undis,
Et tumido superat contemptas flumine ripas.
The River Conow makes Arvon precious, where there are Musles bred, wherein
there are plenty of pearl found, insomuch that I had it from a good hand, that
one of those pearls was sold for two hundred and fifty Crowns. Denbigh and
Flintshire are wholesome high crested Countries. Now for the County of York it
may be called a little Kingdom of it self for the spaciousness of it, being
half as big as all the fix United Provinces in the Netherlands. There is a
famous Quarrey there, whence is dug a Freestone, which is soft at first,
but receives hardness and incrustation by the air. There is also a rare Well,
called Dropping Well, which transmutes wood into stone; there is Mougrave
Castle, where there is good store of Rozin, with Jet and Agat stones, which is
ranked among Jewels, as Marbodaeus sings wittily,

Nascitur in Lycia lapis, and prope gemma Gagates,
Sed genus eximium faecunda Britannia mittit,
Lucidus and niger est, levis and levissimus idem,
Vicinas paleas t^ahit attritu calefactus,
Ardet aqua lotus, restinguitur unctus olivo.
Among other properties of this Stone, it burns in water, and that burning is
extinguished only by oil.

In this Province stands Scarborough Castle highly mounted; the Sea underneath
is almost as full of fish as of water, and this the Hollanders know well, when
they fish there for Herring, with the leave of the Castle, not otherwise; so
that it may be said the English do reserve the honor to themselves, but pass
over the profit to others. There is Rippon Temple, famous for Saint VVilfrids
Needle, which is a hole to try the chastity of women, and only the honest can
pass through it: There is Halifax, who has a peculiar mode of punishment,
which is an axe tied to a pulley, which falls down upon the neck of the
Malefactor, and chops it off in a trice, and heretofore they were used to
punish first, and examine the cause afterward. In this County there is a jolley
Port Town called Kingston upon Hull, which has the true resemblance of a
Low Country Town; for she lies so low and flat, that she can inound and
overwhelm the Country four miles land-ward. The Metropolis of this County is
Eboracum, called York, where a high Provincial Magistrate was used to keep
Court, to determine all causes from Trent to Tweed. This City has been famous
for the residence of Emperors; for Severus had his Palace here, Antoninus
Augustus died here, and breathing his last he said, Turbatam Rempublicam ubique
accepi, pacatam Britannis relinquo, I found the Commonwealth full of troubles,
I leave it peaceable. A hundred years after Severus, Flavius Valerius
Constantinus having got Constantin the Great by his former Wife Helene, a
British Lady, kept his Court here. I will now to Richmondshire, whose
Mountains swell with three several Commodities, with Brass, Lead, and Cole:
The River Swale runs hard by, celebrous and sacred in regard the story
speaks of ten thousand Pagans that were baptized and regenerated there in one
day by Paulinus: Here dwells the fruitful race of the Metcalfs, whereof one of
them being Sherif, brought three hundred of his own name in Blew-coats to wait
on the Itinerant Judges at the Grand Sessions. There confines to the Province
of York, the Bishopric of Durham, a County Palatine, whereof the Bishop is
perpetual Sherif, there is a sumptuous ancient Cathedral Church belongs to
it, and the soil is so fat, that the fertility thereof does contend with the
labor of the Tiller. Then there is Lancashire, that brings forth goodly Oxen
with larger horns than ordinary; besides that Country produces the handsomest
and best favour'dst women of any in the whole Island. Westmerland excells in
the Town of Kendall for curious Artists in all sorts of Wool. Cumberland is
singular for abundance of Fish, and does upbrayd the negligence of the
Inhabitants, who might make a far greater emolument of them; there runs
there the precious River of Irt, which affords plenty of Pearl. This County
also has Mines of Copper, amongst which is found some Gold ore; which Mines
were first discovered by a Countryman of ours, Gemanus Augustan; insomuch that
Caesar and Cicero were in the wrong, when one says, that he was forced to
bring brass to Britany for Coining of Money, and the other says, neque
Argenti scrupulum ullum esse in Insula Britannica; for in Cardigan in Wales,
there is both a Silver Mine, and a Mint, which emploies about three hundred men
every day in the week, and makes them rich returns. And for other Minerals,
there is not only enough to satisfy the Natives, but to furnish other parts
of the World besides, which is done by frequent transportation. The most
Northern County of England is Northumberland, which is full of Warlike stout
people; for every Gentleman's house there is built Castlewise, with Turrets and
Motes.

I have hitherto most noble Princes spoken of the best part of Great Britain,
which is England. I will now cross Offa's Dike, which is a continued Mount of
Earth that extends from Sea to Sea, which the Romans did cast up to make a
partition twixt England and Scotland; there is another Water-partition that
Nature has put betwixt them, which is the Tweed; but before I part with
England, I will give you that Character which Pope Innocent the 4th. gave of
her. Anglia est vere hortus deliciarum, and puteus inexhaustus, England, says
he, is a true Garden of delicacies, and an inexhaustible Well. But there is not
any, who can make a true estimate of England, but he who has seen her -- auget
praesentia famam. Touching this Elogium of mine, I confess it too barren to
set forth her fertility.

I will now to Scotland, which by King James was united to England, he was the
first who may be said to break down the partition wall by way of descent,
Henricus Rosas, Regna Iacobus. Henry the eighth joined the two Roses, and King
James joined the two Kingdoms. And here it is worth the observing, how Keneth
the Pict being utterly destroyed, carried with him a fatal stone out of
Ireland, and placed it in a wooden chair in Scone-Monastery, with this
inscription engraven upon it.

Ni fallat Fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
If Fate fails not, The Scots where e're they find
This stone, there they shall reign, and rule mankind.
This Northern Kingdom is fenced with the same salt ditch as England is. It is
much longer then it is in latitude, in so much that there is never a house
there that is much above twenty miles distant from the Sea. There is plenty of
Fish, Foul and Flesh there. In Sutherland there are Mountains that afford
fair white Marble, and among the craggs of Craford there was a Gold Mine
discovered in the time of James the fourth. But that which redounds most to the
glory of Scotland, is, that they can show a cataloge of Kings for above twenty
ages, which come to the number of 109. from Fergusius to Charles the first.
There has a strong ancient league been struck betwixt this Nation and the
French, who confederated always with them against England upon all occasions.
In so much that the French King has a guard of Scots ever about his person,
called la Guard de la manche; then there is a guard of Swisse, and the French is
last.

I pass now from Scotland to Ireland, which is no long voyage, it is but
twelve leagues distance over a working and angry Sea, full of Rocks and little
Islands, whereof there are hundreds about the two Isles called the Orcades and
Hebrides. Ireland is a Noble and very considerable Region, if you explore
either the fatness of the soil, the convenience of Ports and Creekes, the
multitudes of fresh Rivers, and huge loughs, as also the Inhabitants who are a
robust^, nimble, and well timbred people. In so much that Giraldus says,
Naturam hoc Zephyri regnum benigniori oculo respexisse, Nature did look upon
this Western Kingdom with a more benign aspect then ordinary: The temper of the
air is such, that neither the summer solstice forces them to seek shades or
Caves against the violence of the heat, and in the Winter solstice they may
make a shift to be without fire against the rigor of the cold. There are cattle
there in an incredible abundance; In so much that in one of the four Provinces
alone, there were reckoned there hundred and twenty thousand head of cattle at
one time. Bees do thrive and swarm there infinitely in hollow trees up and
down, as well as in hives. They were Christians with the first, for Saint
Patrik, a Britain born, did convert them, where he did many miracles. They so
adore the memory of him, that it is a common saying among them, That if Christ
had not been Christ when he was Christ, Saint Patrik had been Christ. Hereupon
many famous men flourished in Ireland, both for sanctity of the life and
Doctrine, which the Roman Ecclesiastic history speaks of, as Caelius Sedulius
the Priest, Columba, Colmannus, Aidanus, Gallus Kilianus, Maydulphus,
Brendanus, and diverse of a holy and austere Monastique life, who contemned the
World, with the vanity and riches thereof. For it is recorded of Columbanus,
who being offered great matters by one of the Kings of France,) if he would not
depart the Country, (as Eusebius writes also of Thaddeus, he answered, non
decere videlicet ut alienas divitias amplecterentur, qui Christi nomine suas
dereliquissent, It was not fitting that any should embrace other men's riches,
who for Christ's sake had abandoned their own. Nay, it is recorded in good
story, that the Saxons (now English) crossed over those stormy Seas to the mart
of learning, which was then famous in Ireland, so that you shall find it often
mentioned in the English Annalls, how such a one amandatus est in Hyberniam ad
disciplinam, he was sent to Ireland to be taught, and in the life of Sulgenus,
who lived near upon 700. years since, these verses are found.

Exemplo patrum commotus amore legendi,
Ivit ad Hybernos sophia mirabile claros.
According to the example of his Ancestors, he went to Ireland for love of
learning, who were marvellously famous for wisdom and knowledge. This Island
does partake with Creet, now Candie, in one property, which is, that she
produces no Venomous creature, as Toads, Vipers, Snakes, Spiders, and the
like; and if any be brought thither, they die. It is wonderful what huge
confluences of birds do flutter about the shores of this Island, as also of
Scotland, which offuscate the broad face of Heaven sometimes, and likewise such
huge shoales of Fish. A thousand things more might be spoken of these Islands
which are fitter for a Volume then a Panegyrical Oration. I will end with the
end of the World, and that is the I Will of Shetland, which most of your great
Geographers take to be that ultima Thule that terminates the Earth, which lies
under 63. degrees, and the most Northern point of Scotland.

And now most Noble Princes since the most generous I Will of Great Britain, and
her handmaid Islands, which indeed are without number, does as it were overflow
with abundance of all commodities that conduce to the welfare and felicity of
mankind, and is able to afford her neighbors enough besides, as the Hollander
confesses, when he says, that he lives partly upon the Idleness and
superfluity of the English: Since the ancient Britains were the first
displayers of Christianity in most part of the Western World; Since of late
years they have been such Navigators, that they have swom like Leviathans to
both the Indies, yea, to the other Hemisphere of the Earth among the Antipodes;
since that in the Newfound World they have so many Colonies, Plantations and
Islands; yea, a good part of the Continent of America annexed to the Crown of
England. And since that Her inhabitants for Comelines and courage, for arts and
arms, as the Romans themselves confessed, whose conquests in other places had
no horizon -- Invictos Romano Mart Britannos; I say, that all circumstances
and advantages Maturely considered, Great Britain may well be a Candidate, and
conte nd for priority, and the Dictatorship with other Provinces of Europe. For
my part, according to the motto upon Saint George his Garter, Honey soit quimaly
pense, let him be beraid who thinks any hurt by holding this opinion, which
nevertheless I most humbly submit to this Princely Tribunal.

ANOTHER ORATION OF THE Lord WOLF ANGUS, BARON of STUBENBERG. For GREAT BRITAIN.
Most Illustrious President and Princes,
MY most dear Lord and Cosen, the Baron of Eubeswald, has made an Elogium of
the noble I Will of Great Britain, as copious, and as full of Eloquence, as the
I Will itself is full of all things that are requisite for humane accommodation:
but most humbly under favor in this survey there are some things pretermitted,
which are peculiar to Great Britain, and worthy the taking notice of; one is
the generous, strong-bodied, and dauntless race of Dogs, which that* I Will
produces, whereof Claudian makes mention.

Magnaque taurorum fracturi colla Britanni. Britain has Dogs that will break
the huge necks of Bulls: I do not mean by these Bulls those fierce and truculent
White-buls which are found in the woody Caledonian hills of Scotland (who are so
wild, that they will not touch any thing that men have handled, or blown upon)
for they cannot only repel, but they contemn the assaults of any Dog. It was
the custom of the Romans, to bring in huge Irod Cages the British Dogs to
Rome, which in their Amphitheatres were put to tugge with huge wild beasts;
therefore there was an Officer called Procurator Cynegi^ in Britannis
Ventensis, The Keeper of the Dog-house among the Britains, which Cuiacius would
have to be Gynaecii, not Cynegii, viz. a Workhouse for Women, not a Kennell
for Dogs: And Pancirollus is of the same opinion, when he says, Gynaecia
illa constituta fuisse texendi^ principis, militumque vestibus, navium velis,
stragulis, linteis, and aliis ad instruendas mansiones necessariis, That those
Gynecia, or Female Workhouses were appointed to weave Garments for the Prince
and Soldiery, as also Sails for Ships, Beds, Tents, and other necessaries for
furnishing of houses. But Wolfangus Lazius holds to the first opinion,
Procuratorem illum canes Imperatoribus in illa Venta curavisse, That the said
Procurator did keep and provide Dogs for the Emperor. Strabo says further,
that Britanni canes erant milites, the English Dogs were Soldiers, and the old
Gauls made use of them so accordingly in their Wars.

They are also rare Animals for Hunting, and herein it is wonderful what
Balaeus has upon record, that two hundred and seventy years before the
Incarnation, Dordanilla, King of Scotland, did commit to writing certain
precepts for Hunting, and to be observed by his subjects, which are yet in
force.

Great Britain has also the most generous and sprightfull Cocks of any
Country, and it is a great pleasure to be in one of their Pits at that sport,
where one shall behold a Cock fight out his eyes, and yet retain still his
natural vigor to destroy the other; and if these brute Animals, Beasts and
Birds be thus extraordinary courageous, we may well think the rational
creatures may hold analogy with them.

THE ORATION OF THE LORD DANIEL VON WENSIN, AGAINST GREAT BRITAIN.
Most Excellent Lord President, and Princes,
NOw, that I am to speak of the Britains, I will begin my Oration with that of
Ausonius, Nemo bonus Britto est -- No good man is a Britain, which ever since
grew to be a Proverb. God forbid this should be verified of all, but I believe
I shall rectify the judgment of those noble princes who spoak before me, that
(as I observed when I sojourned there) neither the Country of Great Britain,
nor her Inhabitants are generally so good as they by their persuasive and
powerful Oratory would induce you to give credit unto. For as the English sea
is unfaithful, and from Beerfleet in Normandy almost to the midst of the
channel is full of rocks and illfavourd ragged places (wherein prince William,
son to Henry the first, and Heir apparent to England and Normandy, was cast
away by shipwreck, together with his sister, and a great many noble personages
besides) so the nature of the Britains may be said to be full of craggs and
shelfs of sands, that virtue cannot sail safely among them without hazarding a
wreck. England is not such a paradis, nor the Angli such Angeli (though styld
so by a Popes mouth) which you make them to be, most Illustrious Baron of
Ewbeswald. First, for the Country it self it is not sufficiently inhabited,
notwithstanding there be some Colonies of Walloons and Hollanders among them.
The earth does witness this, which wants culture, and the sea is a greater
witness that wants fishermen; Touching the first, it is a mere desert in some
places, having no kind of agriculture, though she be capable of it; And for the
other, the Hollanders make more benefit upon their coasts then they themselves,
and which is a very reproachful thing, they use to buy their own fish of them.
It Is incredible how many hundreds of Busses they of Holland put forth every
year, and what infinite benefit they make thereof. Therefore Gount Gondamar the
Spanish Ambassador had some reason to say, that the King of Great Britain had a
richer mine upon his coasts (meaning fishing) then his Master had, either at
Mexico or Peru, if he knew how to make right use of them; some of the Charibbi
Islands also, which the English have as Antego, Mevis, and others, which have
not near the number of men which should colonize them, show the scarcity of the
peeple of Britain, or which is worse, their sloth.

Now, touching the Inhabitants of Great Britain it is well known, as the sea
tumbleth perpetually about the Country, so their brains do fluctuat in their
noddles, which makes them so variable and unsteady; And herein they are little
inferior to their next transmarin neighbors the French, only they use to come
short of them in point of counsel and policy, wherein the French has been too
hard for them in all Treaties. But they exceed the French in superstitious
kinds of vanities, specially, (as many writers brand them) with prophecies, and
old Milesian tales, being very apt in arduous and important businesses to
suffer their belief to be transported that way; and as Tages was to the
Hetruscans,

Indigenae dixere Tagen, qui primus Hetruscam
Edocuit gentem casus aperire futuros.
So Merlin of Caermarthen the son of an Incubus left behind him some things
which they believe as Oracles, though they be mere Orestes dreams. To this
Merlin I may add that Arch-Heretick Pelagius (whose true name was Morgan, an
old British name) who in Europe, Afrique, and Asia, belchd out such pernicious
opinions, as Prosper said,

Pestifero vomuit Coluber sermon Britannus,

Like a poisonous Viper he vomited much venom;

But in point of solid learning the English are much degenerated from what they
were, they are grown more flashy, and superficial, and nothing so pious as
they used to be; where shall we find now among them a Winfred, an Alcuin, a
Bid, men that converted whole Nations? Yet this must be imputed to their
supinesse and sloth, rather then to decay of Nature in their intellectualls.
Now, in point of idleness the women sympathize with their men, who have not
only their faces, but their hands masked with leather, for fear their skin
should be too much hardened with working; And for their femalls they seem to be
Hermaphrodits at first appearance, for they use to wear hatts as men do, with
toting feathers in them. There cannot be found now among them such a woman as
Queen Anne was, daughter to the Emperor Charles the fourth, married to Richard
the second, who first reformed that wanton, unseemly fashion of riding astride
on horseback. Their men of late years are arrand pirates; one of them, called
captain Ward, did do Christendom one of the greatest mischiefs that ever was
done, by teaching the Art of piracy, and a better way of building ships to the
picaroons of Algier and Tunis. They go roving abroad to other seas, when their
own might find them work enough, if they would make use of the commodities they
afford. They are but dull for invention, whereas it is true they use to add
something when they have seen a thing; For matter of manufactures of cloth,
and Kersies with other woollen stuffs, they were Flemmins that taught them
first, as also all goldsmiths work, and argentry, with judgment in Jewels. Add
hereunto that it is the proper humor of the English to be arrogant, high minded
and proud, yea in foreign Countries; where if they have a little language, they
will keep such a magnifying of their own Island, that it is fastidious to hear
them. Nor of any other Nation can they agree among themselves when they are
abroad, specially the Merchants, who are envious, and repine at one another
profit; and so ready to cut one another throat. When the Prince of Wales was
in Spain, thinking to have the Infanta for his wife, it was observed that the
carriage of the English was very insolent there; for some of them being dieted
in the Kings House, they would fall a vilifying the Spanish fare, extolling
ever and anon the good beef of England; which was so much taken notice of, that
it did much hurt to the treaty of the match.

There is a saying, and it is a true one, That England may be called the Hell of
Horses, the Purgatory of servants, and the Paradis of Women. Touching the
first, the English take a great pride in galloping, and post it on the high
way, as if they were going for a ghostly father, a midwife, or a physician for
one mortally sick, though indeed there be no cause of any have at all; and then
the poor beast is thrust into some cold corner, all in a water, where he
commonly contracts some distemper. Then have you huge long Races, whereof there
are many hundreds in England, wherein a poor sprightfull horse is rid off his
legs, and made to spend his very lungs, having holes in his flank that will
hide rowell and beam. And in this kind of pastime, there is more cunning, and
rooking then in Cards and Dice, or any other sport. Then for their Carrs and
Carts they are so unmeasurably laden, that the track does not only spoil the
pavements of the streets and highwaies as they pass, but oftentimes it seems
to break the very heart strings of the poor passive animal; insomuch that of
any Nation that holy Text is least observed by the English, A good man is
merciful to his beast.

England is the Purgatory of Servants; for they live no where in so much
slavery: the poor Footman must keep pace with his Master when he gallops in
Hunting, they are sent upon arrands forty, fifty miles a day. The Apprentices,
though Gentlemen's sons of good extraction, sometimes are put to fetch
tankards of water, carry coals, to sweep the gutters, and do other as servile
offices, as slaves do in other Countries; and Servingmen must not offer to put
on their hats, though it rain, or the weather be never so cold, standing before
their Master; which makes me think on a facetious tale of a German Gentleman,
who having entertained an English servant, and riding before him through a
rough foard, where the horses stayed to drink, and the servant keeping his hat
in his hand, though the wind blew hard, his Master smiled upon him saying, Put
on thy hat fool; for our horses drink no healths.

But you will say that England is the Paradise of Women: then it is either for
the extraordinary respect the husbands bear them by permitting them to be
always at the upper end of the Table (whither their lightness carries them
sometimes) or for their extraordinary beauty. To the first I have nothing to
say; but for the second, it is true, they are molded commonly of good flesh and
blood, and have sanguine clear complexions, but they are withal phlegmatic and
dull, and many thousands of them are so massy and big, that they seem men
rather than women, unless they were distinguished by their clothes.

Now touching the haughtiness of mind that is natural in the English, there
is one notable example in the person of Nicolas Breakspeare, born at Langley in
Hartfordshire, who, being elevated to the Popedom by the name of Adrian the
fourth, came to such a height of arrogance, that he rebuked the Emperor for
writing his name before him in a certain Instrument. And being to hold the
stirrup while that Adrian mounted, he took hold of the wrong; but a little fly
cured in him this humor of pride, who getting into his throat choakt him, and
so made him low enough. With such a spirit of pride was Thomas Wolsey
possessed, who was at once Chancellor, Archbishop, and Cardinal, though a
Butchers Son of Ipswich by blood. Charles the fifth in his Letters subscribed
himself his Son and Cosen; for indeed he had a design for the advantage of his
affairs, as they stood then, to advance him to the Popedom after the decease of
Leo the tenth; but when the Emperor had exalted Adrian the sixth, a Brewers
son, his Tutor, in lieu of the Butcher his Cosen, to the Chair, and having
denied him also the Archbishopric of Toledo, he grew so implacable to the
Emperor, that he set all wheels a going to make both England and France to
bandy against him. He therefore began to whisper some surmises into Henry's
ear touching Katharine of Aragon his Queen, Whether the match was consonant
to the holy Scriptures, she having been his eldest brothers wife before; and he
raised this doubt the rather, because the said Queen had miscarried so often in
Childbirth of Male Princes. The Cardinal knowing his Masters humor, might well
think that this would make impressions within him, and so recommended unto him
the Lady Margaret, Sister to the King of France; but when this scruple was
thrust into the Kings thoughts, and that a Divorce was procurable, he did not
look toward France, but he cast his eyes upon Anne, daughter to Sir Thomas
Bolen, having no regard to Majesty, but beauty and lust. This cooled Wolsey
from negotiating the said Divorce, and made him spinne out the time by
tergiversations and delays; which his Master perceiving, his favor began to
decline toward him, and so he died, some say, out of apprehension of grief,
others say by poison. This Wolsey was a man of a notable high spirit, and vast
designs, and among other passages which discovered it, one was, that having
built a College in Oxford, he put his own Arms before the Kings, with this
Motto, Ego and Rex meus, I and my King: which, as one wittily said, might be
true by the rule of Grammar, which tells us that the first person is more worthy
than the third, but the Moral rule tells us otherwise. He had such a splendid
magnificent Family, than an Earl, nine Barons, and I cannot tell how many
Knights and Squires, with near upon four hundred were his domestique servants;
there were all likewise choice personable men whom he entertained, so that
after his fall, diverse of them came to be the Kings servants.

After Pride comes in the Lust and Luxury of the English; It stands upon good
record how Pope Boniface writ to King Etheobald in these words, Gentes Anglorum
spretis legalibus connubiis adulterando and luxuriando ad instar Sodomiticae
gentis faedam vitam ducere; The English Nation forsook their lawful Wives, and
like a Sodomiticall people spent their lives in Adultery and Luxury. There was
one of the Henry's left thirteen Bastards behind him, as some write; and it
was more than probable that Anne of Bolen (who was called in France, La Mule du
Roy, and l'haquenee d'Angleterre, The Kings Mule, and the English hackney) I
say, according to some Writers, it was more than probable, that she was both
Daughter and Wife to the eighth Henry: Among others, one inference was, that
when Sir Francis Brian, who was a facetious Knight, asked the King what it was
to lie with the Daughter and the Mother, It was no more, said he, than to eat
the hen first, and the chicken after. This King married six several Wives,
whereof the second and the fifth he chopped off their heads with an Axe; the first
and fourth he repudiated; the third was destroyed in childbearing; the sixth he
left behind him. This was that merciless Prince who signed a Warrant for
beheading some Noblemen upon his very deathbed, and being much troubled in
conscience, as he was taking his farewell of the world, the last word he
breathed out to the Bishop by him, was, All is lost, all is lost, and so
expired, to go before the Tribunal of Heaven to give account of his life,
wherein he had confessed before, that He had never spared man in his rage, nor
woman in his lust.

But you say that the English are strenuous and stout: they might be such in
former ages, but now they are much degenerated, their wars are now in
Tap-houses and Tobacco-shops; for since Drake brought that enchanting Nicotian
Drugge from the Indies against crudities and rheums, the use thereof is so
frequent in England, that it is incredible; the very Impost of that Indian
smoke alone amounting to more than Queen Elizabeth received in custom for all
commodities whatsoever. In Ireland also this Weed is taken excessively in
sneezing, which the Husbandman at the Plough-taile, and the servant maid at the
washing block do use to suck into their nostrils to beget new spirits in them
when they are tired with labor. King James was a great enemy to this smoke,
and when he was a Hunting if any fogge or mist would rise up to interrupt his
sport, he would swear that Beelzebub was then taking Tobacco; and being once
surprised with a great shower of rain, and forced to go to a Pigstie for
shelter, he caused a pipe of Tobacco to be taken, that one stink, as extremes
use to do, might drive out another. Moreover since the English have been
accustomed to have Beer for their beverage so much, not using so universally
the old drink of England, which is Ale; the Hop by its inflammation has made
them more subject to diseases, filled them with gravel, and so troubled them
with the Stone, Strangury, and Coliques. These with drinking such sophisticated
Wines, has much enervated the English Nation in point of strength, which in
former times was such, that they could draw an arrow of an Ell long, and make
the Gray-goose-wing fly through the heart of France. And now that I speak of
Wine, it is so adulterated in England, that it drinks in some places like a
Potion; and I believe as many dye there by drinking bad Wines, as of any other
disease; for indeed all Vintners are Brewers in England, they mix French Wines
with Syder, the Spanish with milk, and feed other Wines with flesh very
frequently.

Now for the Valor of the English in France, whereof the noble Baron has
spoken so much, they were very valiant indeed, when a silly Shepherdess, Anne
d' Arc did beat them away from before Orleans, pursued them to Paris, and so
drive them over the Seine to Normandy, and when they could not be revenged of
this Maid in the Field, being taken by a Stratageme, they cut her off by a
forged accusation, that she was a Sorceresse forsooth. Then was the time, if
the English had comported themselves like men of prowess and policy, to have
reduced all France under a perpetual subjection, King Charles the seventh
being driven to such streights, that he was constrained to fly to Bourges, and
so for the time was in a jeering way called King of Berry. But that notable
maid at her execution being tied to the stake was nothing daunted, but left
prosperity and victory for a legacy to her Country men, till the English
should be beaten quite out of France, as they were afterward; for being driven
and dogged as far as Calais, they kept that a while, but afterward they were
by a writ of ejectment published by sound of drum and trumpet, as also by the
Canon and Musket of the Duke of Guise, thrust out of Calais, and so casheer'd
quite out of France; which sunck so deep, and made such black impressions of
sorrow upon the heart of Queen Mary of England, that she would often say, if
she were opened after death, the town of Calais would be found Engraven in her
heart. Now for the piety, goodness and virtue of the English, which the noble
Baron did so much magnify, you may judge what it was in those days by the
ingenuous confession of an English Captain, who when he had trussed up his bagg
and bagage to go for England, as he was going out of the gate he in a geering
way was asked, O Englishmen, when will you back again to France? The Captain
with a sad serious countenance answered, When the sins of France are greater
then the sins of England, then will the English return to France. Nor indeed
had the French much cause to affect the English, in regard of their insolence
and cruelty, whereof there be diverse examples: for in some good successes they
had, the victory was more bloody then the battaill, cutting of prisoners off in
cold blood for their greater security. But the English must needs be cruel in
a Foreign Country, when they use to be so in their own. What a barbarous act
was that of Edward the fourth, to clapp up his own brother, George Duke of
Clarence, in prison, and afterward to drown him in a butt of Muscadin, by a
new invention of death. But to descend to nearer times, what an act of immanity
and ignoblenes was that in Queen Elizabeth, when she promised safety and welcome
to Mary Queen of Scotts, and Dowager of France, if she came to England, for
preventing the machinations of her rebellious subjects against her, and
afterward to suffer her to be hurried from one prison to another for twenty
years, and then to suffer her head to be chopped off, and by a cunning kind of
dissimulation to lay the fault upon Davison her secretary, and throw the blood
into his face, under pretense that he sent the warrant for her execution
without her knowledge? Truly this was a most inglorious act, and the reproach
of it will never be worn out, but will stick as a black spot to England while
she is an Island, nor can all the water of the Sea about her wash off the stain,
but it will continue still indelible. But it is the more strange, that Queen
Elizabeth should do this, a Queen that had been herself bred up a good while
in the school of affliction, and might be said to have come from the Scaffold
to the Throne, I say it is strange that she should not be more sensible of
another calamity. Dido the Pagan Queen out of a sweet tenderness could say, Non
ignara mali miseris succurrere disco, and it had more becom'd Queen Elizabeth
to have said so, being a Christian Queen. That Queen Elizabeth should do this
to her own Cosen, and sister Queen, one as good as herself, who after an
invitation to England would never suffer her to have the comfort of her
presence all the while; That Queen Elizabeth who was cried up and down the
world to be so just, so virtuous, so full of clemency should do this, it does
aggravat the fact much more then if another had done it. I must confess she
lost much repute abroad for it; Satyrs, pasquills, and invectives being made
in every corner of Christendom: among others I will recite unto you one that
was belched out in France, which was thus,

Anglois vous dites qu'entre vous
Un seul loup vivant on ne trouve,
Non, mais vous avez une Louve
Pire qu'un million de loups.
No Wolfs ye Englishmen do say
Live in your I Will, or beasts of prey,
No, but a Wolfesse you have one
Worse then a thousand Wolfs alone.
Among other Kings and Queens of England the example of this Queen and her
Father may serve to verify the saying of Porphyrius which you alleged, most
noble Baron, Britannia fertilis Provincia Tyrannorum; That Great Britanny is a
province fruitful for Tyrants. Now Nimrod was called the Robustus Venator, the
strong Hunter, which the Divines do interpret to be a mighty Tyrant; And
certainly the chasing and hunting of beasts, the killing of them, the washing
of the Kings hands in their blood, and feasting with them afterward, must
needs make the minds of princes more ferocious, and less inclinable to
clemency; wherefore they have a wholesome law in England, that no Butcher who is
habituated to blood may be capable to be a Juryman to give verdit upon any man's
life. The Nobles of England may in some kind be called Carnificers of some
sorts of beasts, as the buck, and the do; with other such poor harmeles
creatures, whereof some have no gall in them: for having wounded them first,
and then worried them down with their dogs, at last as a signal of victory
they bath their fingers in the blood of the poor animal, which they call to
take the essay; but certainly this must conduce to obdurat human hearts, and as
it were flesh them in blood. Now it is well known there are no Kings on earth
such great hunters as the English, and who have more of variety of sport in
that kind then any, for there are more Forests, Chaces, and Parks (besides
variety of Royal palaces) annexed to the Crown of England then to any other of
Europe, which might make the Country far more copious of corn, fuller of
cattle, and have fewer beggars, if they were made arable grounds, or turned to
pasturage. Moreover the English Kings may not improperly be called Nimrods, as
Bodin has it herein, considering what rigorous punishments use to be inflicted
upon the poor peeple, by virtue of the Forest laws. In the book called Liber
Rufus, there was one law enacted in Canutus time, Omnis homo abstineat a
Venerijs meis super poenam vitae, Upon pain of life let every man refrain from
my deer and my hunting places.

The Swainmote Courts have harsh punishments and amercements, and for the poor
Husbandman there is no remedy for him against the Kings dear, though they lie all
night in his corn, and spoil it; Sarisburiensis, a reverend and authentic
Author, comprehends all this in a few words, when he speaks of the
exorbitancies of England in this kind. Quod magis mirere, ait, pedicas parare,
avibus, laqueos texere, allicere nodis aut fistula, aut quibuscunque insidijs
supplantare ex edicto saepe fit genus criminis, and vel proscriptione bonorum
mulctatur, vel membrorum punitur, salutisque dispendio; Volucres coeli, and
pisces maris communes esse audieras, sed hae Fisci sunt, quas venatica exigit
ubicunque volant: manum contine, abstine, ne and tu in poenam laesae majestatis
venantibus caedas in praedam. Anovalibus suis arcentur Agricolae, dum ferae
habeant vagandi libertatem, illis ut pascua augeantur, praedia subtrahantur
Agricolis, sationalia insitiva Colonis, cum pascua armentarijs and gregarijs,
tum alvearia a floralibus excludunt, ipsis quoque apibus vix naturali liberate
uti permissum est. But that which is more to be wondered at, says
Sarisburiensis, is, that to lay netts, to prepare trapps, to allure birds by a
whissle, or to supplant them by any kind of wile becomes oftentimes a kind of
crime by the Edicts of England, and is punished either by amercement, or some
corporal punishment; whereas in other climes the birds of the Air, and the
fish of the Sea are common, but not in England; they belong to the Fisk, or
some particular person; you must hold your hand, and refrain for fear of
comitting treason; The Yeoman is hunted away from his new plowd fields, while
wild beasts have liberty to wander in them at pleasure; nay sometimes cattle
are kept from pasture, and the Bees are scarce permitted to use their natural
liberty of sucking flowers.

But the English tyranny does not terminat only in the King, but it difuseth
it self further among the Nobles; In so much that as Camden relates there were
in King Stephens reign as many tyrants in England as there were Castellans, or
Governors of Castles; Stephani Regis temporibus tot erant in Anglia tyranni,
quot Castellorum Domini; Who arrogated to themselves regal rights and
prerogatives, as coining of money, marshall law, and the like; For now, there
is no Kingdom on earth ( Naples excepted) where there have been more frequent
insurrections then in England: for as the Kings have been noted to be Tyrants,
so the subjects are branded for devils. In the Civil wars that happened in
Comines time there were above fourscore that were slain by the fortune of war,
and otherwise, of the blood Royal, besides the Kings themselves that perished;
Whereupon when the Queen of Scots heard of the fatal sentence that was
pronounced against her, with an intrepid and undaunted heart she said, as an
Author of credit has it, Angli in suos Reges subinde caedibus saevierunt, ut
neutiquam novum sit si etiam in me ex eorum sanguine natam itidem saevierint,
If the English have been often so cruel in the slaughter of their own Kings,
it is no new thing then, that they have grown so cruel to me that am descended
of their blood. What a horrid and destructive conjuration was that subterranean
plot of the Gunpowder Treason? so bloody a design no age can parallel. It was
like the wish of Caligula, who wished the peeple of Rome had had but one neck,
that he might cut it off at one blow; He had it only in wish, but these had a
real attempt to blow up not only the blood Royal, but all the Nobility and
chief Gentry of the Kingdom: And Guido Faux who was to set fire to the powder,
did show so little sign of fear and repentance, that he boldly said, It was
none but the great Devil of Hell who had discovered the plot, and hindered him
from the execution of it; that God Almighty had no hand in the discovery and
prevention of that meritorious work, Which if it had taken effect, one of the
Conspirators said, it would have satisfied for all the sins of his whole life,
had he lived a thousand years after.

And whereas, my Noble Baron, you traveled in your highstrain'd and smooth
Oration through all the Shires of England, and pointed at some things
extraordinary in every one of them; you shall find that they have as many
blemishes as they have blessings. When you extol the Province of Cornwall so
much, you should also have made mention of their Pyrrhocoracas, their
Sea-theeves and Pirates, which are so thick as choughes among them. And whereas
you magnify Drake so much, he was no better then a Corsary, or a Skimmer of
the Seas, and an Archpyrate, who, notwithstanding there was an Ambassador here
resident from Spain, and a firm peace twixt the two Crowns; yet was he
permitted to steal and robb by land as well as by Sea among the subjects of the
King of Spain. Nor did he exercise cruelty on the Spaniards and Indians only,
but upon his own Countrymen; as for example, when he landed at Port San Julian,
and finding a Gallows there, set up by Magellan, he hanged up by his own power
a gentleman better then himself, which was Mr. John Doughty, merely out of
envy, because he might not partake of the honor of his Expeditions. You praise
Devonshire, and the Town of Exeter especially, about which there grows nothing
but thin Oats, and ears without grains in many places; but you should have
remembered, that whereas Henry Duke of that City had married Edward the fourths
Sister, yet in tattered rags, and barefooted, he was forced to beg his bread
up and down in Flanders. Whereas you speak also of Dorsetshire, you should have
called to mind the tyranny of King Henry the third, against de Linde, for
killing one of his Dear, which was made a Heart in White Forest; for which he
was not only amerc'd in a great sum of money, but the Tenants of those
Gentlemen that hunted with him were condemned to pay every year such a tax
called White heart Silver, every year to the Exchequer. You pass also over
Portland, a poor naked Island without Woods or any kind of Fuel, but the ordure
of beasts, which they use for fyring. For Somersetshire, what huge tracts of wast
grounds are found there up and down without Inhabitants, which makes it so
subject to thieves and Robbers? Touching Hampshire, what a large act of
sacrilege did King William commit there, by demolishing diverse Churches, and
taking away the Glebes from God and men the space of thirty miles and upwards,
making it a wild Forest, to plant and people the Country with brute beasts
useful only for his hunting, venery and pleasure. But the judgments of Heaven
fell visibly upon his Children; for Richard his second Son died of a
Pestilential air in the same Forest. William Rufus, another Son of his,
succeeding him in the Kingdom, was killed there also by the glance of an arrow
from Sir Walter Terrell: Henry also his Granchild, Son to Robert his first
begotten, breathed his last there like Absolon, hanging at a bow while he was a
hunting. It Is true that Barkshire has one goodly structure, which is Winsor
Castle; but most of the Country about is inhabited by savage beasts, who may be
said to live better then the people thereabouts. For Surrey, you should have
remembered what a perfidious act Godwin Earl of Kent performed at Guilford; who
betraying to Harald the Dane a young Prince, that was sent from Normandy to
receive the Crown of England, was delivered to Harald the Dane. Sussex is
infamous for the murder of King Sigebert by a Swineheard. And the Province of
Kent will never wash away the foul stain she received for the sacrilegious
murder of Thomas Becket, a Saintlike man; which assassinate was perpetrated in
the very Church near the high Altar: for which crying and flagitious deed, they
say, that the race of the murderers have ever have since a white tuffe of hair
in their heads, and the wind blowing in their faces whersoever they go. For
Glocestershire, her inhabitants there are worthy of reproach, that by idleness
and ignorance they would suffer the Vineyards there to decay utterly, and in
lieu of Wine be content with windy Sider. In Oxfordshire was that lustful
Labarynth made at Woodstock, where Henry the second kept Rosamond his
Concubine, whom the revengful Queen poisoned. Now touching the City of London,
the Metropolis of Great Britain, she may be well called a Monster, for she
being the head, bears no proportion with the rest of the body, but is far too
big for it, and might serve a Kingdom thrice as big; but what Saint Hierom
spoake of Constantinople, Eam nuditate omnium civitatum constructam fuisse,
that she was made up of the nakedness (and ruin) of other Cities, so may
London be said to grow rich out of the poverty of other Towns. She is like the
Spleen in the natural body, by whose swelling the rest of the members pine
away. And herein let me observe the poor policy of the fatheaded English, who
suffer this one Town to be pamperd up, while other places though situated in as
convenient places for Navigation* are ready to starve for want of trade. It Is
true that Queen Elizabeth, King James and King Charles his Son, did put forth
Proclamations for restraint of building in London, and that all the gentry
should retire to their Country dwellings in the Vacation time, and at
Christmas; but these Proclamations were like a fire put under a green wood,
which did flash a little, but suffered presently to go again; so those Royal
Proclamations were put in hot execution for a while, yet they quickly grew cold
again. But indeed such is the crossgrain'd and contumacious perverse nature of
the Londoners, specially the schismatical part, that they suspect, or repine at
any new command that comes from authority. For whereas there was a secure and
comely durable way of structure inordred them, that every one should build for
the future with stone or brick, and not with lath and wood; and that they
should build regularly for the beauty, prospect and evennesse of the streets,
as also that the Houses might not be subject to firing; Yet this obstinate
selfwitted people do stand still in their own light, and fall again to build
with lath and lime, notwithstanding that they know well enough the great
advantages that would redound to the City by the other mode of Edifice: In so
much that in England there is not near that Elegance of building generally as in
other Cities, nor are their streets so straight and lightsome; by reason the
Houses paunch out, and are not so uniform as else where.

I could condescend to the praises you give of Essex and Suffolk, were it not
that in the one, at Saint Edmunds Berry, there have happened so many popular
tumults twixt the Monks and Citizens. And were it not for a sordid tenure that
lands are held by them of Hemingstone, where Baldwin called le Petteur, held
lands from the Crown by sarieanty, pro quibus debuit Die Natali Domini singulis
annis coram Domino Rege Angliae unum saltum, unum suflatum and unum bumbulum,
for which lands he was to pay one leap, one puff, and one crack of the tail,
before the King upon Christmas day, every year under pain of forfeiting his
Tenure! O brave Knight service! O Noble homage! O brave devotion upon the birth
day of Christ.

Touching the Norfolk men, they are naturally wranglers and Cavillers. The
Fenny situation of Cambridge is such, that I cannot wonder sufficiently how
that place should be chosen out to be made a seat for the Muses.
Huntingtonshire Countrymen have such a rustiquenesse, that hardly admits any
civility. Northhampton, and Leicestershire are so bald, that you can hardly see
a tree as you pass through them. The people of Lincolnshire are infested with
the affrightments of Crowlands Daemonical spirits. Notinghamshire does delude
the labor of the husbandman with the Sandinesse of their soil. God deliver us
from the Devils Posteriors at the Peak in Darbishire; Warwik is choked up
with wood, there, as well as in Lincolnshire,

The Ordure of the Sow and Cow
Does make them fire and Soap enough.
I should like Worcester but for cold flatulent Perry. Stafford relates many
odd fables of her Lake, and the River of Trent. In Shropshire the sweating
sickness took its first rise, which dispersed it self not only all England
over, but crossed the Seas, found out and infested English bodies in other
Regions. Chester complains for want of corn to make her bread. In
Herefordshire there are walking Mountains; for in the year 1571. about 6. of
the clock in the evening, there was a hill with a Rock underneath, did rise up
as if she were awaken out of a long sleep, and changing her old bed, did remove
herself to a higher place, carrying with her trees, and folds of sheep, she
left a gap behind of forty foot broad, and eighty else long, the whole piece
of earth was above twenty Acres, and the motion lasted above a natural day,
that the said Moantain was in travel. Radnor with her crags would frighten
one; for the rest of Wales, though the inhabitants be courteous and ancient,
yet the country swells with such a conglobation of Mountains, that strangers
would be hardly invited to visit her; which Mountains in some places are so
high, and yet so near one to another, that Shepherds may talk one to another
from the tops of them, and not be able to meet one another in a whole day, by
traversing from one Mountain to the other, through the valley, and precipices
underneath.

Touching the large Province of York, whereas you aver that Constantine and
his Mother Helen were Britains, and born there, Nicephorus makes a question of
it, and would have them to be of Bithynia. Toward Richmond there are such
squalid uncouth places, and horrid Mountains, that the English themselves call
them the Northern Alps, and there be such roaring streams of water which rush
out of them, that the inhabitants name them Hell-becks, that is, Infernal, or
Stygian Rivers.

Now for Scotland, Good Lord what a pitiful poor Country is it! It were no
petty kind of punishment to be banished thither, for it is a Country only for
those to dwell in that want a Country, and have no part of the earth besides to
dwell upon. In some parts the soil is such, that it turns trees to stones, and
wheat to oats; apples to crabbs, and melons to pumpions. In some places as you
pass along, you shall see neither bird in the air, nor beast on the earth, or
worm creeping on the ground, nor scarce any vegetall, but a black gorsie soil,
a raw rheumatique air, or some craggy and squalid wild disconselate hills: And
touching Woods, Groves, or Trees, as Stephen might have escaped stoning in
Holland for want of stones, so if Judas had betrayed Christ in Scotland, he
might (as one said) have repented before he could have found out a tree to have
hanged himself upon. And most noble Auditors, you may make easy conjectures of
the poverty of Scotland by the demeans of the Crown, which scarce amount to a
hundred thousand Dollars a year, which you know is the ordinary Income of a
German Prince, and this both Boterus and Bodin do testify, who were Eagle-ey'd
Inspectors into the Revenues of all Kingdoms and States. And the answer which
the Duke of Norfolk made Queen Elizabeth when she reprehended him for his
presumption to marry the Queen of Scots, does verify this; Madam, said he, it
is no great presumption in me to attempt this, for my Revenues are not much
inferior to the King of Scotlands. This induced the Queen Elizabeth to give
King James, her Godsonne, and Successor, a Pension every year. Nor were the
Revenues of the Crown of England any thing considerable, till of late years
that Trade began to increase so infinitely, and consequently the Customs, with
Suits in Law since the demolition of Abbeyes, and the alienation of
Church Lands to the Crown with the First Fruits, Fines, and other perquisites
by Offices, and Courts of, Justice, I say before these additions to the Crown,
the Revenue of the Crown of England was but very contemptible in comparison of
other Princes. I must confess indeed that in these late Wars, the Wealth of
England, as well as the Strength thereof, has wonderfully appeared; for I
believe on both sides there has been above two hundred Millions consumed. And
there is now coming into this new Republique, I believe, above twelve Millions
of Crowns every year. And for her Strength, one may say, England was like a
Horse, she knew not her own strength till now; for who would have thought that
England could have put forth a hundred thousand foot, and forty thousand horse,
all armed, besides her power at Sea? I say, who could have thought it? Yet
there were so many in number at least, betwixt King and Parliament at one time.

But to reflect again upon Scotland, as the Country is pitifully barren,
insomuch that long Keale and short Keale, which is a kind of Cabbidge, that
they can dress twenty sorts of ways, is one of their principal food, besides
fish, and some odd foul, as the Solan Goose, which is their greatest Regalo,
yet the Eater must stop his nose when he takes a bit into his mouth, the smell
is so rank and strong. I say, as the Country is so steril, so is the people
sordid, and subject to vermin. Good Lord what nasty little huts, and holes
shall you find there up and down; what dirty courts, and stables above the
anckle deep crammed with dung. The sight of an ordinary Scots woman is a remedy
against Lust; for they are as big as Cows in the middle: Nature seems to make
no distinction there between the two sexes, but the women commonly are as big
limbed as the men. These short commons at home drive the men commonly abroad to
seek their fortunes in Swethland, Denmark and Poland, where they are in such
multitudes, that in case of necessity, the King of Poland might put in the
field thirty thousand Scots Pedlars, though they pass by the name of
Merchants; for if one can come up to a horse and a pair of panniers, he
presently assumes that name unto him. Now, though abroad the Scots are kept
under a strict discipline that they cannot steal, yet at home they are notable
thieves, and indeed the Caledonians were ever so to a proverb, they go now
under the names of Mossetroupers. Hear I pray what their own Country man, John
Lesley the Bishop of Rosse speaks of them, Noctu turmatim per invia loca,
perque multos maeandros e suis finibus exeunt, interdiu in prostitutis
latibulis equos viresque suas recreant, donec eo tandem per tenebras quo volunt
perveniant. Arrepta praeda similiter noctu per circuitus and devia loca dunt
axat ad sua redeunt. Quo quisque peritior Dux per illas solitudines, anfractus
and praecipitia, media caligine and tenebris esse potest, is ut ingeni^
excellens majore in honor habetur, and tanta calliditate hi valeut, ut
rarissime praedam sibi eripi sinant, nifi canum odoratu, quorum ductu rectis
semper vestigiis insequentium ab adversariis non nunquam capiantur. In the
night time the Scots do use to steal forth by troops, through odd invious
places, and diverse Meanders and windings; they bait in the way in some odd
nook or cave, where they refresh themselves and their horses, until they come
unto the places they aim at, where they had intelligence there was booty for
them, which when they have got, they return by some other devious passage,
wheeling about until they are come to their own home. He who is the most
cunning conductor through these unfrequented, and craggy by-places in the dark,
is cried up to be a very knowing man, and consequently he is held in greatest
esteem. And so cautious and crafty they are in their art this way, that their
prey is seldom or never taken away from them, unless they be pursued with
Dogs. -- But these Borderers or Mossetroopers, which this description aims at,
are far inferior to the Highlanders or Redshankes, who sojourne 'twixt craggs
and rocks, who in the art of Robbery, go much beyond all other; insomuch that
it is a Law in Scotland, St quis ex aliqua illorum gente damna intulerit,
quicunque captus fuerit, aut damna resarciat, aut capite luat: When any of the
Highlanders commit any Robbery, let the next that is taken repair the loss, or
suffer death. I know I shall strike a horror and astonishment into this
Princely Assembly, by relating here what Saint Hierome writes of this people he
says, Se adolescentulum in Gallia vidisse Scotos, gentem Britannicam, humanis
vesci carnibus, and cum per sylvas porcorum greges, and armentorum pecudumque
reperiant, pastorum nates, and faeminarum papillas solere abscindere, and has
solas ciborum delicias arbitrar. When I was a young man among the Gauls, I saw
Scots there, a people of Britain, who fed upon humane flesh, for when they
passed through the Woods, where there were Swineheards, and other Shepherds,
they used to seize upon, and cut off the buttocks of the male, and paps of the
female, which they used to feed upon as the greatest dainties.

For the Learning of the Scots, once in an age happily they produce a Wit, but
tentimes they prove pestiferous; witness Buchanan and Knocks, which two
villains were fratres in malum, what a world of troubles have they raised?
what a distraction did they bring on men's brains? what proud rascals were they
in their own conceit? how they would vapor and raunt (an humor that is more
the Scotchmans own than any) nay what a malicious and ungrateful monster was
one of them? I mean Buchanan, who though a poor Paedagogue, yet he presumed to
write in such familiar terms, and disgorge such base invectives against so
great a personage, as Mary Queen Dowager of France, and his own Sovereign
Princess, and which sets forth his abject spirit further, this Paedagogues pen
was mercenary; for he was hired to do it. Yet King James took him afterward
for his Tutor, notwithstanding that he had been so ungrateful, and bespattered
his mother so fowly, as appears by these pedantick dunsticall incongruous
lines, this most base and scurrilous Libell which he vomited against her with
that virulencie.

O Maria, O Scota, O Meretrix, O quam been nota
Impure illota, Veneri dedidissima tota
Quae stimulis mota, moechos trahis ad tua vota,
Vinoque praepota, facis id quod rancida Gota.
Reproba Regina, mage salax quam Messalina,
Altera Faustina, semper recubans resupina,
Pellex Palatina, temerans conjugia bina,
Moribus lupina, Regni jurata ruina.
Belie incepisti tu quando puella fuisti,
Inguine pruristi, procaxque viros petiisti,
Hin^ excussisti pudorem, and aperuisti
Seram tuae cistae quam claudere non potuisti.
Quid precor egisti tu in Francia quando fuisti?
Antequam nupsisti, cum Cardinale coisti?
Marito and tristi tu ^ornua multa dedisti,
Contra and jus Christi vitrico temet subegisti.
Nec minus arsisti postquam in patriam rediisti,
Nonne tuo mystae Davidi succubuisti?
Unde viro tristi causam vindictae dedisti,
Et huic and isti mortis tu causa fuisti.
Nonne vir^ est scitum te propinasse aconitum,
Blandeque accitum somno jugulasse sopitum,
Nec mora, protritum moechum duxisti maritum,
Caede insignitum Regni scelerisque peritum.
At principatus moecho est pro munere datus,
Hinc Scotiae status tumultibus est cruciatus,
Miles and armatus jugi in statione locatus,
Usque quo fugatus est Boshwellus dux sceleratus.
Itaque cun^ tota sic intus and in cute nota,
Daemoni devota, tam prudens ut est Idiota,
Ut sic amota cupimus ante omnia vota,
Fortunae Rota si reflectat, vae tibi Scota.
But now that I have given a touch of Ingratitude, I think the Scots are a^
guilty of that base vice as any Nation. What mountaine^s of favors did the two
last Kings of England tumble upon them? What honors, offices, and dignities did
they conferr upon them? What vast pensions had they from the English Exchequer?
how did the last King enervat his own prerogative, to strengthen their
privileges? What gracious concessions did he make them, according to their own
confessions? how he pulled down Bishops at their request and distributed the
lands amongst them; how at his last being in Scotland in Parliament he was so
easy and yielding unto them, that they did nothing but ask and have, In so much
that as one said, he had granted them so much of his Royal right, that for the
future he was but King of Scotland, as he was King of France, only Titular. How
at his depar^ure they confessed, that they had nothing to complain of for the
government of Kirk or State, that they could imagine, and therefore in lieu of
their gratitud their Parliament voted, that the old Act should be revived,
which is, that it should be det^stable and damnable treason in any of the
subjects of Scotland of what degree, condition or quality soever, to make any
military levi^s, or put themselves in arms without the Kings Royal
commission; to observe which Act they took their oths upon the Evangelist, yet
the year scarce revolved when they raised an Army, and rushed into England, not
only without his commission, but point blanck and expressly against his Royal
letters, wherein he desired them (as they confessed themselves*) since they had
nothing to complain of, that they would be Spectators only and no Actors in
some differences which were 'twixt him and his English Subjects, yet directly
against his will and request they did thrust themselves into the business; And
afterward, when their own Countryman and King had fled to them in his
greatest extremity for shelter and comfort, they most basely sold him away. O
monsters of men! O horrid ingratitude, and per^idiousnes, which has cast such
foul blemishes, and indelible Spo^ts upon that nation, that I believe all the
water of the Tweed will never be able to wash away. But the judgments of heaven
were never so visible upon any peeple as those which have fallen upon the Scots
since; for besides the sweeping furious Plague that reigned in Edinburgh, and
the incredible multitude of Witches which have increased, and been executed
there since, besides the sundry shameful defeats they have received by the
English, who carried away more of them prisoners, then they were themselves in
number, besides, that many of them died by mere hunger, besides, that they
were sold away slaves, at half a crown a dozen, for foreign plantations among
sauvages; I say besides all this chain of judgments with diverse other, they
have quite lost their reputation among all mankind; some jeer them, some hate
them, and none pity them. What Is become now of their hundred and ten Kings
which they used to raunt of so much? What Is become of their Crown which they
bragged to be more weighty, and have more gold in it then any Crown in
Christendom?

I will now by the continuance of the sweet gale of your Noble favors cross
over to Ireland, another rough hewn Country, and cross graind peope too; and
indeed the Irish and Scots are originally but birds of one feather, the same
tongue being maternal to both. Yet for the soil and the climes, Ireland much
exceeds Scotland; Nevertheless, the Country is full of boggs, of squalid and
unfrequented places, of loughs and rude Fenns, of huge craggs and stony
fruitless hills; the air is rhumatique, and the Inhabitants odiously nasty,
sluggish and lousy. Nay, some of them are Pagans to this day, and worship the
new moon, for the kerns will pray unto her, that she would be pleased to leave
them in as good health as she found them. For all the pains the English have
taken to civilize them, yet they have many savage customs among them to this
day; they plow their ground by tying their tacklings to ^he horses tail, which
is much more painful to the poor beast, then if they were before his breast and
on his back. They burn their corn in the husk in stead of threshing it, which
out of mere sloth they will not do for preserving the Straw. But to set forth
the Irish in their own colors, I pray hear how Saint Barnard describes them,
when he speaks of Saint Malachias a holy Irish Bishop of a place called then
Conereth; a man that had no more of his Country rudeness in him then a fish
has saltness of the Sea. Malachias, inquit Barnardus, tricesimo ferme aetatis
suae anno consecratus Episcopus introducitur Conereth, hoc enim nomen
Civitatis. Cum autem caepisset pro officio suo agere, tun^ intellexit homo Dei
non ad homines se, sed ad bestias destinatum. Nusquam adhuc tales expertus fuer
at in quantacunque barbary, nusquam repererat sic protervos ad mores, sic
ferales ad ritus, sic ad fidem impios, ad leges barbaros, cervicosos ad
disciplinam* spurcos ad vitam, Christiani erant nomine, Re Pagani. Non decimas,
non primitias dare, nec legitima inire conjugia, non facere confessiones.
paenitentias nec qni peteret, ne^ qui daret penitus inveniri. Ministri altaris
pauci admodum erant, sed enim quid opus pluribus, ubi ipsa paucitas inter
Laicos propemodum otiosa vacaret? Non erat quod de suis fr^ctificarent officiis
in populo nequam. Nec enim in Ecoles^iis aut prae^icantis vox, aut cantant is
audiebatur. Quid faceret Athleta Domini? aut turpiter cedendum, ant periculose
certandum: sed qui se pastorem and non mercenarium agnoscebat, elegit stare
potius quam fugere, paratus animam suam dare pro ovibus si oportuerit. Et
quanquam omnes lupi and Oves nullae, stetit in medio luporum pastor intrepidus,
omnimodo argumentosus quomodo faceret oves de lupis. Malachias, says Saint
Barnard, in the 33. year of his age, was consecrated Bishop of Conereth, but
when he began to officiate, and to exercise his holy function, he found that he
had to deal with beasts rather then with men, for he never met with the like
among any Barbarians, He never found any so indocil for manners, so savage in
customs, so impious in their faith, so barbarous in their laws, so
stiffnecked for discipline, so sordid in their carriage. They were Christians
in name, but Pagans in deed. There were none found that would pay tiths or
first fruits, that would confine themselves to lawful wedlock, that would
confess, or do any acts of penitence: For there were very few Ministers of
the altar, and those few did live licentiously among the Laiques; Neither the
voice of the Preacher or singing man was heard in the Church: Now, what should
the Champion of God do? He must recede with shame, or strive with danger, but
knowing that he was a true Pastor and not a hireling, he chose to stay rather
then fly, being ready to sacrifice his life for his sheep. And though they
were all Wolfs, and no sheep, yet the faithful shepherd stood fearlesse in the
midst of them, debating with himself how he might turn them from Wolfes to
sheep.

It seems this holy Father S. Bernard was well acquainted with Ireland by this
relation; for there is no Country so wolvish: they are in up and down herds in
some places, and devour multitudes not only of cattle but men. In deed of late
years Ireland, I must confess, was much improved both in point of civility as
also in wealth and commerce; Their mud cottages up and down, specially in
Dublin, where the Court was, turned to fair brick or free-stone-houses; Ireland
was made to stand upon her own legs, and not only to pay the standing English
army which was there, and used to be paid out of the Exchequer at Westminster,
but to maintain the Viceroy with all the Officers besides of her self, and to
afford the King of England a considerable revenu every year; and this was done
by the management and activity of the last Lord Deputy, after whose arrival
the Country did thrive wonderfully in traffic (which is the great artery of
every ^land) and in all bravery besides. In so much that the Court of Dublin in
point of splendidnes might compare with that of England; But that refractory
haf-witted peeple did not know when they were well.

But now I will leave the Irish to his Bony clabber, and the Scot to his long
Keall, and short Keall, being loath to make your ears do penance in listening to
so harsh discourses. Therefore to conclude, most noble Princes, I conceave it a
high presumption in Great Britain to stand for the principality of Europe,
considering how many inconveniences attend her: for first though she be most of
all potent at sea, yet she cannot set a ship under sail in perfect equipage
without the help of other Countries, she has her cordage, pitch and tarr, she
has her masts, and brass Canons from abroad* only she has indeed
incomparable Oak, and knee timber of her own; she abounds it is true with many
commodities, but they are rustic and coorse things in comparison of other
Kingdoms, who have silk for her wool, wine for her beer, gold and silver, for
lead and tin. For arts and sciences, for invention, and all kind of
civilities she has it from the Continent; Nay the language she speaks, her
very accents and words she borrows else where, being but a dialect of ours.
She has a vast quantity of wast grounds, she has barren, bad mountains,
uncouth uncomfortable heaths, she has many places subject to Agues and
diseases, witness your Kentish and Essex Agues; what a base jeer, as their own
Poet Skeleton has it, have other Nations of the English, by calling them Stert
men with long tails, according to the verse,

Anglicus a tergo caudam gerit, ergo caveto. What huge proportions of good
ground lies untilled in regard of the sloth of her Inhabitants? she suffers
her neighbors to eat her out of trade in her own commodities, she buyeth her
own fish of them, They carry away her gammons of bacon, and by their art having
made it harder and blacker, they sell it her again for Westphalia, at thrice
the rate; she has affronted, imprisond, deposd, and destroyed many of her
Kings; of late years she has been bafled at Amboyna, she made a dishonorable
return from Cales, she was fowly beaten at the I Will of Re, the small handfulls
of men she sent hither to Germany, in the behalf of the Daughter of England,
did her more discredit then honor. And her two lasts Kings were overreach'd in
the Treaty touching the match with Spain, and the restitution of the
Palatinate. She has been a long time in a declining condition; her common
people are grown insolent, her Nobility degenerous, her Gentry effeminate and
fantastical, they have brought down their wastes to the knees, where the points
hang dangling, which were used to tie the middle, they wear Episcopal sleeves
upon their legs, and though they are far from observing any rites of the
Roman Church, yet they seem to keep As^wensday all the year long by powdring
not only their locks and hair, but the upper parts of their doubletts, with
the capes of their cloakes; and the time was not many years since that they
made themselves ridiculous to all the world by a sluttish yellow kind of
starch, which was a pure invention of their own, and not an imitation of
others, whereunto they are very subject; specially of the French, in so much
that they may be said to be scarce men of themselves, but other men's Apes.
Therefore most excellent President, and Princes, I see no reason why Great
Britain should compare with the other noble Continents of Europe; yet I allow
Her to be Great within herself (if she had the wit to make use of her
Greatness,) and to be the Queen of Isles.

Dixi.
THE ORATION OF THE Lord MAXIMILIAN A Mosch For POLAND.
Most Excellent President and Prince,
TWo Perusian Ambassadors were employed to Pope Urban the fifth residing then
at Avignon, who being admitted, and desired to deliver their Embassage as
succinctly as they could in regard of the Popes indisposition, yet they made a
long tedious Oration, which did disquiet his Holiness as it was observed by
the Auditors; The first Ambassador having at last concluded, the second
subjoined very wittily, saying, We have this moreover given to us in Charge,
that if you will not condescend to our demands, this my Colleague must repeat
his speech again, and make some additions to it. The Pope was so much taken
with this, that he presently dismissed both of them very well satisfied for the
business they came about. But I being to speak for the Noble Kingdom of
Poland, need no such trick of wit to procure your consent that it may have the
Principality of the rest of the Provinces of Europe; Nor confiding so much in
your judgments need I any Rhetorical florishes, or force of Eloquence to
induce you thereunto, for the argument has strength enough of it self, to do
the business. Poland needs no artifice, she needs no Mountibank to set forth
her riches, which nature has scattered in every corner with a liberal hand; It
is a high and very Noble piece of the Continent, she abounds with Mines of
Iron, Lead and Sulphurous Metals, and with Lazurium, a kind of stone of a
blew caerulean color, which God himself pleased to make use of for the
Adorning of his own Palace. Lituania may be said to be Ceres Barn, and Russia
her Haggard: for there if a field be sowd, it will be the year following,
without necessity of throwing any new seed. In Podolia there be grounds that
return 100. grains for one, besides there be Pasturages there that the horns
of the Oxen feeding therein can hardly be seen. The salt pits of Cracovia may
compare with any on Earth, there are such concamerations in them that make a
little Town supported by great Pillars of Salt; and the entrance is so high,
that you need not stoop your head to go in; There is no where better Honey, and
mixed with lesser Wax, or whiter then that which is found in Samogitia; The
trunks of trees are full of their hives. There is such abundance of Pears,
Apples, Plumms, Cherries, and Nuts, and these in such variety, that no Country
can produce more in every one of the 32 County Palatines of Poland, whence huge
quantities of Wheat, Barley, and Oats, with other Grains, as also Hopps,
Hides, Tallow, Alum, Honey, Wax, Pitch, Ta^, Potashes, Masts, and Hemp are
exported to other Countries: The number of Oxen and Horses are infinite. Now
for the Wealth of the Subject, and private men I will produce you one
stupendous Example. In the year 1363. about the season of Shrovetide the
Emperor Charles the 4th. his Nuptials were to be celebrated at Cracovia with the
Niece of Casimir the Great King of Poland; the Kings of Hungary and Denmark,
Peter King of Cyprus, and a great number of the Imperial Princes were present;
Vernicus Germanus, being then Consul of Cracovia, entertained all these Kings
and Princes in his own Houses, and feasted them for many days, dismissing them
with presents, whereof that which he bestowed upon Casimir was valued at 100
thousand Florins; This Vernicus being infinitely rich, exhausted his wealth in
such public Gallantries, yet he looked to the main chance, that he left
himself a competence to live well and honestly: a small pittance will suffice
nature, when immense possessions cannot satisfy opinion. The Pole does not
glory much in high ostentous buildings, measuring the vanities thereof by the
frailty of his own body, which is subject to decay in so short a time; So he
falls into contemplation that the proudest Fabriques will dissolve and crumble
to dust at last. What shall we think of the Pyramides of Egypt, toward the
rearing thereof, there were ninescore Talents erogated out of Garlike, Leeks
and Onions alone; there were three hundred and sixty thousand opificers and
laborers employed for twenty years together in the work; but what is become now
of those 4. Pyramids? They are all turned to rubbish. But observable it is,
that one of them was reard by Rhodope a Courtisan, who was grown so infinitely
rich by the public use of her own. The Temple of Ephesus was no less then
220. years a building, to which all Asia did contribute, the stupendous length
whereof was 425 paces, the Latitude 220. It had 120 columns, 60. foot in
Altitude. The Tomb of King Mausolus was an admirable thing, and the love of
Artemisia his Wife was more admirable in erecting such a Tomb; and not only
so, but taking some of the powder of her husbands body and drinking it in
little doses next her heart, saying, that her body was the fittest Tomb for her
dear Husband. Now come in the Walls of Babylon, 200 foot high, and 60 miles
compass; to finish which there came three Millions of people together. I will
now fix my eyes upon the Rhodian Colosse, which did bear the image of the Sun
in that glory; It was 70 Cubits high, the thumb of the Image could not be
embraced with both the arms, and so you may guess at the vast proportion of
the rest; The statue of Jupiter Olympius composed of Ivory and Gold by Phidias
was a work of wonder. I will conclude with Old Rome, wherein there were in the
Pagans time 420* Temples; The very roof of the Capitol stood in 12 Talents; she
was once above 30 miles about: She had in one Cense that was made above 25
hundred thousand souls in her, but now in point of people she is but a
Wilderness, and but a Village in comparison of what a City she was; being
spacious once to hold all mankind, all her amphitheaters, her baths, Statues
and Temples are mouldred away, and scarce any remnant left, together with her
vast Palaces which aemulate Cities. The serious, wise Pole considering the
small duration, and great charge, with the vanity of such things, measures his
House by his own body, as the Turks do; it is sufficient if it last him for his
own life, let his Son build for himself. It is remarkable what Seneca says;
Romae olim cul^um lib^ros texisse, postea sub marmore atque auro servitutem
habitasse, Rome lived free under culme, and thatched houses, but afterward she
grew to be a slave under Marble and golden roofs.

For matter of civility you shall find Italy her self in Poland; for complement
you shall find France, for plain downright dealing, you shall find Germany; Nay
for urbanity, and elegance of manly attire, the Pole goes beyond us; his
language also is smoother, and not so abrupt as ours: Therefore they are very
wide from truth, who charge Sarmatia with asperity and roughness of manners;
for whosoever will converse familiarly with them, shall find that they are very
humane and open-hearted, that they are simple and upright; for the first
integrity of the World may be found amongst them.

Moreover the Polish air^ is favorable to the M^ses, for there is both poor and
rich, Gentry and Commonalty, Town and Country are versed in the knowledge of
holy things, whereunto it is a great advantage that the latin tongue is spoken
so frequently and vulgarly among them, in every Dorp and petty Village; Nay
their Hoslers, and Chamberlains understand and speak it in many places; They
are also versed in the Dutch, French, and Italian; Which was wondered at in
Paris, when the Delegats of Poland came thither to declare that they had
elected by unanimous suffrage the Duke of Aniou to be King of Poland, for some
of them spoak as perfect French, and knew the Mode of Paris as if they had been
born there: Besides the Parisians did admire the goodly large bodies of their
new guests their manly-Physiognomies, their furred Capps, their rich Buskins,
their costly scabbards with huge silver Chapes, and it was also wondered at,
that none of the whole company, whither Laquay, Page, Groom, or Cook, but could
speak latin, and parley some French; which many spoake so exactly, as if nature
had brought them forth upon the banks of the Loire, and Sein, rather then upon
those of the Vistula and Boristhenes. In this splendid Legation, Sirius
Samosius Chancellor of Poland was chief, a man of rare Erudition and Policy;
There was also Baldwin the celebrous Civilian, who was the Orator, which he
performed to admiration; The foresaid Samosius was famous both for the Gown and
the sword; Touching the latter, he performd many exploits both against the
Muscovites, and the Austrian Family; For the other, there are many printed
works published in his name, as the History of the Muscovian Wars, which
Thuanus would father upon Carolus Sigonius, or Secretary Heidenstein, but
wrongfully.

Among the Polish Nobility, whereof many are famous for Arts and Sciences,
Stanislaus Hosius was very renowned in Italy, where he had spent much time,
both in Padua and Bolonia, where Alexander Farnese was a breeding the same
time, together with Madrucci, and Otho Truchsesius, who were all three coopted
afterward to the College of Cardinals. Besides Hosius, John Dantiscus was a
rare man for knowledge, who when Charles the Emperor had resigned both Empire
and Kingdom with all Earthly Glory, and dismissed all from about him, yet he
reserved John Dantiscus; But with what Elogies shall I celebrate the memory of
Martinus Polonus, or Matthias de Miechow, or Martin de Ilte, who was the first
Composer of the Almanak or Ephemerides in Europe? Cromerus, Herbortus,
Varsevicius, Bzovius, Lascius, Vaporius, Dresnerus, Herbestus, Sternaus,
Lumbostus, Cichocius, with multitudes more of Authors, were men of sublime and
celestial souls. The times are much altered now from what they were, when Pope
Clement, the fourth Bishop from Saint Peter the Apostle did write, In Sarmatia
extremam Germaniam contingente, nullum Geometram, vel Poetam Pictoremve, aut
Trapezitam esse, In Poland confining upon the furthest parts of Germany, there
was neither Geometrician, Poet, Painter, or Trapezit, viz. an exchanger of
Moneys, or Banker. There is a strange Vicissitude since; for all Poland now is
a most litterated Country, as if Athens had transported herself thither; There
is Religion, and Piety also there in the highest degree, since Paganism was
expelled thence by Mieczislaus, and established Christianity, which they
maintain still with that stoutnesse and fervencie, that when the Apostolical
Creed is read in the Churches, every man stands up and draws out his sword,
which he holds naked in his hand till the Creed be read, intimating thereby
that they will uphold and defend it with all the strength that God and Nature
has given them: a solemnity which is observed by no other Nation so much. And
it seems that God almighty has placed Religion thus under the Clientele of
Poland, because that she confining upon diverse ferocious and wild Nations,
which are capital Enemies to the name of Christ, at least wise dissociated and
cut off from the Latin Church, she by the valor and virility of her
Inhabitants might be a propugnacle and rampart to the Holy Church, and by her
fulminating legions, and arms, might be able to repel, and frustrate any
attempt of theirs. The Muscovit her confining neighbor, distant from her in
Faith, though not in territory, serves as a Whetstone to sharpen the Polonian
courage, least by desuetude it should grow dull and rusty; The Mahumetan is
also her limitaneous Neighbor, but a sorer and more formidable foe then the
other: for there is a saying, ubicunque equus* Turcicus ungulam impresserit,
ibi gramen non crescere. Wheresoever the Turks horse does once plant his hoof*
no grass grows there any more: Yet of late years he bears up notably against
that huge Giant, and apprehends no great fear of him; As it appears by the
magnanimous answer which King Stephen gave the Sultan, who having sent to him
for some auxiliar forces against the Persian, under pretext of an ancient
Custom, he sent him word, candidam Polonorum Aquilam antea implumem, and
viribus suis destitutam, nunc rejuvenescere, pennas recepisse, ungues and
rostrum exacuisse The white Eagle of Poland which was thin of feathers before,
had now renewed her strength, recovered her quills, and sharpened her pounces
and bill. For the Pole is naturally a stout man, that will neither be softened
with pleasure, nor dismayed by danger; a death bravely purchased he holds to be
an immortality, and a life disgracefully preserved to be worse then any death.
He is more careful to keep his Honor, then life; and as, according to Cromers
testimony, near the Town of Streme, there is a hill, where Pots, Caudrons, and
other Vessels are found naturally so shapen, though they be soft within the
Earth, but being dug out, they quickly incrustrate and grow hard when they
are exposed to the cold air; so the Pole is naturally shaped for a soldier in
his Mothers womb, but confirmed afterward by the severe discipline of his
Parents; He fears the clashing of arms no more then the wagging of oken
leaves, or the bubbling of waters; And herein they retain still the genius of
the Great Piastus, who as by probity and justice he got the Kingdom at first,
so his Ospring conserved it by succession for 500. years. The women there also
are endued with a masculine courage, for by the old constitution of Poland, no
maiden was to marry, till she had killed three enemies in the field; but
Piastus abolished this custom, and commanded women to exercise themselves in
matters more consentaneous to their sex. We read that Augustus Caesar gave in
command to Lentulus his Ambassador, that he should not disquiet the Sarmatian;
for if he were once provoked, he would not understand what peace was
afterward: so the Danube did put limits to the so prosperous Augustus, and the
Pole did terminate his progress. All this is confirmed by that disticke of
Ovid who was banished thither.

Maxima pars hominum nec te pulcherrima curat
Roma, nec Ausonij militis armatimet.
Good Lord, what Victorious Kings has Poland had? Ziemovit did debell the
Hungarians, Bohemians, Pomeranians, and made them all tributary; Boleslaus
Chrobri subdued the Russe, bridled the Prusse, chastised the Saxons, and upon
the frontires of his Dominions erected brazen Pillars: after his death all
Poland mourned a whole year, all which time there was neither feasting nor
dancing. What shall I say of Boleslaus the third, who fought 50. battles, and
was Victor in all? In his time the Emperor Otto the third, made a Pilgrimage to
Poland to visit the body of Saint Adalbertus (which Boleslaus had redeemed from
Prusse Pagans) and it was to expiate a crying sin that he had committed, which
was thus. The Empress being light, she caressed an Italian Count so far,
that she offered him the use of her body, which he refusing, out of a malicious
indignation, like Pharo's Wife, she accused the said Count that he would have
forced her; whereupon he was arraigned, condemned and executed, but before his
death he discoverd the whole series of the business to his Wife. A little
after a great Sessions in Roncalias, appointed to right Orphans and Widows,
the Countess came before the tribunal, and brought her husbands head under her
vest, so desiring leave of Caesar to speak, she asked what punishment did he
deserve that took away another man's life? Otto answered, no less then death.
Then O Emperor you have condemned your self, who have taken away my guiltless
husband, and behold here his head; and because there wants proof in so private
a cause, I will undergo the Ordeal, the fyrie trial; which the Countess
having performed without any hurt, the Empress Maria Augusta, who had accused
the Count was brought, and condemned to be burnt, which was done accordingly.
And the Emperor gave the Countess Dowager 4. Castles in fuller satisfaction.
To make further atonement for this offense, the said Emperor Otto came to
Poland upon a Pilgrimage, and Boleslaus came 7. miles to meet him, the way
being covered with cloth of diverse colors all along. Hereupon the Emperor for
so Signal a favor, did solemnly create Boleslaus King, and his Companion, and
a friend of the Roman Empire, declaring him free from all tribute and
jurisdiction for ever.

But to come to more Modern times. What a man of men was Sigismund the first?
you know, most noble Princes, that, the Persians do cry up Cyrus, the
Macedonians, Alexander the Great; The Germans, Charlemagne, for heroique and
valiant Kings. The Athenians cry up Miltiades, Cimon, Alcibiades, Thrasybulus,
Phocio and others. The Lacedaemonians their Pausanias, Lysander, and Agesilaus.
The Thebans, Epaminondas, and Pelopidas. The Carthaginians cry up Hamilcar,
Hannibal, and Asdrubal. The Romans do celebrate their Fabios, their Scipios,
Lucullus, and Caesar for strenuous and incomparable Captains. It Is true, they
might be so, but they had to deal with soft effeminate people. But the Polonian
Sigismund had to do with the toughest, the most intrepid and fiercest Nations
of the Earth, and a most favorable gale of fortune did blow upon him,
throughout the whole Progress of his life and actions. He tugged with Mechmet
the Moscovian Emperor, whom Amurath the 3. acknowledged to be one of the
greatest Warriers in the World, and got the better of him. He wrastled with the
grim Tartars, with the furious Valachians, and laid them on their backs. He
cop'd with the Great Turk (who glories in a perpetuity of Victorship) and foild
him more then once. Nay, he had diverse Praeliations with us Germans, and took
from us the spacious Provinces of Livonia, and Prussia, which, not without a
foul blemish to Germany, he added to the Crown of Poland. And although the
people of those Countries have often solicited our Diets, and put the German
Emperors in mind of the avulsion, and loss of those Countries, yet we have
thought it better to leave the quarrel alone, because there is nothing to be
got by the Pole but knocks, for the Poleax is a terrible weapon. Now, touching
the strength of the King of Poland; you know that for Cavalry, he is the
potentest Prince of Europe. Thuanus the Frenchman confesses that the King of
Poland can bring to the field in Noble men and Gentry alone, which are bound to
serve him so long time upon their own charge, above a hundred and fifty
thousand men of all sorts of Arms. The name of Cosacks is formidable all the
World over; And although they are cried up to be freebooters, fighting only
for plunder, I will rectify your opinion in that, by a late pregnant example
in the Ivonic War: for having taken the General of the Enemy Prisoner,
although there was offered 6. times his weight, twice in Gold, thrice in
Silver, and once in Jewels, yet this would nothing at all move the valiant
Cosacks.

Now, for the Nobility of Poland, it is numerous and ancient, nay, there be
good Authors affirm that the great families of Italy, the Ursins, the Colonni,
the Ialians, the Gastaldi are originally of a Lituanian race. There are in
Poland the Radivils, the Ostrogians, the Starasians, the Tarlons, the
Herburtons, with 30. princely families more. All this considered, most noble
Princes, Poland may well come in and stand in competition for the principality
of Europe, but -- verbum non amplius addam

THE ORATION OF THE Lord AC ACIUS AXELIUS against POLAND.
Most judicious and Excellent President and Princes,
THE Oration that was pronounced before was too long and prolix, considering
the poorness and tenuity of the Subject; but to me it was too brief and
concise, considering the Eloquence and strength of the style* I will not say it
was like those ranting speeches that are usually made upon the Theaters of
Italy, who use to make an Ox of a Be, or a Mountain of a Mole-hil, when they
speak in commendation of the virtue of their Balsams, to advance the vent of
them. But I wonder what should come into the mind of the Noble Orator, before
me to extol Poland so hyperbolically; sure it was to try what he could do
upon so bare and barren a Subject. As we read that Archippus fell a praising
the shadow of an Ass, and Passeratius the Ass himself; as Glaucus fell in
praise of injustice, Polycrates and Isocrates of Busiris, H^ttenus of the
Fever, or as Maro fell upon the praise of a Flea, Synesius of Baldness,
Pickhennerus of the Gout, Libanius of an Ox, Diocles of a Rape, ^ierius of
Poetical poverty, Mirandula of Barbarism, Salerius of Drunkenness; Lucian of a
Fly, Dion of a Parrat, Mayoragius of Dirt, or as Erasmus fell upon the praise
of Folly, and Heinsius of a Louse, to make experiment of their inventions what
they could say upon such small theames.

But to make Poland contest either with Germany, France, Spain, Italy, or Great
Britain for superiority and worthynesse; were to make Vatinius and Cicero
competitors for one preferment, or Arachne to contend with Pallas, who was the
best Spinstresse. Now, touching Poland, let the report of those French
Gentlemen that attended the Duke of Aniou thither to be King, be heard, who
questionless found the best things that Poland could afford. They at their
return to France, put her forth in such illfavoured colors, that possibly
could be. They said she was the proper seat, and perpetual domicile of all
barbarism and misery; Therefore it was superfluo^s labor for them to pass a
decree, that no French should have a faculty granted him to purchase any Stable
possession in Poland, for none of them was of so abject a mind or fortune, that
would be Great Duke of Lituania. Let us take a survay of the fertillest piece
of the Country, which is Podolia, and what is it but a harsh and a hard stony
soil, that a yoke of ten Oxen are required most commonly to plough up the
Earth. Then the cold is there so violent, that water thrown but a yard or two
high into a ba^on, will freeze in the air before it descends. But this extemity
of cold has been sometimes advantageous to the Country; for one year there
r^sh'd in an Army of 70 thousand Turks, but there happened such a terrible frost
upon a sudden, that 40. thousand of them starved for the rigor of the frost,
and some of them were found wrapped in Horses bellies; Which did strike such a
Religion into the Mahumetan, that he thought the Pole and Russe were protected
by Heaven.

Touching ^amogitia, a large part of the Kingdom, it is such, that the very
Nobles there dwell in Cottages; What shall we think then of the Commonnalty?

Touching the Virtues of the Pole, I will begin first with Religion, and where
is she housed so poorly as in Poland? Where is she more mixed with
prophannesse? Near Vilna, one of their Capital Cities, the Mahumetan Tartar
does observe his rites. Nay between Lituania and Samogitia, there are many who
attribute a divinity to a kind of Serpents, which in their language are called
Givoijtos, they carry them home, and a certain time of the year they offer
Sacrifices unto them, they provide them meat, and if those Penates or household
Gods of theirs do not eat, it is an Omen of ill luck, and presageth calamities.
Nay, (I will not tell so Princely an Auditory a falsehood) in some places of
Russia, Lituania and Samogitia, the Country people, toward the latter end of
October, do provide Oblations and Holocausts for the Devil. They use to meet
in some Ba^n or Stable, and bring thither a Calf, a Hog, a Cock and Hen, with
other creatures to make an immolation of them, and when they are killed to that
purpose, their Priest or Inchant or whispering out some words, does strike the
ground with his staff, and cries out, the whole brigade keeping tone with him
in pronouncing these words. O God Zeimminick ( for so they call the Devil)
These things we offer unto thee, and render thee thanks, that thou have
vouchsafed to conserve us this year in safety and health. And now we pray thee
be pleased to defend us for the future from Fire, Iron, the Pestilence, and
from our Enemies. Then they take the flesh of those slain Animalls and eat
them, throwing first into the four corners of the room some morsells, and
pronouncing these words, Haec O Zeimmenick nostra Holocausta suscipe, and
comede benignus* O Zeimmenick accept of these our sacrifices, and eat
favorably: Now I beseech you, how can we think that Christ can cohabit or be
found with those infernal, and Reptill Gods? Moreover the Samogitians are so
given to superstition, that whereas it was the old custom of that Country to
till the ground with wooden Ploughes, and Cul^ers, and that the Governor of one
of their Provinces brought them the use of iron Ploughshares for the ease of
the labourer, and that some years after by an unusual distemper of the air,
they had a dear year or two; They threw away their iron ploughshares, and fell
to the old wooden ones again, attributing a kind of divinity unto them, and
unluckinesse unto the other. Though the rest of the Polonique people be not
infected with such gross Idolatry, yet they are as grossly ignorant as any
Christians on Earth can be. Few of them can say the Lords Prayer, or know what
the ten commandments are, they leave that to their Landlords and Priests, it
is enough for them to believe by an implicit faith in God Almighty, and his Son
Jesus Christ, and the holy spirit; touching more knowledge, it belongs to
Princes and Great men. Now for the Mass of common people; They are mere slaves
unto the Gentry, and worse then the Peasants of France; a Landlord may come
into any husbandmans house, attended with a hungry train of followers, and
there do or take away what he will, without any controllment. Nor do the
Country people refrain from their ordinary labor upon the Lords day, but they
plough, and harrow, they dig and delve as upon other days; hereupon a
stranger asking one of them, why he labored upon the Sunday? Because, said he,
I must eat upon the Sunday. The Landlords there have not only a Despoticall,
but Regal power over their Tenants, having power of life and death; which
slavish custom, Vitoldo Duke of Lituania brought in among them, who was such a
Tyrant, that if he bad any to go away and hang himself, the party must do it,
or else he should be put to a worse kind of death. Murder is no capital crime
among them, but only finable; if a Gentleman kills another Gentleman, he
forfetis 30. Crowns; if a clown kill a Gentleman, he forfeits twice as much,
and if a gentleman kill a yeoman, it is but 10. crowns amercement: But
Sigismund the first reformed these laws, and made the price of blood more
precious. That Sigismund could crack a horshoe with his hands, or tear a whole
stock of cards to flitters, or heave up a reasonable horse in his arms. But it
is a thing much to be deplored, that the people of Poland were divided to four
parts, three parts of four are Arrians in the i^hearts, for that heresy
reigns no where more in Europe; there are other among them, but this is the
greatest: and can there be a greater heresy among Christians?

Now for Religion, and all kind of civilities, the Pole is obliged to the
German, who was their first introducer and instructor; as is evident by those
relics of the German tongue, which are yet found among them, which the
Slavonique did shoulder out. Now the Slavonique is the most spacious vulgar
language upon Earth, it extends as far as Constantinople, one way, and Mosco
another way; for above twenty several Nations speak it for their Vernacular
tongue.

Now touching the natural disposition of the Pole, it is as savage and
sanguinary as of any Nation. Among a cloud of horrid examples which could be
produced, that of King Popiel the 2. is remarkable; Who finding himself to be
illbeloved by his Subjects, and suspecting that his brothers and uncles did go
to undermine him, He counterfeited himself to be sick, and so sent for them as
it were upon his deathbed to take his farewell of them, committing his wife
and children to their care, and speaking unto them faintly and with much
tenderness; he calls for a boul of wine to drink unto them, which he scarce
touched with his lips; but they pledging him freely, were all poisoned, and
died soon after. Hereupon the cunning Queen crying out that they had an intent
to poison the King her Husband, their bodies were deprived of Christian
burial, and thrown into the lake Goplus: but mark the judgments of Heaven.
Out of the putrified bodies, there were such ratts engendered, more bigg then
ordinary, that first devoured all Popiells children, and then his Queen, and
lastly himself in Crusvicia Castle, in a most disastrous manner, to the
astonishment of all mankind.

Moreover touching the perfidiousnesse of the Polish Nation; there be as many
pregnant examples as can be produced among any people; but not to detain your
ears long with such harsh notes, let this one serve. When Ladislaus, the Son
and rightful Heir of King Albertus was put by, and Uladislaus the 5. made King
of Poland, God Allmighty having respect to the innocence of young Ladislaus,
powered his judgment upon the Pole in the Varvensian Battle, wherein besides
the loss of many thousand souls, Christianity received the fowlest blemish
that ever she did from her infancy to that day. For this usurping Uladislaus,
having agreed upon Articles of peace with Sultan Amurath, and given him the
holy host for caution in point of performance, The said Uladislaus breaking the
Capitulations, caused Amurath to rush into Poland with a fearful army, and as
both were to close, the Turk drew out of his bosom the host, and the Articles
which Uladislaus had sworn unto, crying out, O thou Crucified, O thou
crucified, look upon thy perfidious people who have pawned thee unto me, yet in
a most scelestous and perjurious manner have infringed their vow: if thou art
some God, let perjury be vindicated. Hereupon there was a general overthrow
given to the Austrian Army, and Uladislaus himself slain; In so much that
Poland grew so despicable, that scarce any would undertake the title of her
King.

Touching the Cosacks which were so much applauded in the preceding Oration.
Truly, most noble Princes, let me tell you, that they are a race of people of
the same trade the wild Arabs are of, who live by robberies and plunder; and I
had almost said they are as wild as they, for they feed upon raw flesh, which
they put sometimes upon their horses back under the saddle to warm a little,
and so they devour it. They are far worse then the Mosstroupers of Scotland,
the Tories of Ireland, the Frondeurs of France, or the Bandoleros of Spain,
which lurk among the Pyrenean hills for rapine and spoil.

To draw to a conclusion, as the genius and natural disposition of the Pole is
rough, fierce and unpolished, so is their speech, which is a most abrupt and
craggy kind of language, in so much that in some words you have ten consonants
and but one vowell; the words of the Pole when he speaks high, are as so many
stones thrown at a man's brains that hears him, they have such penenetrating
harsh sounds and accents. The teeth of a Wolf, dentes lupini, are the of
Poland, I arms will not say their nature does sympathize with that rapacious
beast, but me thinks the Latin tongue whereof they brag so much in point of
vulgarity, should sound but very harshly among such teeth.

For conclusion, I will relate unto you the character which one of Henry the
thirds Secretaries, when he was then attending the King, gives of Poland and
the people, which stands upon record in an Authentic piece of story. Quant a
moy qui ne puis mentir je vous diray fort librement que je ne vis iamais un si
miserable pays, ^ant de pouvre Noblesse, touts brutals and sauuage, mais
toutesfois si pleins d' arrogance qu' elle n'estime ancune Nation. Ces sont
chooses difficiles a representer par escrit, and du tout impossibles a croire
que par ceux qui les auroient veues. For my part, says the French Secretary,
who cannot lie, I will tell you freely that I never saw in the whole course of
my life so miserable a Country; so indigent a Gentry, so brutish, and savage a
Commonalty, but nevertheless so full of arrogance that they esteem no other
Nation. These are things which are difficult to be represented by writing, and
impossible to be believed but by them who have been Eyewitnesses hereof, as I
have been too long.

Surely it must be imputed to this arrogant nature of theirs, that they think
no man worthy to be their King by birth, but by Election. Nature is not worthy
and wise enough to give them a King, but they must choose one themselves. And
it is observable that they are the only people among Mortals, who fetch their
Kings from far, and admit Forreners to rule over them, and one reason may be,
that they who are acquainted with the squalidness of the Country, will not take
upon them such a spendid slavery. But the truth is, that Poland has neither
King nor Kingdom, but it is a kind of confused Oligarchycall kind of
Government; which made the Lady Christina, Caesar's Daughter, and Wife to
Uladislaus the 5. so say, summum illud jus, and authoritatem Monarchiae in
Polonia esse vmbratilem. That the highest power and authority of the Polish
Monarchy is merely umbraticall, it is but a shadow of a power; for neither in
the OEconomicall Government of his domestic family, nor in choosing himself a
Wife, much less in the senate has he any power of free will.

Therefore most excellent and judicious Princes, for to make Poland to have a
precedence of the rest of the Provinces of Europe is the same, as when the
Bramble, according to the holy text, was made the King of Trees.

Dixi.
THE ORATION OF Prince HENRY ALBERTUS Baron of LIMBURG etc. Hereditary Lord
BUTLER of the Sacred Roman Empire, and Allwaies free for HUNGARY.
Most Excellent President and Prince,
WHile we are in so serious a debate touching the Kingdoms of Europe, and
which of them may deserve the principality; truly me thinks that we are
ungrateful to Hungary, that we have deferred so long to speak of the stoutest
people that march under the standard of the Cross, and by whose valor the
peace and incolumity of the Christian World has hitherto stood. We should have
been more mindful of the memory of our Benefactors. But as the Roman
Respublique is oftentimes taxed to have sinned against her best and most
devoted Citizens, as when Camillus was ostracis'd and banished, Scipio
dismissed, Cicero after Catiline undervalued, Rutilius hurried over to Smyrna,
Cato was denied the Praetorship, Vatinius the basest of men being preferred
before him; so truly it may be said that we have misdemean'd our selves toward
Hungary. Now if Hungary could transplant her self hither before us, she would
sharply rebuke us for this preterition and neglect; but because that cannot be,
I will adventure to be Advocate for that most Noble Kingdom. But as in a vast
Forest full of Trees, one intending to fell down one for Timber, and building,
but having such choice about him, is puzzled which to single out; so am I at a
stand being entered into this large Forest of matter, where or how to begin.

Will an inestimable treasure of all Wealth delight you? I pray where has
nature endeavored with more industry to enrich a Country? If the amaenity of
soil, the mavelous clemency of the air, the faecundity of ground can ennoble
a Country, I pray has not Hungary all these qualities? such is the fertility
of fields there, that grain grows no where so kindly and copiously as there.
There are such Vineyards up and down, that you will hardly find any where such
generous and strong Wines. The Medows are there so luxurious, that one Cart
cannot see one another though at a small distance. For numerous herds of
Cattle where can we find the like? How many thousand heads of fat cattle do
the Graziers fetch thence for the supply of all the neighboring Provinces?
Vienna her self, the Caesarean Court, spends above 80. thousand of them. Such
is the felicity of Woods and Groves, that they are full of fruit trees as well
as timber, as Chessnuts, Walnuts, Acrons, Plumms, and Apples; besides they
abound with wild beasts, and Foul, as Boares, Hares, Pheasans, Partridges,
which is the familiar food of the Peasans.

For stately deep Rivers Europe has not greater, and more commodious and
navigable for commerce, and the easy conveyance of all necessaries to and fro.
They are quickened with abundance of Fish, great and small; insomuch that the
River Tibisco is said by a proverb of the circumiacent Inhabitants to have two
parts water, and the third fish, so that Wernherus* affirms that 100. Carpes
taken out Tibisco were sold for one Hungary ducket.

What shall I say of the Richness of Mines up and down, wherein there are
precious ores of Gold and Silver, the purest that is in the World. In a mine of
Dalmatia, which is no ignoble part of the Hungarian Empire, there have been
dug out 500. pound of Gold in one day, out of a Mine in the Principality of
Nero as they call it. There be some Rivers in Transyl^ania, wherein ingots of
Gold have been found half a pound weight, as Bonfinius reports. There is a very
credible report, that Sigismund Chanzares Bishop of the five Churches, was so
rich in Gold, in the memory of man, that he could entertain an army upon his
own pay. Hereupon when Albertus the Pole challenged the Kingdom of Hungaria
from his brother Uladislaus, he used to heighten the courage of his soldiers
by putting them in mind of the exuberant riches of the Country, saying, Hanc
esse Illam Regionem quam mediam Danubius tot fluviorum consiuxu incolis
percommodus intersecat, and quae universi paene orbis faelicitatem
complectitur. Hanc esse Illam optimdrum for acissimam fructuum, vinetis specio
fissimam, equis and caeteris animalibus aff^im abuudant^m; Auri atque argenti,
multorumque praeterea metallorum ditissimam, (...) (...) (...) ribns quae non
modo ad vitae usum spectant, sed and luxum possit ministrare, instructissimam.
This was that Region which the Danube with the conflux of other Rivers does cut
up and down with many intersections, a Country which has the ^aelicity of the
Universe. This is she that abounds with such variety of fruit, with fair
Vineyards, with plenty of generous Horses, and other animalls of all kind. She
is enriched with Mines of Gold and Silver, with many other sorts of mettalls.
In sum, this is that Kingdom which is furnished with all things that appertain
to humane life, either for use or pleasure. Yet Hungary does not measure these
splendid gifts of nature according to the common opinion and wish of man, but
she proportions them according to the necessity and use. And the Inhabitants
must labor for them accordingly* Without doubt industry is a high and
indefatigable virtue; idleness and voluptuousness is a servile, slothful,
weak and degenerous thing, her station is commonly in stoves and taphouses, in
baths, and hot*houses, or such places; When we find the other in the field, in
the Market, in the Mines, or standing in defense of a Town with hard callous
hands. If Virtue and industry can be found no where else, you are sure to find
them embracing each other in Pannonia, now Hungary. What brave masculine births
has she produced, what grave and learned Doctors for the Church, as the most
eminent B. Martin a pious Bishop, a pure Apostolical man. Then she had Saint
Hierom, who for his sanctity and learning is reckoned, and with good reason,
among the holy Confessors and Doctors of the Church. Then you have Andrew
(...)* an admired student of Ciceronian Eloquence, who writ thrice with his own
hand all Cicero's works that are instant. But at last leaving the Papaci^, the
miter, the sublime honors of the Court, and all worldly Pomp, he be took
himself to a private contemplative life, and to his devotions.

If I should stuff my speech with all those rare and holy men which Hungary
has produced, it may be the Catalogue would be so large as that of Germany, or
France. Some of them have deserved so well of the Commonwealth of learning,
that they have been greater Benefactors then some Kings or Princes. Among other
Ioa^nes Sambucus a Doctor of Physic by profession, was so diligent in the
collection of the best Authors, that his Library might be compared to any one
private man's in Europe; which Nonnus and Hesychius do testify at large. We
are going now to make inspection into the heroique virtue of the Hungarians, in
point of Valor and Courage. And first we could nominate eight Emperors, which
under a benign and happy star were born in Hungary. In the Emperor Decius, his
virtues kept touch with his age, and grew up together. He came to the Caesarian
dignity, neither by ambition, by bought suffrages, nor canvasing and corrupting
of friends; but as his Election was fair, so his Government was so exemplary
and glorious, that he was adjudg'd to deserve the character of Optimus Princeps
by the unanimous judgment of the Senate; had he not been given so much to
Pagan superstition, and oppressed Christianity by such cruentous persecutions.
Aurelianus is cried up to have kept the whole Roman Empire three years without
the least invasion, or noise of War; he augmented the bounds of it, and
enhanc'd the glory of it all his life time; but he was tainted with the same
stain as Decius was. He was of a tall stature, but of a sinewy constitution,
and robust; In so much that it is recorded how in the Sarmatian War he slew
with his own hand 48 in one day, but in all above 950. In so much that children
and boys used to sing up and down the streets on festival days. Mill,
mill, mill, mill, mill, mill decollavimus, unus homo, mill, mill, mill,
mill, mill, decollavimus, mill, mill vivat, qui mill, mill occidit: What
shall I say of Probus the Emperor, who for his mere virtue and valor was hois'd
up to the transcendent dignity of an Emperor, though descended of very mean
Parents, of a Gardener; his name suited with his nature, for he was a man of
punctual probity. He trounc'd the Pole, he extinguished Tyrants, he pacified
the World, in so much that VVarres being ceased all the World over by Land and
Sea, it was said, Milites minime fore necessarios, cum desint hosts, Soldiers
were superfluous when there were no Enemies. Dioclesian was also an Hungarian,
a Prince of a notable spirit, who would have antecell'd all the rest, had not
the tenth persecution happened in his reign. For there were nine before under
Nero, Domitian, Tra^an, Marcus, Severus, Maximus, Decius, Valerianus,
Aurelianus, but that of Dioelesian was the bloudiest of all. Iovianus Augustus
was also a child of Hungary, who being chosen Emperor, refused it, saying, that
he would not rule Pagans. hereupon the soldiers with a loud voice said they
were Christians. Valentinianus and Valens were Hungarians, and his Son Gratian,
all Emperors, who did more exploits,

-- quam quae comprendere dictis
In promptu mihi sit --
After this there rushed into Hungary many rough septentrionall people in
swarms, as Vandales, Goths, Hunns, Ostrogoths, and Longobards, at which time
Pannonia came to be called Hungary, and those stout Nations did incorporate and
mix with the Hungarians. Attila struck in like a thunderbolt and brought hither
the Empire; at which time Hungary had Greece and Italy in Vassalage, and
Stipendiary. She did persecute the Gauls with devastations and ^yrings; She
brought Germany after many changes of War to be tributary unto her; and to pay
this tribute, Germany was constrained to make use of, and melt her Church
plate, and that of Monasteries. And there was no people on Earth so formidable
as the Hungarian. For their Empire did extend then from Austria to
Constantinople, and the Pontique Sea, and from Poland to the Adriatique another
way: in which compass of Earth there were 7. spacious Kingdoms, subject to
Hungary; In so much that the King began to be called Archirix.

But what shall I say of Stephanus Sanctus, who would never attempt any* act in
War or Peace, but he would offer up some extraordinary sacrifice to Heaven.
What shall I say of Andrea the 2. who was so happy in the Education of his
Children, that his Daughter Elizabeth being married to the Langrave of Hessen,
for her austere and abstemious holy course of life, was enrolled in the
Calender of Saints? What shall I say of Ladislaus the first, who quelled the
Pole, brought down the Swisses courage, while he was upon an expedition against
the Sarracens, by conjunction with other Princes, pai'd nature the last debt,
and so died in the fullness of glory* and the magnitude of his great exploits;
a man, besides valor, for integrity of life, and innocence incomparable. What
shall I say of the Geisis, of the Belis, of Emericus, of the many of the name
of Charles and Lewis, of Sigismund, Albert, and Uladislaus, and of other most
gallant Kings full of prowess and piety; With what Praeconiums shall I blazon
the praise of Matthias the first? o what a Hero was that Matthias, he that was
a terror to the East and West. He that was Son to Huniades, who was so great an
Artist in policy, and a well temperd Government? He never embarked himself in
any business but he arrived at his wished Port; he never attempted any
business though never so arduous, but he compas'd it, being most constant and
thorough in all his resolutions, and in the prosecution of them; who had such a
dextrous and moving way to incite his soldiers, that he made hope of Victory
to serve for pay. The Emperor Maximilian the first, when he took the City Alba,
when he triumphantly entered the City, the first thing he enquired after was
Saint Mary's Church, where the body of Sanctus Stephanus was interred; but
spying the Arms and Ensigns of Matthias Corvinus, being nearly fixed and
pendant upon the walls with this Inscription, Sub marmore hoc Matthias situs
est, quem facta Deum ostendunt, Fata fuisse hominem: Here lies Matthias under
this Marble, whom his feats showed to be a God, but his fate a man, having I
say spied and read this, he burst into tears, so highly did Maximilian esteem
Matthias; and indeed the perfections and prosperity of such a man, whom would
it not ravish? For Matthias in his time was the only man who was said to bear
arms. He subdued the Bohemians, he orecame the Valachians, he afflicted the
Pole, he tamed the Rebels of Hungary, he reduced Austria under his Dominion,
he extended the limits of his Possessions to the shores of the Adriatique Sea;
he raised the seige of Otranto; He dissipated innumerable swarms of Turks,
and so abated the spirit of the great Sultan Mahomet, who in 32. years had
acquired two Empires, had got 12. Kingdoms, and taken 200. Cities; I say he so
handled this Mahomet, that he and Bajazet his Son desired peace. Besides,
this Sultan Mahomet when he gloried of himself that he had conquered and
quelled all the Kings round about him, he used to except always King Matthias,
who was called by him strenuus Princeps, the strenuous Prince.

But that which adds much to the renown of this notable King, was that he
joined Arts with Arms, that he contracted a kind of Matrimony twixt Mars and
the Muses; to whom he was much devoted in his private retirements. At dinner
and supper he had always some book or other read unto him, or some Doctors
discoursing by learned altercations: He would always say that 'twas impossible
for any to be a General, and to deserve the name of a great Captain, unless
he were versed in the institution of War among our Ancestors, and observed
their discipline of War and Stratagems. He made Buda the Domicile and
rendevous of all kind of Virtue and Knowledge; For he was very liberal and
munificent to all learned men as well as Military, and his reign flourished with
both. Earl Emericus was another Ulisses, his brother Stephen an Agamemnon, Paul
Cinisius another Ajax, Micolas Cyupor a Diomedes, Michael Palatine a Nestor,
Blasius Magerus (who was of ^o robust a constitution, that he lift up a but of
wine which three horses could hardly draw) was another Hercules, and King
Matthias himself was a true Achilles. In his happy reign, Hungary was no other
then an Academy of brave men in all faculties. He boar up most magnanimously
against the whole power of the Ottoman Empire, who denounced War so often
against him; That fresh Empire which florisheth with such incredible Wealth,
most spacious and variety of Dominions, with such veteran Captains and exact
discipline and exercised soldiery; fleshed so often with blood and a
continual course of conquering, having their courage elevated with the conceit
of the puissance and large territories of their Emperor, with diverse other
advantages which the soft. Europaean Princes have not, among whom either want
of money, the mutining of soldiers, the covetousness of Commanders, the
carriage of so much luggage and ammunition for the mouth, the luxury, and
excesses of the common soldier is so frequent. In so much that as an Italian
Author has it, it is a harder matter to take the smallest cottage from the
Turk, then it were to take Calais or Bayon from the French. Hungary is the
greatest rampart of Christendom against that Gigantique Enemy, who magnifieth
and esteems the Hungarian, and slightes all other Europaeans, confessing that
when he comes to the field against them, he is sure to meet with men. Nay the
women of Hungary have such masculine spirits, that it is admirable. Among many
other instances which might be made, I will produce a late one. When Mahomet
had closely begirt Agria by a pertinacious siege, and that the Praesidiaries
being summoned to make a rendition of the place upon very fair terms; for
answer they set up a Mortuary with a death's head upon it on the top of one of
their turrets, preferring death before a dedition. Hereupon the next day he
made a furious storm, and brought his scaling ladders round about the walls,
but he was notably repulsed twice by the Inhabitants. Wherein the virility and
valor of the women was much seen, whereof one having her husband killed before
her face, her mother being by, the mother said that she should have a care of
her Husbands body to give him burial. God forbid, O mother, that my husband
should go unrevenged to his grave, pugnas hoc tempus, non exequias poscit, this
is a time of fighting not burying, and so taking up her husbands sword and
target, she rushed in among the throng of the Enemies, and never left till she
had killed three Turks with her own hands, as they were scaling a wall, and so
offered them for a Victime to her spouse, to whom she afterward gave the rites
of burial. Another following her Mother, who carried upon her head a great
stone to throw down upon the scaling Enemy, and being shot by a bullet and
killed; the daughter takes up the same stone and went furiously to the walls,
where she made so happy a throw, that she knocked down dead two huge Turks as
they were climing up a ladder. This female courage did much heighten the
spirits of the men, who behaved themselves so manfully, that the gran Signior
was constrained to raise his seige most ingloriously, and so trusse up his
bagage and be gone. Bonfinius has another story of a valiant Hungarian, who at
the seige of Iayza, clim'd up a Turret where the Turk had set up his colors,
which he pulled down, and fell down with the colors, and so sacrificed his
life. What shall I say of the portentous courage of Nicolas Iurischyzius who
kept Gunzium a small City against Solomon, maugre his Army of 300. thousand
men. What stupendous exploits did Nicolas Serinius perform ^ at the siege of
Ligeth, who being encompas'd on al sides, with fire, famine, and thirst, with
the howling and screeching of women and children, Thuanus reports, he caused a
gate to be opened, and having a select company of Adventurers with him, they
rushed into the midst of the Enemy, to the amazement of the whole army, where
some of them lost their lives so happily, that they raised the siege: But
Serinius like the Salamander went through and through the fire without being
burnt. Necessity is virtues occasion, and it is the property of a man truly
valiant to make use of it, and turn it to virtue. Now virtue has many ways to
try the valor of her children. She tries the courage of Regulus by fire, of
Rutilius by banishment, of Socrates by poison, of Cato by his self-necion; And
of the Hungarians by these and many other ways: Thus she tried Serinius,
Iurischyzius, Georgius Thurius, and Nadastus, who have got themselves high
seats in the Temple of immortality.

It is Hungary that is the Antemurale, the true Propugnacle of all Europe,
against that prodigious huge Tyrant the Musulmans Emperor. The Germans grow
rich by the Hungarian arms, the Italians live by their Funerals, the French
sleep quietly by their Calamities, the Spaniard is at leisure to War else
where by their Perils, the English and Dutch made the more safe for their
Power, The Pole follows his spotes by their labor. And Christians in general
live securely through their perpetual and contiguous dangers. So that Noble
Hungary is not only the inexpugnable rampart, but the buckler of Christendom.

Therefore, most Noble Princes, the Hungarians without much profaneness may be
called the Patrons and Tutelar Angels of Europe. Therefore the Pole, when the
French Henry had stole away from them, made no ill choice when they reflected
upon Stephen Bartorius to be their King. What an heroique Expedition did he
engage himself in against the Moscovite; what an immense tract of ground was he
to traverse, what thick endless woods, what huge Rivers, what fenns and loughs
with other horrid uncouth places was he to meet withal! The Turks expeditions
to Persia, the Spaniards to the Indies, the expeditions which were made in
former ages to the holy Land, come short of this difficult march which
Bartorius made. But what did he do by this tedious and venturous march? when
he had gone from Boristhenes to Cerinova, from Staricia, and Novogard, as far
as the lake Lohod; depopulating all before him, and taking all the youth of the
Country Captives, he constrained the Sudari the Emperor of Mosco, to refrain
from all navigation in the Boristhenes, and all the Ports of the Baltique Sea,
and confined him to the interior Russia, that he should wander no further. This
Bartorius extended his arm from the Danube, the Titisco, the Dravo, and the
River Marossa to the furthest parts of the Northern World. When the Turk
besieged Plescovia, there came an Ambassador from him into Bartorius his Army,
where they were put in battalion. The Ambassador beholding the countenances of
the men, their postures, and regular discipline, with the splendour of their
arms, and richness thereof, together with their horses and Canons, he fell
into a kind of astonishment, breaking out into these passionate words, Faceret
Deus ut isti Principes -- would God were pleased that these Princes, meaning
his Master the Great Turk, Amurath the 3d. and King Stephen Bartorius were
conjoined in a league, and they might subdue all the World. I will conclude
with a brave Character that Vanotius gave of Stephen Bartorius.

Bartorius erat
In Templo plus quam sacerdos,
In Republica plus quam Rex,
In Tribunali plus quam Senator,
In Iudicio plus quam Iurisconsultus,
In exercitu plus quam Imperator,
In acie plus quam miles,
In adversis perferendis injuriisq, condonandis plus quam Vir,
In public a liberate tuenda plus quam Civis,
In amicitia colenda plus quam amicus,
In convictu plus quam familiaris,
In Venatione, ferisque domandis plus quam Leo,
In tota reliqua vita plus quam homo.
Bartorius was
In the Temple more then a Priest,
In the Commonwealth more then a King,
In point of Judgment more then a Lawyer,
In the Army more then an Emperor,
In the field more then a soldier,
In suffering adversities and more then man,
In pardoning of injuries more then man,
In preserving the Public liberty more then a Patriot,
In all Offices of friendship more then a friend,
In his conversation more then familiar,
In hunting and taming wild beasts more then a Lion,
In all the rest of his life more then a Philosopher.
All these things impartially considered and well pondered, I do not see, under
correction of the judgment of this most sage Assembly, but Hungary may stand
in competition for pre-eminence with diverse other Provinces of Europe.

THE ORATION OF THE Lord ERNEST SCHAFELISKI against HUNGARY.
Most Illustrious, and Highborn Princes,
THE Noble Henricus Albertus, Baron of Limburg, has detained your attentions a
good while in setting forth the praises of Hungary, and so to make her capable
of the principality of Europe; but therein he has labored to put a Giants
head upon a Pygimes shoulders, or Hercules Buskins upon a Child's legs. For, as
by unanswerable arguments I shall endeavor to prove, she has no reason in the
World to aim at such a Prerogative.

For the Kingdom of Hungary, although it enjoy a fat and fertile soil, and
almost every where Productive, yet by the fury of Mars, and neighborhood of
the common Enemy, her agriculture and Mines have extremely suffered for many
Ages. Besides, her air is found unwholsom, and disagreeable to all strangers,
for the grossnesse of it in some seasons, and the tenuity of it in others.
Therefore they cannot continue in one place above a month without danger, least
the languor Hungaricus, the Hungarian faintness seize upon them; which is
prevented by frequent remove of stations; that disease of the Hungarian languor
or lithernes, having begun in the army at Comorra, dispersed it self to
Iavarin, and so the contagion did expand it self among the Germans, Bohemians,
Belgians, French, and Italians, where it extremely raged for a while. And as at
Buda (then which besides Possonium there is scarce a City worthy the view of a
stranger in all the Kingdom) there be some sulphurous Waters of such an
intense heat, that will singe hoggs if they be thrown into them, yet there are
peculiar sorts of fish that are there generated, with certain kinds of froggs,
but if you throw other Rivers fish or froggs into them, they presently die and
turn up their bellies. So the air of Hungary agrees by decree of nature with
the inhabitants themselves, but it is averse, pestilentiall and intolerable to
other people. What shall I say of those kinds of lice, which are the offspring
of the Hungarian air, which much infest all people? for it is found there by
experience, that if one take a Napkin and wash it there in pond water, and
exposed to drying in the Sun, it will be presently full of Vermin. Nay, if one
sweat never so little, the moisture of his body will turn to lice by the
pravity of the Hungarian air. Add hereunto, that besides the Malignity of the
air, the waters are also there of an ill quality both Fountains and Rivers,
all for the most part except the Danube, whose streams are wholesome and
potable: The River Rabniza which mingleth with the Danube about Iavarin, runns
with such unwholesome waters, that the fish and crabbs which are caught there do
cast an ill sent, yea, after they are boiled. But as Parents, if they have a
child either crump-shoulderd, hopperhipp'd, bleareyd, or marked with any other
deformity, do make her a compensation for it in an extraordinary Dowry, which
is able to make a sow appear like Susanna; So Nature and Fortune have made
Hungary some amends for these her imperfections, and furnished her with patches
to put upon her Moles.

Now touching the Inhabitants of Hungary, I pray be pleased to hear what Otto a
grave Bishop of Frisinghen says of them. Hungari sunt facie tetri, profundis
oculis, statura humiles, moribus and lingua barbari and feroces, ut jure
fortuna culpanda, vel potius divina patientia sit admiranda, quae ne dicam
hominibus, sed talibus hominum monstris tam delectabilem exposuit terram. The
Hungarians says the Bishop (and Bishops should not lie) are commonly of a
tetrique countenance, hollow eyd, low statur'd, barbarous and fierce in their
behavior and speech; That either Fortune may be justly blamed, or the Divine
providence admired, that such a delightful Country should be exposed to such
men, or rather Monsters of men. The Hunns, which are birds of a feather with
the Hungarians, if ancient writers may be believed, had their Original from a
sort of Demons. For, as not only tradition, but the story goes, Filimer King of
the Goths having in his army a huge vast-bodied woman which was accused of
impudicity; he banished her to a Wilderness beyond the Maeotis, where meeting
with Satyrs and Demons, she coupled with them and brought forth a numerous
issue, which were afterward called Hunns. But certain it is that both Hunns
and Hungarians came at first from the extremest parts of the North, out of a
Province called Iuharia, or Iurha, which were subject to the Moscovite; who in
quest of a hotter clime came as far as the banks of the Danube, to that part
of the Continent now called Ungaria, which took its name from Iuharia; for in
that Province of Iuharia, they speak to this day the same language as the
Hungars do: of these Iuharians Claudian speaks.

-- quo non deformius ullum
Arctos alit, turpes habitus, obscaenaque visu
Corpora.
Marcellinus calls them Bipedes bestias, vel quales in commarginandis pontibus
effigiati stipites dolantur incompti in hominum figuras; They are two footed
beasts, or rough-hewn trunks effigiated in the form of men, which use to stand
upon the margen of bridges.

Now their Intellectualls are as ugly as their bodies. There were never before
nor after such Martins, and such Hieroms, as Hungary had the hap once to
produce, which were two columns of Christianity. What a bloody tyrant of
Christians was that Decius you extol so highly? what a fierce Persecutor was
Dioclesian? Valentinianus though a Christian was a Tyrant, and Valens an
Arrian. But Attila you say was that unparalleld Hero, yet I pray hear what
Lucan speaks of him.

Terrarum fatale malum, and sydus iniquum
Gentibus --
That Attila was a prodigious Blasphemer; he was used to belch out that, as
Olaus has it, he would make stellas prae se cadere, terras tremere; the stars
to fall before him, and the Earth to tremble. In his Public diplomas, and
warrants he styled himself to be Attila filius Beneduci, Nepos magni Nemroth,
nutritus in Engaddi, Dei gratia Rex Hunnorum, Medorum, Gothorum, Dacorum,
flagellum Dei, metus and malleus Orbis. Attila the Son of Beneduc, Nephew to
great Nemroth, nursed in Engaddi, by the grace of God King of the Hunns, Medes,
Goths, Dacians, the scourge of God, the terror and hammer of the World. He had
an Army of 700* thousand men, yet fearing to be taken once, by Aetius the Roman
General, he had caused many saddles to be put in a place, that if need were, a
fire might be made of them to burn him: but it pleased God to throw away this
iron rodd in the height of his pride; for being to be married to the daughter
of the King of the Bactrians, this bloody Tyrant was choked in his bed the
night before by a sudden flux of blood.

You well know, my Noble Princes, how these Hungarians were for many ages like
Goads in our Ancestors sides; how prone they have always been to rush into
Germany to breath better air; but stories tell how magnanimously our Emperors
have repelled and routed them. Among others, how did Henricus Auceps, and Otto
the great trounce them? They grew so insolent as to demand tribute of the
Emperor, who in disdain of them, sent them a lame old scabby dog; whereupon
they came into the field with a formidable Army, but Heaven was so auspicious
to Henricus Auceps, that he utterly discomfited them with the death of 150.
thousand, and 50. thousand taken prisoners; yet they made head again, and
invaded the confines of Germany by the incitement of Horoldus Bishop of
Salisburg, with such a numerous Army, that they vapour'd in these words, nisi
Caelum cadens nos obruat, aut Terra dehiscens nos absorbeat, nulla vis humana
tanta erit quae vel aspectum nostrum sustinere possit: Unless the Heaven fall
down and overwhelm us, or the Earth gape and swallow us, there is no humane
power never so great dare look us in the face. But Otto the Great pricked the
Tympany of their pride, utterly overthrew them, took their King Bultzko
prisoner, with their 4. chief Generals, Lelius, Sura, Toxus and Schaba. This
Signal and mighty victory did so abate their spirits, that they could never
since be elevated to that height against Germany; but that which confounded
them most, was, that their But sco should be hanged before that Gate in
Ratisbone which looks toward Hungary. There is a proverb that Hungarus multum
lupi in se habet, The Hungarian has much of the Wolf in him: this alludes to
his immanity, fiercnesse and cruelty. Therefore one gave Uladislaus this
advice, as Bonfinius has it; Hungaros non clementia and impunitate, sed ferrea
virga continendos esse, The Hungarian was to be kept in aw, not by mildness
and impunity, but with an Iron rodd. Much more might be spoken of the odd
humors of the Hungarians, but I will here cut off the thread of my discourse,
for fear I should abuse the ears of so gentle an Auditory with such abrupt
matter. And, most Noble Baron of Limburg, this presumption of Hungary in
demanding the precedence of other Kingdoms, is like that of Weiderad the Abbot
of Fuldo, when in a Diet at Mentz, he demanded Priority of the Archbishop of
Colen, who answered, sure this Imperial Council will not think it fitting,
that an Archbishop should give the place to an Abbot, nor a Prince Elector to a
Monk.

THE ORATION OF THE Lord LAURENCE VONWENSIN For ITALY.
Most Illustrious, and nobly extracted Princes,
IT is recorded of the Macedonian Alexander, that when he fell a reading those
verses of Homer, wherein the Valiant Hector challenged any of the nine greatest
Captains of Greece to combat, and that the army thereupon putting it to a
sortilegious chance or lot, with trembling vows, so Jupiter wished that he
might be Ajax, or Agamemnon; Alexander broak out into a sudden passion and
said, Occiderem qui me Tertium nominasset: I would kill him who should name me
the third, intimating thereby that he scorned to be the third in chief among
nine, though thereby he might have more under him then above him. But, most
excellent Princes, put case any were at Rome, and in the presence of Caesar or
Pompey should offer to range Italy in the third place among the Provinces of
Europe, I believe an ordinary death should not serve his turn, or such as
Alexander threatened, but he should be presently snatched to the Gemonian
scales, hurld into Tyber, or praecipitated down the Tarpeian Rock.

For indeed Italy, fair Italy is the most precious gemme of Europe, and other
Provinces are but Bristoll stones in comparison. I will begin with that
Character which Pliny gives of her, who is acknowledged to be one of Natures
chiefest Notaries. Italia omnium rerum alumna, eadem and parens, numine Divum
electa, quae caelum ipsum clarius faceret, sparsa congregaret imperia, ritusque
molliret, and tot populorum discordes ferasque linguas sermonis commercio
contraheret ad colloquia, and humanitatem homini daret, breviterque una
cunctarum Gentium in toto or be patria fieret. Italy is the nurse and Parent of
all things, she is the Elect of the Gods, as she who should make the Heavens
more clear, who should congregate scattered Empires, and mollify their
customs: it is she that is cut out by nature, to draw unto her by sweet comerce
of language the most discordant and fiercest people, yea, to give humanity to
man. And lastly, it is she who is fittest to be the common Country of all
Nations. Therefore I cannot choose but wonder, and not injustly, that she
should be pretermitted all this while in so Judicious an assembly; but the same
fortune befalls Italy here, as does commonly fall upon the most precious
jewels exposed in some Cabinet to be sold, where the richest are shown last:
For if the praises of Italy had been first dilated, the elogiums of all other
Countries had proved insipid and tedious. Now as the glorious Sun, when he
culminates and touches the Meridian Circle does cast a lesser shadow, then
when he declines toward our horizon Westward; so the perfections of Italy
which are so high, that they may be said to be in the Zenith, and the Vertical
point over all other Nations. If I should undertake to speak of them, and draw
them down to the horizon of humane understanding, I should shadow and obscure
them the more. There is in Italy such an harmonious concent of all creatures,
that the Elements can afford, and those in such a perfection, that as Pliny
says again, quicquid est quo carere vita non debeat nusquam est praestantius.
Whatsoever is, that life ought not to want, is no where more excelling. The
terroir or soil is gentle, copious and cheerful, it returns more profit to
the husbandman then he sometimes expects, being at no great charge of culture,
for the land does not struggle there with her Lord, but is gentle and complying
with his desires. The Italian Wheat for whiteness and weight is distinguished
from any other Countries; the Boetian is next, then Sicily, and the African
Wheat is the fourth in goodness. Here I pray what an Emperor ( Constanstin
Paleologus) speaks of her, Nisi scirem a sanctissimis viris in Orient
Paradisum esse* meo judicio non alibi posse reperiri quam in persuavi Patavina
amaenitate. If I did not know* says the Emperor, by the affirmation of most
Holy men, that Paradise were Eastward, it could be found no where else but in
the most sweet amaenities of Padua; whence sprung the proverb, Bologna la
grassa, Padoua la passa. There be some soyles in Italy that afford four
lattermaths of Hay and grass; there are Cheeses made there in many places of a
hundred poundweight. Nor does Italy feed the eye only as you pass with
delectable prospects far and near, but it feeds the smelling also with the
most aromatical odors of her fruit, witness Apulia with many other places,
which would make you think you pass through the Elysian fields as you journey
along her territories. For Vineyards, she may be called Bacchus his Inner
Cellar, where the most generous and sweetest Wines are kept. And whereas Pliny,
who had survaid so much of the Earth, does enumerate fourscore kinds of Wines,
the one half of them may be appropriated to Italy. Who has not heard of the
Greek Wine that grows hard by Naples, on that part of ground were the fiery
Mountain Vesuvius is superincumbent? the Set in Wine which Augustus Caesar
preferred before all others; the Caecubum and Falernian Wine, the Albanian, the
Surrentin, the Massican, the Statan, the Calen^, Fundani and Veliternian Wines,
with the Rhetican which grows near Verona, and is of a royal taste, which
Theodoric King of the Ostrogoths, while he did signorize over Italy, caused to
be brought to Rome for his own palate; the Ligustic and Tabian Wine, and lastly
the Wine about Monte Fiascone called Lachrymae Christi, the tears of Christ,
for the suavity thereof, which when one of our Countrymen had tasted, he
fetched a sigh saying, O Domine, quare non lachrymasti in nostris Terris? O
Lord why did thou not shed some tears in our Country? At Papia there grow
most fragrant Grapes which perfume one's mouth as he eats them. The licor of
these grapes is better then any Hellebor against melancholy, it expells
corroding cares, and wonderfully elevates the languishing spirits. It is
recorded that the Famous Boethius Severinus, a Patrician of Rome being in
Prison, and but half alive, the sense of his Captivity having sunk so deep into
him, was so revived by this Wine^ that it begat new spirits in him. O faelicia
vina quae labantem m^rore animum, curisque depressum modico haustu erigunt,
firmantque nutantem. O happy Wines which elevate the mind depressed with cares,
and crestfaln with grief, bearing it up from going down, though he drink but a
modicum of it. Hereupon his strength and spirits being restored and instaurated
by this Wine, he fell to write his book de Consolatione: Who doubts but
Oenotria received her old denomination for the goodness of the Wine that is
gathered there.

Italy also excells for rare large cattle, whence she happily may receive her
name from (...), which is a Calf. The fame of the Neapolitan Coursier runs all
the World over. And for herds of sheep she has had always great numbers,
according to Martial.

Velleribus primis Appulia, Parma secundis
Nobilis, Altinum tertia laudat Ovis.
Apulia has the first fleeces, Parma the second, and Altinum the third. For
Volatills and Aquatique creatures, Italy also abounds with variety. For all
sorts of metalls Italy also vailes to no Country; there is a Mine of
Quicksilver hard by the River Hydra. For Alum also in Toscany, and the
territories of the Church there is great store, and it may be called now one of
Romes Staple Commodities, whereof there are mighty proportions carried away;
and to encourage the Merchant to come thither, the Pope has long since
published a Manifesto, that if any shipp be taken by Pirates, or cast away by
storm being laden with Roman Alum, when he comes again he shall have it at
half the rate he paid for it before; it is thought that France vents of this
Commodity above a Million of Ducats every year. There is most excellent Salt
made in Italy; she has excellent Alablaster, and Marble. She has Manna, which
no Kingdom of Europe has besides her. She has store of Corral and Porphyrie,
she has Ophits, Agats, and Chalcedeny, she has the hard Azur, and the Lazul
stones, the grain for Purple dies, with innumerable other rich Commodities. O
precious Italy, and among other territories of thine, O luxurious Campania?
which Florus does describe thus very elegantly. Omnium non modo Italia, sed
toto terrarum orb pulcherrima Campaniae plaga est, nihil mollius caelo, nihil
uberius solo, bis floribus vernat, Ideo Liberi Cererisque certamen dicitur,
nihil hospitalius mari. Heic illi nobiles portus, Caieta and Misenus, and
tepentes fontibus Baiae, Lucrinus and Avernus quaedam maris ostia. Heic amicti
vitibus montes Gaurus, Falernus, Massicus, and pulcherrimus omnium Vesuvius,
Aetnaei ignis imitator. Campania is the most beautiful tract of Earth, not
only of Italy, but of all the World. There Is nothing more gentle then her air,
more luxuriant then her soil. Bacchus and Ceres strive here for the mastery.
There is no Sea so hospitable, here are the Noble Ports of Caieta, and Misenum,
Lucrinus and Avernus are as two Gates to let in Neptune; here are Baths fedd
with tepid Fountains, here are hills clad with Vines, Gaurus, Falernus,
Massicus, and the fairest of all Vesuvius, Aetna's Ape. Halicarnassaeus
affirmed in his time, that fruits are gathered there three seasons in the year;
what a place of pleasure was Capua in Tiberius his time? what a Paradise is
Naples at this time? Here Virgil melted away his time when he writ his
Georgiques. Horace, Livy, Statius, Pampinius, Claudian, Anneius Seneca,
Agellius, Petrarca, Panormitanus, Laurentius Valla, Porcellius, Blondus, Facius
with other excellent writers. For the luster and number of Nobility, there is
not such a concourse upon Earth of Princes, Dukes, Marquises, and Counts. Who
then, that has the least ambition to virtue, but would be transported with a
violent desire to visit Italy, who has Cities that shine in her like so many
constellations in the Firmament? Those of the first magnitude are Rome, holy
and magnificent Rome, wise, rich and Lordly Venice, gentile, and odoriferous
Naples, beautiful Florence, a City, as Charles the Emperor said, to be seen
only on Festival days, Milan the spacious, Bolonia the fat, Ferrara the
civil, Padoua the strong, Bergamo the subtle, Genoa the proud, Verona the
worthy, Brescia the fortified, Mantoua the glorious, Rimini the good, Siena the
studious, Luca the industrious, Furli the wanton, Ravenna the mild, Capoua the
amorous, Urbin the loyal, etc. with diverse renouned Cities more that have
their peculiar Epithets.

The Divine ingenie, and inventive brain of the Italian, is well known all the
Earth over, for all Countries have reaped the benefit thereof. There are not
such Opificers and Artists in the World; if you respect Limmers, Architects,
Painters, Weavers, and such like; who are not only imitated, but admired by the
rest of the Europaeans. What a rare Chymicall invention was that of making
Crystal Glasses by the Venetian. What a happy, and infinitely profitable
invention was that of the Mariners compass, found out by the subtle reach of a
Napolitan wit, that immortal John Goia of Amalphi: What prodigious fancies had
Michael Angelo of Florence, and Raphael of Urbin. Now, as Biscopius a British
Monk, made 5. Pilgrimages to Rome, and carried back to Great Britain in the
year 703. the choicest Artificers of Italy, at which time one may say that that
Island was first civilized, so to this day all other Countries fetch their
chiefest Artists from thence.

Moreover for all other Speculative and Theorical Knowledge, the Italian brain
transcends all other in the study of the Sciences. Rome had but short skirts
before litterature was introduced, which happened a little after the first
Punique War, then she began to be another Athens. O immortal Gods, how did
she expand her self afterward, how violently did she thrive and augment her
Dominions? what rare wits did she produce, as Ennius Rudinus, Accius Plautus,
Lucretius, Catullus, Statius, Horatius, Persius, and Valerius Flaccus, Iuvenal,
Porpertius, Ovid, and Virgil; all heavenly Poets. For Prose, Porcius Cato
Censorinus, Q. Claudius, Marcus Varro, who wrote more then others use to read,
Salustius Crispus, Cornelius Nepos, Pompeius Trogus, Titus Livius, Caius Julius
Caesar, Velleius Paterculus, Cornelius Tacitus, Valerius Maximus, Suetonius,
Pliny, Natures Bibliothecary. What accurate rules of historizing are given us
by Archytas, Aristoxenus, Luritus, Nicomachus, all Tarentines. Alchmen, and
Philolaus, Crotonians, Vitruvius of Verona; The Mysteries of Greek Philosophy
were opened to us by Papirius, and Sempronius. For the Pandects of the Law we
are beholden to Papinianus, Paulus, and Ulpian. What shall I say of those
Hero's of Eloquence, Cornelius Cethegus, Appius Caecus, Q. Metellus, C.
Laelius, P. Africanus, Ser. Galba, Aemilius Lepidus, C. Gracchus, Q. Catulus,
Herennius, Titius, and the great Standardbearer of Orators, of Tullius Cicero.
What were found single in all the other, met all in him together. His Orations
had the gravity of Cato, the lenity of Laelius, he had neither the
boysterousnesse of Gracchus, nor the heat of Caesar, nor the confused
distributions of Hortensius, nor the sophisms of Calvus, nor the niggardnesse
of Salust. There could nothing imaginable be either added, spared or altered in
his Orations. And what a powerful stroke did the Ciceronian Eloquence carry
with it against Catiline? what a virtue it had to preserve Rome? Romulus did
not so great an act to build Rome, as Cicero did to defend it. It was a great
trophy that Scipio carried away from Hannibal, Fabricius from Pyrrhus, the
other Scipio from Antiochus, Crassus from Spartacus, Pompey from Sertorius and
Mithridates, but it was a more wholesome Victory for Rome which Cicero had of
Catiline.

But after these glorious Lamps of learning, there happened afterward dark
times, by the irruption of many barbarous Nations into Italy, who ravished Rome
so often, overwhelmed all Italy with ignorance. But Urban the 4. revoked the
Muses from Banishment, and learning began to flourish again. He sent for Thomas
Aquinas to Rome, who had been a scholar to Albertus Magnus. This Aquinas was a
man of extraordinary intellectualls, so that he grew more illustrious for his
learning, then for his birth, though he descended from the ancient Counts of
Apulia: The old Academy of Rome was then reestablished by new instaurations.
After Urban, Clement the 5. in the Council of Vienna made a Decree, that at
Rome, or wheresoever the Pontifical Court should reside, the Hebrew, Chaldaic,
and Arabic should be read by public Professors. Then in Nicolas the 5. time
choice Agents were sent all Europe over to fish for old Authors, to which end
he gave them golden hooks, and large allowance. He offered 5000. Ducats to him
who could bring the Hebrew Copy of Saint Matthews Gospel. Cosmo, and Laurence
de Medici, were great Restaurators of learning. Which made Marsilius Ficinus,
Argyropilus, Chalco^diles, Picus, and Politianus to come to Florence. Azon of
Bolonia did much in reviving the Civil Law, together with the glossaries of
Accursius.

I come now to Dante Aligero, Petrarca, and Boccaccio a triumvirate, who were
Gran-Masters of the Italian tongue.

Leo the tenth was a man born for the reparation of Letters, and advancement of
knowing men; from his time it is incredible how all kind of Sciences did
reflourish in Italy, and consequently in all Countries else; for Italy may be
called the Source or great Cestern, whence all kind of Virtues flow to the
Europaean World. Divine Writers did multiply, Sadolet, Caietan, Contarenus,
Borromaeus, Sirletus, Caraffa, Caesar Baronius, who with much Oil and labor
compiled a Gigantic work, viz. the Ecclesiastic History, which for Magnitude,
for Method, for Variety of Narrations, for Expense and pains, must be
confessed that nil oriturum alias, nil ortum tale. There is not, nor will there
be such a work. I bring Bellarmine next to Baronius, they were both purpurated,
and great Cardinals, great in Doctrine, as well as in Dignity, there was a
great heap of knowledge lodged under their red Caps. Peter Martyr, Zanchius,
Paulus Venetus, Isidore, Clarius and Folengius, two Benedictins, were Eminent
men.

For prudence of the Law how Celebrous is Alciat, Pancirolus, Albericus
Gentilis, Pacius, Peregrinus, Monochius, Vaudus Mascardus, Farinacius, Surdus,
and Hondaeus.

What could Hippocrates or Galen know more in the secrecies and Operations of
Physic then did Fracastorius, Fallopius, Hierom Mercurialis, Aldrovandus,
Matthiolus, Maranta, Brasavolus, Cesalpinus, Baccius, John Baptista Porta,
Costeus, Chlumna, Ghinus, Aloys, Anguillara, Tapivacius, Tali^otius, who could
make Lips, Noses, Ears, and Eyes so artificial, as if they had been
natural, to the wonder of the spectator.

Within the whole circumference of Philosophy, what could be so critical and
recondit, that Julius Caesar Scaliger did not penetrate. Fran. Guicciardin need
not give place to any Historian old or new, according to the opinion of Thuanus
and Lipsius. What singular men were Paulus Iovius, Sigonius, Bonamimicus,
Gyraldus, Cardinal Bembo, Cardan, Gauricus, Onufrius, Hermolaus, and Daniel
Barbari, Calepin, Albertus, Manucins, Peter Aretin, Pomponius Laetus,
Vergerius, Picus, Zabarella, Piccolomini, Magirus, Bonciarius, Ehinus,
Speronius Torquatus Tasso, Paruta, Ur sinus, Ricobonus, Superantius. What rare
Women for Morality and Erudition were Laurentia Strozzia, and Olimpia Fulvia
Morata. Nor can Italy choose but be full of such exquisite learned spirits,
considering there are so many convenient Seminaries to plant them in, so many
brave Universities. There is Rome the Mother of all. There is Padoa her first
Daughter, there is Bolonia the subtillest, Siena the pleasantest, Florence the
fairest, Milan the profoundest; There is Naples, Pisa, Papia, Ferrara, with
diverse others, to the number of 17. in all; therefore there must needs be good
corn where there are such fields to sow it, and such good culturage.

Nor has Mercury only his Pavilions in Italy, but Mars has also his tents
there, Military Virtue and Discipline never came to that height of perfection as
it is there; what notable ingenious Engineers does she daily produce? what new
ways of fortification does she daily invent? how she reduces all to rules of
art, so that any one is there a Mathematitian. The Italian does not rush rashly
into danger as other blind bayards; but he does cast the action first into the
balance of judgment, to see whither it be feasible, and then he continues in
one degree of heat all the while; whether it be in assaulting, or pursuing,
whither he makes a halt or retires, he is still the same man in point of
courage. In matter of Treaty there is no Nation ever went beyond the Italian,
he was never cosend that way, wherein he uses to show resolution as well as
reservednesse; there is a memorable example of that, when Charles the 8. came
into Italy, he advanced as far as Florence, where entering into a Treaty with
the Duke, he employed 4. Commissiones to the Emperors Camp, whereof Caponi was
one, who hearing the propositions read by the Kings Secretary, and finding them
very high, snatched them from him, and toar them, saying, Frenchmen, if you
propose such high things, go and sound your trumpets, and Florence shall ring
her bells; and so he and his fellow Commissioners withdrew themselves suddenly
from the Kings Bedchamber, where the business was to be transacted. This
resolute comportment of Caponi startled the French, and brought them to far
lower terms. I should tire your patience too much if I should give a Cataloge
here of all the great Captains of Italy, therefore I will instance but in few.
Who has not heard of Farinata Uberti, celebrated by Dante? Castruccio was
admired by all. Scaliger Prince of Verona was feared by all, Balbicino,
Draccio, Sforza, Gutamelata, to whom the Venetians erected a brazen Statue at
Padoa Piccinini, Coleone, and Feltrio Prince of Urbin, Vitellio, Ursini,
Liviano, Macone, Correggi, Trivultio, Gonzaga, Davali, Vastio, and Prospero
Colonna, were all of them great Martialists, and men of admirable conduct. What
shall I say of the Strozzi, of Iacomo Medicini, of Castaldi, of Andrea Doria,
another Neptun, and of Ambrosio Spinola a great Captain; of sound prudence in
Counsel, and performance in the Camp. What notable exploits did he do in high
and low Germany? how important was his presence at the siege of Ostend, where
120. thousand souls found their Graves. What a stupendous circumvallation was
that of Breda? how politiquely did he seize upon the Palatinat; but being
commanded a far off from Spain to raise the siege of Casale, his great spirit
not being able to brook it, he said, me han quitado la honra, They have taken
away my honor; which made such impressions in him, that he retired to the town
of his Nativity ( Genoa) and so marched to Heaven. But, most Noble Princes,
excuse me that I have pretermitted so long one of your rank, Alexander Farnese,
Duke of P^rma, of whom Monsieur de la Noue his Enemy, and one of the greatest
Martialists in France, says, Iamais Capitain n' eust plus de Judgment en la
conduite d'vne Armee, ni plus de justice en la discipline militaire. Never
Captain had more judgment in the conduct of an Army, nor more Justice in the
discipline of War. Who does not admire Americo Vespucio the Florentine, who
has christn'd the New World, which is held to be as big as the Old, with his
name? Who does not stand astonished at Christophoro Columba, who may be said to
be a greater Hero^ then Hercules; for he discovered a far greater World; and
went far beyond his nil ultra. Truly all Antiquity cannot parallel that exploit
which he performed, merely by strength of wit, and his rare skill in the
Mathematiques: for contemplating with himself, that the Equator the great
Circle in the Heavens did divide the whole World into two equal parts, and
finding that there was such a proportion of Earth on the North-East side; he
concluded with himself that there must needs be so much on the South-West to
counterbalance the Globe, and make the Heavenly Circle to be just in his
division; and this speculation of his was grounded upon a true principle, as it
proved by the effect; Though the Ligurians his Countrymen deemed it a vain
fancy. Henry the 7. of England held it ridiculous, Alphonsus the 5. a mere
fancy, at last this great Artist being in despair to find some Prince to
patronage the Work; he made his address to Isabella Queen of Castile, a most
pious and fortunat Lady, who began to give ear and credit to him, and so
accommodated him for the voyage, which notwithstanding a thousand difficulties,
as the danger of those vast unknown Seas, the murmuring humor of the Spaniards
that went with him; yet he brought his ends home to his aim, and returned with
an Olive branch, or rather a leaf of Gold home in his mouth. Thus as providence
would have Columba, a Dove first to discover dry Earth after the Deluge; so
Columbus first discovered this new piece of Earth to the Inhabitants of the old
World. In so much that this Italian may be said to have laid the first
foundation of the greatness, which Spain is mounted unto at this time. But
Columbus chancing to be one time unkown among some Spaniards, who discoursing
of this discovery, and slighting it, saying it might have beeen feasible by any
Navigator, he calls for an Egg, and laying a wager that none could make that
Egg to stand at an end upon a smooth table, the Spaniards trying many ways to
do it, and missing, Columbo took the egg, and b^uising the shell at one end,
made it stand upright; then every one could do it after him; whereupon he told
them, just so when an Italian had showed you the way, 'twas easy for you
Spaniards to go to the new World. Yet that brave Queen Isabella and Ferdinand
with their Successors did nobly reward Columbo, though Genoa his own native
town was ungrateful unto him, for having left her a mighty Legacy at his
death, she did not raise any monument, much less any brass Statue to his
memoey, which he so much deserved. But herein Genoa carried her self toward
Columbo, as London in England did toward Cavalier Middleton, who fell upon a
brave wholesome invention of bringing a fresh River fifty miles about, to run
through her streets to her infinite advantage for many uses.

Touching the noble virtue of Friendship, she reigns no where so strongly as
among the Italians, who are naturally of a most humane and mansuete
disposition, not only among themselves but to strangers. There was a notable
example thereof in Alostio Priuli, a Gentleman who had contracted a strict
league of love with Cardinal Pole an English man, which lasted many years, so
that there was much notice taken at Rome, of that conformity of manners,
reciprocation of affection, and sweet sympathy which were between them. This
friendship continued in the same strain of strength for twenty six years; all
which time Priuli could not be wrought upon to enter into the College of
Cardinals, though often invited by Julius the third. Cardinal Pole falling at
last sick of a lingering disease, Signior Priuli never stirred from his side all
the while: at last, the Physicians telling him he had not long to live, he sent
for a Notary, and made Priuli Heir of all he had; but such was the generosity
of the Venetian, that he made not a penny benefit of it, but gave it all among
his English kindred; being twenty months in perpetual agitation for the
recovering of the estate.

Nor are there any people so naturally addicted to Charity as the Italians:
Cardinal Atestino was a great example hereof, of whom there was a kind of
Proverb in Rome, That his House was an Exchequer to the rich, an Hospital to
the poor; his Person was the splendor of the sacred College, and an ornament
to the Roman Court.

I pass now to the Nobility of Italy, which is very numerous; there is no
clime under Heaven, where Virtue is more rewarded, good qualities more pryed
into, and Industry higher advanced. Rome is the Common-countrey of all Nations,
it is the rendevous of all Ingenious spirits; and its impossible for any person
of Merit to be there long, but he is sought after, and advanced. This makes
Italy so abound with Nobles of all Nations. For the generous exercise of riding
great Horses, they go beyond all, and it is wonderful to see, what a docible
creature they bring those fiery mettall'd animals to be; they use to make them
dance, and keep touch with the music, by a rare art, and do strange feats
besides. What a famous Master in this art was Sigismondo Locatello of Ferrara?
Grisonio was no less rare in point of Horsmanship.

Among other complete and gallant spirits which Italy produced these latter
Ages, Cosmo de Medici was one of the most admired all the world over: 'Twas He
that did first found the grandeur of the Medicean Family; 'twas He brought his
Hetruscan Country to such a civility; 'twas He who taught Sovereign Princes
first, to look to the encroaching power of their Neighbors, and to keep them
in aequilibrio; therefore Apollo made fit choice of him to hold the Balance,
when all the Kingdoms and States of Europe were weighed before him at Delphos.
He was a man of an exquisite temper in his behavior, of a notable reach of
understanding, of a marvailous forecasting head, a subtle clear brain, quick
apprehension and profound judgment. He was munificent to strangers, liberal to
his domestiques, and extremely charitable to the poor, a mighty restaurator of
Gods Houses. In all these acts he was equal to Kings, he exceeded ordinary
Princes, and went far beyond all private men. Now, although out of the
largeness of his heart, and piety of his soul, he had expended a Kings Ransom
in Hospitals, Monasteries, and Churches, yet he was used to say, Non potuisse
se in suis accepti and expensi codicibus unquam reperire Deum Debitorem: When
he went to look into his Ledger book of Account what moneys he had received and
issued, he could never find God his Debtor. Yet this mighty man was, when
Auditor Cossa did audit his expenses, 'twas found, that he had spent forty
millions in public and private Fabriques, and ten millions in private acts
of munificence, and charity. He was such a Lover of his Country, so mighty a
Patriot, that having lived above seventy years, this modest, but well merited
Epitaph was engraven upon his tomb, Cosmus Med^ces heic situs est, Decreto
publico, pater patriae. Cosmo of Medici lies here, Father of his Country by
public Decree.

And now that I am in Toscany, I will visit Pisa, who I find was in former
times a Commonwealth of great authority by land, and power by sea, she did
subjugate Sardinia, and Carthage also, bringing her king captive to the Pope*
by whom he was converted; she also made her self mistress of Majorica, Panormo,
and Salerno; she was once at that cumble of wealth and greatness, that a
hundred Gentlemen of Pisa were used to build and maintain upon their own charge
every one his Galley, to scowre and secure the Ligustic sea.

What shall I say of the state of Genoa? who among the Records of her Triumphs,
can glory, that she took and possessed once, Sardinia, Cyprus, Lesbos, and
Chio, as also Pera opposite to Constantinople on the Asian shore; she was also
mistress of Theodosia, or Caffa, insomuch that her dominions extended as far as
the banks of Tanais: And to this day there be some Christian Rites, and Italian
Families in that part of Tartary. What tough wrestling, and terrible Wars
continued 'twixt her and Venice for two or three Ages together? and we may
easily conjecture how potent she was, when she could tugge with Venice so long.

The Duchy of Milan is come to a stupendous height of magnificence, power, and
riches; insomuch that the Insubrian Revenues are above those of some Kings.

I come now to the most Rare and Renowned Republique of Venice; she is of that
high consequence, that without her, Italy should want her chiefest Ornament,
Liberty should want a refuge, Europe should want her chiefest Bu^ (...)*
Neptune should want a Mistress, and Nature a Miracle. What shall I say (...)
Venice, orbis christiani arx, the prime Castle of Christendom; and the Sea
(...) be said to be hers too; she is Lady of more Sea than any state in the
world (...) point of extent; she has a Fortress the most exactly built by the
rules of ^ginry of any upon earth, it is Palma, which cost two millions the
erecting, (...) the yearly keeping of it stands her in a hundred thousand
Crowns per annum* She has an Arsenal that is almost as great a wonder as her
self, there is no^ ^e like under the Sun: she has three hundred Artificers
perpetually in pay, and she spends communibus annis, above six hundred thousand
Crowns merely (...) that Arsenal. She would ravish a fresh comer with the
luster of her Palaces* with her marble Pictures, and marble Statues, with the
Church of Saint Mark paved with Porphyrie, and checkered with many kind of
precious stones, and her roof and walls all Mosaical work: If I could get into
the Treasury of St. Mark, I could tell you more wonders; but they who have seen
it, report they were quite stupefied at the wealth they saw there.

Touching the Commerce of Venice, it is beyond belief; walk in the Rialto, or
Saint Marks place, and you shall meet with Greeks Turks, Arabs, Egiptians,
Moors, Cannibals, Tartars, Ethiopians, Persians, and Indians: There you shall
find Merchants of the black, white, and red sea, of the Hellespont, of all the
Isles of Greece, of the Miditerranean, of Ormus, besides European Merchants from
every corner; The boys there will not stand gazing at a turband or a shash, or
any other strange habit which are worn there familiarly; This City, though a
Virgin (of near upon thirteen hundred years standing) has been such a
Virago, that she has wrastled with the greatest Monarchs upon earth, and laid
some of them on their back, but none of the^ could lay her in such a posture as
to get her maydenhead; And lately she has cop'd singly of her self with the
Great Ottoman Emperor any time these eight years both by sea and upon Terra
firma, and given him many ill favored foyles; Now the reason that this sage
Signorie has continued a pure intacted maid so many ages, besides her
advantageous situation, the Adrian Sea being her protector, is, that the
Venetians are grave in their Counsels, severe in judgment, constant in adverse
fortune, and temperat in good; They are excellent patriotts, they have public
souls, and it is the study of every particular man how to conserve their
liberty, improve their strength, and the glory of Venice. But her incolumity
does not depend upon any one frail man's life, progeny, or wit, but upon the
prudence of a politic and immortal Senate; For although Venice has had most
heavy, and in the eye of human reason irreparable defeates, as destructive as
that of Rome at Cannas, yet she never sunk in her courage and Counsels, but
boar up still above water; That overthrow at Abdua, That at Trebia and
Trasimeni, that at Bresica and Vicenza were very sore and fatal blows, as
great as that of Cannas was to Rome, yet she recovered herself in a shorter
time far then ever Rome could do; For the richesses of this state you may
easily guess at their greatness, when the revenues of S. Mark, use and imposts
of the City of Venice herself is able to support an Emperor. Besides the very
demeanes of the Church amount to three millions.

And now O Rome, O glorious Rome, O holy Rome, I make my entrance into thee,
the pyramidall top of all glory, the lady of all virtues, the source of all
piety; It was the wish of S. Augustine to see three things, Christ in the flesh,
Paul in the pulpit, and Rome in her highest flourish. Hear Martial.

Terrarum Dea, gentiumque Roma,
Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum.
Livie in his time gave this character of her, Nulla unquam Respublica nec
major, nec sanctior, bonisque exemplis ditior fuit; No commonwealth was ever
more potent, more pious, and richer for good examples; Lipsius averres, that
Rome had three millions of men in her, and a hundred and fifty millions in
annual revenu: she had at one time in Legions abroad and at home for her
preservation six hundred and five and forty thousand armed Soldiers; From
Romulus to Augustus Caesar she had above three hundred Triumphs; Julius Caesar
brought into the aerarium or common treasury sixty and five thousand talents,
which amount to almost forty millions of our money: she had above thirty miles
in circuit, which in Aurelianus his time extended to twenty miles more, and the
people increased accordingly. In so much that Vopiscus affirms, she fed at one
time four millions of men in City and Suburbs. Seneca left seventy and five
hundred thousand philippicos, or crowns behind him; Caecilius Claudius
Isidorus, although he had lost much by the civil wars, yet he left 4117.
slaves, 3060. yoke of Oxen; and of other cattle two hundred and fifty seven
thousand: Tacitus reports the first, and Pliny the second. There were at one
time in Rome five hundred Gladiators or Fencers, a thousand Bears, one hundred
Lions; which were kept in diverse denns. The high way of Appia extended three
hundred and fifty miles, the Flaminian more. Touching the Aqueducts and
fountains, the baths, and the waters of Rome, there were at once five hundred
men hired to look to them, and the channells were so broad, that a horseman
might foord over* What art was used to furnish the seven hills with conduits
and cesternes. When Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus came to Rome and was
brought about to view the City, he was asked what he thought of her? He
answered (looking upon her four hundred Churches) he thought, said he, that
all Rome was but one Temple, her Senate is an assembly of Kings, she is yet to
this day the flower of the whole earth, and the better part of mankind. Now
Rome came to this vast magnitude by her parsimony, by her severity, and
industry; she had her legions always well trained, and never sufferd to be
idle, nor did she pamper them with too much pay; The Senators were more
careful for the discipline of the soldiers, then of the education of their
children; They used to inure and habituat them to arms before they sent them
abroad; And certainly the Romans must needs be very valiant men naturally;
besides so many victories did heighten their courage; Among thousands of
examples which I could produce, let Licinius Dentatus serve for one, who as
Valerius Maximus avoucheth, had received forty and five several wounds and
never a one backward, he had been in above one hundred battles, and brought
home thirty and four spoils. What notable great Generals did she breed of
diverse tempers; Marcellus was of a fiery spirit, Fabius Maximus was politiquely
slow, Pompey was daring, The Scipios were patient, Caesar for expedition, for
martial knowledge, and magnitude of mind was unparalleld. When Pyrrhus came
with a new race of men, and horrible Elephants into Italy, and was advanced
within thirty miles of Rome; He sent unto her if she would parley, word was sent
Pyrrhus, Italia cum copijs excedito, ubi excesserit, de pace si volet agito; ni
excesserit, Arma and viros and acie^ expectato. Let Pyrrhus depart Italy with
all his forces, when he has done that, there shall be a treaty for peace if he
will, but if he do not depart, let him expect Arms, men, and a battle: such
was the undauntable courage of Rome in that age, which it seems did much
degenerat afterward, when the Goths, Vandalls, Huns, and other Septentrionall
rough-hewn peeple appeared before her; And the reason of this degeneration in
the mind of the Romans was, that by desuetude of arms, and want of an enemy
they fell to voluptuousness, to ease and softnes; Before, they had a brave
method in training up their youth, they were instructed in letters till they
were twenty, and afterward in military discipline.

But new Rome after so many assaults, and sackings of diverse barbarous nations,
as she fell in glory, so she also fell lower in situation, for she removed from
the seven Hills to the plain of Campus Martius where she is seated now, having
lost the fifth part of her circumference, and magnitude, and being not the sixth
part so populous; yet a notable providence has attended this City, that she
florisheth still, and though she be not so bigg as she was', yet she is better,
since the standard of the Cross was planted there by a special benignity of
heaven; she has the Law of Christ instead of her Legions, As she was before
the chiefest City in the world for arms, so she is now for Religion; she is
the Court of the Chief Pastor, and the common Country of all Christians, she
is the gnomon of the great Dial of saving Faith, Romana Ecclesia est illa quae
non modo tot principum and Imperatorum, sed quod long praeclarius est, omnium
sanctorum Catholicamater, and in cujus gremio mori faelicius est, quam ab
initio nasci, cum non nasci satius sit, quam in hac non mori. The Roman Church
is she who is not only the Catholic universal mother of Princes and
Emperors, but of Saints, in whose lapp it is more happy to die, then to have
been born, it being better not to be born at all, then not to die in Her; as
Montanus says. This makes her so refulgent for so many prerogatives, that the
greatest part of the European world, as also all the new Converts in the
American new world do acknowledge her the Chief seat of the Oracles of God,
and her Bishop the chiefest ministerial head of the holy Church: and to deny
this, if we may bebelieve Stapleton, summae impietatis vel praecipitis
arrogantiae est: It is either the highest impiety, or the desperatest
arrogance; He is the universal Shepherd, the successor of Saint Peter, and
the Vicar of Christ; the Commission which our Savior gave Saint Peter, Feed my
Flock, is transferred to him in chief, and with the Commission the keys, and
power also of absolving, and binding. For which respect (such an humiliation
and reverence Religion strikes into the Soul of man) all Emperors and most
Kings do willingly give not only precedence, but perform Offices of service
unto him, as, among a world of instances that could be produced besides,
Charles the fifth, did at Bolonia, and Francis the first at Marseilles. How
many Emperors have held the basin while he washed his hands, how many Kings
have held his stirrup while he mounted and descended off his Mule, how many
have lead his horse by the bridle. How many thousand Princes have kissed his
Pantouffle, and carried him in a Chair upon their shoulders, and gloried in all
these acts of submission; such a Power Christian Religion has to humble the
hearts of the greatest Princes, and make all temporal greatness stoop to the
spiritual hopes of Heaven.

It Is true, that Rome from her very infancy, when she was a Pagan, was much
given to the reverence of the Gods. Her Pontifex Maximus was then in high
adoration, she had magnificent, and costly Temples, Altars and Fanes which had
singular immunities and prerogatives, the Temple was then an Asylum and
Sanctuarium, a refuge and sanctuary from all violence; and of these Ethnic
Temples Rome had 4. times more then she has now of Christian Churches. She had
then her Nunneries and Vestall fires, her Flamins and Archflamins more in
number then any other City; when she had conquered any foreign Nation, their
Gods were brought to Rome, and they were ascited among hers, and admitted;
alleging that there could not be too many Gods to preserve so great a City.
Yet there was violence laid then upon the conscience in spiritual things, nor
did the Ecclesiastic Power, and Pontifex Maximus ever clash with the temporal
for Superiority, but always yiedling unto it, as receiving his Protection,
Means and Maintenance from it. This was the genius of old Rome, but new Rome
came to be so high in her devotions, that she came at last to give more
allegiance to the Pontifical Power then to the Imperial. Nor were the Roman
Emperors ever in that adoration in old Rome, as the Pope is now in the new,
whom she holds to be so far above the temporal power as the Soul is above
the body. It Is true, there was much reverence given to the chief Roman
Magistrate and Senate, from all times. Adherbal King of Numidia called himself
Romanorum Procuratorem, The Romans Procter. Eumenes King of Pergamus came to
Rome, and pulling of his Capp, offered it to the Senate, confessing he received
his liberty from Rome. Prusias King of Bithynia when he came to the Senate, he
used to kiss the threshal of the door, acknowledging himself Mancipium
Senatus, a slave unto the Senate. Tiridates, King of Armenia, bowd himself to
Nero's knees. But there was never such low submission done to any Pagan
Governor, as is now done to the Pope, whom the Turks call Rumbeg, that is
Prince or Lord of Rome, and the Persian Rumschah, King of Rome; for we never
read that the Ethniques ever descended so low as to Foot-Osculation, which is a
reverence peculiar and due only to the Pope; the Emperor and other Kings being
contented only that the Vassal kiss their hands, or hem of their Garment. Nor
does the Pope return reverence to any other potentate by rising up, bowing his
head, or uncovering his head to any, only to the Emperor after he has kissed
his feet, he is afterward admitted to kiss his hand, and then he rises a
little and gives him a mutual kiss of Charity with an Embracement. There is
a cloud of examples, how diver Emperors and Kings came to Rome to do their
filial duty to the Holy Father, and to have their Coronations confirmed by him.
Justinian, did so to Constantine, Pipin to Stephen the second, Charles the
Great to Leo the 3. Lodovicus pins of France to Sergius the 2. the Emperor
Henry the forth to Paschall the 2. Frederic the first to Adrian the 4. But that
was a notable Signal reverence which Lewis of France, and Henry the second of
England did to Alexander the 3. Who came both together, and jointly attended
the Pope a good way to his lodging, he being on horsback, and they both a foot.
Now it is one of the high Tenets of the Catholics, That the Pope is the only
Free independent Prince upon Earth; not accountable to any for his actions, but
unto Christ himself whose Vicegerent he is. He cannot only command, but make
Kings, at least confirm them. The King of Spain did not hold himself perfectly
established King of the West Indies, till the Holy Father pleased to allow of
it, and confirm him. Now touching the Title of Emperor, there is a notable
letter upon record, which Adrian the 4. writ to the three Ecclesiastic Electors
of Germany. Romanum Imperium a Graecis translatum est ad Alemannos, ut Rex
Teutonicorum non ante quam ab Apostolica manu coronaretur Imperator vocaretur;
ante consecrationem Rex, post Imperator. Unde igitur habet Imperium, nisi a
nobis? ex electione principum suorum habet nomen Regis, ex consecratione nostra
habet, nomen Imperatoris, Augusti and Caesaris. Ergo per nos imperat, etc.
Imperator quod habet, totum a nobis habet; Ecce in potestate nostra est, ut
dem^s illud cui volumus, propterea constituti a deo super gentes and Regna, ut
destruamus, and evellamus, ut aedificemus and plantemus. The Roman Empire,
says Adrian the 4. was transferred from Greece to Germany, therefore the King
of the Teutons cannot be called Emperor, till he be apostolically Crowned,
before his consecration he is but King, and Emperor afterward. Whence therefore
has he the Empire but from us? by the Election of his Princes he has the name
of King, but he has the Title of Emperor, of Augustus and Caesar, by our
consecration. Therefore he is Imperial by us, etc. that which he has of
Emperor he has wholly from us; behold it is in our power to give the Title to
whom we please; therefore are we constituted by God himself over Nations and
Kings, that we may destroy, and pluck up, build and plant, etc. Nor does the
Papal power extend to give Titles to Emperors, but to make Kings. It is upon
record how Pope Leo made Pipin King of Italy, Sergius made Stephen King of
Hungary. Pope John made Wenceslaus King of Poland. Alphonso King of Portugal
was made by Eugenius the 3d. Edgar was made King of Scotland by Urban the 2d.
John de Brenna was made King of Jerusalem by Innocent the third; Pope Pius the
5. gave Cosmo de Medici the Title of Gran-Duke of T^scany, notwithstanding, the
opposition of Maximilian the 2d. and Philip the 2d. of Spain. I saw in the
Archives of Rome the names of those Kings who are Vassalls to the Pope, and
they are ranked in this order, and Bodins Cataloge agrees with it. Reges
Neapolis, Siciliae, Arragoniae, Sardiniae, Hierolosymorum, Angliae, Hiberniae,
Hungariae; all these are, or should be at least feudetary and hommageable to
the Bishop of Rome.

Nor can the Holy Father entitle Emperors, and make Kings and Gran-Dukes; but
he can, as he alleges, depose them if they degenerate to Tyrants or
Heretics; he can absolve their subjects from all ties of allegiance. As among
other examples Innocent the 3. did to John King of England, and Sixtus quintus
did to Queen Elizabeth. Innocent the 1. did not only thrust Arcadius out of
his Throne, but out of the society of Christians. Anastasius the Emperor was
excommunicated by Anastasius the 2. Pope Constantine anathematized the Emperor
Philippicus, Gregory the third delivered over to Satan Pope Leo Isaurus, and
took from him all Italy. Gregory the 7. excommunicated the Emperor Henry the 3.
and Boleslaus King of Poland. The Emperor Lewis the 4. was barred to come to
Church by Benedict the 12. Otho by Innocent the 3. Frederic the 2. by Innocent
the 4. and Peter King of Castile was quite thrust out both of his Throne and
the holy Church by Urban the 5. who made Henry the bastard capable to succeed
him by a bull of legitimation; and indeed that Peter was a hateful Tyrant,
having murtherd many of his own Subjects, and his Queen or the house of Bourbon
with his own hands.

There is another high prerogative which the Roman Bishop claims, which is to
summon General Counsels, which Montanus, who was president of the Council of
Trent from the Pope, did avouch in open assembly upon a design of removing the
Council to Bolonia, where he among other things did positively assert and
pronounce, Caesarem nempe non Dominum a^t Magistrum esse, sed Ecclesiae filium
esse, se vero and Collegas qui adsint, Roman sedis Legatos esse, penes quos
ordinandi and transferendi concilii jus erat. Caesar was not Lord nor Master,
but Son of the Holy Church. But he and his Colleagues there present were
Legates of the Roman See, whose right it was to ordain, and transfer General
Counsels*

Moreover the Bishop of Rome has a great stroke in preserving the Universal
peace of Christendom, and keeping Earthly Potentates from clashing one with
another. In so much that the Pope may be compared to that Isthmos of land which
runns twixt the Ionian and Aegaean Seas, keeping their waters from jusling one
with another. Nor is the Bishop of Rome thus powerful only by his spiritual
Authority, by virtue whereof, besides Patriark^, Archbishops, and a world of
Bishops, he has 70. Cardinals, who are accounted equal to Princes, and who,
as they are all of his making, so are they at his devotion; which number of 70.
was limited by a solomn diploma, or Bull of Sixtus Quintus; and the election to
be always in December, so many days before Christmas; which is a general
Jubilee of rejoicing for the Nativity of our Savior. And as these Cardinals are
Princes Companions, so have they revenues accordingly from the Common aerarium,
or Treasury of the Church, which is an unknown thing and inexhaustible. For as
long as men have souls within them, and believe there is a Heaven or Hell, the
Roman Church can never want Money. There is a proverb in Italy, Al papa non
mancano maj danari quando non manca la mano and la penna. The Pope can never
want Money as long as he has fingers to write. In so much that when a league
was struck twixt Pius the 5. Phillip the 2. and the Venetians; whereas the
Spaniard was to be at half the charge, the Venetians two thirds of the other
half, and the Pope the sixth part of a third; The Venetian Ambassador took him
up somewhat short, telling him, that his Holiness quill might command all the
Wealth of Europe. In that age there were 130. Archbishopricks, and a thousand
and seventeene Bishoprics that the Pope had the confirmation of, besides those
of the East and West Indies. Touching Monasteries and Religious Claustral
Houses, there were in Charles the fifths time, and Paul the 4. which was 60.
years before, above a hundred and 44. thousand; of Parishes two hundred and
fourscore eight thousand, which the Pope had influence upon. In so much that
when there was an ouverture of a league twixt Charles the Emperor and the
French King, for a conjunction against the Turk; there was a proposition made,
that every Monastery should contribute 6. Crowns yearly, and every Parish 52.
Crowns toward the support of the War, which would have amounted to near
upon 16. Millions per ann. And for men, if there had been 10 culled out of
every Monastery, it would have made an Army of fourteen hundred and forty
thousand men: Nor should so much regard be had to the number, as to the quality
of the men, who having been accustomed to penances, to fasting, and watchings,
could endure more hardship then other men. Add hitherto the zeal they would
have to the Cause, being Votaries and Religious persons; holding the Pope to be
an Earthly God, and that those who lose their life's in any service or
expedition warranted by his Cruzada, deserve a greater degree of beatitude in
Heaven. Such an Army as this the Pope can raise, which no Mundan Potentate can
do, or ever could do; Who out of a conceit of the Holiness they bear to his
Function, and power of his Commission, would run through fire and water, to
serve him with their Soul, as well as with their bodies.

Nor is the Pope thus potent among the Ecclesiastiques, for spiritual revenues
and perquisits, but he is also a Great Temporal Prince: witness the Duchy of
Ferrara, and Bolonia; Each whereof singly is able to support a secular
Sovereign Prince, besides other signories which he has. Wherefore it was well
expressed by the Poet, speaking of the Pope.

Ense potens gemino, Cuius vestigia adorat
Caesar, and aurato fulgentes murice Reges.
This is the largest field for matter that possibly an Orator can run in, me
thinks it has no Horison. Now Scaurus has a wise saying; Non minus magnam
virtutem esse scire desinere, quam scire dicere, It is no less virtue to know
when to give over speaking, then to know when to speak. Therefore most noble
Princes, I hold it safer to strike sail, and launch out no further into this
Ocean of matter: Wherefore I will bid a farewell for this time to fair Italy,
and conclude with three several Characters, which three famous Authors gives
her. Mamertinus the Panegyrist calls her Gentium Dominam, The Lady of all
Nations. Rutilius Numatianus calls her Caelestem, mundique Reginam, A Heavenly
thing, and the Queen of the World. Dionysius Halycarnassaeus calls her Totius
Orbis Optimam, The Best of the Universe. Therefore under favor take spiritual
and Temporal power; take the word and the sword, the pike and the pen, Arts and
Arms together, Italy, Divine Italy deserves without controversy, or any
scruple at all, the Supremacy of Europe.

Dixi.
THE ORATION OF THE Lord GEORGE ROELDERER VON HOCH, Against ITALY.
Most noble, and anciently descended Princes;
IT is reported of Francisco Barbaro, and Georgio Trapezuntio, a pair of great
Scientifical men, and singularly versed in the Greek and Latin Tongues, that by
decay of their Intellectuals, and decrepitnesse of age, they came utterly to
forget both. The like is recorded of Philip Seci^s, a famous Jurisconsult, and
Professor of both the Laws, both in Padoa, Florence, Siena, Ticini, and Pisa,
that his memory came to be so strangely eclipsed and clouded, that he did not
remember one Paragraph of the Roman Law. And Pliny, that great Register of
Nature, does write of Messala Corvino, that the faculty of remembrance was so
declined in him by longaevity, and the revolution of so many Winters, that he
had forgot his own name. The same may be said now adays of Italy, she that was
in former times the Eye of the World, and Rome the Apple of that Eye, are
fallen to that delirium, and dotage, that neither of them can remember what
once they were, most of her Cities have almost forgotten their primitive names,
her vital spirits, virtue, and valor are so far spent, by having so many
years on her back, that she is quite transmuted from what she was, and grown
^ank and litherly both in her strength and courage. Touching Rome, she is
shrunk into a Pigmey's skin, from that Gigantick stature she was of* And as
some did guess at the magnitude of Rome by that Incendium, that huge voracious
fire which happened in Nero's time (who was then in his turret tuning upon his
fiddle the sack of Troy, so little did he resent that direful spectacle, but
rather rejoiced at it; hoping out of the rubbish of old Rome to re-edifie a new
City of his own name) which fire, though it was very consuming and violent,
yet the City found it matter enough to work upon for nine days: I say, as
partly out of that the hugeness of Rome might be guessed at; or by that raging
Plague which swept away about ten thousand men every day in the time of
Vespasian; or by the weight of those Cobwebs which Heliogabalus caused to be
gathered and poised, which came to ten thousand pound weight; I say, as out of
these one may make a conjecture of the vast dimensions of Rome, so out of that
obscenity and filth which now reigns, out of the fire of concupiscence which
rages there (no where more) and lastly out of those numberless infectious
diseases and various vices that now reign there, which I shall endeavor to
produce before you, you may give a guess at the goodness and government, the
happiness and deserts of Italy; and then I believe you will not have so
favorable a conceit of her as the noble Lord who spoke before, and was so
prodigal in displaying her merit.

The Peacock when she beholds her glorious feathers, swells and puffs with an
amorous opinion of her self, but looking upon her feet she is presently
dejected: you have hitherto seen the gay feathers of Italy, I will show you now
her ^oul feet. The common tenet, that Italy in goodness and riches excells all
other Regions, is a mere fable, which Boterus her own child does refell,
accusing them of imprudence and shallow judgment who think so; for we know well
that two third parts of Italy has no navigable Rivers, and the fourth part is
a steril rough-hewen umbratical country, made up by the Apennine hill.
Bonfinius, who had been a curious lustrator of many Countries, prefers Austria
before Italy, though his own Country. Liguria was damned by Nature her self to
a perpetual sterility; And the Plains of Verona, though they be famous for
some battles that have been fought there, yet do they bear but a sorry report
for the wildness of the soil, and huge stones that are therein. In Alagnia
there is a cankerworm that corrodes the Vines, and strangely grows with the
grape, and takes wings at last, it revives with the culture of the earth, and
dies with it; besides there be swarms of little stares that does much annoy
the crop both of Corn and Wine, and there is no fence against them, they are so
numerous. The Pisan, Aquileian, and Roman fields themselves how many patches of
rough barren ground have they? what ill air'd fens in many places? which makes
them so thin of inhabitants. How many places in Italy are there, whither
strangers when they go thither, are warned not to go unto, in regard of the
ill air? as Piombino, Grossetto, Sinigallia, Arimino, Cervia, Pesar^.
Pestilentiall Fevers are frequent in Venice and Ancona, and Tertians in
Ferrara; nor is the meridian of Rome free from them; for upon the Maritime
coasts from Port Hercules to Tarracina, which is a hundred and fifty miles in
extent, there are hardly eight thousand inhabitants in all. The Veliternian
Wines are good for nothing unless they be boiled; nor can those of Viterbo last
any time till they be also used so; for generally the Italian Wines are so
fading, that they will last scarce a year to an end; whereas our German Wines
gather strength with their age, as those of the Rhine, and the Necc^r; but
those of the Po and the Tiber grow quickly sower and flat, which made Scaliger
spit out this bitter jest of Rome, Urbem illam esse novum ac^tum pessimum
veteris vini optimi; that she is the worst new Vinegar of the best old Wines.
Besides, there are some places in Italy which might be fruitful, if they had
the hands of industry; for the Italians are not so industrious with their
bodies (I cannot tell what their brains may be) as the world takes them to be,
witness that capacious and noble port of Ancona, which was suffered to be
choked up with sand, merely by the supinenesse and sloth of the inhabitants.
For Metals; I am sure in Clement the sevenths time, there were knowing
Mineralists sent for from Germany to Italy, and they returned quickly after;
for they said that the benefit would not countervail the charge.

Moreover there is no clime so subject to vicissitude of Tempests as Italy: The
Apennine keeps her snow longer than the Abnoba, the mother of the Danube. How
passengers are tormented with Chinches, ^ stinking little vermin, in their
lodgings at night? The heat of Naples is such, that none will travel in July
and August, though the King should command him. It Is true that Padoa has
fertile fields about her, but the Tillers of them are half devils, and more
humorous than any part of France. Sicilia, once a part of the continent of
Italy, was used to bear away the bell for faecunditie, being called by Cicero*
Cella penaria Reipub. and nutrix plebis Romanae, She was Romes Nurse, and the
peoples Pantree; but whereas there is a principle, Omnes Insulanos esse malos,
pessimos autem esse Siculos; That all Ilanders are bad, and the Sicilians the
worst of all; It is truer now then ever it was. Touching the Calabrians, King
Alphonso could say that, nihil habebant praeter figuram, they had nothing of
men, but the shapes of men. Touching Campania and the Kingdom of Naples it
cannot be denied but they are luxurious Countries, and very populous, in so
much that Bozius gives an account of above three millions of peeple there, and
near upon four hundred thousand fit to bear arms, together with foureteen
hundred and sixty towns; but take all along with you, the improbity of the
peeple is such, that there is a proverb among the rest of the Italians, Napoli
e un paradiso, ma habit ato da diaboli; Naples is a paradis inhabited by
devils. Indeed it is so delicat a country that it will put to trial the virtue
of any one; witness Hannibal and his army. The Genoways is as bad as the
Nopolitan, hear what the tartmouthed Scaliger speaks of him, giving a wipe
also to the English, by huddling up a company of Epithets.

Genuenfi Osor pacis, ac boni moris,
Unus Brit annis tetrior, Ligur cunctis,
Saxicola, pelagi cursor, invidus, spurcus,
Famelicosus, turpis, Archipirata.
Now whereas you have been persuaded to believe that Italy is the source of
civility, the nurce of noblenes and virtue, the prime propagatresse of piety
and learning, I pray herein take me along with you; I will not say the Italians
are ignoble, but the corrupters of Nobility; They are not illiterat, but the
perverters of letters: They are not vicious, but the very cutthroats of virtue;
They are not impious, but the abusers of piety: they have drunk so much
superstition, and it has got so far into their bones, that it will never out
of their flesh. I am loath to bring all their vices before so princely an
Assembly, for fear the sent of them might be unpleasing unto you, and make you
stop your noses, as peeple use to do when they pass by a carren, or dounghill:
and when they once infect a German, they transform him to a Devil, according
to the proverb, Tudesco Italionato e un diabolo incarnat, a Dutchman Italionat
is a Devil incarnat. Now there is no place upon earth where vice goes more often
in virtues habit, and so is able to deceave the wisest: For as in the sands of
the river Anien there are fine white stones gathered of various shapes, some
like comfetts, others like round sugar plumms, others like candid ^innamon,
which are called in derision the junketts of Tivoli, and are put sometimes upon
the table for a merriment to strangers, so are counterfeit banquetts and sweets
of virtue served before strangers in Italy, though they be mere baits of vanity
and vice.

I confess Italy abounds with nobles, but what kind of one's are they? such as
are found in Lunigiana, where a passenger spied three Marquises upon one tre^
eating figgs to preserve them from starving: I Marchesi di Ceva, i Conti di
Piacenza, i Cavaglieri di Bolognia, The Marquises of Ceva, the Earls of
Piacenza, the Knights of Bolonia, are poor to a proverb; for all of them will
not make one complete nobleman in point of estate. But indeed the Italian
Nobles are rather Merchants then Nobles, nay many of their Princes are no
better: what I pray is the Gran Duke of Florence? what are the Clarissimi of
Venice? what are the Senators of Genoa but all Merchants? yet every broker and
peddler is there termed by Vostra Signoria, which is, your Lordship: The meanest
Prince in Italy must be called Serenissimo, a title used to be given only to
the Archdukes of Austria; they scorn to be called Excellentissimi, or
Illustrissimi. Nay the Duke of Savoy returned the Senats letters to Venice,
because mention being made in them of the Dukes children, they termed them
Excellentissimi, not Serenissimi.

But learning and the sciences you say do flourish in Italy more then any
where; Indeed I confess literature is a rare virtue, it enables one for any
profession; and no profession, unless it be mechanique, can be without it. The
Emperor Sigismund did make high esteem of it, in so much that he preferr^d a
Doctor before a Knight, and his reason was that he could make twenty Knights in
a day, but not one Doctor. You all know the famous apophthegm of Alphonso King
of Aragon, Rex illiteratus est Asinus coronatus, an illiterat King is an Ass
with a crown on his head; The Genoa Lady was of another opinion, who said,
penna non facit Nobilem, sed penis. It Is true, we are beholden to Italy for
learning, and she to Greece; But as poor Greece is now so degenerated in this
point, that she who called all the world Barbarians (yea the Italians among
others) is now become Barbary Herself in point of literature, and scientificall
knowledge. In Honorius time there dwelt but a few Merchants of honey in Athens.
And I wish the same fate may not befall Italy for her nefandous crimes which
are rife there: but touching learning, I pray hear what Muretus speaks; In
media Italia, in medio Latio, in media Magna Graecia vix centisimum quemque
invenias, qui Latin aut Graece loqui sciat, In the midst of Italy, in the
midst of Latium, in the mid^t of Magna Graecia you shall not find the hundredth
man that can understand Greek or Latin, or any kind of letters.

And I pray, how does Italy use to encourage and reward learned men? Look upon
Philelphus the lea^nedst man of his time, yet they were forced to sell his
books to bury him in Bolonia; And who would have thought that Aeneas Sylvius,
or Pope Pins the second, who was beholden to the Muses for all his fortunes and
promotion, I say, who would have thought that being congratulated by sundry
pieces of Poetry when he came to be Pope, in lieu of reward he put them off
with this distic.

Pro numeris numeros a me sperate Poetae,
Carminaque est animus reddere, non emere.
O Poets, expect numbers for numbers, I use to return, not buy verses.

But it seems that Homers fate of inevitable poverty is devolved by way of
inheritance to all poets; Paul the second, next successor to Aeneas, had a
mischievous design to demolish all learning, in so much that he esteemed
students and philosophers no other then Heretics or Conjurers. And now that I
have fallen among the Popes, I believe you have heard of the common saying
amongst them, Nos accipimus pecuniam, and mittimus asinos in Germaniam, We
receive money, and send Asses to Germany; There were two Popes, I know not who
was the wiser, who was the simpler of the two, viz. John the eighth, or
Calixtus the third: The first sold the Crown of France to Charles the bald for
a vast sum of money, depriving the right heirs; The other put Edmund of
England, and Vincent of Spain into the catalogue of Saints, whereupon when
Cardinal Bessarion heard of it, Novi hi sancti de veteribus mihi dubium
movent, These new saints puts me in some doubt of the old. Alexander the sixth
scraped up so much treasure by the nundination, and sale of Indulgences, that
Caesar Borgia (his son) loosing a hundred thousand crowns one night at dice,
said, Germanorum tantum haec peccata sunt, These are only the sins of
Germany. Julius the third intending to advance Montanus to a Cardinalship, and
the consistory dissuading his holiness from it, because he was of very mean
birth, and no parts, answered no less modestly then wittily, Then what think
you I pray of me, whom you have constituted Prince of the Christian
Commonwealth?

Leo the tenth had a purpose to creat Raphael Urbinus, a mere painter, to be a
Cardinal, if he had lived to it. But touching the strange humors, and
extravagancies of some Popes, I put you over to Platina, who was secretary to
so many of them.

But to revert a little, touching the older sect of Italians, Authors, there is
more vice then virtue to be found in most of them; witness those triumvirs of
wanton love, Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius; Ovid might be called a pander
to Venus in some of his works; what spurcidicall and obscene things do we read
in Martial, and Iuvenall? what a foolish humor was that in Persius to study
obscurity so much? And in Virgil, whom we cry up so highly, what was he but a
mere Ape to Homer, Theocritus, and other Greek Poets? I have seen Homer's
picture in a posture of vomiting, and all the Latin poets about him licking up
what he had spewd, but Virgil lapp'd up more then all the rest. Now Cicero whom
we magnify above all, if we well observe him, we shall find that he sat often
upon two stools. Petrus Bembus was such a slave to Cicero, and so sworn to his
words, that he infected Longolius with the same humor, who would use no other
Latin words but what he found in Cicero; Therefore the Senate of Venice is
always called by him Patres Conscripti; Dukes and Dukedoms, Reges and Regna;
The sophy of Persia, and Gran Turk, Reges Armeniae and Thracum; Faith is called
by him persuasion; Excommunication, Interdiction of fire and water; Nunns are
called Vestalls, The Pope Pontifex Maximus, The Emperor Caesar, etc. In so
much that he holds any word barbarous that is not found in Cicero; But touching
learning and eloquence we well know that Greece has been the true source of
both, whence the Romans have filled their cisterns; Nay, for the Latin tongue
herself we know she is two thirds Greek, all her scientificall words, and
terms of art are derived from the Greek: In so much that it is impossible for
any to be a perfect Latinist, unless he understand the Greek also.

I will go a little back to Bembo again, who as you have heard was so
fantastical, that he would use no words but pure Ciceronian; but this fancy
drew him to a pure prophanes, for it brought him to contemn the Epistles of S.
Paul, and in a kind of slighting way to call them Epistolaccias, dissuading his
friends from reading them, least they should corrupt their eloquence. What
shall I say of Sanazarius, that in three books he writ of Jesus Christ, he has
not the Name of Jesus or Christ through the whole work? and the reason one gave
was, that they were not Latin words; he puts the Sibylls works in the blessed
Virgins hands, and making no use of Esaias or David, he makes use of pagan
prophets to prove the coming of Christ.

But to leave these santastiques, I will now be more serious, and pry a little
into the Canon Law, which has such a vogue in Italy; It makes the Crown a
slave to the Miter, and the scepter to the crosier, and the Emperors throne to
the Popes chair; Nay it lessens and distracts the allegiance of the subject to
his natural rightful prince; For it is the concordant opinion of all the
Canonists; Imperij vasallos criminis Rebellionis, and Majestatis haud esse
reos, si pro Pontifice Romano adversus Imperatorem ipsum pugnent; The vassalls
of the Empire cannot be guilty of the crime of Rebellion, if they take arms
for the Roman Bishop against the Emperor; And Bartolus himself, who by
Schurfius is called Magister veritatis, the Master of truth, by Menochius,
Iurisconsultorum signifer, the standard bearer of Reason, by Natta,
Excellentissimus Doctor, by others the Lantern of the Law, the Guide of the
Blind, the Mirroir and Father of verity; holding that his works are worthy to
be bound with the Sacred Code, averres the same in favor of the Pope, though
he poorly excuses it, that he held these tenets, when he was engaged in the
Roman Court.

Moreover, these Canonists are not only content to give his Holiness the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, but also of the Kingdoms of Spain, of Great Britain, of
France, and indeed of all the Kingdoms upon earth: There are some think there
are Kingdoms likewise in the Air, and he may as well pretend a power paramount
over them also. But let us see how the Pope came to this transcendency, to this
cumble and height of greatness. His first rise was when Constantin gave him
Rome, and it was a notable rise; yet all others, the Canonists excepted, do
question the validity of this donation, and Aeneas Sylvius himself did so
before he was Pope: for said he, Callide id provisum a Pontifice; It was
cautiously provided by the Bishop of Rome, that this should be always under
controversy, whether that donation of Constantine was valid or not valid, that
such a donation might be presumed still to have been; so the Popes are not much
displeased that another question should be still litigated, and that the
Schools should ring with the debate, Whether that power which the Bishop of
Rome has over Princes in temporalibus be directly, or indirectly; for the
stating of the question it self presupposes that he has a power. But many
Princes, not only those who have quite shaken off his yoke; but others who
still adhere to Rome, have quite freed themselves of this servitude; France did
it long since in the clash that happened 'twixt Philip le bell and Boniface the
eighth, claiming a jurisdiction in Gallia over Temporals; but the King wrote to
him in these tart words, Que ta tres-grande sottise scache -- Let thy great
foolishnes know, that in Temporals we are subject to none but to God himself,
and they who think otherwise are sots --.

And Monsieur Nogaret going afterward to Rome in quality of Ambassador, and
using some bold terms at his Audience, the Pope upbraided him that his Father
had been burnt for a Heretic; thereupon Nogaret took him, with a Gantlet,
which he had on his hand, such a cuffe under the ear, that felled him.

It is memorable also in what terms the Greek Churches writ to John the third,
who demanding plenitude of power over the Church universal, sent him word,
Potentiam tuam summam circa tuos subditos firmiter credimus, superbiam tuam
summam tollerare non possumus, avaritiam satiare non valemus. Diabolus tecum,
Dominus nobiscum. We firmly believe thy supreme power over thy own subjects,
but we cannot endure thy pride, nor are we able to satiate thy covetousness.
The Devil be with thee, and God with us. It was an odd farewell.

Nor of late years touching the right to the Crown of Portugal, would Philip
the second, though extremely devoted to the Sea of Rome, stand to the decision
of the Pope after the death of Henry, of whom it is very memorable, that he
died the Moon being in an Eclipse, and the very same day and hour that he had
been born 68 years before. No, King Philip thought that the Sword was fittest
to be Umpire in that business, which he made accordingly. Of such an opinion
was Paul the third also for maintenance of his power; for he was used to laugh
at those who would make use of arguments to maintain the Pontifical power; no,
he was used to say, It is not the Word only, but the Sword which must defend
that; good Garrisons, Castles, and Bastions must do it, as well as
Excomunications and Bulls.

The Venetians of late years gave a shrewd wound to the Papal power through the
sides of Paul the fifth; when he had threatened them with spiritual Arms,
Nicolao Pontano the Doge, or Duke, a man of a free soul, answered the Nuncio,
That if Rome would dart her thunderbolts so rashly, verendum esse, ne qui
Graeci olim fuissent, e Latio in Graeciam migrassent, it was to be feared that
they who were Greeks of old, might go again from Italy to Greece* meaning to
the Greek Church. In this quarrel the Pope had recourse to Spain for to appear
in it, and thereupon did much complement with the Duke of Lerma, but a little
under the dignity of a Pope: He termed him, Basin Hispanicae coronae, super qua
acquiescat Monarchia Catholica, unicum Ecclesiae fundamentum. He writ, that
Lerma was the support of the Spanish Crown, upon which the Catholic Monarchy
did rest, the only prop of the Church.

In the year 1337. Lodovicus Bavarus being Emperor, there happened some
contrasts 'twixt the Emperor and the Pope, who alleged that the Electors made
him King only, but he made him Emperor. Hereupon at a solemn Diet this
notable Sanction was enacted. Sacrosanctum Imperium, summa in terris potestas,
coeleste donum est; Imperator enim primus ante omnes, secundus post Deum est,
per quem, leges, jura, regna humanae genti largitur aeterna Majestas, and tam
grande nomen a solo Deo traditur, cui soli me Reipub* administrandae ratione^
reddendam habet. A curiatis igitur Heptarchis rebus impositus, continuo more
Majorum atque jure gentium Rex est and vocatur: ipsum contra majestatem Reipub.
decus Imperii legatos ad sacerdotem Romanum, ut Author fiat copiam
administrandi concedat mittere, eidem jurejurando fidem astringere, atque
petere ab ipso usum regii diadematis Religio est. Nullum harum rerum sus omnino
est pastori, qui servus ovium est, and in consecrando domino gregi servit*
quippe jure suffragiorum, beneficio Electorum atque populi quisque imperat.
Haec verissima esse convenit inter omnes annalium, rerum humanarum,
divinarumque peritos, atque jam saepius utriusque juris Caesarei atque
Pontificii coelestis thesauri testimoniis comprobatum est. Nonnulli quidem
sanctuli praeter fas contra naturae legem docere non erubescunt, pastoris
beneficiarium esse Dominum, neque ante principem principum esse aut nominari
oportere, quam ille servus servorum Author fiat, and dignum judicarit qui
regnet, sed haec cum maxima Christianae Reipub. pernicie, intollerabili populi
Christiani, imperatoriae Majestatis jactura, nec sine gravissimo Tetrarcharum,
Dynastarum, Clientium imperii detriment^, instigante Stygio principe, domino
hujus mundi, commenta esse, eventus docet, exitus probat.

Quare decernimus, and perpetuo sancimus Edicto, nimirum ex solo Electionis
beneficio omnem potestatem imperiumque proficisci, nec ullo pacto pontificis
Romani in hac re sanctimonia, flaminio, authoritate, consensu opus esse.
Quicunque aliter docuerit, senserit, ^actitarit, crimine laesae Majestatis
reus, hostis reipub. atque proscriptus esto, capite paenas solvito, bona ejus
publica sunto, praedia infiscentur. The most holy Empire being the highest
power upon earth, is the gift of heaven: For the Emperor is first before all,
and second after God Almighty, by whom the eternal Majesty does bestow Laws,
Rights, and Kingdoms to mankind, and so great a name is only given by God, to
whom only he is accountable for the administration of the Commonwealth. By the
election of the Heptarchicall Electors, according to the custom of our
Ancestors, and by the Law of Nations he is King, and called so: For him to send
Ambassadors to the Priest of Rome, that he would authorize him, and give him
leave to administer, is against the Majesty of the Empire; but to bind himself
unto him by oath, and seek of him the use of the royal Diadem, is Religion. The
Pastor has no right to any of these things, who is servant to his sheep, and
serves the flock in consecrating the Lord: For by right of suffrage, by the
benefit of the Electors and people, every one reigns. That these things are
true, is well known to all those that are versed in Antiquity never so little,
where they shall find this Doctrine confirmed not only by Caesarean, but
Pontificial testimonies themselves. Yet nevertheless some Sciolists, or little
modern Saints do not blush to teach the contrary, viz. That the Lord is a
Beneficiary to the Shepherd, and that the Emperor may not be called Prince of
Princes, till he receive his authority from servus servorum, from the servant
of servants, as the Pope styles himself to be. But this cannot be without much
mischief to the Christian Commonwealth, and without the utter overthrow of the
Imperial Majesty, on which so many Princes and Potentates depend. Therefore it
may be called a Doctrine suggested by the Stygian Prince, and belched forth out
of hell.

Therefore we decree and divulge it for an everlasting Sanction, that the
Caesarean Majesty is derived from the power of Election, and not from any
sanctimony, consent, or confirmation of Pontifical authority. And whosoever
shall maintain, publish, or teach otherwise, we pronounce him criminal of High
Treason, a professed Enemy to the Imperial Commonwealth, and worthy of capital
punishment, or Proscription, that the property of his goods be altered and
confiscated.

Yet notwithstanding this solemn Sanction, how has the Papal power increased
upon the Imperial of late times? Caesar was used to summon universal Counsels.
It was Constantine the Great, who called the Nicene Counsel. Theodosius the
Constantinopolitan: Theodosius Junior the Ephesian. Martianus that of
Chalcedon, which four Councels are next in authority to the 4. Evangelists,
they are like the 4. Rivers that ran through Paradis. Besides how many other
General Councels were indicted by Emperors. Besides it was their Prerogative to
institute Popes. Henry the 3. created Clement the 2. Damasus the 2. Leo 9. and
Victor the 2. Nay Caesar was used to punish the contumacies, and exorbitances
of the Pope. So did Otto the 1. chastise Pope John and Benedict. Henry the 3.
Sylvester and Gregory. Henry the 5. deposed Pope Paschal. There is a cloud of
examples to prove this. The summons of Henry the 4. to Gregory Hildebrand, that
Satanical St. as Damianus styles him, are very remarkable. Tu Hildebrande, non
jam Apostolice, sed false Monache descend, vendicatam tibi sedem Apostolicam
relinque. Alius sedem B. Petri ascendet, qui nulla violentiam Religione
palliet, sed Beati Petri doctrinam doceat. Ego Henricus Rex dei gratia cum
omnibus Episcopis nostris tibi dicimus descend, descend. Thou Hildebrand, who
art no apostolical, but a false Monk, descend; leave the Apostolical seat which
thou claimst, another shall ascend blessed Peter's Throne, who will not palliate
violence with Religion, but teach Peter's* pure Doctrine. I Henry by the grace
of God King, with all our Bishops do tell thee, descend, descend. I do not see
but the Emperor is Caesar still, and endowed with the same power.

Now, touching the oath which the Pope exhibits to the Emperor, it is not an Oath
of allegiance or fidelity, but that Oath relates to the protection, and defense
which he is bound thereby to give the Holy Church, which Lords use to promise
ordinarily to their Vassalls, and temporal Princes to their subjects. And
whereas of old, the Emperor out of a pious reverence to the Church, did use to
calculate the time of his reign from the day of his Coronation by the Pope, we
know well that that custom is grown obsolet, and antiquated by a long
desuetude; In so much that the German or Electorian Coronation is now as valid
as the other. And I pray how many Emperors have omitted the Papal Coronation,
and neglected those superfluous formalities and ceremonies? The Emperor
Henricus Auceps, being invited by the Pope to be crowned at Rome, answered, It
was sufficient for him to be King of the Romans by Gods Grace, and so obliged
to protect Germany from the incursion of infidells. Rodolph the 1. gave such an
other answer, being advised to go to Rome to be crowned. Italy said he, I know,
has consumed many Alman Kings, I will not to Rome, I am already King, I am
already an Emperor, and I hope I shall be able to act for the Christian
Commonwealth, as if I had performed that ceremony at Rome.

The Canonists, whose main endeavors are to elevate the Popes Miter above the
Imperial Majesty, would have it; that when Caesar dies, the Right is devolved
to the Pope, till a new Election. But we well know, most noble Princes, that by
our Golden bull it is ordained otherwise, and that during the Vacancy of the
Empire, the right of Administration appertains to the Electors of the Rhine and
Saxony. It is well known how Paul the 4. would have molested Ferdinand the 1.
by his Caraffical Canons, but to little purpose. For as Serpents do naturally
retain a poison still in them, though they do not always vent it; so the Roman
seven headed Beast does still keep within him that malignant humor toward the
Emperor; which may chance be his own destruction at last: as we read of John
Baptista Bishop of Concordia, who at a Ducal feast in Venice, kept in his gutts
that Wind which should have found vent backward, so long, that he died of it.
Now touching the Right that his Holiness has to Rome by the donation of
Constantine, it is the same that Venice has to the Dominion of the Adriatique
Gulf; they are both of them no other then Titles of Straw: yet that of Rome
does produce the Pope much grain. And as that vainglorious City was first
founded by Fugitives and Robbers, and afterward patched up an Empire of varia
magna latrocinia, of diverse great Theeveries (for Kingdoms are little better)
which she got by oppression, tyranny, and rapine; so the same genius remains
still in Rome, for she may be said to be a Harpye still, and to rob all the
Christian World that is subject to her by her mercenary Pardons, Bulls, and
Indulgences: She seldom takes the Lamb without his Fleece: Lord, how is she
degenerated from her self when she was a Primitive Christian! in those times
there were golden Priests, and wooden Chal^ces, but now clean contrary, as
Boniface the Martyr cried out,

-- In time of old
The Chalices were wood, the Priests were gold;
But now a man may swear by Haly rood,
The Chalices are gold, the Priests are wood.
Indeed the Italians are generally covetous, and it is to foment their
pleasures, whereof they are the greatest embracers of any people. About the
precincts of Padoa, there were two brothers that in a clear shine night were
walking in the fields, and one of them casting his eyes up to the Firmament,
wished that he had as many fat Oxen as there were Stars in the Heavens. The
other presently wished, that he had a Field as large as the Firmament; the
other replying, what he would do with it? he answered, To feed your Oxen. But
the judgment of Heaven is observable herein; for as they multiplied discourse
about these profane wishes, they fell a quarrelling, and so slew one another
in the place.

And now, I pray, what Nation is more vindicative than the Italian? How many
have been murdered for casting but a few glances upon another man's wife out of
a window? What various inventions have they of poisoning, sometimes by the
smoke of a candle, sometimes by the suavity of a flower, sometimes by a
poisoned glove or handkerchief, sometimes by small crossebowes with poisoned
needles instead of arrows. What an inhumane horrid revenge did a Millanez take
of an old friend of his, to whom having been reconciled after some quarrel, he
bore still a black rancor in his breast against him, and having surprised him
in a convenient place, he put a dagger to his throat, vowing that if he would
not do one thing, he was a dead man, which was to abjure God Almighty, the
unfortunate man did it thrice, and the third time as he was pronouncing the
words, he stabbed him to the heart, and so dispatched him, glorying afterward
of the fullness of his revenge; for he had destroyed his body and soul? And
now that I am in Milan, me-thinkes I see that glorious Empress Beatrix,
Barbarossa's wife, riding through the streets upon a Mule, with her face
toward the posteriors of her, and holding the tail in her hand for a bridle;
O most unmanly, and base unparalleled piece of barbarism; but the Emperor was
soundly quit with them; for besides those whom he put to death for this
affront, he caused the chiefest of the Town to lick out figs being stuck in a
Mules Fundament, whence proceeded that proverbiall Jeere which continues to
this day in Italy, Ecco la fico; Lo here the fig: For when they would mock
any, they use to put the thumb betwixt the two forefingers, and pronounce those
words.

And, to draw to a period, I pray hear what that noble French personage,
Alexander de Pontaymery, a man of a candid and clear judgment, speaks of this
wanton Country of Italy, Nous allons, says he, en Italy auec une despense
incroyable achepter la seule ombre de la civitite, and nous en rapportons la
mass entiere de vices; ceux de Milan nous apprenment la tromperie, le Venetien
nous rend Hypocrites, le Romain nous plonge en un Ocean d' Atheism and d'
impiete, and le Neapolitain nous change en satyr, ou plustost nous fait un
esgoust, and un cloaque de tou^ lascivite, mollesse, and paillardisse, le
Florentin nous enseigne l'artifice et l'operation de poison -- We traverse the
Alps, and trot into Italy with incredible expense, to take up certain shadows
of Civility, but we bring back the whole mass of Vice; the Milanez teaches us
how to be Iuglers, the Bolognois to be Liars, the Venetian to be Hypocrites,
the Napolitan transformeth us to Satyrs in lascivity and lust, the Roman
plungeth us in an ocean of Atheism, the Florentine teaches us the artifice of
Poisoning.

Therefore under the favor of this noble Prince that spoak before me, and of
this most celebrous and sage Assembly, I hold Italy, in statu quo nunc, to be
most incapable to recover her former Principality, but fitter rather to be the
Queen of Pleasures, than the Empress of Europe.

THE ORATION OF The L: NICHOLAS BAWNICKHAUSEN OF BALMEROD, By way of Apology,
or as a Temperament to the preceding ORATIONS.
Most Ample, Illustrious, and Highborn Princes,
THere is no quality more naturally inherent, and so hereditary to humane
brains, as variety and difference of opinions, which, I think never appeared
more evidently then in this most learned, and renowned Assembly; but I believe
that those discrepancies of Judgments, which have happened, have proceeded not
from any hatred, or Malignant humor, but from the innocent, and free
conceptions of the mind; let malice and partiality seek lodging among the
vulgar, and not harbor in such noble breasts as yours; It Is true, there has
been much acrimony and bitterness showed in detecting the Vices of some peeple,
but on the other side there has bin as much candor and sweetness in displaying
their virtues; In performance of both, Eloquence mounted up to her very height.
But touching the Vices you have spoken of, we must have a due and serious
regard of the frailties of humane condition, and it is a high point of
injustice to charge a whole Nation with the misdemeanors of a few: so that
Apology which the amorous Poet made in behalf of maids, may be applied to
Nations:

Parcite paucarum diffundere crimen in omnes;
Spectetur meritis Natio quaeque suis.
We are all the Sons of Adam, and sprung from his loins, Omnes mali sumus, and
it comes oftentimes to pass that what one reprehends in another, or abroad* he
finds it at home, and happily in his own bosom. Now, as all quadrupedrall
Animalls, except Asses, are subject to a kind of Vermin, so there is no Nation
unless it be merely Asinin, but is subject to some infirmities or other; There
is a free and facetious common saying, Nullam familiam esse in qua non sit fur
aut Meretrix, There is no family (high or low) but has a whore or a knave in it:
Now, if single Families cannot plead such an immunity, how shall we think that
whole Nations can be able to do it? The greatest wits have a kind of mixture of
madness, and the best policied peeple, cannot be without some spice of
Exorbitancy. The purest fields have some kind of weeds that repullulat among the
corn; Either Intemperance, Incontinence, Idleness or Hypocrisy, or some other
signal vice does sway among all peeple more or less. Whereupon when Gaspar
Slickius was telling Frederique the fourth, that he abhorred Hypocrisy so much,
that he would go travel to find out a Country where there were no dissemblers,
The Emperor smiling said, Ultra sauro matas ergo and glacialem Oceanum tibi
eundum est* tamen cum eo veneris non omnino carebit hypocrisi locus, si modo
and tu homo non Deus es, Inter mortales enim nemo est qui non aliqua ex parta
fictus fucatusque sit. Thou must go beyond Sarmatia, and the frozen Ocean, yet
when thou comst thither, thou will find that there is Hypocrisy if they be
Men, and no Gods, for there is not a Soul among Mortals but is some way or
other feigned or counterfeited. Vitia erunt donec Homines, There will be Vices as
long as there are men, as Cerialis says.

But while we inveigh against the Vice, it is no part of humanity to hate the
person, let us hate the ill Manners and not the Man. And being mindful of our
own lubricities as well as of mankinds in general, let us not be too Eagle
eyed into other men's infirmities, unless it be by them to mend our own.

I have heard, most excellen Prince Maximilian, what you have charged the
French withal, viz. that they were possessed sometimes with Furies, alluding to
their sundry civil Commotions; it is very true, yet they have not bin so far
transported, but they came to themselfs again, and I doubt not but the hand of
Heaven will in a short time quench these present flames that now rage there,
and for us Germans it were our duty to bring all the water of the Rhin to do
it; by calling to memory that most holy league which was struck between the
Emperor Frederique the second, and Lewis the eighth of France, wherein the most
ancient appellation of Germans and Franks, was revived and acknowledgd to be
the same nation, and sprung of the same stock, therefore it was capitulated,
that when we came to mention one another, we should mutually term our selfs
brothers; We must remember also how Maximilian the first, caused the book which
was kept among the Records at Spire, to be publicly burnt, wherein all the
injuries and quarrels that had ever happened twixt the Empire and the Kingdom
of France were couched.

And you most adorned Baron of Limburg, under favor you have inveighed against
Spain with too much heat, as if she were

Nido di tradimento ove si cova
Quanto mal per il mond'hoggi si trova.
As if Spain were the nest, wherein was hatched all the mischief that has
befaln poor Europe, since the Castilian mounted to this greatness. Now as some
Painters when they draw a Face take more pains to set out a Mole, or Were, then
the gracefulness of the whole countenance, so under correction have you bin
pleased to delineat Spain unto us; It is true, the Spaniard is much emulated by
some, and hated by others, suspected by all; but as many sweet and savoury
things are not therefore insipid, because they prove so to squeazy and unsound
stomachs, so the Spaniard is not so bad of himself, because he is reported to
be so, by such who either envy or Malign him; All Spaniards are not like the
Duke of Alva, who because he perfectly abhorred a Rebel, such as he held our
Countryman the Low-German to be, did such severe execution upon them; for
whereas they alledg that King Philip had broke his Oath, and infringed their
privileges, by introducing the Inquisition, and imposing new taxes, K. Philip
answered, that 'twas they themselfs who had broken their own privileges first,
by receding from that Religion, wherein he found them, and wherein acording as
he was engaged to God Almighty by solemn Oath, taken at his Inauguration, he
was bound to maintain them, which he could not do but by strength of Arms and
a War, which they had drawn upon themselfs, and therefore it was just they
should maintain it: For what he did was to preserve his Oath with the Religion,
and Immunities he found them in, which they would force him to violat, therefore
they may thank themselfs for the miseries that befell them; which yet in some
respect turned mightily to their advantage, for it filled Belgium with wealth
and tresure; In regard the Spaniard being of so haughty an humor, that he would
not relinquish his right to those Provinces, he employed so much Indian Gold
and Silver to reduce them that countervayl'd the price of the Country forty
times over; And had it not been for those unhappy Wars, the Catholic King
might by this time have paved all his Churches and palaces with Peru Ingots,
and Mezican Patacoons.

Touching the Society of Jesuits, were it not for their Hildebrandian Doctrine,
they might be very necessary Members of Church and State, both for the
Education of youth, the propagation of learning, converting of Infidels and
other things.

For what concerns Great Britain, Hungary and Poland, truly the Darts which some
Noble Princes here have hurld at them, were a little too keen; Touching the two
last, those Encomiums which some noble Princes whom I behold before ^e have made
of them, make a full compensation for what was spoken contra; They a Martial
peeple, perpetually inured to Arms, and standing upon their guard, that the
Common Enemy shall rush no further into Europe. And for them of Great Britain,
as they were in former ages much renoun'd for their trophies and feats abroad,
(for one of them built the walls of our Vienna returning from the Holy land,
which, to confess the truth, was more honor to him then to the Archduke, who
articled with him to do it) I say as some ages since, the English were famous,
so of late years they were envied by all Nations for their mighty increase of
wealth and commerce, with peace and afluence of all felicity; Until these late
intestine Wars happened, which makes them now to be rather pitied then
Envied, to be rather scorned then respected; yet they have discovered that the
same spirit of magnanimity and prowess remains still in the hearts of the
peeple, as appeared by those sundry battails, sieges and Skirmishings they had,
which were more then happened in any Country for the time, considering the
extent of ground; But that addition of Scotland to England was unhappy and
fatal to her, for from that cold Northern door blew all her troubles.

And now do I much admire what came into that Prince his mind, who spoke of
Germany, to be so tart against her, and to throw so much dirt into the face of
his own Country; surely as I believe he took those taunts and contumelies out
of some forr ein Author, who was no great friend to Germany; but it is as easy
for Her to shake them off, as feathers off a Cloak, or small flies when they
infest us in Summer; but as Tiberius answered one, who told him of some
aspersions that were cast abroad upon him, Non indignamur aliquos esse qui
nobis male dicat, satis est si hoc habemus ne quis nobis male faciat; We are
not angry that there are some who speak ill of us, It is enough that we are in
such a condition, that no body can do us any ill; so may Germany say of her
self. It Is too true, that Caesar has received some deminution in point of
power, but though some Countries which seem to have revolted from him seem to
usurp his rights, yet he still claims them, and they acknowledge fealty; We know
that Frederique the second writ to the Pope, Italia haereditas est mea, and hoc
notum est toti orbi; you know Italy is my inheritance, and this is known to all
the world, therefore when Pius the fourth would have made Cosmo of Medici King of
Hetruria, the Emperor did countermand it; And afterward when Pius the fifth
created him, Gran Duke of Toscany, Caesar did protest against it, as an
invasion of his imperial prerogative; though that title was afterward
confirmed to Francis his Son by the Emperors special charter, and intercession
of friends, yet with this proviso, that he should acknowledge himself Beneficiary
of the Empire. Moreover it continues to this day that when any difference
happen twixt any of the Italian Princes about extent of Territory, the decision
hereof belongs to the Imperial Court; There is a late pregnant example hereof,
for when the Genoways had encroached upon the Marquis of Final, and had in a
manner exterminated him from House and home, the Emperor Ferdinand did summon
them to answer for themselfs, with this menacing addition, Nisi Feciali suo
parerent urbem and agrum Genuensem se proscripturum* If they would not obey his
Herald, his Imperial Majesty would proscribe both the Town and Country of
Liguria, but they conformed to his command; Now, there is no Civilian Doctor but
will confess that Caesar is Lord paramount, and consequently has Jurisdiction
over all the States of Italy, and that it is an incontroulable truth, and a
Rule in Law, Nullis Italiae civitatibus leges condere jus esse quae Romanorum
legibus quas Fredericus promulgari jussit contrariae sint, There is no City of
Italy can by right establish any Law that may repugn any way the Roman Laws
which Frederique commanded to be promulgated. Touching the Pope, all the world
know that he is no other de Iure but a Vassal or Chaplain to Caesar, who gave
him the praefecture of Rome, and the Country adjacent; a confirmation whereof,
he solemnly seeks of every new Emperor: Therefore Caesar is not fallen from his
property and Imperial Right to Rome to this day; Nor is it absolutely
necessary for him to make his personal residence in Rome, it being a Rule, Ibi
est Roma, ubi est Imperator, There Rome is, where the Emperor is; We know that
when Constantine the Great, did first transferr his Court to Constantinople,
and fixed there, she being the fittest City to rule the world by reason of her
situation, yet he and his successors did still entitle themselfs Roman
Emperors, preserving still their first rights; as the Athenians were said,
notwithstanding that they had relinquished the City to conserve Athens still
in their Ships; So that it may be said without much impropriety of speech, that
Rome is now at Vienna, or Prague, or Norimberg, whersoever the imperial person
of Caesar is: All the Hans Towns, though they have made use of Caesar, and
procured large privileges for some pecuniary contributions, yet they acknowledge
him still their supreme liege Lord; Add herunto that Savoy, Lorrain, and
Burgundy are members of the Empire to this day; as also the Neitherlands or
Belgium, therefore when the confederat Provinces having revolted from Spain, had
sent a splendid legation to Elizabeth Queen of England, to take them under her
protection, the just and wise Princess put it to deliberation of Council, as
it appears yet upon Record, An cum alterius principis subditis protectionis
faedus inire liceret, and an Belgae faederati offerre jure possent sine
Caesaris consensu qui supremus Feudi Dominus erat; I say the said prudent Queen
put it to debate, whether it was lawful to enter into a league with the
Subjects of another Prince, and whether those confederated Provinces could make
such a proposal with the consent of Caesar who was Sovereign Lord of the Fee:
Whereupon the first answer she sent them was, Nihil sibi antiquius esse quam
fidem cum honor con, unctam tueri, nec dum sibi liquere, quomodo salvo honor,
and conscientia integra provincias illas oblatas in protectionem multo minus in
possessione^ accipere posset, Nothing, said Q. Eliz. was of more Religion to
her, then to conserve her Faith conjoined with an honor worthy of a Prince, and
that it did not yet appear unto her how with safety of her honor and integrity
of Conscience, she cold undertake the protection, much more the possession of
those Provinces: Yet afterward some darknesses and jealousies increasing 'twixt
her and Spain, she undertook the protection. And she proved a brave Auxiliary
unto them, both for men and Money, in so much that the foundation of that Free
State may be said to be cimented with English blood; It Is true, that France
concurred with her for pure political respects, for they were both as Remoras
to the Spanish greatness; Therefore although those six Fugitive Provinces which
have revolted from Spain have been strangers to the Empire ever since, yet all
the rest of the Provinces acknowledge their old homage to Caesar.

Now touching the Helvetians or Suisses, although by an Imperial Diplom or
Charter, they have Exemptionem a Iudicio Aulico, Camerali and Rotvillensi,
libertatem foederationum, and immunitatem ab omnibus oneribus realibus Imperio
debitis, tamen constitutione fractae pacis publicae tenentur, and pacem Imperii
publicam violantes in Camera accusari possunt, imo etiam contra omnes Imperii
hosts exteros suppetias far sunt obstricti. I say, although the Swisses have
exemption from Court or Chamber censures, although they have freedom or
confederacy, and an immunity from all real taxes of the Empire, yet in case
they infringe the public peace, they are citable to the imperial Chamber, and
they are bound to bring aid against all foreign Enemies of the Empire.

Touching the excess of Drinking, wherewith you brand the German, it is true,
that no Nation is more sociable and hospitable, which proceeds from the
largenes of their Souls, and free Spirits, yet if they are peccant this way,
their rare continence makes a compensation for their intemperance; Yet under
favor there be other Nations that be as guilty this way; For whereas the German
does pelt the brain with small shot, I mean with little draughts, the
Englishman does use to Storm it with Canon Bullet, I mean with huge drawghts at
a time, In so much that of the two he is the purer Drinker, for he is the only
man who trades in sheere liquor, without eating any thing else, which all other
Nations use to do; In so much, that Scaliger does not hit the humor right in
his Epigram, wherein he descants upon three Nations,

Tres sunt Convivae, Germanus, Flander and Anglus,
Dic, quis edit melius, quis meliusve bibit?
Non comedis Germane, bibis, Tu non bibis Angle
Sed comedis, comedis Flandre, bibisque been.
Lastly, touching ITALY, Renowned and Triumphant Italy, that Noble Prince who
declaimed in her praise spoke too sparingly, and he who pleaded against her,
spoke too much, he rubbed her sores with too rigid a hand, specially the
imperial seven-hill'd City, glorious and immortal Rome, of whom it seems that
Providence has a peculiar and more special care then ordinary, for although
she has bin so often ravished by such swarms of barbarous peeple, yet she
still-holds up her head; and though so many Crowns and Scepters have forsaken
her, yet the Crosier bears still up her aged limbs, and keeps her from falling.
She, who in former ages preserved her self by Prowess, does do it now by
piety. Touching her Bishops, that saying of Guicciardin's was a little too
virulent, wherein he tells us, Hodie tam depravati sunt mores, ut in Pontifice
laudetur probitas cum caeterorum hominum nequitiam non excedit: There is such a
deprivation of manners now a days crept into Rome, that if the Popes vices do
not exceed those of an ordinary man, he is accounted virtuous. Touching the
wealth of the Church, and the bounty of our Pious progenitors, I am none of
those that repine at it, and I would be loath to deprive Saint Peter of his
patrimony, or have any of his lands to mingle with mine, for fear they should
prove as a Canker in my Estate, I would be loath to exchange Souls with any of
those that robb the Church, I would not fill my Chests with such Aurum
Tholosanum: There was a remarkable thing happened in the time of Frederique the
second, who being extremely incenc'd against Peter de Vineis his Secretary,
caused him to be exoculated; yet though he had so lost his eyes, the Emperor
readmitted him to his Council, because he was an extraordinary wise man: The
Secretary was very sensible of the loss of his eyes, and therefore studied how
to be revenged. Herupon there being a War twixt the Emperor and the Pope, the
Secretary de Vineis told him, Vires Ecclesiae suismet opibus esse conterendas,
The power of the Church is to be quelled by her own wealth: Herupon he advised
the Emperor to sell some of the Church goods, which he did in Pisa and other
places, which being done, the Secretary told him boldly, Imperator, injuriam
mihi a te illatam ultus sum, -- O Emperor I have now revenged my self of the
injury that was done me, Thou have drawn upon thy self already the hatred of
men, and now I have drawn upon thee the hatred of God by this act of Sacrilege,
therefore all things shall fare ill with thee hereafter, which proved accordingly
as the History plainly tells us.

Touching the excesses of some Popes, which Poggio and Platina ripp up, it
cannot be denied but among so many some must be bad; In the first Election that
our Savior himself made of his twelve Apostles, we know there was one naught,
But let it not be forgotten that the first 33. Bishops of Rome were all
Martyrs; If the Cardinals purple seem too gay in the eyes of that Noble Prince
who spoke against it, and that some Ecclesiastiques live in too much pomp and
Plenty, The Capuchins frock, and the austere abstemious life's of other
mendicant Friars may make some compensation for their excesses; If Venice and
Naples with other places, have so many Courtesans, the continence of so many
thousand cloistered sweet souls who have quite divorced themselfs from the
world, and wedded Heaven, may serve to apologize for the Country in general;
Yet I am not so far transported with the love of Italy, (or any Region else)
that she may deserve to stand in competition for pre-eminence with Germany; No,
Italy comes as far short of her in that point, a^ an Italian mile comes short
of a German league, which in some places is five times longer.

DIXI.
C. Frederique von Pliegianem.
I Have heard with no less pleasure then profit all those most learned and
Elaborat Orations, which have bin pronounced in this Princely Diet; and
touching my own judgment I totally concur in point of opinion with the
personage that spoke last, and with his highness Charles Duke of Saxony, who
dilated himself so gallantly upon the same subject, viz. that of all the
Kingdoms and States of Europe, Germany deserves the Palm, and principality.

B. Henry von Pa^owitz.
And I also, most excellent Princes, am settled also in the same opinion, which
I hold to be Orthodoxall, and not derogatory to any other Country besides.

C. Ioachim von Iaxheim.
And I am clearly of that mind, nor do I hold it a wrong or disparagement to
any other part of Europe to veil to Germany, and come in the arreare.

C. Christopher von Belward.
I have weighed and winnow'd in my intellectualls, all those opinions that have
been delivered in this high convention, and I hold it appertains de Iure to
Germany to have the pre-eminence, which I would be ready to maintain with my
Sword, as well as with my saying, if occasion did require it; Nor does this
opinion proceed from any partiality or fondnes of affection because I am a
German born, but from the pure dictates of reason and Justice.

THE CLOSE OF THE ASSEMBLY, By the most excellent, FREDERIQUE Duke of
WITTENBERG, andC.
Most Illustrious Prince, ever endeared Cosens, and much Honored Barons. --
There have bin many famous Diets in Germany, which have bin more populous, and
of a longer continuance then this, but I believe there was never any which
transacted more business in so short a time; I dare say that Europe was never so
exactly survayed, and traveled over, as she has bin these few days by us;
And this we have don without incurring any inconveniences or hazards at all;
either of difficult ways, incursion of thieves, stumbling of horses, hard
fare, illfavour'd lodgings, or crossing of Seas, with those nomberles
incommodities which we know are incident to perigrination, and journeying in
foreign Countries.

And now me thinks, you expect with earnestnes, and a kind of impatience that I
should deliver my opinion touching the question which has bin controverted so
many days, and canvas'd to an fro, with such high strains of Rhetoric and
Energie of wit in so many fluent Orations swelling with such high tides of
Eloquence, and learning; But I humbly desire to be excused herein, you know
it is a rule of morallity all the world over, that Comparisons are odious;
Besides, under favor, neither the place nor persons of this Assembly, are fit
to pass a definitive sentence hereof; We are all Germans, and do what we can,
we must be a little indulgent to our own Country by an irresistible instinct
of Nature: All Regions have some advantage or other to make them lift up their
crests. Let Germany glory that she has the Prince Paramount of Christendom for
her perpetual guest, that Caesar keeps his Court in her. Let Spain be the
Queen of Mines, France of Men; let Great Britain be the Queen of Isles, Italy
the Queen of Policy, with all sorts of Elegancies; let it be granted that the
French and Pole are best a Horseback, the Englishman and Hollander upon a deck,
the Spaniard at a siege, the Italian in a Treaty, the Hungarian upon a rampart,
etc. Every Nation has a particular aptitude to something more then another, and
this by the common decree of Nature, who uses to disperse her benefits, and
not power them all together upon any one peeple.

And now, most splendid and magnificent Princes, my most dear Cosens and
Compatriots, how shall I pay that due tribut of gratitude, which I confess to
have made my self liable unto, for this noble and virtuous Congress? truly, no
words are strong enough to express my self herin, unless they were couched in
such patheticall and gallant Orations which have bin formerly framd; All that I
can say and desire for the present is, that you would please to accept of a
lipp-payment only, (which yet is cordial) until some happy encounter may
afford me an opportunity to return some real acknowledgment: In the interim,
most noble and hopeful Princes, well may your Souls fare, may your Virtues
increase, and your Fame flourish to all posterity.

FINIS.
A particular of such matters as were debated in this German Diet.
A
A Buse of foreign Travel 3. in the pro. sage advise to a Traveller 4. fol.
ibid. Abbot of Fuldo the greatest of Christendom, he furnished the Emperor
with 60000 fighting men. 9. In that Abbacy 600. Gentlemen were usd to be bred,
and 30. Doctors to teach them 10. Auspurg famous for Goldsmiths 13. The
admirable wooden Eagle made by Regiomontanus to the life 14 All the old famous
Artists musterd up among the Greeks and Romans 14 A notable passage 'twixt
Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas 14 All the famous Printers numbered 15
Antwerp uncharacterized 16 Acostas opinion of the Torrid Zone 17 One of
Aristotle's Errors 17 Augustus Caesar and Tiberius drank most commonly German
wines 18 Annwerp erected the first Burse 20 Of Ariovistus the valiant German,
his stout answer to Caesar 22 Above 19 millions of souls in Germany not
counting Denmark and Bohemia, as Boterus affirms 25 A notable passage of Babo
Count of Aheneberg 25 Andaluzia from Vandales 26 Augustus Caesar twice defeated
by the Germans, called Lolliana, and Variana clades 25 A memorable passage in
Constantinople touching one of the Emperors Ambassadors 26 The ancientest race
of Noblemen is in Germany 26 of Artemisia and her wonderful love to her
husband 2 The answer of a Pole why he held the plough on Sunday 7 A notable
example of poysning used in Poland, and the fearful judgment that ensued
thereupon 8 Aurelianus the Emperor killed 48. men in one day in the field 12
Attila uncharacterized 18 his death 19 A wise Answer of an Archbishop of Colen to
the Abbot of Fuldo 19 S. Augustins wish 28 A Calabrian has nothing but the
shape of a man in him 36 A shrewd judgment of a learned Frenchman touching
Italy 42 Aquitaine daintily described by Salvianus, and Province by Boterus 38
Aristotle foully erred when he writes that there are no Asses in France 53 The
Duke of Anjous miscarriage in the Netherlands, he was made Governor by Queen
Eliz. letters 59 Of the French disease 59 The French Nation censured, They have
whirlwinds in their brains, quicksands in their breasts, characters given of
them by the Ancients 59 French Kings not liable to pay the debts of their
predecessors, examples produced 59 A nasty leprous French peeple called Capotts
dwelling in Bearn 59 The Invincible Armada in the year 88 described 39 Of
Prince Arthur, his character in verse 41 Mr. Arondel of Warder how he came to
be Count of the Empire, his patent 42 Ausonius his character of a salmon 46 His
opinion of the Britains 53 Adrian the fourth an Englishman his haughtines 55
Anne of Bullen taunted in France 56 Of the Abuse of Tobacco 56 An Apology for
human infirmities 45 The advantages of diverse Countries 51 An Apology for the
Popes and the Cardinals 49 Another for Italy 50 The Atheistical life and
saying of a German Prince 36 Of Amsterdam 35 Of the Austrian Family 29
B
BOdins notable description of Germany 10 Berchtoldus Swartzius a Franciscan
first Inventor of gunpowder 14 Bezas Epigram of Aldus Manutius the Printer 15
Boterus his opinion of the German Cities 16 Of Bachrag wines 18 The benefit
Holland makes of her milk may compare with Bourdeaux wines, or Lisbons spices
19 Biscopius a Welsh Monk made five pilgrimages to Rome, and used to bring with
him some choice Artists 23 Bon^inius preferrs Austria before Italy 35 The bad
Popes censured 37 Bembo's profaneness 38 Of a Bishop that died by keeping in
his wind backward at a feast 41 Beatrix Emp: Barbarossa's wife barbarously usd
in Milan, the Emperor had his full re venge 42 The Britains of the Gallic, or
Wallic race 42 Bodin censured 60 Great Britain uncharacterized 33 Her
advantag^ous situation 33 Her seas as fruitful as her shores 33 Her character
in verse 33 Her character by Eumenius to Constantin the Great 33 The progress
that her Fish makes about her throughout the year, with her several seasons of
fishing 34 Britain a microcosm of herself 34 Of the Inhab^tants of Britain 34
Britain had the first Christian King and Emperor 36 Britain branded by
Porphyry 36 The old Britons or Welsh the greatest planters of Christianity 36
Most of the famous men of Britain ancient and modern musterd up 37 Boniface his
ill report of the English 50 Britain has the best Cocks and Dogs 51 The Baths
of Germany 36 Bartolus saying, that tall men are seldo^ wise 30 S. Bernards
description of Ireland 6^ A bitter satyr against the Queen of Scot land 64
Buchanan and Knocks censured 64
C
THey of China an Eagle-eyd p^eple, next neighbors to the Rising Sun. They
disdain all other Nations. Their proverb. The true appellation of China, 8.
times bigger then France. They are good Artists. They have generally flat
noses. They restrain strangers to come into their Country. They inhibit the
Natives to travel abroad, etc. 2 in the proeme. The character of man 2 in the
pro. The Chino is enemies to humanity, to the law of Nature 2 in the pro.
Cybeles priests were Hermaphrodites 4 in the pro. Charlemain versed in many
languages, a good Poet, he caused the Grammar to be put in the vulgar tongue,
and German names to be imposed upon the months in the year, he divided the
winds into twelve, he was used to be present in the schools, and threatened a
degradation to all Nobles that were illiterat 11 Charles the V. had Thucydides
always with him in the field 11 A comparison touching Italy 35 Another
comparison 36 A comparison of the French Wines 39 A comparison of the French
Kings 50 A comparison of Monsieur de la Nove 54 Two comparisons wittily used 7
A fit comparison 6 A comparison 'twixt the Germans and Italians 8 Caesar
saluted only the skirts of Germany 8 A comparison of Rivers 9 A comparison of
Weeds 9 Cicero^s complaint of false writing 15 A comparison of Tacitus 17
Caesar's saying of the Swablanders 23 A comparison touching Kingdoms 23 Of the
Cosacks 23 A high comparison about the praises of Italy 21 A comparison 41 The
Italian Wheat is the first, the Boetian next, the Sicilian the third, and the
African next that 21 Of Cosmo de Medici and his rare abilities, his admirable
piety, his golden speech, his Epitaph 27
D.
THe duty of a Traveller 3. in the pro. Duke of Saxony Orator for Germany 5 His
curious Proeme. 5 Disswasions from foreign Travel 7 Danzick, Delph, in Low
Germany, and Rostock, Paderborn, Brunswick, and Breslaw in High Germany the
most famous for Beer 18 The Duke of Holyiein had at one time 1000. Ma^es, and
160 Stallions 19 Of the Danube that waters a hundred people 19 The Dutch were
Grandfathers, if not Fathers of the Britains, as Caesar writes. 23 Of diverse
that writ upon bald petty subjects, as Archippus ^ell upon the praise of an
Ass, Passeratius upon his shadow, Lucian of a fly, Erasmus of folly, etc. 6
The defects of Italy in not having Navigable Rivers with others 35 Diverse
places in Italy subject to ill aires 35 Of Duke Godf^ey of Bullen 43 A
Discou^se against Elective Kingdoms, and what confusions come by Interregnums
47 Dirt of Paris indelible 63 Montague his saying of his Countrymen 64 A
Discourse of Foreign Travel by the Duke of Saxony 5 Of Duels so much used by
the French 64 The dangerous opinions of the Jesuits, and the various ways they
have to oblige the Gentry 17 Of Sir Francis Drake and his exploits 42
E.
The English taunted wittily fol. 6 Eudoxus his Extravagant wish to go near the
Sun 6 English sweat 6 Eckius first found found the way of mingling Oil with
Colors 14 An Encomium of Printing 16 The Excellencies of the German Cities 17
England called Transmarina Saxonia 24 Entringh Castle, a memorable passage that
happened in it 24 The Encouragement the Pope gives Merchants to buy his Alum
22 Aeneas Sylvius his witty Distic to the Poets 37 Extravagant wishes of two
Brothers in Padoa, whereby they both perished 42 The Excess of speech that
Maximilian used touching France 37 A notable example of a drunken woman in
France 62 Of the English Kings 39 The English made Trade to flourish first in
Flanders 40 Of Queen Elizabeth 40 The English great Reverencers of their Kings
40 The Earth is the Native Country of all men; she is but one Mansion 3. in the
Pro. The mavelous Echo of Charenton bridge in France, that reverberates 13
times 4. in the Pro. Of the Escurial in Spain the eighth wonder of the world 3
Notable Examples of the Spanish constancy 6 Edgar rowed by four Kings 38 The
Exploits of the English in France 38 The English formidable in France as by
example 38 The English King prayed for more often than any other 41 Queen
Elizabeth caused the Great Turk to expel the Jesuits out of Pera 19 The
English censured 67 Englands Inconveniences 61 The English and Dutch compared
in point of drinking 37 Examples of Drunkards 37
F.
A Fantastic Traveller 3. fol. in the Pro. Set forth by Sir Thomas More in the
person of Lalus, a mere Ape or Mimick, etc. 3. in the Pro. He turns a Sprat to
a Whale 4. in the Pro. France taunted 6 Foreign Travel the best Academy 7 The
famous Divines of Germany mustered up, the famous Politicians, the famous
Physicians and Philosophers 12 Germany the first Correctresse of the Calendar
12 The Fantastic humor of Petrus Bembus touching the Latin tongue 13 France
the center of Europe, she enjoyes a delicate temper, able to unite or hinder
the conjunction of the forces of Europe, her comodious situation 38 The four
Loadstones of France according to Boterus 38 Without France, Spain might starve
for Bread 39 Of the French Wines 39 Of the French Hemp 39 Of the French Salt
compared with that of other Countries 39 Of diverse other French commodities
wherewith the Country abounds 39 The bad fruits of foreign Travel 6 Friburg
famous for Crystal work 13 Florence a City to be seen on Holydaies, as Charles
the Emperor said 16 Of the French Mines 40 A Fish in France that changes with
the Moon 4 Of the French Rivers, and how commodiously they lie for Navigation,
40 France the eye and pearl of the world 41 France has 102 Episcopal Cities,
whereof four are Metropolitan, she has 30000. Parishes 41 Of the French Town,
and of Paris in particular 42 France the freest Country upon earth, and the
reasons 42 The Freedom of France exemplified by two notable instances 42 Of
the French Martial Kings 43 Of the French Church, and the vast Revenue thereof
43 A Frenchman the first Latin Lecturer in Rome when Cicero was a boy 43 Of the
great Learned men of France, and the College of Sorbon 44 Of the French
Academies 44 Of the French Tongue, and of Joseph Scaliger, the Dictator of
Literature 46 The best French spoken upon the banks of Loire 46 Of the French
Kings, and their excellencies 46 The French Crown not tied to a Distaffe, and
the reason alleged 46 French Kings never die, example thereof 47 France
prohibits the Imperial Law, 48 French Kings begin to reign inchoativ^ at 14
48 Their high Prerogatives, and of the Parliament of Paris 49 French King more
glorious than the Emperor in gards, etc. 50 The French King cures the Struma,
and the manner of it 50 Of the late French Kings, and their characters,
specially of Henry the great, and his Son the late Lewis the 13. 51 France and
her King worthy to have the Principality, and the reasons 52 Francis the first
brought in the Turk against Spain, and the act authorized by examples 55 Of the
French Ligue, and the monstrousness of it 55 French Kings censured 55 Of Henry
the 3. his vision, his death, his Epitaph 56 France possessed with 3 Furies 56
Sale of Offices in France a high Injustice 57 French Gentlemen all Surgeons 61
Of the French language 61 France full of wanton Books 62 Of the French Rablais
62 The French often eaters 63 The French most changeable 63 When the Frenchman
sleeps the Devil rocks the cradle, a Proverb of the Flemin 63 The foolishness
of the Londoners in point of building 61
G.
Gratianus his famous Decree 2. in the Pro. Germany much bettered by foreign
travel 3. in the Pro. The German Gentlemen taxed for abusing foreign Travel 6
The Germans very thick abroad in other Countries 6 Germany the Princess of
Europe 7 Gaunt in Flanders the greatest City in Europe 7 Germany suddenly
turned Christian, her marvailous piety 9 Germany described by Paulus Iovius 10
She has mightily flourished since the Council of Constance in Universities
and Knowledge 10 The German Princes very covetous of degrees in Learning 11 Of
the Duke of Gelders 11 All the German great Towns excel in some particular
thing 13 A German Friar Inventor of Guns, and A German Swordman Inventor of
Printing, vice versa 14 The German Cities uncharacterized 16 The German
Territories uncharacterized 17 Of the German Wines 18 Germany compared to Italy
18 The German commodities set forth 18 Of the German Horses 19 Of the German
Rivers 19 Of the German Fish 19 Of the German Mines of Gold and Silver, with
other Metals 19 The German most Hospitable 20 German Gentlemen restrained from
Trade 20 The Germans never beat their servants, nor imprison their Tenants 21
Germany an ill Country for Bastards 21 The German rare for chastity and
conjugall love 22 Of the German valor 22 Germany called by the Belgians, Magna
patria 23 Germany the strongest body of Europe if united 26 The Genoways only
worse than Englishmen 36 The Germans tartly censured 34 The German way to try
whether a child be a Bastard 73
H.
AN Honest man must be a mixed man, the reason why 3. in the Pro. Hyperboles of
diverse sorts 4. in the Pro. Hollanders best makers of Linen cloth, their Looms
are as fine as Arachnes Webb 13 Holst and Oudenard excel in woven Pictures 13
Holland has thirty three Cities, whereof from Gorcham Tower one may see 22 16
Hercynian Forest once nine days journey broad 17 Holland uncharacterized by
Scaliger 17 Holland Cowes give twelve quarts a day 19 Herodes King of Iudaea
had a Guard of Germans 21 How the Germans took footing in France 23 Horslers
and Tapste^s in Poland understand Latin in many places 3 How Rome has been
ungrateful to those who deserved best of her 10 Hungary has strong Wines 10
Hungary has a River called Tibisco, whereof it is said, that she has two
parts water, and the third fish 11 Saint Hierom an Hungarian 11 Hungary has
had famous men, their names 11 Hungary affoorded eight Roman Emperors, their
names 12 Other brave Kings of Hungary mentioned 13 The brave answer of an
Hungarian Gentlewoman 14 Hungary the Antimurale and chiefest Rampart of Europe
15 Hungary glories of Stephen Bartorius, and deservedly, his character. 15 Of
the Hungarian languor, or fai^iness 17 Some Hungarian Wells that will singe
Hoggs, yet they breed fish 17 The Hungarians described by Bishop Otto of
Frisenghen 18 The Huns said to have their original from some Demons 18 Henry the
4 of France censured many ways 65 In Henry the seconds time but two Coaches in
all Paris 63 The Hollander lives partly upon the idleness of the English 49 A
horrid Murrher of a German Butcher 49
I
THe Italian taunted 6 The Italian sends yearly to Germany for Artists as
Statuaries, Architects, Limmers, Surveyours, Aqueductors, etc. 12 John
Guttemberg of Mentz, first Inventor of Printing 14 How Irenaeus adjur'd the
writer of his works tobe true 15 Of the Italian Mountibanks 6 Of Idleness and
sloth 11 Italy to other Kingdoms as a diamond to Bristol stones 20 Italy
uncharacterized by Pliny 20 The high Elogy that an Emperor gives of Italy 21
Some Italian soyles afford 4 ^attermaths 21 Italy, Bacchus his Inner Celler 21
Of the Italian wines 21 The wines of Papia cured Boethius, and afterward he
fell to write his book de Consolatione 21 The various commodities of Italy 22
Italy described curiously by Florus 22 The Italian Cities with their Epithetts
22 A Napolitan found out the Mariners Compass, a Venetian found out the making
of glass 23 Of the brave Artists of Italy, of the Poets and Orators with
Philosophers 23 Italy the great source and Cestern whence all civility flow^s
24 Italy has 17. Academies 24 The Italian cautious in exposing himself to
danger 24 The brave resolution of an Italian when Charles the eight entered
Italy 25 Italy bred great Captains 25 Of Christophero Colomba a greater Hero
then Hercules, the reasons induced him to that design, his proceedings in
short, how he jeerd the ranting Spaniards, how he was slighted, and at last
listened unto by Isabella 25 The Italians are true friends, exemplified by
Signior Priuli a Venetian Gentleman, and Cardinal Pole 26 Italy a seeker
after, and rewarder of virtue, Rome the common Country of all Nations where any
is capable of dignity 26 Of the stupendous wealth and strength of Venice, still
a virgin, the greatest mistress of Sea in the world, her exploits and policy
28 Diverse Characters of Rome, one by Livy, her admired populousnes and riches
in times passed, of her Bishop, always a Reverencer of the Gods, of old and
new Rome, of the Pope, and many examples produced, what adorations have been
done him by Emperors and Kings, the notable letter of Adrian the fourth to the
Electors of Germany, the names of those Kingdoms that are feudetary to Rome,
how diverse Emperors, and Kings have been excommunicated by him 31 Touching
General Councels, a proverb of the Pope in Italy, etc. 33 Italy by many
characters of merit deserves to have the precedence of all Countries in Europe
33 Of famous John Hawkwood 45 Ireland famous of old for learned men 49 The
Irish have a holy proverb of S. Patrick 49 Ireland and Scotland censurd. 66
K
KIngdoms no other then Magna Latrocinia fol. 41 Kingston upon Hull like a
Low Country town 47 Of Keneth the Pict, who brought the coronation stone from
Ireland to Scotland 48
L
THe Lord Presidents complement to the rest of the Princes 1. in the pro.
Lycurgus against foreign Travel 2. in the proeme The Law of God that strangers
should be as well used of Natives 2. in the pro. Of Luther his quil compared to
Hercules club 9 Lotharius the Emperor the first restaurator of learning in
Germany 10 Leunclavius compild the History of the Mahumetans while he was
Ambassador for Rodolphus in Constantinople 11 Lovain had 4000. Weavers loomes
in the year 1330 13 The English first taught to make cloth by the Lovantans 13
Lubecks beer medicinal 18 Of Lorenzo de Medicis a memorable passage 22 Leo the
tenth born for the restoration of letters 24 London and Genoa compared in
Ingratitude and why 26 Latin tongue two thirds Greek 38 Languages descanted upon
61 Laval in the reign of Francis the first, a corpulent gentleman, was the
first Inventor of Coches 63 Lipsius his opinion of Oxford 44 Of London,
Englands Imperial chamber 44 A Libell in Spain against the Jesuitts, and
another in France 18 Of love to ones Country 31
M
MAn not tied to one place no more then a bird or fish 3. in the proeme Man
Lord of all elementary creatures by divine charter 3. in the pro. Machiavill
rebukes his Country men because they used German Mathematicians 10 Magdeburg
the Metropolis of Germany 16 Many errors of the Ancients musterd up 17 The
monstrous trade of Antwerp in times passed 20 The marvailous riches of Antwerp,
when she was plundered by the Spaniards 20 The memorable History of a Duchess
of Bavaria, of conjugall love to Guelpho her husband 22 The miraculous story of
a Countess in Holland who brought forth so many children as days in the year
24 Lituania in some parts does offer sacrifices to the Devil; the manner of
their worship 7 M. T. Cicero the great standard bearer of Orators 23 A maxim
of Ilanders 35 A modest saying of Julius the third, though an odd one 37 A
mighty clash 'twixt the Pope and the King of France 39 Moses Gods Chancellor 2.
in the pro. Mets put bounds to the conquests of Charles the fifth 43 Of the
great Massacre in France, and the horrid comet that followed a little after,
the eminent men that were slain 54 Medalls with the inscriptions after S.
Bartholome massacre 55 Of Marseilles in France a Greek proverb 61 The Marquis
of Ancre most barbarously murtherd 63 Of Maurice Prince of Orange, his speech
upon his death bed 37
N
NAtures Great Ordinance 2. in the pro. Nilus has a strange property 7
Norimberg one of the most ingenious towns in Europe 13 A notable saying of
Valentinian touching the French 24 The Normans a valiant peeple issued from
Germany 25 How they came to be called Bygods 25 The Normans elegantly
uncharacterized by Roger Hoveden 25 Notable exploits of the Germans against the
Romans 25 The Normans chased first the Saracens out of Sicily 25 A notable
resolution of the Gosack 5 No learning at all left in Greece at this time 37 A
notable saying of Borgia Pope Alexanders son when he had lost 100000. crowns at
dice 37 The notable cunning of Aeneas Sylvius touching Rome 39 Nogaret the
French Ambassador takes the Pope a cuff under the ear 39 A notable letter the
Greek Churches writ to John the third 39 The notable speech of Charles the fifth
to Seldi^s at Flushing 11 No River so full of Meanders as the Sein in France 14
Narbon curiously uncharacterized in Latin verse 41 A notable example of sacrilege
49 Of Nations in general, and their dexterity 51 Three notable stories in
Germany 34
O
THe occasion of this meeting 1. in the pro. Otho the Emperor escaped
imprisonment in Greece, because he spoak the language so well 11 Of Mary Q. of
Hungary a remarkable passage 21 Of the glory of the Emperor and the Electors 26
Of Charlemain the first founder of the German Empire 26 Of the famous men in
Poland 3 Of ploughs and culters of wood to which the pole does attribut a kind
of Divinity 7 Of some positions of the Canon Law 38 Of the Canonists who are
great champions for the Pope 38 Of diverse Emperors who summond General
Counsels 41 Of diverse Popes who were elected, and chastised by Emperors 41 Of
Italy, France and England a proverb 57 Of the Jesuits their rise, their
progress and policy, all factors for Spain, their strange tenets, how they
tugged to get into Paris, how they were banished Venice. Of the Indispositions
of the Spanish monarchy 26 Of the ghastly death of Philip the second, and many
circumstances belonging to it, his Epitaph. Of Portugal and her pitiful
sterility Of the strongest Forts upon earth 34 The Opinion of an Italian
touching the strength of England 38 The Order of the golden Fleece more proper
to England then to any Country else 40 Of York the Seat of Emperors 47 Of
Scotland 48 Of Ireland 49 Of the lightness of the Britains 53 Of the
prerogatives of the Emperor 48 Of curing the Kings evil by the French King,
the opinion of Crescentius 68 Of the base Ingratitude of the Scotts 65
P
IN praise of Peregrination 3. in the pro* Poison cured in a strange way 6 A
proverb the Italians have of the Germans 12 In the praise of Poland 1 Of the
Perusian Ambassadors employed to the Pope a facetious passage 1. in Pol. Poland
has salt pitts under ground like palaces 1 Poland a very plentiful Country 2
A Polonian merchant named Vernicius being Consul of Cracovia was rich to
admiration, famous entertainment he gave to 3 Kings 2 The Pole delights not
much in sumptuous buildings 2 There were nine score talents erogated out of
Garlik, Onions and Leeks, toward the building the pyramids o^ Egypt 2 The Pole
measures his house by his own body 2 The Pole goes beyond all for manly attire
2 The Pole confines upon two potent neighbors, the Turk and the Russe 4 The
brave answer that Stephen King of Poland gave the Turk 4 Potts found naturally
shapen in the earth near Streme 4 Poland has had very victorious Kings, they
are reckoned up 4 King of Poland created a perpetual friend to the Empire 5
Philip the second would not refer to the Pope the right to Portugal 39 The
prerogative of the German Diet 1. in the proeme. Plato against foreign travel
1. in the pro. The famous pilgrimage of Otto the third to a saint in Poland,
and the story belonging to it 4 The Pole can bring into the field 150. thousand
fighting men 5 Of the Polish Nobility 5 The Poles three parts of four are
Arrians 8 In some Polish words there are 10. consonants to one vowell 9 The
Polish words as so many stones thrown at a man's brain A proverb of Hungary 19
The power of Pisa in times passed, when she had 100 gentlemen that could put
every one a gally to sea upon his own charge 27 The power of Genoa in times
passed ibid. Of Philip the second, his consciousnes before he invested
Portugal, his sage carriage about his son before he died 12 Of the
perfidiousnes of the English against the old Britains 34 Of Printing and Gunns
39
R.
ROme recovered Learning by Urban the 4. who sent for Thomas Aquinas 23 As also
afterward by Cosmo and Lorenzo de Medici 23 Reasons that Great Britain may
stand in competition for the primacy of Europe 50 Raphael Urbin designed by Leo
the tenth to be a Cardinal 37 Reasons why Great Britain cannot deserve the
pre-eminence of other Countries 67 The Russe seldom travels abroad 2. in the
Pro. Rodolphus the Emperors wise speech to a Traveller 6 The Rule of
Providence not to power down all blessings at once 8 Of Regiomontanus 10 A
Remarkable passage of Everard Barbatus Duke of Wirtemberg 21 The Roman
Emperors had a guard of Germans for their fidelity Of the Renowned Families of
Germany, and their antiquity and extent through all Europe 26 Rhodope a rich
Courtisan built one of the Pyramids of Egypt 2 Rome in one Cense that was made
had in her two millions and a half of souls 2 Rome when Pagan had above 400
Temples, now Christian she has scarce the 4th part 2 The sorry report the
French gave of Poland at their return with Hen. 3 6 Rome often ravished 28 Rome
shrunk into a Pigmey's skin from that Gigantick shape she was 34 The hugeness
of Rome conjectured by many arguments 34
S.
SCotsmen Men-eaters 63 Spain first attempted, and at last subdued by the
Romans 2 Spain preferred before all countries by Charles the 5 1 Spain with her
commodities laid op^ 2 Spain the fragrantst Country 2 In Spain Milk cannot turn
to Whey in some places 2 Spain the Queen of horses 2 Of the chief Cities of
Spain 3 Of the Mines of Spain 4 The site and form of Spain 4 Of the 150 Rivers
that water Spain 4 Spain has a bridge twenty miles long, whereon cattle feed 4
Spanish Crown made of her own gold 4 Spain described by Claudian 5 A Spanish
Guard about Julius Caesar, Augustus had a Band of Biscainers 6 A notable
example of the Spanish valor 6 The Spaniards right justified to the West
Indies 7 The Spanish Discoverers of the West Indies, the Discoverers of the
East 7 Spaniards the sole Grandees of this Age 8 Spain has bred notable
Spirits 8 Of the Jesuits founded by a Spaniard 9 The Spanish Monarchy the
vastest since the Creation 10 The Sun always shines upon some part of the
Philippian Monarchy 10 Sacrilege to dispute of the Emperors power 2. in the
Pro. Spain taunted 6 Seneca's notable Speech against Foreign Travel 6 Satan
does commonly set up his Chapel near Gods House 9 Scaligers witty saying of
^lavius 12 Scaligers comparison 'twixt thunder and canon 14 Scaligers witty
saying of Printing* of Canon, Wheele-clocks 16 Scaligers Elogium of Antwerp 16
The Swisse scarce knew the use of Gold and Silver til the overthrow they gave
the Duke of Burgundy near Granson 19 Spanish Soldiers made hilts of swords of
massy Gold at the plundring of Antwerp 20 A notable speech of Philip the
second when his Father resigned him his dominions 22 The wondrous strength of
Sigismund King of Poland, who could crack a horshooe 8 Slavonique the most
spacious Tongue 8 Strange examples of some learned men that lost their memory
as not to remember their own names 34 Scaligers tart opinion of Rome 35 Sicily
called by G^cero, Romes Nurse, and the peoples Pantry 35 Sannazarius writ three
books of Jesus Christ, and yet never names him 38 Spain has afforded many
brave Emperors 11 The Spanish Grandezas expressed, and reasons alleged that
the Spanish King is to be preferrred before all other Potentates 11 In Spain
the Mule fares sometimes better than the Master 1^ The sterillity of Spain
discovered by a pleasant tale of the Count Palatin of the Rhine 15 Of the
Spanish pride some examples 21 How Spain came to this greatness 22 A question
whether the Spaniards were first discoverers of the East and West Indies 22 Of
the Spanish cruelty in the Indies 23 Spanish King not so potent as we take him
to be, and the reasons 24 The Spanish valor questioned 26 Diverse Spanish
Rodomantadoes 26 The Spanish Fleet the highest Grandeza that ever was 27 The
sharp sight of the Spaniard 27 A memorable story of a Spanish Captain in
Flander^ 27 Though the King of Spain be in perpetual war, and infinitely
indebted, yet there is no appearance at all in his Court 27
T*
A Traveller compared to a Horsleech, and Paris of Troy 6 Tacitus his notable
speech against Germany 7 Thuanus says that Cambray makes 30000 linen cloths
yearly 13 Tacitus like to have been lost, had he not been received in a
monastery of Westphalia 15 Typography casts a bridle into times mouth 15
Typography Ars memoriae, and Mors oblivionis 15 Tacitus his opinion of Germany
rectified 17 The Tower of Strasburg 574 foot high 17 Tacitus called by Budaeus,
the wickedest of all writers, by Tertullian, the lyingst, by Orosius, the
flattringst 17 Tyrol abounds most with Metals of any Country 17 The Turks call
all Christians Freinks, and the Abyssins call them Alfrangues 24 The Great Turk
prefers the Christian Emperors Ambassador before all others 26 The temple of
Ephesus 22 years a building 2 The Pope a great temporal Prince and proud 33 A
tart censure of the Italian 36 A tart saying touching Saints 37
V
ULms excells in Drapery of all sorts 13 Utrecht stands betwixt 50 Cities,
whereof the remotest but a days journey 16 Vienna described by Aeneas Sylvius
18 Vladislaus the perjured K. of Poland and the horrid judgment that fell upon
prince and peeple 8 The Yew poisonous to those that sleep under it, a brass
nayl beaten in takes away the poison 40 The virtue of Iron 40 A strange vision
Henry the 3 of France had before his death 56 How he was murdered, with his
Epitaph ibid. Vulcan has his chief forge, and Mars his Armory in Bilbo 4 Of
Viriatus the valiant Portuguez 6 A question discussed, whither the old world
got more by the new, or the new by the old 8 The vanity of the Portuguais 20 Of
the Spanish Inquisition 20 The three vows of Solomon 29
W
BOdin wittily taunted 53 A witty Epigram on Katherin de Medicis Q of France 54
A witty saying of Henry the 4. of France 57 A witty comparison touching Bodin
60 A witty character of the French by Pontumarinus 60 A witty Chronogram 12
Witty reparties 'twixt a German and a Dutchman touching their languages 61 A
witty Epigram for drinking 38 A wise law of the Lacedaemonians touching
lascivious books 62 A witty saying touching the order of Knighthood in France
63 Two witty comparisons 64 A wise saying of an English Captain 57 A witty
letter of C^ligni to the French King 64 A witty Epigram upon Spain 24 A witty
saying how Philip got the Kingdom of Portuga^l 6 A wise saying of Philip the
second 11 His wise speech at his death 11 A witty simile touching Spain 14 A
witty speech of Henry the fourth touching Spain 14 The witty speech of King
James touching the Spaniard 24 Whither the Indian gold has done more hurt or
good to Europe 24 Some witty sayings of the wild Indians reflecting upon the
Spaniards 23 A witty saying of Robert Duke of Normandy 10 A witty speech of K.
James touching Tobacco 5 A wise saying of Cosmo de Medici 27 Walloons that fled
from the fury of the Duke of Alva in Flanders taught the English to make Bays
and Serges 13 A witty character of a King 15 The Wines of Germany 18 Wine fo
plentiful in Germany, that in some places they macerat their lime and mingle
their mortar, with it 18 The Walls of Babylon 200 foot high, and 60 miles in
compass 2 Of the seven wonders 2 Where the Turks horse sets his foot the grass
never grows 4 A witty answer of Charles the sift 21 A wise saying of Scaurus 33
A wise saying of Sigismund the Emperor, and of A^phonso of Aragon touching
Learning 37 A witty Epigram upon Henry the 4 19 A wise speech of the Pontano
Duke of Venice to the Popes Ambassadors 39 A wise sanction made at a Diet
against the Popes power in the election of the Emp. 39 A wise saying of the
Duke of Alva. 24 Witty answers of some Emperors to the Pope 41 A witty saying of
an Ambassador 1 The witty answer of Hen. 4. to the Parisians 42 Of brave women
47 A witty saying of Hen. the 2. King of France 49 A witty saying of Lewis the
12 50 A witty saying of a Spanish Ambassador 50 A witty Epigram upon Sir
Francis Drake 42 Ward the English Pirat did a world of mischief to Christendom
36 A witty saying of a Spanish client to K. Phil. 26 A witty Pasquil against
Spain when the Goletta was lost 26 A witty comparison of Europe 29 A witty
Spanish Proverb 29 A Welsh Prince freed England of Wolves 40 Why Woolsacks are
in the House of Peers 40 The wise speech of King Canutus 43 A wise speech of
Charles the 5 1 Of the (...) of Wales 46 Women did ride astride til Queen Anne,
wife to Richard the second 54 Of C^rdinal Wolsey 55 The weakness of the Empire
32 A witty Anagram 56 A witty comparison made to the French by Florus 66 A wise
saying of the Emperor Frederique 46 Of the Wars of the Low Countries and the
grounds of them 46 A wise answer of Tiberius 47 A wise answer of Q. Eliz. to
the Hollanders 48 A witty comparison that Florus makes of the French valor 66
The witty saying of an Aethiop 67 Water in Moravia of great virtue 68 A witty
saying of Henry the fourth 19 The wise speech of Paschasius against the Jesuits
19 A witty saying touching the Philosophers stone 20 A witty saying touching
Portugal 20 A witty revenge of a Secretary 49 The witty answer of an Empress
36 A witty saying of Katharine de Medici 35 The woeful catastrophe and last
words of Henry the 8 58
To the Reader.
The plen^y of matter wherewith this book does swel, might have made a larger
Index, but that the Author had a regard to the Rule of Proportion, viz. that
the poster^-gate should not prove too big for the Fabrique.

Errata.
Edw. the 6. for Hen. 6. page 38. best for left. p. 31. Charles the first for
fifth. p. 11.


