THE LAST WILL and TESTAMENT OF The late Renowned Cardinal MAZARINI Deceased
February. 27 1660.

Together with some Historical REMARQVES OF HIS LIFE.

London, Printed by Peter Lillicrap for William Gilbertson at the Bible in
Gilt-spur-street, 1663.

Licensed

October 20. 1663. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

TO THE Right Honorable, THOMAS LORD Wentworth One of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council
May it please your L^rdship,
I humbly crave your leave, to inscribe your noble name to this Translation of
the Late Cardinal Mazarini's Will and Testament with some Remarquer of his
life; from just though different respects.

The first is your Lordships knowledge and particular acquaintance with that
great and eminent personage, while you followed our Soverains Fortune in that
Court in the same quality of his privy Counselor, which afforded your
Lordship in your prudent and serious converse with him an experience of his
abilities; improved to great advantage in your many Loyal and Noble services to
this Crown.

To do the Cardinal so much right therefore, I have presumed to put this last
MEMORIAL, of him into you Honorable hands, (...) the fittest and equallest
Repository of his Illustrious Name, which shall now pass without profanation to
the world, when sacrated by YOURS.

The other respect is to signify and declare to the world the due sentiments
the Nation has of your Lordships Conspicuous worth, together with the
particular acknowledgements and obligations which I am bound to render for some
Favors abroad, which your Lordships singular Nobleness was pleased to
vouchsafe me.

And consulting herein also to my self this further favor from your Goodness,
as to shelter my meanness under your Lordships patronage, which is sufficient
to vindicate the Cardinal, and to protect,

My Lord Your most obedient and Devoted Servant, J. H.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THe French Original of this Last Will of the Cardinal, being Printed at Colen,
in Germany, was so full of faults, litterall and others, that the sense in some
few places could hardly be made out, which will make it in some such places
seem imperfect, but the careful Reader will soon supply such seeming deficiency
as I have not adventured on in the translation: therein he is likewise desired
to understand by the word Substitution (...) is a French (...) Term^, a
Reversion or kind of Remainder, in perpetuum.

Other Errors and mistakes in Printing the Reader is desired heartily to
correct and excuse.

The Last will and TESTAMENT OF CARDINAL MAZARINE:
TO Day being the third of March one thousand six hundred and sixty one, about
nine of the Clock in the morning, at the comandment of the most Illustrious and
most Eminent my Lord Cardinal Julius Mazarine Duke of Nivernois and Ouziois
being at present at the Castle of Vincennes; the Notaries, Inventory keepers of
our Sovereign Lord the King at Paris here undersigned, transferred themselves
to the said Castle, to the appartiment of his Emmence^; where they found the
said Lord Carelinal Duke a bed, sick in body, but sound in mind, memory, and
understanding (as it appeared to them, who said, declared, and acknowledged,
that all his goods, moveable, and immovable, of what nature or quality soever
they were, or where ever they were situated or remaining, and in whatsoever
they consisted, without exception or reserve* did come and proceed from the
Liberality and Magnificence of his Majesty: For which reason he believed he
could not do better then by remitting (as he does by these presents remit and
return) into his Majesty's hands, all his said goods, moveable and immovable,
and all other* generally whatsoever, of what ever nature or quality they may
be, and where ever being or remaining, and in whatever they may consist,
without any exception or reserve: the which present Declaration and delivery
his Eminence does make in favor of his Majesty by Donation and Gift of death,
Testamentary disposition, or any other way in the best form and manner it can
or ought to be made; willing that his Majesty be und do remain seized of all
the said goods, from the day of the decease of his Eminence, who hops that
his Majesty will have the goodness and bounty to dispose of the said Goods
according to the intentions and designations of his Eminence, which his Majesty
was pleased to receive from his Mouth; Leaving to his Majesty nevertheless
full and frank liberty of the said disposition, as it shall seem good to him,
as the Lord and Master of all the said Goods, which to that very purpose he
has given and bequeathed by these presents to his Majesty. This was done and
said by his Eminence to the abovesaid Notaries, and by one of them, the other
being present read and read again to him in the chamber of his Eminence
aspecting the Tower of the dungeon the day and year abovesaid and signed by the
said Lord the very minute of these Presents.

The same day the date of these presents, at the Commandment of the most
Illustrious and most Eminent my Lord Cardinal Julius Mazarini Duke of
Nivernois, etc. The Notaries Inventory Keepers for his Majesty, etc. being
arrived at his Eminences chamber in the Castle of Vincennes, found the said
Lord Cardinal Duke, a bed sick, in body, etc. as before, who said unto them,
that the length and tediousness of his sickness, the uncertainty of life, and
the necessity of death had obliged him to think of making and ordaining his
last Will and Testament, which he now made and nominated to the abovesaid
Notaries as hereafter follows.

First of all, He thanks the Author of all good things, that he gave him his
Birth in the Profession of the Catholic Religion which he acknowledges to be
the sole, true, and only way of salvation.

He thanketh the same Divine goodness, for all those Favors which it has been
pleased to bestow upon him during the whole course of his life, and
particularly for raising him to one of the most Eminent Dignities of the Church
among an infinite number of many others of greater merit, bese^c^ing the Divine
Goodness; that the said Elevation turn not to his confusion, for not having
profit^bly enough employed those Talents which it has been pleased to give
him; for which he craves pardon from the bottom of his heart of the Divine
Majesty, to whom he acknowledges himself guilty, but hops for forgiven, is
by the merit of the precious blood of Jesus Christ shed for our Redemption.

After his thanksgiving to God as the Author and Beginning of all good things,
he judges, it will be no derogati n to his Glory to (...) also (with
disproportion nevertheless of the Creatures to the Creator) those
acknowledgements he owes to his good Masters whom God has given him.

And first to the King deceased of glorious memory, who after his having called
him to his service, and employed his instances and nomination to the promoring
him to the dignity of a Cardinal, conferred on him the inestimable Honor of
making him Godfather to the King now reigning, and in fine to judge him worthy
of the Administration of his most important afairs, and to substitute him in
the place (vacated by death) of one of the greatest, most glorious, and most
sufficient able Ministers of State, [Cardinal Richleiu] that ever France had.

To the Queen Mother, whose goodness was pleased to continue him in the same
Administration during her Regency, of which with truth he can say, that the
incredible firmness and constancy of her mind, has saved the State from one
of the greatest dangers it ever underwent.

To the King, who having approved the choice made of his person by the King his
Father deceased and by the Queen his Mother, has pleased to continue to him
the same Honor, and to make him partaker of those blessings which Heaven has
abundantly powered down upon his Sacred person, by those glorious and
advantageous successes, which it has given to his endeavors since his
Majesty's advancement to the Crown; by that calm and repose which it has
Established within his Kindoms, soon after his Majority.

As also by the glorious peace which his Majesty has since afforded to the
Christian world no less by the respect, renown and glory of his Name, then by
his Mediation which all the Princes and Potentates engaged in War have besought
and held in estimation and Reverence: so that it may be truly said that since a
1000 years, Christianity has not joyed of such a tranquillity as this at
present, by the endeavors and Authority of the King.

And as in all these great successes it has pleased God to make use of such a
feeble and weak Minister of his will and pleasure and the orders of the King;
by so much the more he ought to abase himself before the face of the Divine
Majesty, and to acknowledge his real unworthiness and how little he was capable
of himself to serve as an instrument to such great things without His
particular assistance. The Principal satisfacti^n which his Eminence hoped for
after the conclusion of those great works, and the return of their Majesty's to
Paris was in a diligent application of all his care and pains to effect
incessantly the Execution of his Majesty's good intent^ons of re-esta^lishing
Order in the general Administration throughout the Kingdom, where many abuses
were increased and reigned by the length of the War, the which, Prudence was
obliged to Tolerate or was not suffered to repress for fear of some troublesome
intestine Commotion, while there was a necessity of sustaining the foreign
Hostile Impressions and effects of a Power most considerable. But God not being
pleased after so many other, to grant him this last satisfaction which he had
purposed to himself; and having visited him with a long and troublesome disease
which took away from Him all means of applying himself as was requisite to an
Affayr of that Importance for the Weal of the State, and the Profit of the
Kings Subjects: He comforts himself in the thoughts and certain Hopes he
cherishes, that His Majesty having taken such a Resolution, by his weak
Counsels; will maintain it, by his Wisdom and his Goodness altogether Royal.

His Eminence finds himself further obliged to say, that nothing has given him
more displeasure in the Course of his Disease, them his disability of
endeavoring a considerable alleviation and mitigation of those over-pressures
and surcharges which the People have suffered: who having testified their zeal
and their obedience by those great succors and supplies which they have given
the King on all occasions during a War of 25 years: He no way doubts but
that his Majesty will take a particular care of performing those good
intentions of which he has discoursed with him, by the motives of that
tenderness which he has for his people, and to excite them also to be equally
and m^tually ready to supply him in all pressing occasions

For Conclusion, Their Majesty's having recompensed ^is mean services which he
has endeavored to perform to them, by a Magnificence worthy of the^ mind and
Royal greatness; He finds himself obliged to give testimony thereof to the
Public, and that the world may know, that if he has served them with all
Fidelity, they have recompensed his services, not only beyond his hopes and
desires, but also beyond all he could imagine: to the end that this great
example of their Liberality in his person may excite all their good Subjects to
serve them with the same zeal and the same Fidelity which he has endeavored
to do.

The said Lord Cardinal has appointed his Sepulture, in the Chapel of the
College which he has founded; and in the mean while he prays his Majesty
that His Corpse may be deposited in the St. Chapel of Fincennes.

The said Lord Cardinal confirms* and when it is or shall be needful
reiterates and doubles that gift made to the R^ligious the Theatmes of St. Anne
Royal.

He confirms also the Donation made to the College of the four Nations and
Academy in pursuance of the contract made and passed before Notaries,

The said Lord Cardinal gives to the Hospital General the sum of sixty
thousand livres [6000 l. ster.] besides the hundred thousand Livres which he
gave to it before. He gives likewise and bequeaths unto the Hostel de Dieu, at
Paris thirty thousand Livres.

The said Lord Cardinal Duke, gives and bequeaths to the Hospital of the
Incurable the sum of twelve thousand livers for the founding of two beds
according to the Reiglement or rules of the said Hospital, the nomination
whereof shall belong to his successors and descendants of the name of Mazarini.

The said Lord Cardinal Duke gives six years Alms, which he was used to give
every year to several Convents of the City of Paris; He gives likewise to the
poor and beggars of the said City the sum of six thousand Livres.

The said Lord Cardinal Duke, gives the sum of six hundred thousand Livres
which is in the Hands of the Sieur du Pont St. Pierre at I yons to be employed
in making War against the Turks according to the Orders of his Majesty.

The said Lord Cardinal Duke gives to the Sieur de Fontenelle his first
Esquire the sum of twenty thousand livres. To the Sieur Bernouin the first
Groom of his Chamber the sum of fi^teen thousand livers; To the sieur Pronty
his Housekeeper the like s^m.

The said Lord Cardinal Duke, gives to all the rest of his Domestics, that
which shall be allowed them by a certain memorial which he will cause to be
made.

The said Lord Cardinal Duke, gives to Monsieur Cardinal Antonio all those
sums which he owes to him the said Cardinal Duke and which has been lent him
either by obligation, on his promise or otherwise, which he wills to be rendered
back, discharging the sieur Mazarine of all those sums which he may have given
to the said Cardinal.

My Lord Cardinal having accomplished a Design of matching 18 of the largest
Diamonds which could be found, gives them to the Crown, desiring his Majesty
to accept of them, and that they bear the name of Mazarines.

Gives and bequeatheth also to the Crown all those pieces of Pain^ings which
are at present within the the Library of his Eminence, and two suits of
Tapestry, the one the Fruits of War the design of Julius Romain given to his
Eminence since the Treaty of Peace, by the King of Spain, the other the Rape of
the Saoines the design of Raphael. Most humbly thanking his Majesty for all his
Bounties and Magnificences, and for that not long since he has caused to be
given him fifteen hundred thousand livers upon the Treaty of the Neutrality of
the French County, and the disposal of the Offices of the houses of the Queen
and Monsieur, which reward amounts in all to three or four millions.

The said Lord Cardinal Duke having always regarded Madam Martinessi whose
Offices of Piety and charity are eminently known, has incessantly procured the
advancement of the Daughters by advantageous Alliances, having married the
eldest with Monsieur the Duke of Modena one of the greatest Princes, and of the
most Ancient and Illustrious Houses of all Italy, and the second with Monsieur
the Prince of Conti, Prince of the Blood Royal of France; and therefore no way
doubting but that they will prefer his Interests before their Advancement; He
gives to Madam the Duchess of Modena the sum of three hundred and fifty
thousand livers, which shall be paid unto her by the Executors of his Testament
hereafter named. More, three pence making part of eleven pence to receive of
the salts of Brouage: more, half of the Rents upon the City of Paris, purchased
by his Eminence of Monsieur Charles Armand at present Duke Mazarini.

He gives and bequeaths to Madam the Princes of Conti the like sum ^f three
hundred and fifty thousand livers, which shall be paid her by his Executors;
more, the sum of thirty thousand livers to receive and take upon the Excise or
Farn^s of Languedock; more, three pence making part of eleven pence to receive
and take upon the said Salts of Brouage; more (...) other ^^ity of Rents upon
the Town hall of the City of Paris; more, the Compensation of the Rents of the
office of sur^ntendunt for the House of the Queen Mother, amounting to two
hundred thousand livers, which his Eminence has purchased of (...) the
Princess Palatine, and of which she is at present in possession; more, the suit
of Tapestry Hangings with the story of ^ehoboam.

He gives to the Lady Martinessi Sister to his Eminence the sum of eighteen
thousand livers of a rent for life pavable at Rome monthly by adv^^ce; and
upon charge to her and the said Ladies the Duchess of Modena and Princess of
Conti, to renounce, and quit claim to the succession of his Eminence, and to
all and such rights which they may pretend to the same: In default whereof they
shall forfeit their Legacies abovesaid which shall return to the Heirs and
Legatees General.

The said Lord Cardinal, intends not that Monsieur the Marq ess of Mancini his
Nephew shall marry with any person whatsoever without the consent of the King;
and in consideration thereof gives him the Peerage of Nivernois (or Nevers) and
Ouziois, with the appurtenances and dependances purchased by his Eminence of
Monseigueur the Duke of Mantua by contract of the 11th of July 1659. with the
Decrees obtained since free and quit of all Rights: More, two thirds of the
Subsidies arising from the Actions of Mortaine, which may be changed for those
of Nevers: More, four pence, part of the nineteen pence purchased of my Lord
the Duke of Ornanes deceased: More, three pence part of eleven pence upon the
Salts of Brouage: More, the sum of six hundred thousand livers in ready money,
which shall be paid by the hands of the Executors of his Will hereafter named.
All upon charge that the said Lord Mancini shall punctually comply with what is
before enjoined him toward his Majesty, and not otherwise; in default whereof
he shall forfeit his Legacies abovesaid; and others that shall be made to him
hereafter, shall be comprised in the Legacy General. And further upon charge,
that the said Lord Mancini and all his Descendants Males or Femals, shall carry
the Names and the Arms of Mazarini without joining other names, or quartering
other Arms therewith: And that the Eldest Son and Male Descendants of the said
Marquess Mancini, by perpetual and infinite representation from Male to Male,
and from Eldest to Eldest, shall have and take by gradual and perpetual
Substitution, all these things and sums above mentioned, given to him the said
Marquess Mancini; and in default of Issue male of his body, the Substitution
shall belong to the eldest Daughter descendent of the male and to the male
descendents for ever, observing always the right of Eldest to eldest, upon
condition that in every degree the eldest male, and every daughter that shall
be called to the Substitution, shall be tied to take the Name and Arms of
Mazarini as abovesaid: And in default of descendants from the males, the
Substitution shall belong to the eldest Daughter of the said Marquess Mancini,
and to her descendants Males and Females; and in default of Children of the
eldest Daughter or her Descendants, to the second third or other Daughters
successively and their Descendents, preferring always the elder before the
younger, and Sons to Daughters, as long as there shall be any Descendants of
the said Daughters, on the same conditions of taking the Arms and Names of
Mazarini Mancini jointly together. In case of default of Issue by the said Lord
Marquess Mancini, all the abovesaid things and sums above given and
bequeathed him, shall belong by the same right of Substitution to the high and
might Lord Armand Charles now Duke Mazarini, and after him in his place to the
eldest of his Sons issued from him, and the high and mighty Lady Hortense
Mancini his Wife.

No person shall have benefit of this Substitution, who shall be an
Ecclesiastic or Knight of Malta, unless he shall have renounced it before: the
said Lord Cardinal willing and declaring, that he who shall refuse to accept of
the said Conditions, shall be deprived of all right thereunto, and that all
shall return to the Legatee General.

The Lord Cardinal beseeches his Majesty to receive the said Lord Marquess
Mancini in survivency to the Government and Lieutenancy of the King in Brouage
and Rochel, the profits whereof shall remain in the hands of the Sieur Colbert.

The said Lord Cardinal gives unto Monsieur Mancini his Nephew the sum of 30
thousand livers to be employed for payment of his debts; the said Lord Cardinal
wills and intends that the administration of the goods of the said Lord
Marquess Mancini remain in the hands of the Sieur Colbert, until he shall have
attained the age of majority.

The said Lords Executors may name a person to be Tutor to the said Marquess
Mancini under direction of the Sieur Colbert, who shall be obliged to give
Caution and Security: and whilst the said Marquess Mancini shall attain to the
age of major, there shall be paid unto him the sum of thirty six thousand
livers for every year, and if he marry with consent of the King, the sum of
eighty thousand livers.

The said Lord Cardinal desiring to perpetuate the name of Mancini at Rome,
makes and ordains the said Lord Mancini his Nephew, Legatee Universal, and Heir
of all his Goods at Rome, willing that he be seized thereof from the day of his
Decease, which goods shall remain substituted to the second Son of the said
Sieur Mancini, and to the Children of the second, and of his male issue by a
perpetual and infinite representation from male to male, and from eldest to
eldest, and in default of male Issue of the second Son, to the third, and from
the third to the fourth, and consequently so from male to male, and from eldest
to eldest. And in default of Issue male, the substitution shall belong to the
eldest Daughter Descended of the male of the said second, third or fourth Son,
and consequently to their issue male for ever. And in default of Daughters
Descendants of the males, the said Substitution shall pass to the eldest
Daughter of the said Lord Marquess Mancini and to her Descendants, preferring
always the eldest to the youngest, and the Sous to the Daughters, as long as
there shall be any Descendants of the said Daughters. All upon condition that
he who shall be called to the Substitution, of whatever condition or degree he
be, shall be obliged to dwell in the City of Rome. and to bear the sole Name
and plain Arms of Mancini, without partying or quartering them with any others,
(...) upon condition also, that if there be any Daughters of the males which
are excluded by the males in a direct or collateral Line, the said Substituted
shall be holden to give them Portions suitable to their quality.

In default of Posterity of the second third or other son and of the daughters
of the said Lord Marquess Mancini, the Palace, movables. Rights and other
effects which are in the said City of Rome belonging to his Eminence, shall
appertain by the same right of Substitution unto the eldest son of the said
Lord Mazarini Mancini and to the male Jssue of the said eldest son, and in
default of the males to the daughters and to their male children from eldest to
eldest, as long as there shall be any male or female issue of the said Mazarini
Mancini or of his descendants, on condition that the right of Primogeniture be
always observed as abovesaid. And if there shall be but one of the said House
of Mancini, to whom the Duchy of Nivernois shall appertain by the same right
of Substitution, and that the goods at Rome shall belong to him likewise by the
same right of Substitution; He shall be obliged to dwell in France. And if it
shall so happen that the said Lord Marquess Mancini decease without issue, the
said goods at Rome shall remain and belong to my Lord Armand Charles Duke
Mazarini and his youngest descendants from male to male, and eldest to eldest:
Observing always that Mazarini is Praferrible before Mancini.

The said Lord Cardinal entreats my Lord Cardinal Mancini, to take the
Administration of the goods at Rome, and because they consist mostly in his
Palace, and a number of Offices and places and the public stock, which may be
put into money, he requesteth the said Cardinal if he thinks fit, to convert
into the Purchase of some Land in the Ecclesiastical Stae, which shall carry
the name of the Substitution.

The said Cardinal Mancini in case of Death, may appoint another to the said
Administration, who nevertheless shall not sell nor engage any of the things
above named; And if the Sieur Mancini be more then five and twenty years old at
the death of the Lord Cardinal, he may name an Administrator, but not dispose
of the said Goods which shall remain substituted as already said.

Further the said Lord Cardinal gives and bequeathes to the said Marquess
Mancini the Tapistry of the Acts of the Apostles made in Paris, with the rich
Furniture of green Velvet to be sent to Rome to Cardinal Mancini, which shall
be part of the said substitution.

In lieu whereof, the said Marquess Mancini shall renounce the Rights which he
may pretend to the succession of the said Lord Cardinal Mazarini, and if he
fail to do so, he shall absolutely forfeit all his said Legacies, which shall
return to the Legatee General.

The said Lord Cardinal gives and bequeatheth to the eldest Son of my Lord
Duke de Mercoeur and de Ferie his Spouse the Demesne of the Duchy of Auvergne,
the Demesne of Languedock, the third part of the Subsidy of the Election of
Mortaigne, and the sum of three hundred thousand livers in money, which shall
be employed toward the payment of the debts of the House of Vendosme.

As to the second Son of the said Duke de Mercoeur, the said Lord Cardinal
prays him to be content with that which he has procured him from his
Majesty, on condition also that both of them renounce their Succession to his
Eminence, and all those Rights which they may pretend to by reason of these
said Legacies, which in default of renunciation, shall be forfeited and
returned to the Legatee general, even although the eldest shall make the said
renunciation, if so be it be not done jointly by the youngest.

The said Lord, etc. gives and bequeatheth unto Madam the Countess of
Soissons, besides the sum of three hundred thousand livers in money, the
Subsidy or Imposition on the Election of Verneuil, and the sum of two hundred
and fifty thousand livers, paid by his Eminence to Madam the Princess
Palatine for the purchase of the Office of Surintendent in the House of the
Queen for which she has at present a Patent; on condition that the said Lady
Countess of Soissons dorenounce any Caim or Title she may pretend to the
succession of the said Lord Cardinal. In default whereof she shall forfeit her
said Legacy, which shall return to the Legatee General.

The said Lord Cardinal gives and bequeatheth to Damoiselle Mary Mancini, now
married to the Constable Colonna all that which he has assigned her for her
portion, willing that she content her sell with the part he has given her, on
condition she renounce all Claim and Title to the Succession of his Eminence.

He gives and Bequeathes to Damoiselle Anne Mary Mancini the sum of six hundred
thousand livers, which shall be paid to her, or put out at Interest by his
Executors, they notwithstanding not to be responsible for the employ and profit
thereof: on condition likewise that she renounce all Claim to the Succession,
etc. otherwise to forfeit as aforesaid.

The said Lord Cardinal names for Trustees and Governor of the said
Damoiselle Anno, Macini, the Executors of his Will hereafter mentioned.

If there shall not be found ready money enough to discharge all those Legacies
above mentioned, the said Lord Cardinal Wills that it shall be equally
divided among the Legatees, penny for penny upon the liver, excepting the
Legacy of Dame Mary and Mary Anne Mancini, who shall be paid in full, and which
Legacies shall remain substituted to the Heirs of Dame Mary, and Mary Anne
Mancini.

The said Lord Cardinal having always had a most particular affection for
learned men, continues to them during their life the Pensions he was accustomed
to pay them, according to a catalogue or Memoyr which shall be given in by Sr.
Colbert.

The rest of all his said moveable Goods, Debts, Obligations, Rents, and other
Effects whatsoever, in Lands of Inheritance or Custom, the said Lord Cardinal
gives and bequeatheth to my Lord Charles Armand now Duke Mazarini, and the
Lady Hortense his Spouse, whom with his own mouth he appoints to be his Heirs
and legatees General; they to defray his Funeral charges, and to accomplish his
present Testament, declaring that he intends not to comprise within this
general Legacy his Palace, his other Jewels, Rings, moveable and immovable
Goods, Painting, Pictures, Vessels of Silver, with his Statues and Figures of
Marble or Brass being within his Palace and his appartement in the Loruve and
in France; nor his Governments, which he has not disposed of, reserving to
himself the disposition by Codicil, or otherwise as shall seem good unto him,
on charge of the said Goods with a gradual, perpetual and everlasting
Substitution, and nevertheless, all that which shall come and provene of his
Legacy General, shall be in the nature of propriety to the said Lady Duchess
Mazarini, the said Lord Cardinal barring in both the said Substitutions, as
well in France as in Rome, any alterations; but such as shall be permitted.

Forbidding likewise all distractions of quarter parts in the one and the other
Substitution.

As to his Dispatches, Letters, Missives, Negotiations, Treaties and other
Papers concerning the State, and Domestique affairs, in what place soever they
are, nothing being more dear or precious to him; he humbly prays his Majesty
that they may be put into the hands of the Sieur Colbert, without making any
Inventory, and that the said Colbert dispose them in order, and if there be any
difficulty, he may demand the clearing of it of Monsir. the Bishop of Freins
for the Affairs of Rome, and Mounsieur de Lyonne for the affairs of State, so
to communicate them to the King, or to whom his Majesty shall please to order
them upon occasion.

The said Lord Cardinal not being able to give sufficient Testimony of the
fidelity of Mr. Colbert which he has experienced for more then twelve years
last past, does approve all that has been done by him to this present, and
wills that it be believed upon his bare word.

The said Lord Cardinal wills and intends (having been hindered by great
Affairs from examining the Accounts of the Sieur Picon for some years as he was
accustomed to do) that the said Accounts which shall be given of his house, be
examined by the Sieur Colbert, and signed and firmed by him alone.

The said Lord Cardinal most expressly forborbiddeth any Inventory or
Description to be made of his moveable Goods or Effects, or of any Titles or
Papers, and if the Legatees whether particular or general shall offer to demand
them, His Will is, that they forfeit their Legacy, all which shall be vested in
the person of the first Substitute, without that, that any disposition thereof
may be declare penal or comminatory.

Furthermore the said Lord Cardinal entreats his Majesty in case of
contravention, to interpose his Authority, that his Will may be followed, and
that the said Accounts and Papers may not be seen, nor Inventory, nor
description made thereof, it being necessary to keep them secret for the
interest of the State and many Families as well within as without the Realm. He
prays also the Messieurs of the Parliament and other Judges to forbear here,
not doubting but that they will prefer the Interests of State to that of
particular men's.

The said Lord Cardinal gives and bequeatheth to Don Louis de Haro a rare
piece of Titian representing Flora, by reason of the friendship which they have
Contracted in the Treaty of Peace.

He gives and bequeatheth to my Lord the Count of Fuensaldigne a great Watch
in a Gold Case.

And for the execution of the present Will and Testament, the said Lord
Cardinal names my Lord the first President of Parliament my Lord Fouquet
Counselor of the King in all his Counsels, Procurator General of the
Parliament, and Intendant of the Finances; My Lord le Tellier Counselor of
the King in all his Counsels, Secretary of State; My Lord the Bishop of Freins,
and Monsieur Colbert Counselor of the King in his Counsels, and Intendant of
the Houses and Finances of his Eminence, whom he entreats not to suffer any
Inventory to be made of his movables, or papers, nothing being more necessary
to be kept then secrecy; and to acknowledge in some manner the pains which they
shall take in the Execution of his present Testament; He gives and bequeathes
the sum of forty thousand livers in money, or in goods at their choice to be
equally divided among them. The said Lord Cardinal wills and ordains that
if death, or any other considerable hinderance shall happen to any of them, the
Survivors shall name such others as they shall choose, to supply the places of
the deceased, willing that the number be complete.

He gives and bequeatheth to each of his three Secretaries a Diamant of four
thousand livres, beseeching his Majesty to protect them, and to continue them
their Assignments.

He gives and bequeatheth to the building the Parish Church of St. Enstache
the sum of six thousand livers.

He gives and bequeathes to the St. Chapel of Bois de Vincennes the sum of ten
thousand livers on condition they cause to be said and celebrated every year on
the day of the decease of his Eminence, an Anniversarie for the Repose and weal
of his Soul.

My Lord the Cardinal declares, that whereas he had left all his goods to the
King by his Will of the third of the present month, and that his Intention was
always such, that his Majesty should dispose of them as he pleased, and that
now the King was pleased to testify to him that his Majesty desired he should
dispose of his own goods; He had therefore caused this present Will to be made
which was so said, and named one word after another to the abovesaid Notaries
by his Eminence, and read and repeated to him by one of them, the other being
present, in the Chamber of his Eminence before declared, one thousand six
hundred sixty and one, the sixth day of March, and signed by his Eminence.

THE CODICILL ANNEXED.
TO day the sixth day of March one thousand six hundred and sixty one,
afternoon, at the commandment of the most Illustrious and most Eminent the
Lord Cardinal Duke Mazarini the Notaryes Inventory Keepers, etc. as before
found the said Lord Cardinal a bed sick in Body, but of sound mind and
understanding, as it appeared to them, who having caused the Will and Testament
by him made to be showed him again, and adding thereunto,

Gives and bequeathes the sum of seventy thousand livers which he wills to be
distributed to his Officers, according to their Rank and Seniority of their
services by the Executors of his Will, without any of their complaining against
that which shall be given them by the said Executors, on pain of forfeiture of
each (their) part, which in this Case shall be distributed among other the said
Officers within the said 70000. livres, besides the sums bequeathed by him to
the Sieurs de Fontenelle, Bernouin and Pronti, who may not pretend to the said
sum of seventy thousand livers.

He gives and bequeathes to Madam de Revel Governess of the Ladies Mancini his
Neices the sum of thirty thousand livers as a reward for those pains she has
taken with them.

He gives and bequeathes to the Sieur de Gaumond Advocate to the Parliament,
besides his other Assignments, the sum of twelve thousand livers. He gives and
bequeathes to Monsieur Colbert Intendant of the houses and Finances of his
Eminence, the house where at present he dwells, adjoining to the Palace of his
Eminence.

As concerning the Palace of his Eminence, Appurtenances, and Dependencies,
Statues and Figures therein, being others then those before specified, he gives
and bequeathes them by Moity to the said Lord Duke Mazarini and Marquess
Mancini, to be equally divided between them; the said Lord Cardinal willing
that the Choice of the Lors shall be given to my Lord Duke Mazarini: And the
said Lord Cardinal Duke having reserved to himself by his Will, his Movables,
Jewels Rings and other things, besides those which he has disposed, wills,
means, and ordains that they be prized at the rate and sum of three hundred
and sixty thousand livers, which shall thus be distributed, viz. Six score
thousand livers which he gives to the said Lord Mazarini Mancini of which sum,
one half shall go to the Substitution, the other shall be the proper money of
the said Seigneur Mancini: and the sum of forty thousand livers to every of the
other his said Heirs, on promise and condition that all and every of them do
quit those claims they may have to the Succession of my said Lord Cardinal,
which claims they shall renounce in favor of my said Lord and Lady the Duke
and Duchess Mazarini; who may also dispose of that part which shall fall to
them of the said Palace and Appurtenances: but as to the Statues and Figures
they shall remain in Substitution, as likewise shall the sum of six hundred
thousand livers, which shall be taken upon the Estimate that shall be made of
the Rings, Jewels, etc. which shall be divided; the which sum of six hundred
thousand livers shall be in the nature of a Provenue for the said Lady
Duchess Mazarini.

The said Lord Cardinal more expressly prohibiteth any Inventory to be made of
his goods and papers upon the Penalties imposed by his last Testament,

Gives and bequeatheth unto Cardinal Sachetti the Tapestry hangings of D'esnee.

The said Lord Cardinal gives unto my Lord Cardinal Albis the Hangings of
Tapestry of Verduire of Brussels, hanging at present in the Appartiment of his
Eminence at the Louvre.

He gives and bequeathes unto Sr. Lezio. Disnio a Diamant Ring worth eight
thousand livers.

To Sr Paul Manarani a Carkanet of Diamants of one thousand Crowns.

Further, my Lord Cardinal having reason to gratify the services of the Seiur
Lepidio Benedicti, he prays his Majesty to be pleased to continue to him the
Pension which he gives him at present.

This was done, said, and named to the Notaries, and by one of them, the other
present read and repeated in the Chamber, the s^id day and year above said.

To day the sixth of March 1661, the King being at Vincennes, caused the last
Will and Codicil of the Lord Cardinal to be showed unto him; and having
approved thereof, His Majesty renounced and quitted all that was done to his
advantage by the said Cardinal the third of this Month, and wills and
intends that the said Will and Codicil shall take their plain and full
effect, and that they be executed from point to point according to their Form
and Tenor, His Majesty commanding for a testimony of his Will to dispatch this
present Breviate, which he would sign with his own hand, and to be
countersigned by me his Secretary of State and of his Commands and Finances.

To Day the seventh of March 1661, at the Commandment of the most Illustrious
and Eminent my Lord Cardinal Duke Mazarini the Notaries ut supra, came to the
Castle of Vincennes in a Chamber there, where they found the said Lord Cardinal
a bed sick in body, but sound, etc. who said that he thanked God for the
prolongation of his Disease, and for that by lengthening his days, he had given
him more means to consider of his Salvation, hoping of the Divine goodness the
remission of his sins, and that God would show mercy to him; and that if he
should desire any other further length of life, it should be only to employ it
in those reflections which he ought to have upon those Favors he has received
of God and the King, and to sacrifice it wholly in the acknowledgement of so
many benefits of which he judges himself altogether unworthy.

The said Lord Cardinal approves and confirms his Will and Codicil
heretofore made, reiterating his Donations and Bequeastes made by him, and
adding thereunto, most humbly beseeches his Majesty to accept of two fair
Cabinets.

He also humbly supplicates the Queen Mother to accept of a large Diamond of
the Rose of England a large Diamond Brute weighing 14 Caracts, a Ruby Ring
Caluchon perfect, 2 great Cabinets of the Peace and of the War, one Cabinet of
Peace and war which came from Rome, thanking her for her Favors, and
requesting her to vouchsafe her protection to his Nephews and Neices.

He gives and bequeathes to Monsieur the Duke of Orleans the only Brother of
the King, sixty Marks of Gold, thirty and one Emeraulds, of which many are
great, one of the fair Cabinets of Jasper brought from Rome, and the Tapestry
Hangings of Leander, beseeching him to accept this small acknowledgement, and
to accord his Protection to those of his House.

He gives and bequeatheth unto my Lord the Cardinal of Colonne a great Watch
of Gold which came from the Queen Mother Deceased, and is at present upon the
Table of his Eminence.

He gives and bequeatheth unto Monsieur the Marshal of Grammont the sum of
100000 livers which he owes him by Obligation, and which he wills to be
rendered to him as paid and acquitted.

He gives and bequeathes unto my Lord the first President a Basin with its
Ewer, Vermillian and Gold made at Augsburg, or as much in value as he has
given him as Executor of his Testament.

He gives and bequeathes unto Monsieur the Archbishop of Arniuzi a great Watch
in a Case of Gold.

My Lord the Cardinal refers himself to his Heirs and Legatees to give presents
to his principal friends.

He gives to Monsieur de Massat Advocate in Parliament a Diamond of fifteen
hundred livers.

He gives and bequeathes to Sr. Poisson his Apothecary four thousand livers.

To the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul at Rome, a Lamp of three thousand
Crowns.

He gives another Lamp of the same price to the miraculous Crucifix of St.
Briget at Rome.

He gives and bequeatheth to the Church of St. Roch in St. Honory's street a
Chalice of the sum of eighteen thousand livers.

He wills and ordains that after the sharing of the Palace of his Eminence,
together with the Statues and Figures, which shall be therein, and that the
said Lord Duke Mazarini has chosen the part which best likes him, that then it
shall be lawful to the said Marquess Mancini to take the sum of three hundred
thousand livers for his part of the said Statues and Figures, which sum in the
said Case the said Lord Mazarini shall be bound to pay him; for which payment
all the said Statues and Figures shall be comprised in the said Substitution of
the Legacy general, without comprizing nevertheless the Palace and
Appurtenances, which shall remain in his disposition.

If the said Lord Marquess Mancini receive the said sum of three hundred
thousand livers, my Lord the Cardinal wills and intends that it shall be
employed in the purchase of a House fit to receive him, the which purchase
shall not be made without the advice of Monsieur Colbert.

My Lord Cardinal gives unto Madam the Princess Colonna, besides that which he
has assigned her, as abovesaid, by his Testament, the sum of 15 thousand
livers as well for the buying her Horses, Caroach and Equipage as for the
expenses of her voyage into Italy.

All which was so spoke and said to the said Notaries, and by one of them the
other being present read and repeated Monday the seventh day of March about
nine a clock in the morning the same year, 1661.

TO day the seventh day of March 1661. the King being at Vincennes, after the
reading to his Majesty by Francis le Foin Notary, etc. of the Testament and
Codicils made by my Lord Cardinal Duke Mazarini: His said Majesty diverse times
renounced and renounceth that made to his advantage of the third of March
instant, and Wills and Ordains that the said Testament and Codicils be
executed according to the Form and Tenor: at which said reading were present
my Lord the Prince of Conde; by and at the request of Madam the Princess of
Conti, Monsieur the Duke of Mercoeur, Monsieur the Count of Soissons, the
Sieurs, Duke and Duchess Mazarini, the Sieurs Premier President Fouquet, the
Bishop of Freins and Colbert Executors of the Testament of my Lord the
Cardinal, His Majesty commanding me for the the testifying his pleasure to
dispatch the present breviat, which he has signed with his own hand, and
caused to be Countersigned by me his Secretary of State, and of his Commands
and Finances.

Signed Le TELLIER.

SOME HISTORICAL REMARQVES OF THE LIFE Of the Famous CARDINAL MAZARINI

London, Printed by Peter Lillicrap for William Gilbertson at the Bible in
Guilt-Spur-Street, 166^.

Some Historical REMARQUES OF THE LIFE of the Famous Cardinal MAZARINI.
IT might pass for no great misadventure, (in imitation of Philosophers, and
those Mathematicians who to describe the Globes and the Government of the
Universe have assigned Terms and Names to the great and Principal Parts
thereof) if in the Elements of Humane Policy which has ordered and disposed
the Affairs of Christendom, in its Modern Administration, we give to its chief
Motion the Name of MAZARINI whose Designs and Actions were the Supreme
Intelligences the Poles and Hinges by which so many wonderful changes and
vicissitudes have been Rolled upon the World.

And he may properly be also called that Altern Luminary which upon the setting
of the Glorious Richelieu, arose in the French Horizon, and with Universal
Splendour pierced into the most Recondite and Abstruse Mysteries and Cabals of
State, and influenced and Governed their Transactions; Like the Moons Opacous
Body his Gleamings and Glitterings and uncertain lights dazzled the Eyes of the
World, while his dark Intrigues were reserved and concealed in himself.

He was Fate it is self in a Humane shape, which dispensed Events and favored
or crossed all Counsels and Designs according to his Pleasure; nothing
succeeded without his Concurring advice and assent, and nothing failed with his
auspicious Encouragement. To so near a resemblance herein, that he was able to
clue glorious and most wonderful Effects through dark Labyrinths of Time and
Adversity, and appoint the hour and minute of their Termination.

He was a dark. Lanthorn whose Lucidations discovered all before him, and
concealed his own Mysterious Practices; the Oracle of State, which no Sword or
Wisdom could resolve, He could turn the Edges of the sharpest Steel, and blunt
the Points of the acutest Wits, neither Mars nor Mercury could prevail against
Him.

In vain therefore it is to think to give any competent Character of Him, who
surmounted the capacity of the ablest Personages Christendom e're enjoyed, and
who may be reckoned for one of the Wonders of the World.

As he may in some sort also be said to have been a Monarch himself, having
governed France absolutely in the Regency and Minority of the Present King and
Queen Mother in very difficult and perplexed Times, and yet he was but a
stranger, and a new commer to that Court and Country in a very private
condition, which His Fortune and M^^it equalled after to the highest
Advancements any Public Minister ever attained.

It Is true, he had an Excellent Master and Pattern the aforesaid Richlieu, who
doubled his Faculties upon him at his death, commending him to the King as he
had done before to the Queen, as the only fit and able person to undertake His
Affairs. The main Scope whereof was the Ruin of the House of Austria, and the
Advancement of the French Greatness upon it, to an Universal Sovereignty.

And it will not be ungrateful I suppose to the Reader to show the Parallel and
Differences between these Eminent Statesmen, (the latter exactly treading in
the steps of the Former,) without any ambitious Hope or design of expressing
them in their due proportions, but only to serve an ordinary Curiosity.

Cardinal Richlieu was born at Paris, and so a Native of that Kingdom, and of
Noble Extraction, which rendered him to the observation of the Queen Mother, who
took him into her service and preferred him to the Bishopric of I uzon, where
at her command he wrote a Book of Con^roversies, and Thereafter to the King, who
procured him a Cardinals Cap from the Pope ( Paul the fifth, is reported upon
viewring him to have said, that he would one day (...) would prove the greatest
cheat in the World.) He highly merited his Preferments of the King, by his
taking of Rochel, which caused such an obliging confident affection in the King
toward him that he left the total direction of Affairs to him, but that
Interest in the King was very ungratefully managed against the Queen Mother who
raised Him, and all her Party or Dependants, the Queen he forced into a
dishonorable and wandering Exile; and to rid himself of Her and the Intrigues
against Him, He cut off the Marshall Marillacis head her great Favorite, and
ruined all such of whom he had any jealousy. He was beloved by the most
zealous Protestants and hated by the most zealous Catholics, and never
pardoned such as had offended against him. He gained the Duchy of ^^^urain by
sine policy, and sudden force intending to ^^ine the House of (...), the
successors or Char^^^^n, in order to the sa^e destructive Design un^^, the
House of Austria, designing to have seized also the L^w Countries, upon which
bottom the War with Spain in 16^^. was begun and continued till his death.

He assisted the Duke of Never, in his succession to the Duchy of Mantuua, and
made an alliance with the Swedes and the Protestant Princes; and yet
notwithstanding ruined the Hugonites in France.

He was an enemy likewise to the Princes of the Blood, especially the Count of
Soissons, who deserted the Kingdom and joined with the Spaniard; His Party
with him published a Manifesto against the Cardinals male administration, yet
he continued in the Kings favor and firm assurance thereof, and for attempts
and underminings thereof by the persuasions of the King to a peace, he caused
Monsieur le Grand and De Thou, two Eminent Noblemen to be beheaded at Lions;
which last sanguinous Action loosned him from his former fixedness in his
Masters breast, whose coldness toward him raised Damps in his own, which with
other distempers fomented and fed by this, extinguished his life on the 4th of
December 1642.

He was accused of having Embroyled England, to the end that it might be in no
condition to hinder his seizing of the Low Countries, and this by most unjust
and Malign practices (though varnished over with its like intermedling in the
business of Rochel) and of setting all Europe in general by the ears, though
he cannot be deprived of the glory and praise of having done the Kingdom of
France Superlative services though it were with the huge oppression of the
poor people, he lived in great anxiety and sear, having perpetual
apprehensions of the mischiefs he had done.

His death was not overmuch lamented, and such as had either feared him, or
fled his persecution returned into France, and by the Kings Grace repossest
themselves of their Charges and Estates. He died wealthy and rich, seized of
several Governments and Offices and Titulado'd with Dignities and Secular
Honors, leaving a Peerage and Duchy to his Nephew Duke Richleiu now
surviving; and was buried with a public sumptuous Funeral a little before the
death of Lewis the 1^^^ which happened in the beginning of the year 1643. after
he had declared the Queen, Regent and recommended Cardinal Mazarini to her, who
suffered no Eclipse or Diminution of Luster in the clouded close setting of his
Patron Richleiu.

And we shall now perceive this Apotype and Copy of this great Exemplar
Cardinal Mazarini who was (as has been objected to, and reported of, him
frequently) a Sicilian by birth, and so a Native Subject of the King of Spain,
but took his Priesthood at Rome as did Richleiu, and by his good Fortune
conducted to France, into which Court he cunningly insinuated himself, and
gained the favor and knowledge of the Cardinal, who employed him in
transacting his Affairs at Rome, and as his Envoy or Minister for that peculiar
Negotiation, while he found it convenient to dispose of him for his better
service, and prefer him to the Queen, as her Secretary, by which means he might
fasten a sure Intelligencer of whatever should be contrived against Him, and
continue and cherish those good correspondencies between her Majesty and
Himself.

And so true and faithful a Servant did he carry himself in that preferment,
and so prudently and wisely for himself, that he preserved the entire favor of
their Majesty's and the Cardinal, without any suspicion of a partial study in
things of a nice and dubious adherence.

For as he had by his Birth the disadvantage of Alliance and Interest, so had
be the unobserved unbusied and serence way of beneficing and engaging the means
to his Grandeur which he saw designed for him by so Potent and concerned
Inductions to the secrets of the Government; so that there was little odds
between the Locality of their Extractions but what ambitious Envy against the
one, and contemptuous Hatred against the other ineffectually signified.

By the aforesaid direction of the King at his decease he now managed the
State, and in prosecution of Richleius Design, (Sacrated to him by the Merit of
his Advancement) resumed the next Summers Expedition of 1643. with more violent
Effects, the tediousness of the former having wearied Lewis the 14th of his
life.

The first signal Action of his Administration was the relief of Rocroy, which
Don Francisco de Mello a Portuguese (then Governor after the death of the
Cardinal Infanta of the Low Countries under the Spanish obedience) went to
besiege with a gallant Army, but having declared the Duke of Albuquerque (a
Portuguese likenese) General of the Horse, who was a very young man and raw
Soldier, the Officers took so much offense thereat, that they quarrelled
themselves into a discomfiture so that all their Foot were presently worsted
and defeated by the Duke of Anguien now Prince of Conde a person that could
not, would not be debarred from Military employment, and was suffered to run
his venturous fate in this service for other guess effects then a braving
Experience, which after wards threatened the Fortunes of this Great Cardinal.

This Victory was very great and most opportune to ingratiate His
Administration with the people which voyced up likewise his favorite, General
or Marshall Gassion a Protestant besides, who after took in Theonville. Of whom
further.

This success was also the more officious to him for that it removed the said
Francisco de Mello from the government of the low Countries, the Marquess
Casiel-Rodrigo being substituted thereto, till the arrival of the Archduke
Leopold from Germany, as if Fortune intimated that other Ministers of State
were inferior to his Eminence, and could not consist nor stand with his
insuperable Policy and felicity of Government.

His aims were no less upon Germany pursuing the old League with the Swedes,
then on Flanders, though with different success. For the remainders of the
Duke of Saxon Weymars Army being recruited and reinforced by the French,
marched toward Bavaria, intending to swallow that Duchy, but here fortune
faltered, for the Duke of Ioram and John de Were accompanied by the Baron of
Mercy the Bavarian General, so rudely accosted them, that the French lost 400
Officers and of them the gallant Marshal Guebriana, and 6000 Soldiers, and
with speed were forced to return to the Rhine

These 2 Battles of Rocroy and Dutling within so short a space of 6 Months were
almost as signal as any in the Swedish or Flandrian War, and made the world
suppose to the Cardinals advantage, that he would direct and govern the Arms
of France in their own natural way of sudden and sprightly resolution and push
at a speedy conquest and Decision.

The prudent Cardinal knowing how the pleasure of this Victory might transport
the Duke of Lorrain, having highly vindicated and revenged himself of the
French affronts (to feed the humors thereof, and charm the opportunities of
this success) proposed a Treaty with the said Duke now as more facile to an
accommodation, since he stood upon as aequall if not higher ground: but the Duke
being slur'd before by Cardinal Richlieu upon the same account at his last
journey to Paris by the like offers would not venture another Flam, but fell
into the low countries to winter quarters and gave the Cardinal leave to
undertake another Composure.

And that was between the King of England and the members at Westminster by the
outward solemn Embassy of Prince Harcourt and as well entertained by them as
intended by him; (the Members quarrelling at his Credentials as not amply and
in form directed to them, and affronting him by a search and seizure of his
papers as he was going to Oxford) for he bound himself up to the Dictates and
Methods of Cardinal Richlein, which was by any means to continue our divisions;
and the effect of this splendid whither go ye manifested no more, when the said
Prince Harcourt, depart hence, without so much as one praliminary or word
treated of tow^rd an agreement.

And as his averseness to the English Nation was m^erly Politic and hardly
discovered in him, so had he a natural dislike of and Antipathy to the N^et,
easily to be observed varying and counterchanging the interest of France which
thi^herto had maintained an indissoluble Le^gue and Amity with Scotland;
whether prompted to it by his Generosity a virtue relucent enough in him which
abhorred their disloyal practices, or from a vile contempt of their Condition,
and the dictates of Prudence which disobliged any confidence in that Nation (as
they then went in the worlds Repute) is not determinable.

But most certain it is that some grounded radicated pique and quarrel he had
against that people, for that the Immortal Marquess of Montross of Famous
Memory was put by his Command of that Kings Guard which had been promised him,
merely by this Cardinal, although he brought with him the greatest Merit that
Loyalty, Conduct and Courage did ever lay claim to.

As little indulgent he was indeed to the admission of any stranger into places
of Trust, no not his own Countrymen of Italy, as knowing one was enough and
thought by the Princes of the Blood and the Nobility to be too many, serving
himself altogether of Frenchmen, except for Foreign Intelligence, for which he
had Emissaries and Pensionary's of all Nations.

And now we will return to some other Passages of his Administration as to the
War he maintained yet with the Emperor and King of Spain in the year 1646.
when the Duke of Orleans was Generalissimo, (the Cardinal studying to busy the
Princes of the Blood in Military Actions, out of the Kingdom) and the
aforesaid Duke of Anguien his Lieutenant General.

That years greatest Campania fell upon Flanders where a Decision of the
quarrel for those Provinces was resolved upon, by taking the chiefest Towns of
Importance in the Heart of the Country, which would give the Spaniard a mortal
blow; having prepared for it, by many successes to the Hollanders as well as
the* selves the year before: for that the Spaniards loss of Graveling and the
Sasse of Gaunt, the two main Frontier Defenses both ways, laid the Country open
to an entire Conquest.

Courtrack was first taken within twenty miles of Gaunt, but victuals growing
seant, by the multitude of such an Army, they retreated toward the Seaside to
be supplied by the Hollander and took in Berghen St. Wynox by Dunkirk, besieged
Mardike suprized from them the Winter before, but lost many gallant brave
persons of the French No ility, and some four thousand men before it, and yet
could not carry it till Vantrump with his Dutch Fleet blockt them up by Sea.

Dunkirk and Fuernes followed the same Fortune, so that nothing was thought now
able to withstand the progress of the French Armies to Antwerp, which the
Cardinal by earnest expresses and instances desired the Prince of Orange to
besiege promising him 6000 Men to his assistance; but the Dutch jealous of the
French for former Reasons, and suspecting the Cardinals reaches, and not
willing to spoil the Trade of Amsterdam which must return again to Antwerp,
would by no means approve of the design.

Nevertheless the Prince of Aurange (Marshal Gassion and Rantzaw having driven
back Piccolomini the Emperors General and secured the passage by the Channel
between Gaunt and Bruges) came with his Army and complemented the Duke of
Orleans with a visit, and returned with booty and plunder into the Land of
Wasse and there took in Hulst in October the last admirable felicity of that
great Captain.

So succesful were the endeavors of this great Cardinal, that no doubt was
made of reducing the Countries which France pretended to have been wrested from
her some ages before, and so accomplish a total Sovereignty over all Belgia in
process of time; when the Prince of Aurange the great wheel of the Holland War,
by the insinuations and persuasions of the right honorable George Lord Goring
Earl of Norwich deceased, was at last induced to hearken to an accommodation,
which having been labored at Munster by Deputies of all the concerned Princes
and the Arbitrators, was in 1648. by that Princes single Condescension (such a
command had his Fortune upon Christendom) concluded and ratified on January
the 8th and the French left to stand upon their own legs (after many instances
made to the Contrary by Monsieur de Servient the French Ambassador at the
Hague to no purpose) the Swedes and Hollanders returning to their repose after
a m^st tedious War which the Ambitious Cardinal preferred before a most just
honorable and necessary Peace for the impoverished Subjects of France.

Notwithstanding he obtained by this Munster Treaty from the Emperor in
satisfaction of his charge and expense in the Swedish War, the strong Town of
Brisack and most part of Alsatia, bordering upon Lorain, no small addittament
of Territory, besides the s^curity thereby of his acquests in Lorain; and his
rights in the 3 Bishoprics of Metz, Thoul and Verdun.

Maintaining and keeping also Portolongone and Prombino in Italy taken by his
Arms under the Conduct of Prince Thomaso, as also his Conquests in Cataloma,
where the War was continued with various success under the several Commands of
Marshal de Motte, The Prince de Harcourt, de Conde, and Marshal de Schomberg,
to the continuance of the Catalonians in their revolt.

He retained likewise what he gained in Flanders, with a resolution to improve
the French Flower de Lyzes in that Country, where they had formerly flonrished,
looking with an evil eye upon the Dutch for abandoning their League, and
evil-intreating of their Subjects in their Trade and Navigation, which showed
how much he was displeased with this peace, which he foresee would breed ill
humors in the State, and some envious designs against his Person and Authority
therein.

The said year 1648. on the 29th of August he was fortunated with another
Victory at Lens in Artoys against the Archduke Leopold gained by the valor
but allayed by the death of the gallant Marshal Gassion, slain with a bullet
(as most men thought) treacherously by some great person near him, who shall be
nameless. This noble Captain was a Confident of the Cardinals, and proved a
greater loss to him then was at present imagined, but his sagacity and
prudence seasonably provided himself with another Martialist.

Hitherto the Cardinal had carried all things evenly without any intestine
Commotions or open disturbances, and to his great Reputation and Honor: but
the influence of the late general peace which stilled and dulled the minds of
most men, like a comprest heavy vapor broke out into a violent Earthquake at
home, and gave the Spaniard leave to respire after a war on both sides of his
Provinces for thirteen years together, but belaid this great Agent of
Christendom with very importunate s llicitudes.

Some Cabal now on foot against him cherisht by the Princes of the blood, and
managed chiefly by the Prince of Conde, had obliged him by the Queen Regents
Order in September 1648. to commit the Messeiurs de Brussels de Charton and de
Blanckmesnel Presidents of the Parliament, whom the people much respected and
looked upon as Patriots, to the Bastilt of Paris, whereupon they began to cry
Alarm and ran in Herds down to the Palace Royal (in the nature and to the
Event of our unhappy Tumults in 1640) requiring the Liberty of the said
Gentlemen: the Shops were shut up, the Chains made fast, and all the approaches
barricado'd, so that Paris seemed to be in more disorder now, and the danger
greater then that which happened in the Reign of Henry the 2d nor did the
uproar cease till the Queen was constrained to release them. And so the
discontent was for a while hushed up, being a forerunner to greater mischiefs,
and a seeming calm cast upon the surface of the Kingdom, while it violently
labored for a free Vent through the turbulent blood of the Princes.

Which happened on the 28 of December in their Christmas time 1649. when in the
Evening the Queen, the King and Duke of Anjou with the Cardinal departed from
Paris; which secret Retreat gave the Parisians another Alarm, for imagining
that the Queen would revenge her self of the former commotion, they took up
Arms again with as much Heat as they had done before, and raised their
respective Militia's and Forces under the Command of the Dukes de Elbeuf,
Beaufort, Bouillon and the Marshal de la Motte, their chief General being the
Prince of Conty.

The Queen Regent and King raised Forces also, there fl^cking to him many from
all parts to reduce the Parisians to reason, he had alread seized upon the
Approaches, and some hot Skirmishes were made in one, whereof the Duke of Rohan
was slain, he pretended to be the Son and Heir of that most Famous Soldier and
Scholar the Duke of Rohan the Head of the Protestant League.

By this means the King possessed himself of St. Dennis, Meredon, Corbett, and
Lagny near the City, who fearing the due punishment of their disloyalty, and
the revenges of the Cardinal and animated by their Leaders, and the Nobility,
invited the Archduke Leopold to their assi^^ance, declaring their intolerable
burdens under the pressures of a t^dious War, and the oppressions of the said
Cardinal.

Upon this invitation the Archduke advanced, and to facilitate his Design
caressed the Country as he passed, suffering not the least spoil to be
committed upon their Goods or Cattle, but by the advice of the Duke of Lorain,
he prudently retired and prevented the stops of his return, remembering that of
Curtius, Gratiarum actiones apud hosts supervacaneas esse -- aut prorsus
nullas, That the thanks of an Enemy are altogether vain and unprofitable, or
not to be expected or relied on.

For the wise Cardinal to divert this storm which would shiver Him if he met
and withstood it singly, veiled the Kings and Queens Authority to this
Exigence, Counselling the Queen to conclude with the Princes without any delay;
which advice was suddenly executed, and thereby the Archduke having lost 2000.
Horse for want of forage and by the celerity of his expedition, was yet fain
to make more have out of the Kingdom then he did into it, although he had
saved Paris from a very forward Ruin.

By this Agreement the Citizens of Paris were pardoned and restored to all
their Privileges and Franchises and the Army of the King and his mutineers
dispacht under the Prince de Harcourt to make an in-road into Flanders, who
coming before Cambray were content to dislodge at the approach of the Arch
Duke, whose Leivtenant General the Marquess S'sondrate took in Ypres after a
gallant defense made by the French, while Harcourt took Conde and laid wast the
Country of H^nault and part of Fra^ant to the fright of the City of Brussels it
self.

This was one of the finest extricating fineries he manifested in so sudden
Schazardous an emergence which else would have sunk him immediately, and the
Kingdom together; no small advantage of this occurrence that it complicated
the Monarchy of France with his particular Fate, and showed that its glory and
safety were redevable to his single Concern.

The Cardinal well knew where those Arrows were forged, and therefore having so
triumphantly and nimbly surmounted this shock and encounter, he used the like
diligence to be before hand with his Enemies for the future, and hereupon the
Princes of C^nde and C^nt^ next Princes of the blood Royal after the Duke of
Orleans together with the Duke of Longueville their brother in law and the Duke
of Beaufort, were upon a sudden made prisoners in the Castle of ^incennes, with
several of their servants secured and removed from them; this happened in 1650.

The Princess of Conde retired her self to Bourdeaux (where the Duke of
Bouillon and many Lords came to her) who for the hatred they bore the Cardinal
and the Duke of Espernon, who stuck fast to the King, were welcomed by her and
the Town, as well as the Viscount Marshal Turenne upon the same account at
Brussels.

The Duchess of Longueville got aboard in a Vessel which lay off before the
Haven of Deip, and thence passed to Holland, and so to Luxenburgh to
communicate intelligence and make a straight Alliance with the Arch Duke.

This was a potent Combination, wherein most of the great men of the Kingdom,
with the generality of the people were engaged against the Cardinal and which
would have ruined the greatest Minister Europe ever had, were it not that his
wisdom and policy were paramount and above the reach of Fortune, which had
little to do with his Felicities.

First therefore the King published a Manifest concerning the detention of the
Princes, to give Satisfaction to the world of the justice and necessity
thereof, the chief points of which declaration were the Prince of Conde's too
great power and exorbitant Ambition, that had proceeded so far as to invade the
royal Prerogative.

In answer to this the Marshal of Turenne being in Stenay (and having agreed
with the Archduke for the manage of the war) beat his drums and listed forces,
declaring with the said Arch Duke, that neither Party would lay down their Arms
till the Princes were released, the Duke of Lorain restored to his Estate, the
Cardinal banished, and a firm peace concluded between both Crowns; but the
Cardinals Dexterity and diligence bafled all these designments, and turned
their Resolutions into prayers and entreaties for most of the same things at
his own hands.

The Parliament of Bourdeaux also renewed the Order and Arrest given against
the Marquess de Ancre the Favorite of the former Queen Mother, whereby it was
declared that no Stranger (by reason of his Enormous Administration) should
ever have thereafter the great Ministry and Intendency of the Kingdom.

The Marshal Turenne with the Archduke attaqued Guise and notwithstanding
terms and propositions of Peace public and private, resolved to prosecute the
war, while the King seizes upon the Princes Governments and places of strength
in Normandy, and finally by the Artifices of the Cardinal and the power of the
Duke of Espernon, possesses himself of Bourdeaux, which dangerously threatened
his Crown, where he entered with triumph and with the same returned to his City
of Paris.

And now the second time had he quieted and laid the envious Rage of his
Enemies against Him, when the Duke of Orleans the Kings brother undertook the
Princes Intercession and Vindication, which he procured to be decreed by the
Parliament of Paris, who in a body came and presented their Arrest in favor of
the said Princes, to the Queen; which Authoritative Reversement of those
proceedings and severe restraint the Princes had suffered, with universal
outcryes against the Cardinal as the Author and Contriver of those injuries
and other mischiefs to the Public, by his continuance of the War and
oppression of the people, now at last forced this able Pilot to abandon the
Steerage of the State, and to consult for his security, which the liberty of
the Princes dangerously threatened.

The Princes were set at liberty by Marshal Gramment who was Commanded to see
it done, and made their entrance into Paris the sixth of February when the
streets rung again with the noise of Live the King, Live the Princes, no
Mazarine; every one accusing him of Exhausting the Revenue, etc. and of the
mischiefs which embroiled the State, but he had played his Cards so, that they
ceased not with his departure.

Nevertheless to Honest his Retreat and take off the dishonor of it, he got
the King and Queen to give him their Conge or leave for this his retirement,
giving his Enemies full swinge to act their Exorbitancies, without any Treasure
to mitigate that acuteness the people must suffer under those necessities of
mis-rule, while he had wherewithal to loosen their combination and divide
their interests into Atoms, and so make his return infinitely more glorious,
then his Exit was disgraceful.

His passage out of France was by Peronne, Sedan and Dinant where he staid some
days, and thence to Liege or Luyck and so to Bruel to the Elector of Colen who
received him according to his quality, he having refused the like offers of
civility from the Spaniards. Yet such was the present hatred of him in France,
that even those who showed him any respect in his way to this Exile, were
informed against as Enemies to the King and their Country, most of the
Parliaments of France Decreeing against Him.

And now returned the Marshall of Turenne, the Count of Grand Pre and the
Duchess of Longueville, being welcomed with their Troops, while the Cardinal
secretly listed men in Luyckland for the Kings Service, which now went very
backward in Flanders, for the Marquess Sfondrate re-took Fuerues and Wynoxberg;
and the Impositions and clamours of the people were as great as ever.

To raise these discontents to another Sedition and Rebellion, the Prince of
Conde gave out a Rumor of another Design to seize him and his Brother, and so
all things were put in the same hazard as before at the Cardinals departure,
for though the Queen protested there was no such Design by an Express sent
after him, which brought him back to Paris upon condition that Monsieur
Servient and le Tellier should be discarded, as being the Cardinals Creatures;
yet he returned to the same suspicious humor and hasted to St. Maur and thence
to Bordeaux, which again received and readily declared for Him.

The King to prevent his ^Lavies and increase there (having been newly declared
Major the 27th of August 1651 by the Chancellor of France in Parliament as
being fourteen years of age) followed after him to Poyctiers, and seeing no
remedy but in the prudent Counsels of the Cardinal, against this ambitious
dissatisfaction of the Princes, sent for Him to come to them thither, which he
obeyed: and the Prince of Conde* dealt with the Archduke in like manner;
Mazarin being now declared Traitor, his Goods to be Confiscate, his fine
Library sold, and fifteen thousand pound Sterling offered to any body should
bring him either alive or dead: and at the same time the Duke of Nemours with
Spanish Forces entered Picardy.

This Restitution of the Cardinal, was then one of the wonderfullest Changes
and Affairs of Christendom, though it were but an ordinary Effect of his
prudence which plainly foresee this glorious Event of his secess and departure.

France that had leaned so long upon his Shoulders, could not choose but miss
her supporter, and unaccustomed to new Props, was in danger of an irrecoverable
fall. Yet when he had Sampsons opportunity of pulling the stately Frame of
Government upon the Head of his Enemies, who triumphed at his disgrace, the
kindness of his Revenge rather strengthened the Fabric and raised it higher.

Necessity that injures and insolently crosses other men, officiously served
His Fortune, France could not be safe without Him, the Engine of the Government
was discomposed and in pieces, and none but his skilful Hand could set it right
and in order, which he did suddenly and invisibly by securing the Kings
Interest and Sovereignty, and dividing and perplexing the Princes, particularly
by moderating and in some sort neutralizing the Duke of Orleans.

The main Intrigue whereof was the gayning the Marshall Turenne over to the
Kings Party, who had constantly followed the Fortune of Conde, and appeared the
Cardinals most avowed and formidable Enemy; but nothing it seems was
insuperable or unfeasible to Him, who could reconcile Contraries, and out-doe
Nature, with the Elixir of his Brain.

So that the Princes were constrained to invite the Archduke and Duke of Lorain
to the other Expedition for Paris, which threatened the ruin of one of the
Parties; but such was the favor of Fate toward this her great Instrument and
Agent that she opportunely interposed the Authority and Mediation of our
Sovereign the King of Great Britain then at Paris which superseded the fierce
and sanguinous Resolutions of the Princes, and saved the Cardinal the Emergent
Hazard of his Felicity. Which Courtesy how he requited, is one of the most
Envious Enquiry's and the blackest darkest passage of his whole Administration.

By the said Intercession the Duke of Lorain, with other satisfaction,
retreated into Flanders, whither not long after perforce followed the Prince of
Conde and his Partisans, and the King trinmphantly entered Paris with the
acceptable insinuations of his Grace and Pardon, solemnly thereafter published;
Nothing was wanting to complete the new settlement but the Duke of Orlean's
(the Kings Uncles) presence at Court, now absenting and retiring himself
thence, which was one of the difficultest and nicest Punctilio of State the
Cardinal ever met with.

Being thus again Culminant and placed in his former Crb, he resumed the War
with fresh vigor, and with two Eminent Successes the taking of Stenay whither
he carried the King in Person, and the Victory at Arras 1654. re-stated and
recovered the Honor of the Puissance of France.

It will be unnecessary to mention the Chain of Successes which followed them
in Flanders, as it will be rudeness to abrupt and disjoyn It with his League
with Cromwell and his Cunning destructive Design of Jamaica which he put into
that Usurpers Head, because they press too near upon His Memory, and are every
man's observation and public Discourse.

But most certain it is, he joyed not our late Miraculous Restitution, nor did
he foresee it at that Distance which timed and Governed all his other
Consultations, for his Politiques were like China Metal prepared and refined by
years; though upon the Emergent and sudden Crisis thereof, at the Death of
Oliver Cromwell he Complemented Her Majesty the Queen Mother, with the undoubted
Hopes of Her Families Restoration; the Effect whereof settled such a
Melancholy in his Creature Monsieur Bourdeaux Neufville the French Resident
here, that he endured not to survive it

For a fit Conclusion: Nature favoring the fair and goodly Structure of his
Glory, and in an obsequious compliance to his Fortune and Prudence with all
other things had so humbly served and obeyed, prolonged his life (whose Lamp in
a Sanguine Constitution the great drayner of the spirits, and ventilated with
so much Air of business was never thought of such a Continuance and Duration)
till he had settled and Established that Kingdom in the greatest and potentest
Condition the World ever saw it; and after he had restored to it a most
glorious Peace, from a War of twenty seven years standing, and rendered his
Prince the most Signal and incomparable Services, having annexed and
Established on the Crown by the GENERALLL TREATY in 1659. the Counties of
Roussillon, Haynault and Artoys with other advantages and Dependencies.

Having also lived to see the glorious Effects of his Tuition and Education of
the present King; as if Nice and Curious Fortune scorned to exhibit and
continue so rare a Masterpiece of Government to the World in vain; or that a
Phoenix should rise but out of his Ashes.

He was by Fate intended and designed for the Troubles and Dangers of France,
to the Redress whereof he was solely Competent, and they being Composed, His
work was done, and He dyed when there was no need of His Life; If perhaps he
prevented not some afterclaps of that Storm which impends at present upon one
of his greatest Confidents and Privadoe's, and Loures upon many other of His
Dependants and Retayners.

Fortune was so much his Familiar that even his Pleasures and Vacancies were
entertained by Her, His greatest recreation being Play, or Gaming both at Dice
and Cards, or any other Sport; at all which he was very lucky, and took great
delight in success; but many times he did not owe it either to Chance or any
Cunning but that of his Play-fellows Design, who knowing his Winning and
Thriving Humor, would play Booty against themselves; and by their Loss make
great Advantage; For he that had a great Suit at Court or aimed at any High
Preferment, had no readier way to effect his Business then by an Opportunity of
playing with the Cardinal, to whom a loss of a thousand Pistols was worth a
Bribe of ten thousand, and engaged him more easily and surely then any friends
or other money whatsoever.

So that in Effect He lost by his Gains, his indiscreet Avarice being eluded
by the tickling Vanity of Conquest, and the pleasing Ambition of a good Hit.

But it seemed to Him a kind of a more Noble Oppression to drayn Gentlemen of
all their money (as it also famed his Generosity in recompensing them with
Offices) alike to that he exercised over the Commonalty, without redress or
mitigation during his whole Administration; by which he heaped such vast sums
of Money, computed by his Testament foregoing; and yet there is a report of
twenty five thousand millions of Livers, which is two Millions and a half of
pounds Sterling, to be yet concealed by his Heirs and Executors more then was
any manner of way disposed of by Him.

And yet nevertheless His Death was not sung with the Dirges of revengeful
Ribaldry as was his Predecessors Richlieu, though he had more Potent and
impotent Enemies.

At home he was reconciled (to view) with the Prince of Conde, who was willing
to entertain his friendship, as he was ikewise respected by the King of Spain,
and Dou Louis de Haro: only the Pope who always took him for the great
disturber of Christendom, and the sole Opposer of the general Peace (his own
great design at first) the War giving him opportunity of raising and preferring
his Confidents and pillaging the people, did now upon the Conclusion of it very
much more suspect and Malign the Cardinal, first for taking the glory of that
Affair to himself, and then designing a worse War upon the Church of which he
was sensible some long time before the present Rupture and Turkish Invasion.

This Nativity being showed me by that ingenious and famed Artist Mr. John
Gadbury, and knowing what particular respect is had by great Men to those
Schemes of Geniture, I thought it would be acceptable to prefix this; being
declaratory of the main Concerns of this the Cardinals life Secundum Artem.

Nasc. Cardinal Mazarine, anno 1602. July 14 6 b. 43 m. P. M Sub Elevatione
Poli, 42 degrees. a ad *.



THe Nativity of this great Statesman was pablished by a Pretender to
Astrology in England, some ni^e years since, but falsely: for the Scheme
thereof is no less then nine Degrees in the Medium Coeli, and seven in the
Ascendent, distant from the Truth; as by this Correction following appears,
(1.) In the thirty fourth year of this Persons Age, he began to be greatly
noted, and to live in Favor of the greatest Persons in the place he inhabited:
he had the Medium Coeli ad Trine Venus; a fit Direction (...) lay a Foundation
for future Honor. (2) In the year one thousand six hundred and forty he began
to rise into great Favor at the French Court, and this in the month of
November: The Medium Coeli had but lately passed the Sextile of Jupiter by
Direction, and Jupiter in that month upon the Ascendent at Birth, and Venus
upon the place of Direction; both very eminent Transits. (3.) In the year one
thousand six hundred forty and three, and forty one of his Age, he had the
Ascendent directed ad Trine Sol, and Sextile Luna: at which time the Nobility,
Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty so cried him up, that he began to be, and indeed
was, in greater request then the King; for the King was then but a Child of
five years old. (4.) In the 49 and 50 years of his Age, he was divested of his
Honor and Greatness for a time; and by the means of an enraged Nobility, etc.
was banished, He had then the Sun ad Conjunction Mars, and Luna ad Quartile
Mars by Direction; which should also have given him a very violent Fever: but I
cannot inform my self thereof.


Lastly, In the year 1660. in the Month Febr. he dyed: some say of a deep
Melancholy, others of a Fever; the last is not without Reason, nor yet the
first in a sense; therefore I believe he participated of both. The Ascendent
was directed ad Opposition, Mars, and Saturn upon the Opposition of the Moons
Radical place.

FINIS.

