DAVID'S Labor and Rest: OR, A DISCOURSE On ACTS XIII. v. 36.

Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. RICHARD SHVTE, THE LATE Most Reverend Pastor of
the Congregation of Stow-Market in Suffolk.

TOGETHER With some memorable Remarques upon the Deceased, for the Benefit and
Use of that Parish.

By SAMVEL HVDSON, Rector of Earls Stonham.

LONDON, Printed by James Astwood for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1689.

TO THE Truly Pious, and my much Honored Sister, Mrs. MARTHA SHVTE.
Dear Sister,
WHEN it pleased our Infinitely Wise and Holy God, to translate my most
Reverend and Worthy Brother into those blessed Mansions of Glory, where he now
dwells for ever; I was my self prevented by so sharp a Sickness, as that I
could neither accompany that very numerous and extraordinary Train of Mourners,
that followed him to his Grave; nor could I then be an Auditor of this
excellent Discourse preached at his Funeral: my Sorrows were much augmented
upon both these Considerations: For in that dark hour of Providence, when the
Crown was taken from thy Head, and a deep wound was made in my own Heart, it
would have been some relief to me, to have seen multitudes both of Ministers
and People, of different Persuasions about little things, so unanimously united
as they were in their Sorrows, for the loss of such an Eminent Instrument of
Gods Glory, and of so great an Example of practical Piety, conjoined with such
prudent managent of his Labor, as that he had effectually obtained much of his
great End, viz. Of establishing a profound Love to God, and to one another, in
the Hearts of very many of his Auditors; and had also diffused the same Spirit
into all his Brethren, in that Corner where God had placed him; it would have
been a further Comfort me, to have heard the Duty of Imitation so Pathetically
urged, as it then was, in that Sermon which is now made public.

The report of which was then sent me, but the Copy thereof came but lately
into my Hands, with liberty of Printing it, and the restraint which the
Reverend Author had first laid upon you, being in greatest part removed.

My Dear Sister,
Although I could have wished, that the Impression had been more early, yet it
now comes time enough (I hope) not only to be communicated to his whole Flock,
but to add some new Fuel to their former great Zeal, whilst every one of them
seemed very ardently bent to pay, a most just Veneration to his Memory; which
in Truth will be now best done, if that they hold this Glass frequently before
them, and while they are beholding so beautiful a Picture (drawn but in brief,
yet truly representing him, and without all flattery) they shall every one
endeavor to dress and adorn themselves according to so rare a pattern. Dear
Sister, I am informed that the time is almost come, when you will discharge
part of that Legacy of 100 l. which my Excellent Brother bequeathed to some
Trustees named in his Will, for the purchasing of Lands, for the benefit of the
Poor of that Borough of Stow-Market, and that for ever: Now Dear Sister, let
me earnestly beseech you, that whenever you pay any part thereof, you would
deposite it in such hands, as that a most sacred Promise may be given you and
us, who are Overseers of his Will, that such Lands may be purchased and also
settled, so as that the annual Rent may be employed, as the yearly reward of a
Schoolmaster, for his Teaching of the Children of the poorest sort, to read
the English Bible, in such number as the Trustees shall think fit: This will be
the erecting of a perpetual Monument to his memory, more lasting than any of
Marble, which his Parishioners have Thought and Discoursed of to set over his
Grave. May the good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush, still for ever dwell in
that Town; and may the Holy Spirit of God, so influence all their Minds; that,
that most precious Seed, which has been sown in their Hearts, by our (now
glorified) Relation, may take deep root, and bring forth abundant Fruit, which
will be, I am sure, the inexpressible Joy of thy Soul, and is the most earnest
Prayer of

Dear SISTER, Your most Affectionately Sympathizing Brother, Sam. Fairclough.

To my Worthy and highly Honored Cousin, Samuel Blackerby, Esquire and to my much
esteemed Friends, Mr. Charles Blosse, Mr. Joseph Crane, Mr. John Keeble, Mr.
John Carter, Mr. Benjamin Cutlove, Mr. John Peake, Mr. Jonathan Peake, Mr.
Charles Booth, Mr. William Gerrard, Mr. Thomas Hayward, Trustees for the Legacy
bequeathed to the Borough of Stow-Market, by their late Reverend Pastor, Mr.
Richard Shute.
GENTLEMEN,
AT the Desire of my Sister, (who is now in my House, and not capable of doing
it her self) I do very Earnesty and Passionately request, that the Annual
Revenue of the Lgacy that her dear Husband and your late Reverend Pastor,
bequeathed to your Borough, may be employed for the benefit of the Poor, and
not for the ease of the Rich. And I do believe it cannot be more avantageously
laid out, than in procuring a Person (fit for such a Work) who shall be obliged
to Teach a certain number of poor Children to read the English Bible, whose
Parents are not well able to be at that Charge for them: It Is true, my Brother
has not prescribed any particular way for the expending of it, but I do not
question but this will be grateful to him, if he has any knowledge of what is
done here below. I hope the Confidence he put in you will prompt you to use it
in that way which (you cannot doubt) would be most acceptable to him, could he
now speak to you from Heaven, as he formerly did on Earth: You are Trustees for
God as well as for him; I pray Dispose of it as Men that must give an Account
thereof. I have no more to say, but that

I am your Friend and Servant, George Jones.

DAVID's Labor and Rest.
ACTS XIII. v. 36. For David, after he had served his own Generation by the
Will of God, fell on sleep.


IF there be any Force either in Precept, Prohibition, Promise, or President,
to engage to Holiness of Conversation; doubtless the Christian is under the
greatest Obligation. No Religion so strictly commands Holiness: Be ye holy in
all manner of conversation: Nor more prohibits unholiness; without which no man
shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14.
Where do we meet with the like encouraging Promises? having the promise both
of the life that now is, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and of that which is to come. Or where so strict and obliging Patterns and
Examples, not only the President of the holy Jesus, who went up and down doing
good; but also a Cloud of Witnesses, whereof we have one in the Text, holy
David, who served out his Generation.

In the projecting Age wherein we live, he is a very inconsiderable person that
has not some Design or other on foot; but there is no Design a Christian ought
to have in in pursuit, comparable with that of glorifying God, and saving of
his Soul: All others compared with this; whether raising great Estates and
Fortunes, or climbing up to highest Pinnacles of Honor, are but low and
beggarly Designs. Nor is there any other way we can better express our real
care for carrying on this good Design, than by a suitable Comportment and
endeavor to do as David did, to serve out our own Generation: Nor any Rule for
us to square our Conversation by, in order to the glorifying of God, and
serviceableness, than the Rule David walked by, viz. the Will of God. And
whosoever walks in this Way, and by this Rule, may expect a David's Issue and
Event, to fall asleep, to be gathered to their Fathers, and receive a glorious
Resurrection. The words as they lie in the Relative sense, are brought in to
prove the Resurrection of Christ, and that as a thing foretold by the Psalmist,
That he would not suffer his Holy One to see corruption: But David saw
corruption, and therefore the Prediction of the Psalmist relates to Christ, and
not personally to David: For David, after he had served out his generation by
the will of God, fell on sleep, and saw corruption, etc.

But I shall consider the words absolutely in themselves, which contain these
three Considerables.

First, Good David's Agency and Fidelity, He served out his generation.

Secondly, The Canon or Rule of his Activity, the will of God.

Thirdly, The Exodus, or Event of both, which doubtless was happy, He fell
asleep, and was gathered to his Fathers.

Of these three in their order,

First, Holy David's fidelity and agency, who served out his Generation, i. e.
the whole series, course and scope of his Life, was how he might be serviceable
to God, in all the parts thereof, not only in a fit and mood, by starts, and
fits, but throughout his Generation.

Whose excellent Pattern, Note.
recommends to us a necessary, and important Duty incumbent upon us, to be
Active, and Serviceable to God in our Generation, in all the Stations and
Relations Gods Providence sets us in. He did not serve God, as a Servant his
Master for a Year, or an Apprentice for seven Years, as long as his Indentures
last, but he was as a bored Servant all his days: Not putting Limits, Bounds,
or Periods to his Service, but as long as Life lasted. He never begun well, or
to good purpose, that does not continue his Fidelity: Nor may he expect a Crown
of Life, Rev. 2.10.
who is not Faithful to the Death.

And here I must consider, David in his respective, and several Relations
wherein Gods Providence set him, and show how serviceable he was in them all;
and how reasonable it is for us so to be. And those were either in

His Political, Ecclesiastical, Domestic.
Relation.

First, Consider him in his Political Relation, as he was a King. No sooner did
God advance him from the Shepherds Crook, and by his special command, invest
him with the Crown and Scepter to lead his People Israel, as his peculiar
Flock, but he set himself to defend his Subjects, to subdue Isreal's common
Enemies, put Garrisons into the Cities for the safety of the Commonwealth: When
possibly malcontents might think a less guard might serve the turn to secure
the public Peace. This was he who enjoined, and commanded by his Authority the
Worship of the God of Israel, according to the Law of Moses, and required the
People under his Charge to serve, and fear the God of Abraham. This was he, who
was serviceable by appointing Judges, for the Execution of Judgment and
Justice, both for the Punishment of evildoers, and for the Praise of them that
do well. Nor was he a negligent Administrator of Justice himself; or did he
turn off all to be managed by others hands: but declares, that when he shall
receive the Congregation, he would judge uprightly; Psalm. 75.2.
which he performed with great faithfulness, notwithstanding the
after-insinuations of a Rebellious Son Absalom, and a Crafty Courtier
Achitophel, who out of Sinister ends aspersed the Government, to raise their
own Fortunes, and gratify their own ambition. It is a very difficult, if not
impossible thing to wear a Crown long, but some touring Spirits will be apt to
raise Clamor, and unreasonable Slanders, and think it would fit better upon
their own heads, and that if they had Power they could better manage the
Affairs of State.

What he engaged to his God, David was careful to perform: Early destroying the
wicked of the Land, and cutting off evil doers from the City of the Lord.
Leading his People Israel in the Integrity of his heart, and guiding them by
the skilfulness of his hands. In short, in his public service and
administration, he eyed public good, so as to the most and best men,
Whatsoever the King did pleased the People. 2 Samuel 3.16.


Consider him, (Secondly,) in his Ecclesiastical relation, as a Prophet of the
Lord, and so he served out his Generation.

This was he who brought the Ark; the visible Symbol of God's Presence from
Kirjathjearim, and placed it in a Tabernacle, notwithstanding the insolent
scoffs of a deriding Michal. So hard a thing it is for any in public Authority
to promote Religion, but some or other will revile, and reproach. But yet he
proceeded and made preparation for building a House for God, tho the
completing of it was left to his Successor: yet his good purpose was
acceptable to God.

How careful was he in ordering the Priests and Levites to perform their
Offices in their several courses, Sacred Writ do testify; to rectify abuses,
2 Chronicles. 23.^.
and regulate the Worship of God. How industrious in composing that precious
Model of divine Truth, the Book of the Psalms! And ordering the Singers in
their places to serve God in Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgiving! And himself
also with Supplications and Intercessions to God, standing up in the gap to
divert the wrath of a justly provoked God, from a God provoking People, as
diverse Psalms testify, Psalm. 79.83. nor was he wanting upon the Receipt of any
signal blessing, to return his grateful resentments of God's goodness: Several
of the Psalms being Anthems of Praise, penned upon such occasions, to be
publicly sung: As Psalm. 18. etc.

Nor (Thirdly,) was he less careful to be serviceable to God in his Private, or
Domestic relation: By a holy, and exemplary Conversation. This was he who gave
not only holy Precept, but Pattern, behaving himself wisely, Psalm. 101.1.
and walking in the midst of his house in the perfect way. Not as too many, who
regard not to debauch others under their charge by ill President: Or others who
care not if they have but their Servants bodily labor, tho the Devil have
their Hearts and Lives. He doubtless counseled them to Piety, and bewailed the
miscarriages of any under his charge and care: When Rivers of Tears ran down
his Eyes, because men kept not God's Laws.

And (Lastly,) consider him in his carriage between God and his own Soul: He
was a good Man, and after God's own Heart. He preserved a holy aw and regard
upon his Spirit, Psalm. 4.
so as not presumptuously to sin and offend his Glorious Majesty. Id.
He lived not at random, but communed with his own heart, living under a daily
sense of his Duty and obligations to God. Psalm. 90.
And so numbering his days, as to apply his heart to true wisdom. These I pass
over with all brevity; that in the next place I may evidence to you,

Reasonable.
The reasonableness of this his Agency for God in his Generation; and that upon
a twofold account.

First, Upon the Account, that serviceableness to God is the end, and design of
God's bestowing upon us those Talents, Abilities and Opportunities we enjoy.
Doubtless God did never intend them to be laid out in Riot, or laid up in a
Napkin: Neither to wast them, or to rust. 1 Cor. 12.7.
The Candle is not to be put under a Bushel. The manifestation of the Spirit,
(so all other good gifts of Health, Riches, Honor, etc.) are given to every
man to profit withal; to be useful in our places, to God's Glory, our own, and
others good. He frustrates God's aim that does not employ them; whatsoever we
receive from God, we are not to take as Proprietors, but as Stewards, or as
Executors: not to embezzle as we please, but to employ the bequests according
to the will of the Donor.

Secondly* Considering the Account we must expect to give to our great Lord, of
our Stewardship, when he shall summon us to appear, which will be a just and
strict account; Romans 2.7.
who will render to every man according to his works. As there is a reward to
them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek honor, glory, and immortal
life; so there is indignation and wrath to every Soul who commits evil. If we
acknowledge our selves Creatures (that receive all from God) we must expect an
appearance: If we be more, let us show it, in warding off that account if we
can. But certain it is, 2 Cor. 5.
We must all appear at the judgment Seat of Christ; Therefore it is reasonable
we should serve God in our Generation. What has hitherto been insisted upon,
may be matter of Admonition to us all.

First, Applied.
To you my Reverend Brethren of the Clergy, to whom God has committed Curam
animarum, The charge of Souls; that we study this, of serviceableness in our
places, may we be careful to employ our Talents for the designs of God's Glory,
and others good in our several Stations; not sparing our pains for fear of
hastening our end. Our Lamps can never be better spent, or burnt out, than in
lighting others to Heaven. 2 Timothy 4.2.
Be we then instant in season, and out of season; both in Prayers and
Preaching; rebuking and exhorting with all long-suffering and doctrine: If God
peradventure will give Grace, not only to the acknowledgment, but also to the
Love of the Truth.

May we be willing to spend, and be spent in the service of so dear a Lord: Not
forgetting the injunction given us at our Ordination, when we had the Holy
Bible put into our hands, with charge to preach the Gospel.

And indeed can we be negligent, when besides the Precepts to industry, we have
also the excellent Patterns set before us. The holy Angels, who are ministering
Spirits for the good of the Elect. Such a Cloud of Witnesses, before us for the
good of others; God himself, who does good continually, and excerciseth a
watchful eye of Providence over his Church; Christ, who whilst on Earth went up
and down doing good, and now in Heaven makes continual intercession for us.

Or can we give up a better account of our Time, and Talents to God? What we do
for his Glory, and the Churches good, we may expect God will put upon the file.

Nor can we serve a better Lord and Master, who has an observant Eye to regard
us, and has assured us, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
That if we be steadfast unmovable, and aboanding in the work of the Lord, our
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Secondly, Nor are you in your more private Spheres and Capacities to be
negligent of this, but to be serviceable to God in your Relations. In your
Families by prudent management of those under your charge; preventing as much
as in you lies, those extravagancies, times and places too much abound withal;
by private admonitions, by a holy, peaceable, and obedient behavior, Walking
worthy of the Lord unto all well pleasing.

And hereby you may give great encouragement and assistance to God's Faithful
Ministers; not discouraging those who watch for your Souls.

This is the way to leave our Country better to Posterity, as the Orator
speaks.

We have all but a little time to work in: The time is short, John 9.4.
we shall soon be at our Journeys end, The night approaches, etc. And hereby
we shall bring comfort to our selves in the way; and have hopes in our Death.

But may we not take up a bitter Lamentation for so great a neglect of this
Duty? Lament.
How many prove unserviceable in their Generation, or disserviceable, either by
fomenting needless divisions, or a disorderly Conversation, who regard more
their private Cabins, than the public good; who are as Wenns upon the Natural
Body, draw away the nourishment, and cumbersome to be born; or like corrupt
Stomachs, turn all to putrefaction.

I might here take occasion to rebuke, and lament such who serve not God, but
their own bellies: Or serve God no further than will serve their own turns, who
live as if the great God had sent them hither upon no other Errand than to
pamper the Carcass, and feed the Brute.

But I hope better things of many of you, and that you are careful not only to
be serviceable to God in your Generation, but withal, to take the true, best
Canon for your Agency, The Will of God, which is my next thing to consider.

The Second General is the Canon of David's activity; The Will of God. I am not
unsensible there are who prefix this, and make it an Antecedent to what
follows; reading them thus: By the Will of God he fell asleep.

Beza.
But besides that this pointing of them is said not to be found in the Ancient
Copies: It may be considered, that tho it be true, that all who fall asleep, do
so by the Will of God; yet all do not serve out their Generation by the Will of
God, which is by way of Eminency recommended to us in David's Pattern, that he
eyed his Rule, Note.
the Will of God: So that all our serviceableness to God in our generation must
be regulated by the Will of God. The Will of God is the only, and highest Rule
for created Beings to act by; But not the Will of God as concealed, but as
revealed to us: Things revealed belong to us.

We must not guide our selves by our unruly Fancies, or make our own blind
turbulent passions our Rule; Or that which some call Conscience, tho never so
misguided, or a Light within them; for this is to be regulated by the Rule of
God's Word, and Will; else there will be so many Rules as there are misguided
Consciences in the World.

David did not make God's secret Will the Rule of his Agency: For how could
that be a rule for him, which was kept secret from him? nor did he run to any
infallible Judge, or the determinations of the Church to make that his rule of
Faith, or Life: But what God had clearly manifested to him, and to us, his
Sacred Oracles are our Rule; so many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be
on them. Gal. 6.16


If every Market Town had a diverse Standard for weights, and measures, who
could know what were the Standard of the Nation. Doubtless the Word of God is a
certain infallible, and sufficient Rule, else Christ was not faithful in his
Prophetic Office.

May this be our practice in all matters of Faith, and Life: Take we a right
rule, and if (in matters ritual and circumstantial, and what not forbidden) we
quietly submit to the prudence of our Superiors, we shall not easily err. And
had this method been observed, God knows it had ended many of our unchristian,
and uncharitable dissentions. But when Men make their own will, good meaning,
private opinion, good intention, or prejudiced education, the rule of their
Agency; and judge that their hands can only stay the tottering Ark, no wonder
that the Church falls into endless rents and miserable fractions. Activity
without understanding like mettle in a blind Horse, exposes the Rider to
greater hazards; or like mettle in a restife Jade, apt to run away with the
Rider. Be we careful then not to mistake our rule, nor be seduced by those who
pretend to be infallible Rule-makers, or guided only by a light within.

Thirdly, Which leads me to the last considerable, the Issue, and Event: David,
etc. fell asleep. And they who walk by David's Rule, may expect the like issue:
Sad news, doubtless, to all Israel, when holy David, who had fought Isreal's
Battles, brought back the Ark, settled them in peace, and guided them by the
skilfulness of his hand, shall fall asleep; which must not be understood of
perishing, but as elsewhere, was gathered to his Fathers, or Reversus in
paradisum, returned home to God. I read not that he staid at Limbo in the way,
until prayed out by the Charity of surviving Friends. But here observe with me,

First, That death to a good Man is but a Sleep, and as sleep,

Rev. 13.
(1.) Gives rest and a cessation from labors, and toils; it is requies, et
medicina laborum: So those who sleep in Jesus, Eccles. 5.12.
rest from their labors.

Again, (2.) It gives Refreshment, especially after hard labors: The sleep of
the laboring man is sweet. The more serviceable in Life, the more refreshing
the Sleep of Death: Not like the affrighting sleep of condemned Malefactors, or
a Man in a Frenzy, who start in their sleep.

And (3.) As they who sleep, awake again; so those who sleep in Jesus, when
they hear the sound of the Trumpet, and the voice of the Son of Man, shall
awake, and be raised up again as to their bodies; 1 Cor. 15.
And this corruptible shall put on incorruption. God will be no man's Debtor,
nor unfaithful to forget our work, and labor of Love. Those very bodies which
have been the Souls Instrument in faithful Services to God, shall not be
unrewarded in another World.

But (2.) No serviceableness to God in our Generation here, can exempt from
Death: For David fell asleep. This is the common lot of the Faithful, as well
as slothful. Some wear out with Work, others moulder in Rust, and inactivity.
Moses, who received the Tables from the Mouth of God, gave Statutes, and
Judgments to Israel, and brought them to the borders of the Land of Canaan, the
next news we hear of him is, Moses my Servant is dead. Joh. 7.
Elsewhere says sacred writ, Our Fathers are dead, and the Prophets do they
live for ever?

From which Premises, let us Infer, Infer.
How Scripture dresseth up Death to a good Man; which tho to Nature it be the
King of Terrors; yet to a Believer is but an (...), a pulling down the Cords
of our Earthy Tabernacle; Repatrizare, to return home, and in the Text a Sleep.
And may not this remove all Dread, and Consternation from our Spirits? who
would not be willing to put off his clothes to go to rest? God intends thee no
harm when he puts thee to Bed.

2. And may it not stay the impetuous Torrent of immoderate Grief for deceased
Friends; He is not Dead but sleeps.

And have not you known the Husband go to bed a few hours before the Wife? The
Father before the Child? And there is no readier way to provoke God to snatch
them from us, than by too much doting upon them. We should be careful not to
turn our golden Earrings into a golden Calf, or lean too hard upon our
Crutches. For then God often cuts off the Pipes, that we may live more upon the
Fountain.

Advice.
To conclude by way of Advice, that we may sleep in Jesus,

Be careful, (1.) That we live in no Sin unrepented of. It Is the Child's
miscarriage in the day, that makes it loath to go to Bed at Night, lest it is
Father should reckon with it then: Live we then, that, as Job speaks, our
Hearts may not reproach us whilst we live. And (2.) In an entire Resignation,
and surrender to the Will of God. Genesis 38. v. 6.
How much did Potiphar provide for his own ease, and quiet, when he left all in
Joseph's hand. Could we leave all our Concernments to God; let God do what he
will: How might we possess our Souls, in all Times, and Conditions of Life! and
without Consternation, and Amazement of Spirit, look Death in the Face! But
when we tenaciously hold all we can from God, have our Affections set upon
things beneath, live unsuitably to the designs of the Holy Gospel, and Religion
we profess: No wonder if the Thoughts of Death prove uneasy. With what
Confidence can we commit our selves to God when Dying, when Enemies to God when
Living? For a man to live in open defiance to the Laws of God when Living, and
to Bequeath his Soul to God at Death, is an Incongruous thing: We do not make
our Enemies, but our Friends our Executors. To conclude, (3.) Let Us live with
our Hearts more inflamed with love to God, and in a Sense of our Mortality: and
the latter will be Influential upon the former. Fire is best preserved in its
own Ashes.

In short, let us imitate holy David in serviceableness to God in our
Generation, and this by the Will of God; then may we expect a David's issue and
event, to sleep in Jesus. They who perform a David's service, may expect a
David's Portion.

And this I dare say was the design of our deceased honored Friend, and
Brother: To whom I may apyly all the parts of the Text already spoken of. But
to give a full, and proportionable Character of this great, and good man, is a
Province too big for my feeble Hands and Stammering Tongue; and might be more
fit for some of you my Reverend Fathers, or Brethren, whose Tongues do
naturally flow with Streams of Silver Eloquence.

But since this task is so unwillingly devolved upon my weak hands, expect that
I should only draw his Picture in faint and water Colors; which by your
Pencils might better have been laid in Oil, who might rear him a Monument which
might last so long as this Church endures. In speaking to the subject before
us, I fear not an Excess, or Hyperbole. He was beneath flattery, above my
Commendations.

It is not my design here to speak (as is usually upon such occasions) of his
Extract, and Original, descended of a Family of good repute in the West parts
of England.

Nor of his Education in one of the most famous Schools of Learning in our
Land, at Eaton; or of his being a member successively in two Colleges in the
ancient University of Oxford: Or to Traverse the former part of his Life,
unknown to me. I shall take notice of him only, as to that part, since God in
his Providence set him in this place. And here I will make my appeal to you of
this place and Neighborhood, whether he was not serviceable to God in his
Generation, in all those capacities already mentioned in holy David.

First, Take him in his Civil Relation, as a Man, and member of a civil
Society. Tho no Governor in civil Affairs, yet as a Friend, or Neighbor,
industrious either in preventing discords, or composing differences, which is a
good piece of service; which when he undertook (as he was not averse to any
good Offices) he effected with mildness, gentleness, and calmness, bringing
differing Parties to a true understanding of each other, so as to lay a
Foundation for a thorough Reconciliation. Of such a healing Spirit, as he ever
carried with him Balsam to cure Wounds; but could not endure Gaul and Vinegar
to be poured in, to procure a Rankle or Fester. And were he only serviceable in
this respect, Matthew. 5.
he might fall under the blessing of Peacemakers.

Secondly, But consider we him in his Ministerial Capacity and Employment.

(1st.) His Ability, and skill in all parts of Learning, whether Original
Languages, in Antiquity, or Modern History, Chronology or Geography: Divine or
Humane, whatever was fit for a Divine, or was an Accomplishment for a
Gentleman, is too well known, to be disputed, or distrusted. He understood both
Men, and Books, and a competent Judge of both. Of quick Apprehension, strong
Memory, and sound Judgment, not taken with thin Airy and Jejune Notions: But
one who valued things more by their Solidity and Weight than by their Varnish,
and Rhetoric.

(2.) And as these could not be attained without pains; so he was not less
Industrious in employing his Talent, in his constant and public Preaching,
until Sickness took him off, and Death gave him a Quietus from his Labors: It
was very seldom, but he was thrice in the Week in the Pulpit, besides his
Attendance upon public Prayers. In his public Ministration he affected not
Ostentation of Parts, sublime Strains of flanting Rhetoric, curious starch't
Sentences, fine Cadencies, or neat set Periods: He used not the enticing Words
of Man's Wisdom; but studied sound Doctrine, and manly Sense, and condescending
to the meanest Capacities; rather seeking to inform the Judgment, and affect
the Heart, more than to Tickle the Ear.

He esteemed that Knowledge passed into the understanding by plain Truths, and
Method best, as light into a Room by clear, and plain, not painted Glass.

He was a man of too great a Mind to make Rents, and Divisions in the Church
upon the account of a Form of wholesome Words; which in public Administrations
upon mature Deliberation, was not matter of constraint but choice. He never
thought it an Argument of Piety that his Bible would warrant him to turn Martyr
for a Ceremony. He did not hide his Talents in a Napkin, but was willing to
spend and be spent, in the service of his Lord and Master. And probably might
have continued longer, had he not too much addicted himself to a Studious, and
Sedentary course of Life. You will all bear me witness that he has been the
Cement of this place for diverse Years; keeping his Flock from Straggling, and
reconciling Dissenters to the established Church of England.

(3.) Nor was he less remarkable for his Meekness and Humility; not of a
Supercilious, Imperious or Rough Temper, that will endure no contradiction, but
could with Patience hear, and wisdom weigh, what was proposed by others; no
Imperious Dictator, not Passionate, or peremptory, but ready to hearken when
reason was offered; and willing to learn to the last. In public reproofs mild,
testifying rather Pity and Compassion, than Wrath and Indignation: by which
means he gained more upon the Affections of his People, than either a Tetchy
frowardness, or haughty disdain would ever have effected. Although probably his
natural temper was somewhat quick, yet through the Grace of God, was great
Master of his Passions. In all my converse with him, I do not remember any
Indecency; or the waters at any time near overflowing the banks. Though a
great Master of Reason, and Judge of Sense, yet a most candid Auditor. Although
he might in so many as he conversed with, meet with some Provocations to
discompose him. He had learned the Apostles rule, to speak evil of no man,
clothed with Humility, and the Ornament of a quiet Spirit.

(4.) To which, we may add, Exemplariness of Conversation. Not a Jacobs Voice,
and an Esaus hands. He well understood that bad Actions were not only a
dishonor to God, a disparagement to our Holy Religion; but were apt to take a
deeper Impression upon men's Minds, than their Doctrine, and sooner transcribed
in men's Conversation. Hence he was careful to teach in his Life, as well as
preach with his Tongue; in his Parish, as well as from the Pulpit. He knew a
Priest must be accountable to God, not only for his Doctrine, but his
Conversation; therefore careful that he might not destroy the Benefit, and
effect of sound and Orthodox, Canonical Doctrine, by a Heterodox, and
Apochryphal Conversation. He was sedulous to give no occasion to produce any
bad example of his, which others would be apt to adopt into an apology or
excuse for their own Misdemeanors and Miscarriages. In all Company of a very
steady and grave Comportment.

To which he subjoyned, (5.) Stedfastness in the Doctrine, and Discipline of
the Church of England. I knew his sense in this particular as well as some
others: He was not Chamaeleon-like, changing color according to his Company,
but justified in private, what was his public Practice against all gainsayers.

I might add more, relating to his Ecclesiastical capacity, but I must hasten
to show how he was serviceable in his Generation.

Thirdly, In his private Relation. But I had almost forgot one thing relating
to the former, which is, his readiness upon all occasions, and least
intimations, to visit the sick: not over-looking the poorest sort, reaching
forth not only wholesome advice, but superadding a charitable hand, where he saw
need and occasion.

A pregnant instance of his large Heart, and hand, is evident in his Charitable
Bequest, and Legacy he has left for the benefit of the poor of this Parish; to
continue to succeeding Generations. So as those who never knew him, may bless
him. I must confess I have heard him lament, that in visiting some poor, that
he has found some so grossly Ignorant in the Articles of Christian Religion.
But it is high time now to mention, and I can but mention, his domestic
Carriage. His dear Affection, and tender Compassion to his Consort, and
Relatives, whereof the mournful Eyes, and sorrowful Hearts, of those who are
present, is a sufficient demonstration.

In his Family Grave, yet Familiar. Not Rigid and Austere. Affable, yet Devout.
A Priest in his Family, as well as in the Temple. He loved not long or late
absence from the place of his abode: He carried a watch in his Bosom, to mind
him of seasonable retirements, accounting there was something to be done at
home besides going to Bed.

I pass over his secret, and Closet retirements. And it is now high time to
hasten to the second part of his management of himself, as the Text tells us,
By the Will of God.

Secondly, In all these Relations his care was to manage himself by the surest,
safest Rule, The Will of God. This both in private Discourse, and in his
public Preaching: Though he did sometimes, and could make use of the Judgment of
the Ancient Fathers, but this (not to found his Faith upon,) but only to
strengthen it by their Authority. His Method was to back his Discourse with
Proofs out of these sacred Oracles, in which he was an eloquent Apollos. He
loved, and honored the gray hairs of Antiquity; but with Tertullian, revered
the Plenitude of the Scriptures. It was hence he took the Articles of his
Faith, and Rules of Life: and his Creed was composed before that of Trent.

I must not omit here to speak of other of his natural, and moral Endowments:
Sweetness of Temper: Courtesy of Behavior. A pleasant yet profitable
Companion. I have known several of his Friends, who would say, they were as
well pleased with his Ordinary and Familiar Discourse, as his Preaching, which
spoke him a great man, because in his public Exercises he studied to
condescend to the meanest Capacities; but with the more polite, and learned
evidenced himself a Scholar. Yet his public discourses were always Manly,
Practicable, Profitable.

In his converse he was neither Morose, or Cynical; nor Airy and Froathy; but
such as any man in an hours discourse might return bettered from him.

His Charity to his Neighbors upon all occasions, is well known in this place.
But as he would not boast of it whilst living, I will not blaze it now he is
dead. He affected Secrecy rather than Popularity therein; according to our
Saviors Rule, Matthew. 6.
Give not thine Alms before men, to be seen of them.

His love to this people, appeared in not leaving them, when under the
Temptation of other fair offers in his Native Country, and near his Relations.

His Faithfulness to his Friend, is not to be forgotten: Here was a Breast
where one might safely lock a secret; where he found a David, he proved a
Jonathan. In all things eying the Will of God.

Lastly. But now, (as the good man in the Text,) He is fallen asleep. His
Distemper approached gradually upon him, termed by the skilful in the faculty
of Physic, a Scorbutic Dropsy, which proved unconquerable by all their Art
and Skill. This attended with a Drowsiness, toward his latter end; so as
although he knew, and understood well, yet he was apt to fall asleep before he
had finished an answer. But under went all his afflictions, with a calmness and
Serenity of Mind, with an entire resignation unto the Divine Will. Nor was he
under too tedious Pains, and articles, that some meet with before their
departure: And next to a safe passage hence, an easy transitus is very
desirable. In a sober sense he truly fell asleep.

Thus dyed this great, and good Man. May we of the Clergy bewail the loss of
such a painful, steady, valiant, Workman and Labourer in Gods Vineyard. And,
Micah 2.2.
God knows, in a time when we could ill spare him. Such was the time when the
Prophet complained that the good man was perished from the Earth; several great
and stout Champions have of late fallen by death, into the List of whom we may
well put our deceased Brother. Who for Prudence, Industry, Integrity, and
Ability, may be a pattern to many of us surviving.

Let me also Address my self to you of this Place, and Parish, who were lately
under his prudent Care and Conduct: Death has played a mighty prize, at once
triumphing over Learning, sweet Nature, Goodness, and Experience: and at one
stroke, laid in the dust your faithful Minister, at the age of about fifty four
Years.

I hope I need not call for Mourning Men, Jer. 9.17.
or Mourning Women, to take up wailing, or make a bitter Lamentation. You of
this place, I hope had generally such a passionate affection for him, as the
very spectacle of so faithful a watchman, will command your Tears, and persuade
you almost, (for this your Father) to weep with Rachel, so as to refuse to be
comforted. My hearty desire for you is, that God would make up your breach; and
that although the Shepherd be smitten, the Sheep may not be scattered. Serious
resentments of such Providence of God, are mightily becoming of us, under such
heavy strokes.

The Heathen resented the loss of one Philosopher more than of many Orators,
because Orators taught men to speak well, but Philosophers to live well: You
have lost one who knew how both to speak well to you, and taught by Doctrine
and Example to live well; though now to be laid in the silent grave as a piece of
cold clay; may he that is dead yet speak, I mean, speak in the Lives and
Conversations of his people. Repeat his excellent Sermons, and Discourses in
your Lives; and take heed of Skeptical shakings in a day of Trial. Think you
hear him now speaking to you, Phil. 2. v. 12.
as St. Paul to the Philipians: Wherefore my beloved Brethren, as ye have
always obeyed, not only in my presence, but in my absence; work out your
Salvation, etc. Preserve that Unity he left among you, when he left you;
avoiding a needless dividing and separating Spirit.

And particularly to you of the Youth of this Town, and Place. Remember ye the
wholesome advices ye have received from him, the sober demeanor you cannot but
have observed, backed with the Imprimatur of Gravity, and Gray-hairs. So that
whilst possibly you may hear some of the Clergy aspersed as careless and
negligent, recall to mind that you have had a President, of one before you in
this Place, Devout in Prayers, Diligent in Preaching, and of an exemplary
Conversation, amongst others of the Church of England.

I shall conclude: May this Vacancy be supplied, with a Person of Wisdom,
Ability, and Integrity, that may carry on the work of God, and build upon the
Foundations here already laid by him. Yea may a double Portion of Elijahs
Spirit rest upon Elisha, for Gods Glory, and the furtherance of your Salvation.
And may we all study to be serviceable in our Generations, and to do all by the
Will of God, that when we depart hence we may sleep in Jesus; and let all this
people say, Amen.

Now to God the Father, etc.

FINIS.

