A REPLY To a Book set forth By one of the blind Guides of England, who is a
Priest at Barwick Hall in LANCASHIRE, Who writes his name, R. Sherlock,
Batcheler of Divinity, but he is proved to be a Diviner and deceiver of the
People: Which Book is in answer to some Queres set forth to him by them whom he
calls QUAKERS.

And herein are Replies given to his Answers, by those whom the world
reproachfully calls QUAKERS: But we do dwell in the power of the living God,
which makes all the earth to quake and tremble at his presence, who is terrible
to the wicked, and is laying open and discovering the deceipts of all blind
Guides, Hirelings and deceivers, and is making his power manifest, and his name
known in his people, whom the world calls QUAKERS.

Dreadful, powerful God! Praises to thee for ever. Amen. Thy Servant, Richard
Hubberthorne.

O England! thy Prophets have se^en vain and foolish things for thee, and they
have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity, but have seen
for thee false burdens and causes of banishment. Lam. 2.14.

And because thou have hearkened unto them, and not unto me, says the Lord,
therefore woe and misery is coming upon thee and thy Prophets.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1654.

REader, This is the word of the Lord to thee, take heed unto the light Christ
has enlightened thee wi^hall, to guide thy mind into the fear of God, to the
light of Christ in thy conscience I speak, which if thou hearken unto it, it
will lead thee out of pride, and lus^, and envy, and will bring condemnation
upon that nature thou have lived and acted in, that is out of the fear of God,
and harkening ^o this light in thy conscience, it will di^ect thy mind to God,
and draw thy min^ and affections out of earthly things, and the pollutions of
the world, by which thou art defiled; thy mind and conscience is defiled by
lust and uncleanness, lusting after earthly things, and the flesh is defiled
by that mind that wallowes in the earth: Now minding this light in thy
conscience Christ has enlightened thee withal, thy understanding will come to
be enlightened, to see the deceipts and the blind guides which have led thee
from this light in thy conscience which should exercise it, and lead thee to go
to fear him, and to be taught of him, and will lead thee from the teachings of
man which keeps thee in thy sins, and draw: thee from this light in thy
conscience, which convinces thee of sin, and lets thee see sin and evil, and
all ungodliness, and will bring thee to deny it, and lead thee to repentance,
and so thou will come to know Jesus Christ, which gives repentance and
remission of sins, and then thou will deny Priest Sherlock, and all that
generation of Priests, who says in the 32. page of his book, that Christ was a
person ^ot capable of faith and repentance. And here I do charge him in the
presence of the living God to be a liar, for he is the author and finisher of
faith, and be preached repentance, and gives repentance to his people: And he
denies the knowledge and understanding the Apostles had, and yet says he
preaches the same Gospel, page 10. and says that external Tongues, Arts and
Sciences gives them to understand the meaning of the Gospel, page 11. and says
that the spirit causes fleshly fruits, page 22. and says, that to understand
the doctrine of God, they must use the light of distinctions, page 54. and
says that Religion is the art of arts, page 86. and says, that prayer in all
the parts and species thereof is a means to fetch down the holy spirit of God,
page 144. when as the Saints said the spirit taught them to pray, and that they
prayed with the spirit and with understanding. Now to the light in your
consciences I speak, which will let you see these lying Priests and blind
guides, which have deceived you so long, and kept you blind and ignorant. So
all people cease from them, and wait upon the Lord for teaching.

A lover of the truth, and a witness against the deceit and deceivers; and a
lover of the souls of all people: and that righteousness might be established
was I moved to write this. Richard Hubberthorne.

A reply to a book set forth by the Priest of Barwick, who writes R. Sherlock,
which was an answer to some Queries set forth to him, by them whom he calls
Quakers; who writes himself Batcheler of Divinity, and a Diviner he is proved.
Quest. 1. WHether your gospel be the same which the Apostles preached, and if
it be, why go you to Oxford and Cambridge, when the Apostle says, the gospel
that he preached was not after man, neither was he taught it by man?

Pr. Thy answer is, You preach the same gospel the Apostles preached, but do
not attain the knewledge and understanding of this gospel by the same means:

Rep. Here let all people see what wooden stuff this is: How can you preach
the same gospel, and have not the same knowledge and understanding? If it be
not by the same knowledge and understanding, it is not the same gospel; for the
spirit of understanding is but one, and from this spirit of understanding thou
have cleared thy self.

Pr. And thou say, You ought not to depend upon any such immediate
revelation from heaven as the Apostles had.

Rep. Here again thou have cleared thy self from the Spirit that gave forth the
scriptures, who denies immediate revelation from heaven; and here thou have
denied thy self to b^ any Minister of Jesus Christ, for no man knows the Son
but the Father, and to whom he is revealed; and thou that denyest immediate
Revelation, thou have denied the Son of God, and have showed that thou have not
life; for he that has not the Son of God, has not life: And therefore we deny
such schools a^ Oxford and Cambridge, where the rudiments of the world are
invented and abundance of filthy words are in the answer to this Querie, which
are not worth mentioning.

Que. 2. Whether you can give another meaning to the scripture^ then they are?
or whether the Apostles did give the meaning to them when they spoke them
forth, yea, or nay? and if they did, what need learned men give a meaning to
them!

Pr. And in thy answer thou say, The sense and meaning of the scripture is
involved in it.

Rep. Here thou would make people believe, Christ were in the letter, who is
the substance that gave it forth, and was in them that spoke it forth; for the
scripture does declare another thing of God and Christ, it does not declare God
and Christ is in the letter, but here it is that fools might appear to be
blind, and such as thou say, learned men, must give the meaning to the
scripture.

Pr. And thou say that Christ took a text, and that Philip took a text.

Rep. O thou enemy and slanderer of Christ and the Apostle! Did they take texts
to get money with them, and to lie a quarter of a year, or half a year in a
text? Christ came to fulfill the scripture, and the Apostle showed how Christ
fulfilled the scripture, and came to fulfill that, which the prophets spoke: The
Scribes and Pharisees were learned men, and they could not open the scriptures;
Peter an unlearned man, he opened the scriptures.

Pr. And thou speak of standing up in a pulpet of wood.

R^p. In the time of the Law when they read it, there was a pulpet of wood to a
particular people, to whom the Law was given; but Christ said, Go preach the
gospel to every creature: And Christ cried woe against them that had the
chief^st place in the Assemblies: And here thou art one of them that would be
under the Law, and would have a pulpet of wood, and pleads for thy learning,
that the scribes and Pharisees were in, which is to no purpose; who says the
ke^nel of the Nut is in the shell: and that comparison thou bring to make
people believe that the life is in the scriptures, and so the poor people is
groping in the letter to find life there, when the life was in them that gave
it forth.

Pr. Thou speak of flying to God by prayer.

Rep. Yet thou denyest revelation from heaven, which the saints was to wait
for, the revelation of Jesus from heaven; and this makes all you blind guides
to stumble, because you have not the life which gave forth the scriptures,
which now is made manifest to the children of God.

Que. 3. Show me by the scriptures who ever was made a Minister of Jesus
Christ, that was called of men, Master.

In thy answer to this Querie, thou bring the Prophets and Priests under the
Law called Fathers, to oppose Christ's doctrine. Thou would compare Oxford
and Cambridge to such as the Prophets and Apostles; yet thou denyest immediate
revelation from heaven: And here thou have cleared thy self, and Oxford, and
Cambridge from the life of the Prophets; for they had immediate revelation, and
so thou bring many names, as Pastors, and Shepherds, and Ministers, and
Apostles, and Evangelists, to oppose Christ's doctrine, who says, Be not you
called of men Master. So let all see if they be not under the delusion, who
says Master is a civil honor, and so opposes Christ's doctrine. Here thou
have showed thou do not believe; for how can you believe, that seek honor
one of another? and show that thou love it, as the Scribes and Pharisees
did, and would not part with it, and art in thy pride and vain glory, as the
Scribes and Pharisees were, who says that is a civil honor and respect, which
Christ cried woe against. And here thou have brought thy self and all thy
company under the woe, and Oxford, and Cambridge, in the state which Christ
pronounced woe against, and thou art judged with the same life that give forth
the scriptures.

Que. 4. Show me by the scriptures, where ever the Ministers of Christ took
Tithes of the people, or Augmentations.

In thy answer thou say, The Priests under the Law received Tithes. There
was a time that they received Tithes, and they might not neglect them, as
denying their Tithes to the first Priesthood. There was a time after Christ
when he was sacrificed up, that he was preached the unchangeable Priesthood,
Heb. 7. then the priesthood which received tithes was denied, therefore the woe
is come upon thee and all thy generation which receive tithes, according to the
changeable Priesthood. Here thou have showed thy self without judgment and the
love of God, and the woe is come upon thee and all thy generation which receive
Tithes, and hold up the changeable priesthood, and so denies Christ come in the
flesh. They that preached the gospel, which lived on the gospel, denied the
changeable Priesthood which received Tithe^; but for shame you Ministers of
Oxford and Cambridge stop your mouths, for they must be stopped: do not you sue
men at the Law, and imprison men for Tithes? and here you show you do not
preach the gospel, for it will not maintain you; for them that preached the
gospel, lived on the gospel; there thou thief art taken, who has gotten the
Apostles words, who art for judgment.

Que. 5. Show me by the scriptures, and what scripture have you which speaks of
the word Sacrament, which you tell the people of, and deceives the simple.

Pr. And in thy answer to this Querie, thou art confused: First thou say
there is no scripture for the word Sacrament; and yet thou say Christ
commands it, and yet thou say there is not such a word in scripture.

Rep. Here thou which adds to it, have brought thy self under the plagues and
woe: And here let all who are in the light see if thou art not a deceiver, who
deceives thy soul. I charge thee again that thou know not Christ, for thou
denyest immediate revelation, so thou know not his commands, nor does not
obey them; for none knows the Son, but to whom he is revealed: and here I
charge thee to be a deceiver and a deluder of the soul from the Lord. This is
in reply to the answer of the fifth Querie.

Que. 6. Show me what scripture you have which speaks that the Apostles
sprinkled infants.

Thou bring the scriptures (as Christ says) Suffer little chilren to come
unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God: and this thou
bring to justify sprinkling infants; for circumcision outwardly, was a type
of circumcision inwardly: So thou have not a word in the scripture to maintain
it, but thou ramblest up and down, and perverts many scriptures, in which there
is not such a word for it: Acts 33. Romans 4 11. John 5.3. Jer. 1.5, 6 Luke
1.66.80.
And here I charge thee in the presence of the living God to be a liar; for
Christ never commanded sprinkling infants, neither is it any ordinance of
Christ, neither is there any example among the holy men of God, that ever it
was practiced; and the plagues of God is added to thee. Let all people see if
there be any word for sprinkling infants, and let the scriptures which thou
bring judge thee, Luke 18.15. Jer. 15.6. Luke 1.66, 80. Acts 10.47. Here I
charge thee with all these Scriptures to be a liar, that all these scriptures
shall judge thee, which thou have brought for sprinkling of Infants, let the
reader of thy book examine the Scriptures, and find the a liar, and all thy
dirty stuff which thou have gaithered from them, is to be trodden under foot,
with the children of the light, who witness Baptism, and circumsition and
new birth borne again, and all who are here do see thee to be blind, deaf,
and a fool, and there thou may read thy self, let all people see thee
here, who art without the life of the Srripture, who deniest immediate
revelation from Heaven, which the Apostles wittnessed, and the Prophets, for
without God thou art eternally, I witness it.

Que. 7. Show me what Scripture you have to stand praying in the Sinagogues
before Sermon and after, and whether the Apostles did so?

In thy Answer to this querie, thou bring the Apostles words, (which said
pray allwaies) to justify standing praying in the Sinagogues, and having the
chiefest place in the Assemblies, which Christ cried woe against, and here I
charge thee to be a false Prophet, who puts no difference betwixt the Apostle
and the Pharesies, though he said, the temple which Solomon built him, it was a
house of Prayer, Christ said there should not be one stone of it left upon
another when Christ Jesus was witnessed. Stephen for witnessing him was stoned
to death; and here thou have showed, thou have no judgment, and errs not
knowing the Scripture; and as for Christ's whipping them out of the temple, read
thy self, to the light in thy conscience I speak, and so all thy praying
before thy Sermon and after, as thou call it, in the Sinagogues, in the
chiefest place of the Assemblies, the woe which Christ pronounced against thy
Fathers has light upon the Son, thou who art found in the same place, let
Math. 23. judge thee, the life which gave forth these words, the life of these
words is upon thee, and so all thy prayers are abomination to the Lord God, in
the state thou art in, and the praying of the Saints which was moved by the
Spirits, thou have cleared thy self from, for thou deniest immediate
revelation from heaven, and how can thou pray and not with the Spirit? and
here let all people judge and see what thy prayers are if thou be not in the
st^te of the Pharisees, who deny immediate revelation, and to be one that is
blind, and the praying with the Spirit is wittnessed among the Saint^.

Que. 8. Show me by the Scripture, when the Apostles went into the world, and
gave the people of the world David's Psalms to be sung in meeter, the things
that you practice, answer them by the Scriptures or the Apostles practice,
without consequence or imagination.

And in thy answer to this querie, thou perverts the Scripture, as in the Acts,
as Paul and Silas sung Psalms in the prison, with them of the world, they did
not go into the world to give them a Psalm to sing, men that were not come to
repentance, for says David, the dead cannot praise God, and there I charge
thee to be a lier, and puts no difference betwixt the Saints singing with grace
and understanding, and the world which has gotten the form where thou art,
the Apostle did not speak to such as were in thy condition, to be filled with
the Spirit, which is not come to repentance, but he spoke to them which were
turned from the world, and such sung praises to God, but for such as thee, to
go and give to the world David's Psalms in a meeter, and say, O Lord I am not
puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye: O you profane ones and scornful ones!
how can you sing th^s but lie, who have scornful ^yes and to sing all your
bones quake, and you tremble, and you water your bed with your tears, and you
lie roaring all the night and day, when as you scorn Quakers, and hate them,
and speak all manner of evil of them, how can you speak this but lie? But
David's condition and the Saints is witnessed, among them which the world
scornfully calls Qu^kers; which power makes all to tremble, though you scorn
it a while, and have gotten the outside the letter, David's condition in a form
of words, scorning his life, and the power of God where it is made manifest,
take warning all you scoff^rs and scorners, what came to be the end of all your
Fathers that passed before you, but destruction? your lofty ones fear and
tremble before the mighty God, for all your songs must be turned into howling,
but singing with the Spirit we own, the grace which has appeared to all men,
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: and here I charge thee again
to be b^ind, who puts no diffe^ence betwixt the worlds singing and the Saints.

Que. 9. Whether a man shall overcome the body of sin while he is upon the
earth yea or no?

Pr. And in thy answer to this 9. querie thou say, it is not possible to
subdue the body of sin altogether, whilst we are in this world, and thy
comparison is, a tree while there is life in it, will bring forth fruit.

Rep. Here I charge thee in the presence of the living God, to be the corrupt
tree, for by thy fruit thou art known, for a good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit; and here thou art proved to be that corrupt tree, which confesses
you do not attain to the same knowledge and understanding the Apostles did,
as thou speak in thy book, whose harvest is ripe and now is reaping down.

Pr. And whereas thou say, they shall not overcome the body of sin, whilst
in this world.

Rep. And here I charge thee again, for say the Saints, as he is so are we in
this present world, and thou say nor, there is the lying Spirit, and the
Apostle said, they had put off the body of sin, and thou say it is not
possible; and there thy Spirit is found contrary to the Scripture, and the
Apostle says in the 6. Romans they were made free from sin, and thou say
not, it cannot be possible, and here thy Spirit is tried. Let all the children
of the light judge thee and that thou speak to be contrary to the Apostles
words in the Romans, and all you that cannot witness these things, that the
body of sin is not put off, wait upon God through Christ for it.

Que. 10. Whether the curse be not upon him that preaches another Gospel then
Christ and the Apostles preached, yea, or no?

Pr. And in thy answer to this querie thou speak of receiving the Gospel
from Christ, and the Apostles.

Rep. In this I charge thee to be a lier, as I said to thee before, who denies
immediate revelation from Heaven, how can thou be a preacher of the Gospel,
and deny revelation? what a gross darkness people are in that believe thee,
for under the curse and woe thou art, that the Scripture speaks of, and he
that has received the end of his prophecy, is made free from the curse, but
this is without thy understanding and knowledge, thou confessest in thy answer
to the first querie, you preach the same Gospel, but do not attain the same
knowledge and understanding. Let all people see who are in the light, if it be
not the same knowledge and understanding, it is not the same Gospel, but
another, and there the curse is upon thee.

Qu^. 11. Whether any natural man can preach the Gospel yes, or no?

Pr. In thy answer to this 11. querie, thou speak of understanding and of
studying; and of the Gospel, and of a natural man, and say he cannot preach
the Gospel, and thou say your understanding and knowledge is not the same
as the Apostles was.

R^p. Here le^ all who are in the light see if it be not natural, then and if
thou be not him that study a difinition of thy own brain, and instead of the
blessing the curse of God comes upon it, for how many is there that was Priests
as you are, that now cries against you, which is come out of your generation,
and sees the curse of God upon all your practices.

Pr. And thou say the flesh which is quickened with the spirit of life
brings forth some kind of fleshly f^uits or other.

Rep. Here thou have showed thy self to be death indeed, does the spirit cause
fruits of the flesh, or is the fruits of the spirit the fruits of the flesh? O
thou lier and high blasphemer, which thou say is clear from manifold texts
of Scripture, all the Scriptures will witness thee to be a lier, and these
Scriptures thou brings to maintain the spirit of life to bring forth some
kind of fleshly fruits, 1 King. 8.46. Joh. 14.4. Pro. 20 9. Joh. 18.10. Eccl.
7.22.
and the fruits of the spirit to be the fruits of the flesh. Here all who are
in the spirit will judge thee, to be a blasphemer of the holy spirit of God,
for the spirit brings forth no fruits of the flesh.

Pr: And thou say in thy Answer to the first querie, you do ^ot go to Oxford
and Cambridge to learn the Gospel you preach, but to learn the knowledge of
tongues and languages, arts and sciences.

Rep. O for shame stop thy mouth, here thou have shamed thy self and all your
Schools with an external means to open the Gospel, people are blind indeed
that do follow thee, but thy bottle is open and what is within powers out. And
the fountain runs, and thy external stuff powers out, which has poisoned
many people which thou say thou should open the Gospel withal; All that
have the least convincement may see thee to be a seducer, for what is external
is natural, and what is natural knows not the things of God, but the Lord be
praised thou have declaired thy self abroad.

Que. 12. Whether that any ministers of God were made ministers by the will of
man yea or no, show it me by the Scripture.

Pr. And in thy answer to this querie thou say, there is no minister of God
made by the will of man only, but by man in subordination;

Rep. Here thou crossest the scripture, Paul an Apostle, not of man, nor by
man, and here the lying spirit has showed it self indeed.

Pr. And thou say there is no such hope of any such calling as was in the
time of the Apostles.

Rep. And here thou have c^st thy self and thy fellows, and all thy study to
be without the Doctrine and life of the Apostles, for thou concludest there is
no such calling, yet thou talkest of laying on hands, there thou and you are
making likenesses which is forbidden, and to be confounded, and so we conclude,
and all the children of light shall judge, that your hope and your calling, and
your Ministry made by the will of man, and not only by God, to be without God,
and contrary to the Apostles.

Que. 13. Show me by the scripture, whether a man shall grow up to that
condition, that he need no man teach him but the Lord or no?

Pr. We must not look for any immediate extraordinary miraculous teaching by
revelation from the Lord, and yet all men are taught of God too.

Rep. What confused stuff is this, and blasphemy, that comes out of thy
bottle? thou would make God not an immediate, does not God teach immediate?
here thou show that thou do not know the living God; for the teaching of
God is immediate in the least degree.

Pr. None aims to such a perfection of knowledge in his gifts as not to need
teaching.

Rep. Here I charge thee to be a lier, who speaks contrary to the scripture,
and here I charge thee in the presence of the living God to be a slanderer, who
speaks of being taught of the Lord Jesus Christ outwardly, by the spirit, what
confused stuff is this? And here again I charge thee to be a lier; for the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ are spirit and life, but such as thou who
look upon the outward thing cannot receive his words, though you have the
letter of the Gospel, as they had the letter of the law.

Que. 14. Whether they be not Antichrist, and disobey Christ, that have the
chiefest places in the assemblies, stand praying in the synagouges, which
Christ did forbid his disciples to act such things and c^ied woe against those
that did act them.

In thy answer to this querie, thou ramblest up and down, with many words to
justify that which Christ cried woe against, to justify the chiefest place in
the Assemblies, and to be called of men Master; and for standing praying in the
Synagouges, which Christ pronounced woe against, and so let all people see if
thou and you be not such as are called of men Masters, and stand praying in the
Synagouges, which the woe was and is upon, Math. 23. and there is neither
shelter nor hole for thee to hide thy self, for them that walk in the truth
will find thee out, and praised be the Lord God of heaven and earth, who has
given us a spirit of discerning, and we are able to judge you who live in
deceit, for the Apostle prophesied with the spirit of the Lord that such should
come, and we see with the same spirit you are come, and with the same spirit
you are judged.

Que. 15. Whether they be not Antichrists and of the Devil, and no Ministers
of Christ, which do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ?

Pr. They that swerve from the Doctrine of Christ, are of the spirit of
Antichrist.

Rep. There thou art, this is thy own condition, who deniest immediate
revelation, and thou that deniest immediate revelation, deniest Christ (for
Paul said, the Son was revealed in him) and so all that thou speak is with
the lying spirit, in the wicked generation; and wher^a^ thou slanderest and
say we rail, that i^ false; And again thou speak of love, because the
letter declares it, but the love of God who dwells in it, to such thou art an
enemy, and as touching using plainness of speech to people, because we do not
flatter nor use enticing words of men's wisdom, which thou do, so thou have
cleared thy self from the children of God, and to be in the generation of them
that swerve from the doctrine of Christ, who seek to justify that which he
cried woe against, as Math. 23. And whereas thou accusest us for railing upon
people, thou art a lier, for love uses plainness of speech, and love and
charity is out of deceit, if we should flatter we should hold it up, and should
be pleading for thy generation, who talks of God, and confesses that you have
not the same knowledge and understanding that the Apostles had. Therefore how
can you know God then? And whereas thou speak of trying the spirits, the
fruits of it is love, here with the spirit of love is thy generation tried, for
when the servants of the Lord have been moved to come into your Synagogues,
some have been stockt, and wounded and imprisoned and hailed out of your
synagogues; And is this the fruits of your spirit.

Que. Whether they be not seducers that draw people from the anointing which
is in them, and tell them they must be taught of a man, whereas the anointing
teaches them, they need no man teach them but as the anointing teaches them,
and the promise is to him that does abide in it eternally?

Pr. Many false prophets are gone forth.

Rep. Here thou have proved thy self to be a false prophet, who denies
immediate revelation; for whom the Lord sent forth, he spoke to them
immediately, which thou deniest, and there thou art one of the false prophets
which thou speak of, and knows nothing of the anointing, who deceives the
simple and ignorant, the world may wonder after such, but who are in the light,
and receive any thing immediate, will see thee in the dark, to be a deceiver;
for none in thy generation can witness, that you need no man teach you but the
anointing; for who does, are come out from your teaching and you both. And as
touching Sects, them we deny, as thou speak in thy answer to the fifteenth
querie: therefore do we see thee, with that which is no Sect, to be coloring
and deluding people, telling them thy error is truth, who quotes and misapplies
the Scripture to maintain thy falsehood.

Pr. The flesh is quickened with the spirit of life, to bring forth some kind
of fleshly fruits, 1 King. 8.46. John 14.4. Prove. 20.9. 1 Ioh. 1.8, 10. Eccles.
7.22.

Rep. Here I charge thee (to be a lier, and a blasphemer) in the presence of
the living God, let all people read these scriptures and see, if there be any
such thing in them, and whether thou have not misapplied these scriptures, when
the spirit says, it crucifieth the deeds of the flesh, and walking in the
spirit, the lusts of the flesh is not fulfilled, and here I charge thee to be a
lier, and of the Devil, who was a lier from the beginning, and in his
generation thou art.

Qu. 17. Whether they do not bewitch the people, who withdraw them from the
spirit within to observe the ordinances of the world, and tradition^ of men
without, as the Galatians were bewitched? Gal. 3.1.

Pr. I must tell you that there is not only a holy and good spirit within, and
that in too few, but there is also an evil and seducing spirit within, and that
in too many; even the spirit that does bewitch men, and draw them aside from
the doctrines and commands of the spirit of truth; and to strive by all means
to draw the people off from giving heed to seducing spirits; it is not to
observe the ordinances of the world, and traditions of men, as you pervert the
text, but to obey the command of Gods true spirit, who foretelling of false
prophets, and false spirits, often in the word commands, exhorts, and
admonishes to beware of such, not to give heed to such, and not to believe
every spirit, but to try them.

Rep. Here in this answer (thy spirit is tried) which I have given to all
people to read with a single eye, that all may see what confusion here is in
it. First thou say that the seducing spirit draws from the seducing spirit,
and in the seducing spirit thou art, and from the spirit of life, with the
spirit of life thou art judged to be out of the doctrine of Christ, nor is not
guided by the holy spirit.

Que. 18. Whether they be not seducers, which tell people these are the
ordinances of God, which God never commanded, as sprinkling infants, telling
people of a sacrament, which there is no scripture for, and draw them from the
spirit within to follow your imaginations and inventions.

Pr. But for sprinkling infants, I have already given you the grounds of it out
of scripture.

Rep. Here again I charge thee in the presence of the living God to be a liar,
there is not such a word in the scripture to bear it out, nor a word of a
sacrament, which there is no scripture for; let all read the scripture
throughout, and see if they can find such a word in the scripture, so let all
people judge thee to be a liar, and a s^ducer, and in the devils invention,
which calls that an ordinance of God, which is invention and imagination.

Pr. We are not blind-folded to follow the dictates of the spirit within.

Rep. Here J charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be in the flesh, and to
follow the flesh, for who are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God,
and thou that do not follow the dictates of the spirit, thou do not follow
the commands of God: and what have thou to do to talk of clearing it by the
scripture, when there is no scripture for it, and when the scripture witnesses
against the works of the flesh, which thy spirit stirs up.

Qu^. Whether you have the same spirit which was in Christ, the Apostles, and
Prophets, which gave forth the scripture, seeing you act contrary to the
scrip^ures, and follow your own inventions and tradition^, and so err from
them?

Pr. Our ministerial actions are agreeable to the scripture.

Rep. Here J charge thee to be a liar, for in thy answer to the former Quere
thou say, you do not follow the dictates of the spirit within, and art
holding up sprinkling infants, which there is no scripture for, and so walk
contrary to the scripture, and to them that were led by the spirit, which gave
them forth.

Que. 2^. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles did first baptize, and then
preach faith and repentance twenty or thirty years afterward?

Pr. Christ himself wa^ not capable of faith and repentance.

Rep. Here J charge thee to be a lier and a slanderer, for he was capable of
faith and repentance, and the baptism which the Apostles baptized withal,
what have thou to do with it, who art holding up sprinkling infants, which
there is no example for, in the scriptures, nor in all the Apostles practices?
Therefore silence flesh, for thou know nothing of the wisdom of God which
the Apostle speaks of, but art in the state of Simon Magus, who art buying and
selling the letter, worse then he, for he would have bought the spirit which
the Apostles denied, so thou art denied with the same spirit, but the saints
baptism we own, and the believers, and the promises which is to the seed,
thou have cleared thy self from, who says Christ was not capable of faith,
how could he be above it, and not capable of it? and the life that I live, is
by faith of the Son of God, says the Apostle; which thou have cleared thy
self from.

Que. 21. Whether ever Christ and his Apostles received 100. or 200. pounds a
year for preaching the Gospel?

Pr. Many of the Apostles converts sold their estates, and brought it and laid
it down at the Apostles feet.

Rep. Here J challenge all the Oxford and Cambridge Teachers in England; how
many of their converts have sold their estates, and laid it down at your feet,
but you teachers and they are so earthly minded, you are fit to sue them at the
law, and imprison them, (as Lancaster, and K^ndal^ goals may witness, where
many suffer now because they will not pay tithes,) and so you show you preach
another Gospel, so let Christ and the Apostles judge you all to be without
their doctrine, and your convert, as thou call them, to be without the
Apostles and Christ, let their example judge you all, and so you show that you
never sowed spiritual things, but only as a custom and a cloak thou bring
these words, for the Apostle did reap carnal things, where he sowed spiritual
things.

Que. 22. What scripture is there to limit God to a place, calling it a Church,
when as the Church is in God? 1 These. 1.1.

Pr. You cry down all distinctions, as favoring of humane learning, whereby
the naked truth might be clearly and distinctly seen, as it is in it self.

Rep. Here let all people take notice, whether humane learning can open the
naked truth; Here thou would make people believe, that humane learning was
before the naked truth; and again, let all people take notice, and see, if the
meeting in a steeplehouse in England be a Church, when so many has been moved
of the Lord to come into meeting places among them, and something has been
revealed to them, and they have spoken, and he that was the pretended teacher,
which was in the chiefest place in the Assembly, has cried out, they disturb
me; and then they have hailed them out to the stocks, or prison, and knocked
them, or bruized them; and may be some have lain a quarter of a year in prison
or more.

Now let all people take notice, which have a love to God, whether this be the
Church which is the pillar and ground of truth, or the ^age of unclean birds,
which the Scripture speaks of when as the Scripture says, if any thing be
revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his peace: and the Church of
God we own, but all such Churches as are fighters, and which do imprison them,
who are moved of the Lord to come speak to them, such Churches we deny.

And whereas thou slanderest us, that we cry against the Ministers, all such
Ministers are to be cried against, for they are contrary to the scripture.

Que. What scripture is there to have a Clark say Amen, and to have groats
apeece of the world for his trade?

Pr. And for the groat he receives yearly of some persons in the world, J
conceive it is not so much for saying Amen, but he has other offices.

Rep. Here thou go about to justify the Clarke and his groat, and the
custom of saying Amen, which the Apostles practiced no such thing, neither had
they any Clarke to say Amen, which had a groat for his labor, and let all the
practice of the Apostles judge thee, who says that the Clarke has other
offices then saying Amen, that is, may be to ring the bell to gather carnal
people together, to hear such a blind guide as thou art, and for laying you a
cushion, that you may lie soft, or opening the book, or giving forth the
Psalms, which all this here is no example for, that the Apostles had any such
thing, but it is that you false prophets might utter forth your folly, for to
the children of light you are discovered, and seen to be without the Doctrine
of Christ, and the Apostles, and all the Scripture shall judge you, and in thy
answer, thou do conceive, there thou have brought thy self under that state,
which must be scattered, for the Lord will scatter the proud in their vain
^maginations and conceivings, and let the Prophets words judge thee.

Que. 24. What Scripture is there, for taking money for burying the dead or to
have ten or twelve Shillings for preaching a Funeral Sermon, or to take money
for marrying man or woman?

Pr. For our pains in laboring in the word and doctrine, the Apostle gives
that general rule, the labourer is worthy of his hire And what their wages is,
is not of our choosing, but partly the liberality of founders, and benefactors,
partly custom among all people, in all Christian countries, has settled it.

Rep. Here thou usest the Apostles words, which as I have showed thee before,
thou art cleared from his life: O thou blind guide, whose mind is in the earth,
who art in the customs, and art one of them, that does hold them up, which all
the Ministers of Christ are ashamed on thee, and all thy generation, who art
without the life that gave ^orth the Scriptures, who art one of them that goes
in the way of Balaam, who durst not take the gift though he loved it; end as
for the Apostles condition, I charge thee and command thee to be silent, and
let it alone, who denies immediate revelation from heaven; therefore all that
thou speak is from the earth and below: and the word thou know not, which
was in the beginning, Joh. 1.1. when the letter was not, and therefore in it
thou can not learn, and the Christians that are baptized into Christ, are
redeemed put of countries, where yet thou art, with thy customs and ways of
the Nation, as thou do confess, which Christ coms to redeem from; and thou
who receivest Balaam^ wages, art sp^ing forth thy venom against the righteous
seed, where ^t is rising.

Que. 27. When did any that was sent of Jesus Christ to preach the Gospel, sue
men at the Law?

Pr. Many differences may arise, which cannot well be decided without suit at
Law.

Rep. In thy answer to this querie thou do allow of going to Law, which the
Apostle did not, as in the Corinthians; and he was a Minister of Christ: and
here thou show thou art none; for thou allowest that he did not, and who are
come to the doctrine of Christ, which is yea and nay, there is no difference
they need no going to Law, there is no contention: and many differences are in
thy generation, which is without Christ and his doctrine, which many of you
professed Ministers sue men at the Law, which the Apostle forbad; and here
openly I charge you all in the presence of the living God, to be no Minister of
Christ, but are raced from the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles: and thou
writest a scripture in Acts 19.38. as concerning the rude multitude that was
stirred up when truth was spoken, these were they which were not brought, into
the truth, and there thou art among such a company, let all people see, how
Acts 19. will justify thee for going to Law, who professes thy self to be a
Minister of Jesus Christ, which the Ministers of Christ denied: and here J
charge thee again to be a perverter of the scripture, and void of the knowledge
of Christ, and the life of the Apostles, and out of their doctrine, and do not
call this r^iling, which is plainness of speech, and love to thy soul.

Pr. And you rail very highly in scripture terms too, whereby you take the
garments of Gods holy Spirit, and put them upon the Devils shoulders.

Rep. Here thou do accuse us for railing speeches, and as we told thee
before, that we deny; and here thou call thy self a Devil, for of him thou
art, which thy pretenses, therefore woe is thy portion: and whereas thou say
we revile and accuse the brethren, this is another of thy slanders: we bid thee
answer the queries, and thou call them scrupulous, to thee they are so: and
again thou say we ^isapply the scripture, that is false, and the Lord Jesus
Christ thou know not, who deniest immediate revelation, and what have thou
to do to talk of him, and as throwing the woes which the Scripture speaks of,
which is against the deceits which thou live in, they are thy portion, thou
can not escape them. If we should not give thee thy due and portion, we
should flatter thee, and it would not be love: and why do thou talk of
understanding and bid us weigh and consider? we have considered thy way, and do
know it, and God has given us an understanding in all things.

Pr. Hebrew and Greek we do truly call the Original.

Rep. Here I charge thee that thou have no more original then Pilate thy
father had, Pilate had Hebrew and Greek, which c^ucified Christ, which was the
original: and here I charge thee in the presence of the living God to be a
liar, for the word was in the beginning before any tongue was, and your Hebrew
and Greek is natural, and the natural man knows not the things of God, and
the world by wisdom knows not God; Pilate was a worldly man, and he had this
original, and the wisdom of the world, and there thou art, and and there the
curse is upon thee, so here thou preachest another original then the Apostles
did, they preached Christ the fountain, and ^hou preachest Hebrew and Greek,
that is thy original, and thy father Pilate had that original, which
crucified Christ, and set it over him, and the scripture came not by the will
of man: Therefore it is not the knowing of it by Hebrew and Greek, but by the
spirit that gave it forth; therefore all people take warning, and cease from
such deceivers, and take heed to the light in your conscience, which is the
light of Christ, to guide your minds up to God the Father of light, and be not
deceived, nor wander not up and down after such, who know not the truth, but
put Hebrew and Greek for the original, which Pilate had, which crucified
Christ Jesus, as you may read in Luke 23. All people may see thou art brought
no further yet, then thy father Pilate, so all thy prayers we deny, for there
is nothing of truth born up in thy understanding, who are led with a seducing
spirit into delusions, who says the spirit of life stirs up the flesh to bring
forth fruits and thou that art in the flesh, cannot please God; and there thy
spirit is tried co be the spirit of error, and a great deal of such stuff thou
have in thy answers to the queries, which is not worth mentioning: and this
thou have written to publish thy self, that them that have a love to Christ,
their hearts may be turned from thee to God, to see how thou have uttered forth
thy folly, though with many fair glosses, thou and such as thou art deceives
the simple, but all who are is the light do see thee and comprehend thee.

Something in Reply to the Epistle thou wrotest to the Lady Bindlosse.
TO her thou speak of the doctrine, and spirit, and the holy Ghost.

Here I charge the to be a liar, who knows nothing of them, who denies
immediate revelation, for thou who deniest that, deniest the Father and the
Son, as in Math. 11.27. Wherein go thou about to exhort others, who art in
the condition thy self, but art as Matthew, that would be serving?

If she do but take heed to the light which Christ has enlightened her
withal, she will quickly see thy folly, for the light which Christ has
enlightened her withal, shall be her condemn^tion if she hate it, and if she
love it, it will guide her into the way of righteousness up to Christ, and
there O woman is thy teacher, and this condemnation.

And the work which is brought forth in the North does terment thee, R.
Sherlock, and such as the Lord does move to exhort or to speak, such thou
slanderest and do accuse as tempting; for the slanders and reproaches the woe
will turn upon thee from God, who is the justifier of his children, and with
such Priests as thou art, the righteous seed was ever hated, as you may read
throughout the Scriptures.

If she that thou call a Lady, be grounded upon thy doctrine, and be a
member with thee of thy body, let her read thy answers to the queries, and the
replies to them, to the light in her I speak, which is of Christ, which will
witness me and let her see thee; and if her mind be guided by it, it will
condemn all her former practices of worship, and let her see thy delusions.
And again thou art flattering the Lady, and tells her of a discourse of the
spirit, and these are thy unsavory words, who art discoursing of the spirit,
but denies it, for thou that deniest immediate revelation, denies the spirit;
^n the Corinthians the Apostle said things were revealed to him by the spirit,
and all thy doctrines t^ be denied, and all that thou speak; and thou art
seen to be one of the evil beasts and slow bellies, whose mouth must be stopped;
and what do thou tell her of growing up in the knowledge of God, and stop the
way for her to pass, who deniest immediate revelations, which the Apostle
exhorted to? and they Saints was to have the loins of their minds girded up,
as in the 1 Peter. 1.13. And what have thou to do to talk of heaven or
happiness, who art a beast in thy colors? And so this is the intent that I
have written this reply to the Ep^stle which thou wrote to her thou calls Lady,
that she might with the light of Christ in her, see thy folly, for to that I
speak which is the light of Christ, which if she hate it, it will be her
eternal condemnation.

Something in Rebly to thy Introduction.
Pr. NO age has brought forth more pretenders to the spirit of God, then this
wherein we live.

Rep. Let all people take notice, if thou be not he that pretends the spirit,
who has not the same understanding and knowledge that the Apostles had, and
there thou art in the pretense, who art blind, and thy worship as thou calls
it, is, thou do not know what; worse then it was at Samaria, who art in the
pride of heart. And as thou say the Devil has sown his crop, and r^apt his
harvest, and there thou art one of his servants, sowing his seed, and among the
delusions as thou calls them, for that is in thy Generation, which comes one of
thy own bottle, which now shows out, what is within issues forth, this is thy
own condition, who seduces the people, the fire is kindling, and the tares are
burning; which makes you wicked ones to cry out; and so all impostures and
blasphemies are in thy generation: and you are ignorantly worshipping, and your
gross idolatry which thou speak of is your own, and thou art a murderer,
and understandest not what thou speak of them, and God thou know not, who
deniest imm^diate revelation from heaven; but only what thou know, thou
know naturally as a bruit beast, which Jude speaks of, and a great deal of
stuff thou have in this Introduction, which is not worth mentioning. If the
Reader do but read with a single eye, he may see all thy confused stuff, which
is not worth naming, and a great deal of stuff tho^ have written in discourse
of the Spirit; and the Holy Ghost, which thou know not what thou speak,
and of the Trinity, which there is no Scripture for.

A Reply to an Epistle that thou wrotest to him whom thou call Sir Robert
Bindlosse.
THe Queries being sent to his house from Rich. Hubberthorne, being his desire
that they should be made public, and we do praise the LORD, that deceit is
brought to light. And thou say perhaps some satisfaction might be given to
those seduced wavering souls amongst you: truly I do believe they will, and
see your folly, that under his name whom thou call Sir Rob. Bindlosse, under
his name and patronage they may appear, as a covert to veil^ their
imperfections: But they will not veil your imperfections: Therefore R. B. to
three I say be wise, and fear the Lord, and run not on in the broad way, with
such a one, who does confess in his answer to the first querie, that he does
not attain the same knowledge and understanding of the Gospel as the Apostles
attained; therefore thou R. Sh^rlock thy knowledge is brutish, and thy
understanding sottish, as the Scripture says, for none knows the Apostles
condition and knowledge, but with the same understanding, and in this thou
deniest it, and thou art in another knowledge and understanding, and art in
another doctrine, and the true Gospel thou do not know, and thou art to be
held accursed, as the scripture says, Gal. 1. and so here thou have given
satisfaction to many that stood in doubt, though to all the children of light
thou wast known, and all things shall work together for good to them that love
God, Romans 8. therefore R. B. take heed what thou lets forth under thy name, and
fathers, for if thou see a thief and consent with him, thou art guilty. And R.
Sherlock, the queries that were sent to thee thou call them scrupulous, and
the Letter which was sent to thee as a Libell; why do thou slander the
innocent, and simplicity, but of thy generation we look for no other, whose
mouth is full of slanders. Thou slanderer, in thy Ep^st^e to the Lady thou
slanderest privily under a color, who flatters her, where thou art telling her
of love, and stirs her up to envy, as in page 46. and incensing her, and would
stir her up against them wh^m thou call Quake^s, so thou might as well
have incensed her against Moses, who was a judge over all Israel, and quaked,
and David who was a King quaked: so all that are virtuous will own us, who
denies opinions, for them we deny, and there thou art, who live in opinions,
and as thou speak of some to strike at the root of many infections and
errors, which is overspread amongst you; the Lord Jesus Christ has raised up a
light in his children, that they are striking at your root, and laying open the
deceits, and bringing forth his own work to his own praise: and thou say all
men do worship God and Christ with one heart, and one mouth, and after one
manner, is not only decryed, but also dismissed our Congregations. And since the
pale of Ecclesiastical Discipline is pulled down, by whose coercive laws all
men were kept within the limit of the true faith. Here I charge thee to be a
liar was the true faith maintained by an outward Law, and the Church, and the
worship of God. Thou Traitor, have they plucked down the true Faith, and the
wo^sh^p of God, or your old Ceremonies? Thou seducer, how art thou tormented by
that which has plucked down the traditions: Tremble, for the hand and sword of
the Lord is against thee, as it was against them, thou dissembler and envious
one, the Law was not made for the Church which is the pillar and ground of
truth, which worships God in the spirit; but for such envious persons as thou
art, who have cleared thy Church and worship here, from the tr^e Church and
worship of God, to the view of all honest hearts, and thou art tormented
because the freedom i^ given for the liberty of tender consciences, to
worship God his own way, even in spirit, and in truth, as in Joh. 4.23.24. And
thou say since under the name and priveledge of ^iberty of conscience,
licentiousness of opinion has got footi^g, and this thou seems to Father
upon the Magistrates.

We which are in the light of Christ Jesus, which does exercise our
consciences toward God and man, all opinions and licentiousn^sse we deny.
Therefore thy mouth must be stopped, Osl^nderer, which sowet^ dissension, for
since the Lord has opened the Magistrates understanding with the light of
Christ in them, the same light does give freedom to the light in others
consciences, which works into tenderness of conscience, and teaches to
exercise a good conscience toward God and man; and such Magistrates do not
make a law over the consciences of me^, which, thou seducer and brutish fellow
would have a l^w upon but the law is against such as thou art, and so thou have showed thy self to be in the frantic state, and Heresy which thou
^alks on, and many such speeches as thou have in thy Epistle to Sir R^^.
Bindl^ss, as thou call him, and whereas thou speak of your Church and
hope, your hope will perish, and your Church, and all who are in the light will
be ashamed of your Church.

And thou art he who art of the Devil, who do promote lies and untruths,
which is of thy Father the Devil, Joh. 8.^4. But God is coming with his mighty
power, to chain up thee, thy Father the Devil, the old Dragon, who is the
Father of lies, and thou art one of his servants who blinds the
understandings of the people, which are in the unbeleife, and seeks to poison
their affections, with vanities and lying slanders; and in thy conclusion thou
would not have him to perish with the blind and giddy, but if he follow such
as thou art, he does follow both, and in the ditch both will perish together.

And thou speaks to him of walking in the paths of the just and righteous: and
such thou privily slanders, and their way hates thou, who walks in the steps
of the wicked, and with those that forget God: and thou must be cut down with
the sword of the almighty God, to that in thy Conscience I speak: when thou art
in the terror, remember me, for that in thy conscience condemn thee and witness
me. And friend, to the light in thy conscience I speak, under whose name this
book goes, there is thy Teacher if thou love it, which is the light of Christ
if thou love it, it will teach thee as thou goes up and down; and show thee the
way of the just, for it is just, it will condemn thee if thou hate. And when
the book of conscience is opened, thou shall witness what I speak, that its
truth to thy soul.

Pr. And whereas thou say you do neither pretend to any such sublime and
eminent gifts, neither do you, nor ought you to depend upon any such immediate
revelation, but do use such ordinary means and helps, which God in his merciful
providence has in all ages afforded his people: viz. by study and industry in
the Schools of the Prophets. Schools thou say they had at Bethel, 2 King. 2,
3, 5. and Elisha's College was so full that they enlarged it. 2 Kings 6 1. 1 Samuel 14.20. and upon the hill of God, 2 Samuel 10.5.10.

Rep. Here let all these Scriptures witness against thee, that thou art no
true Prophet, nor Minister of Christ which witnessed the end of the Prophets,
and were all taught of God, which thou denies, that denies immediate
revelation from heaven. And here I charge thee in the presence of the living
God to be a liar and false Prophet, and that thou art guided by the father of
lies. Where thou tells of Elisha's College, and says, that it was so full
that it was enlarged, and brings in that place of Scripture to color over thy
lies, 2 Kings 6.1. Let that Scripture be a witness against thee, that thou art
a liar, and a perverter of the Scriptures, thou full of all subtilties, blush
for shame thou liar, is there any mention of any College there, or is there
any mention of the schools of the Prophets where the word of God was studied in
those places of Scripture beforementioned, as thou say, let them witness
thee: All the Prophets where taught of God, and there was no studying for what
they spoke at Naioth: see if they did not receive the Spirit of prophecy, and
spoke by immediate revelation, which thou denies, and knows not their manner of
teaching and learning, 1 Samuel 19.20 to the end of the Chap. and the prophecy
came not in the old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost, and the Scripture is of no private
interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Here art thou proved a liar, and a perverter
of the Scripture, wresting it to thy own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16 and the
plagues and wrath is due to thee for so doing, Rev. 22 Now call not truth
railing thou dissembler and enemy of all righteousness, the Scripture turns
edge against thee, and witnesses against thy deceits and filthiness, whereby
thou seeks to strangle the truth; but thou art found out to be among the Dogs,
Sorcerers and Liars spoken of in Scripture, and art shut out of the kingdom of
God, and art no Minister of Christ, Rev. 22.15, 18, 19. Thou enemy of God, how
dare thou say that the Prophets studied the word, when no prophecy came by
the will of man, but by the will of God; and no man knows the father but the
son, neither knows any man the son but the father, and he to whom he is
revealed, Matthew 11.27. And here thou deniest both the Father and the Son, and
the Prophets and Apostles, that denies immediate revelation, for they all bear
witness against thee, and such as thou art: for the Apostle said, Hope to the
end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus
Christ: And all the true Prophets witness that which thou denies. And here I
have proved thee a liar, a false Prophet, and a deceiver, perverting the
Scriptures, and they bear witness with me And thou full of all guile and
deceit, the word of the Lord shall rise up in judgment against thee, and such
as thou art.

Something in reply to thy discourse of the Spirit, as thou calls it.
FRiend, the Spirit of the living God thou have not, for thou denies immediate
revelation from heaven, who art discoursing of the Spirit, and here thou art
made manifest but to be in the pretense of the Spirit, and knows nothing that
is revealed with the spirit. For thou that denies immediate revelation from
heaven, denies the spirit of the living God: The Apostle said, Eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the
things that God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed
them to us by his spirit, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. And here thou that have denied
immediate revelation from heaven, have denied the Spirit of God, and manifested
thy self to be in the natu^al state: therefore I command thee and charge thee
in the presence of the living God to be silent, and to give over deceiving of
the people.

2. Thou that denies immediate revelation from heaven, thou denies the grace
that was to be brought unto the Saints, whose minds was to be girded up, which
grace was to be brought unto them, at the revelation of Jesus Christ, and this
thou have denied again, as all people may see, 1 Pet. 1.13. and here thou have
denied Jesus Christ, and this grace, who denies immediate revelation, and art
in the fashion of the world and a blasphemer.

3. Thou that have denied immediate revelation from heaven, have denied the
Spirit to pray with all, and so all thy prayers is hypocrisy.

4. Thou that have denied immediate revellation from heaven, have denied the
son of God; For none knows the father but ths son, and to whom the son reveals
him. Mat. 11.27.

5. And thou that have denied immediate and miraculous revelation from heaven,
have not denied the son of God only, but the father also: And those that have
not the son of God has not life.

Pr. The power is originally from God, as the fountain, but conveyed through
the ministry of man as the conduit. p. 90.

Rep. Paul an Apostle not of man, nor by man, but by the will of God; and here
thou art proved to be a seducer, and thy ministry contrary to his; here thy
spirit is tried. And thou slanders them who hears the voice of God, and art
scorning them, and in a deriding way calls it a deceitful echo: but we know
that God scorns the scornful, and has them in dirisiin.

Pr. For any man to pretend immediate calling from God, without the Ministry of
man, is a new Gospel distinct from Christ and his Apostles, and such can be no
other then the dictates of seducing spirirs and doctrine of Devils. page 91

Rep. Here I take all the children of light to record, to prove (and try thy
spirit) and Gospel to be of man and whether thy Ministry and Gospel, which thou
preaches (which is of man) be of God: for Paul said, that Gospel which he
preached was not of man; and here again thou art contrary to the Apostle; and
thy spirit is tried to be a seducing spirit, and thy doctrine to be of the
Devil, who denies immediate revelation.

Pr. For thou say, that which is immediately from God, and without the
Ministry of man, is the doctrine of the Devil, and of the seducing spirits.

Rep. (...) Paul, said, the Gospel that he preached received it not of man, but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ and here thou art contrary to the Apostle,
and thy self in the state thou speaks of. And Paul an Apostle not of man, nor
by man, but by God the Father: Thou impudent and enemy of God and blasphemer,
will thou say his doctrine was of the Devil? who denied man, as Gal. 1.1 who
said, Paul an Apostle not of man, nor by man.

Pr. Therefore there is no need of any such qualifications; for the best of us
dare not stand to such sublime and eminent gifts of the spirit, or to any
immediate and extraordinary spiritual gifts. p. 93.94.

Rep. Here thou preachest up that which is not qualified, for we do believe
you, that you dare not stand to such eminent gifts of the spirit, for we have
tried you, and knows your spirits, how can you have the same gifts which denies
the son of God, and immediate miraculous revelation, and say there is no
need of any such qualifications now, therefore does all your Teachers show
forth your railing and slanders: but these things we wave, for God will give
you, you liars, your portion, who has not the same knowledge and understanding
that the Apostles had, and here thou have shamed thy mother that is,
adulterated from the Apostles life.

Pr. Our gifts are from the Spirit of God, though studied for with these means
that are outward and moral.

Rep. Here I charge thee to be a Liar in the presence of God; the gift of God
is a free gift, it is not studied for, nor it is not gotten by Moral, and if it
were studied for, and found in outward means, then it were not a free gift: and
here thou have made it manifest, that thou know not the gift of God, for it
is not him that wills, nor him that runs, but God that shows mercy; so thou
blasphemer, for shame blush.

Pr. No man can be wise without the Spirit of wisdom, nor knowing without the
Spirit of knowledge, so no man can pray as he ought, without the Spirit of
prayer. page 71.

Rep. In thy answer to the first quaere thou say, you do not attain the same
knowledge and understanding of the Gospel, as the Apostles did, then if thou
have not the same knowledge and understanding it is all deceit: For in thy own
words thou say, you cannot pray without the Spirit, and knowledge, and
understanding; and thou say, you do not attain the same knowledge and
understanding the Apostles had, then thou have not the same Spirit of love to
pray withal, and thou say you cannot pray without the Spirit: yet thou goes
and tells people of a Gospel, and has not the same knowledge and understanding
the Apostles had; therefore thy knowledge is brutish, Jer. 10.14. Psalm. 92.6.
Psalm. 49.8.

Pr. That we may according to the Catholic faith, worship one God in Trinity.

Rep. For these things which thou tells the people of, there is no Scripture as
Catholic faith and Trinity, and of three persons.

Pr. The second kind of the holy Spirits impressions on humane souls, page 78.

Rep. There is no Scripture which speaks of humane souls, for the soul thou
knows not, who art a murderer with thy Deity stuff, who would dit up the way
from God, but praises be to the living God, who has given his sons and
daughters eyes to see thee, and all your Deity stuff, which you imitate, who
are whoredomed from God, but the Saints of the most high God does sing (over it
and you) hallalujah to God, who witnesses their souls redeemed. And there is
abundance of stuff in that book which thou calls the discourse of the Spirit,
which is not worth mentioning, and abundance of lies and slanders, but them we
pass, as knowing the Author of lies from whence they come is for destruction.

And in page 95. thou speaks of Timothy studying for his gift. Did he study for
his gift, or for the proving of it, and dividing of the word aright (but he did
not study for it) for the gift of God is a free gift. And in another place thou
speaks of the blessing of God being upon your studies: but I say the curse of
God is upon your studies, who has not the same knowledge and understanding
that the Apostles had, and so preaches another Gospel^

Pr. And most blasphemously to profess and boast of an equality with God, page
66.

Rep. Thy boasting is excluded without in thy generation: And thou art excluded
from the life and mind of the Apostle, who said, Let the same mind be in you
that was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, 2 Phil. 5.6. And this thou calls blasphemy, and
so thou have showed what spirit thou art of, contrary to the Apostle.

Pr. And for our new Sect of Enthusiasts, had they the Spirit of God as they
pretend abiding in them, and speaking in them.

Rep. All pretenses and sects is denied where the spirit of God dwells, though
with thy generation such was ever called so: And that is thy own who has made
a discourse of the Spirit: and here thou art clearly from them that the Spirit
of God spoke in, and did abide in them; which Spirit of God did ascend into
their hearts, which Spirit God has given to every one to profit withal: and
the Spirit of the Father speaks in you, says Christ, Math. 10.20. take no
thought: and in many plates thou art speaking of a study, and blessing a study,
here thou art contrary to Christ (who says take no thought) and art of the
Devil.

And here I charge thee to be one of them that Jeremy speaks of, who speaks a
vain divination of thine own heart.

Pr. As here Angels are Spirits, and the souls of men are Spirits, but God is
not a Spirit as they are Spirits. page 57.

Rep. This is confusion, for Christ says God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit, and there thou art raced out to be
without the doctrine of Christ.

Pr. It Is the very ground whereupon this last upstart crew of Quakers, build
all their resolutions, and strange fanatic opinions, and heresies, even that
which they call the light within us, whereunto we must only give ear. page 112.

Rep. O thou impudent, God will make thee an example, thou lying spirit, Is the
Light which Christ has enlightened every one withal that comes into the world
(a strange fanatic opinion) which one he loves it, and the other he hates it,
and he that hates it, it is condemnation. Here thou art against Christ and the
Apostle, for the Apostle did exhort the Saints to take heed unto the light
within them, until the day dawn and the day star arise in their hearts. O thou
Liar! did the Prophet call the true light a deceit of the heart; or is the
light of God a false vision: Christ Jesus which does enlighten every one that
comes into the world, which is witnessed among the Quakers; and he that walks
in the Light shall have the Light of Life, and thou that hates this light
speaks a divination of thy own brain, and a lying imagination: and with this
light of Christ thou shall be condemned, thou blasphemer, who calls the light
of Christ heresy and fanatic opinions, but here thou do but fill up the
measure of thy Fathers, who calls this light which is Christ in us, Heresy.
page 113.

To all you Readers of his Book, I speak to the Light of of Christ in you,
which if you love it, it will bring you to weigh and comprehend his words, and
if you walk in it, you shall have the light of life, and you that hate it, it
shall be your Condemnation, when the book of Conscience is opened, you shall
witness that I speak the truth to every one of your souls.

R. Sherlock, thou bids them beware of false Prophets, and says the trial of
the spirit is the Word of God.

Rep. By the Word of God thou art tried, who art in the conceivings.

Again, thou speak of the Highpriests and Pharisees that councelled against
Christ to put him to Death.

Rep. So do you now, where he is made manifest, showing your selves to be in
the same generation.

Pr. It was this spirit also that stirred up Demetrius the Silver-smith, with
the rest of the Crafts-men, against St. Paul and his companions, because his
profit and gain which he got by making silver shrines for Diana was in danger
to be lost. page 116.

Rep. The same spirit now being made manifest, it cries against your
Tradesmen, and Crafts-men, and your Diana, and your two great Schools where
you learn your trade, which are puddles of darkness; and the same spirit being
stirred up to cry against your profession, it sets you in an uproar now, as in
the Synagogues we do witness.

Pr. And the earth opened her mouth and swallowed Corah and all his Company: a
fair warning for Lay-persons. page 86.

Rep. The judgment did not come upon Corah because they was Lay-persons, but it
was for gainsaying the truth as thou do. For many of them that gave forth
the Scripture was plain men, Paul a Tent-maker, and most of the Apostles
Fishermen, Moses a keeper of She^^, thou may call these Laymen which gave
forth the Scripture, who make a trade of their words.

And here thou have showed that thou have not the knowledge and understanding
which the Apostles had, which thou confessedst thou had not, therefore thou
art as a bruit beast, and there I leave thee to be condemned with the light
which thou call Heresy.

RICHARD HUBBERTHORN.

FINIS.

