AN ANSWER To a book called A JUST DEFENSE AND VINDICATION Of Gospel Ministers,
and Gospel Ordinances; put forth by J. G. In which he pretends an Answer to E.
B's. Trial of the Ministers, and other things against the Quakers.

But on the contrary has manifested, that he is altogether Ignorant of the
Gospel Ministry and Ordinance, as will appear to him that reads this Answer,
with desire to understand the Truth; and so to receive Satisfaction.

And instead of clearing the Truth in any Particular, he has falsely charged
God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Primitive Churches and the Quakers, with such
things of which they were never any of them guilty, as will appear in the
following Testimony.

Given forth from him who desires the Edification and Satisfaction of all in
the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, RICH. HUBBERTHORN.

The workers of inquity have no knowledge, there is no faithfulness in their
mouth, their inward part is very wickedness, Psa. 59. and with their words they
show forth the same. London Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the
Black-spread(...) and Windmill, in Martins l'Grand, 1660.

An Answer to the Priests Defense.
WHatsoever is written or acted against the Truth, and those that walk in it,
is but a fulfilling of the Scripture of Truth, which says, The way of the
wicked is darkness, and they know not at what they stumble, Prove. 4. 19.
Although the stumbling-stone be the Light, the Foundation of many generations;
in rejection of which many go about to build and would be approved, one of
which I shall here mention.

John Gaskin, who would Defend and Vindicate the Priests, their Preaching,
Practice and Maintenance, though contrary unto Christ his Apostles, his Light
and his Words declared in Scripture, as will appear.

And first, That his Testimony may be received, he begins in an appearance of
feigned humility, and begging of Pardon for his slips and impertenences and
rudeness of style, used against the Quakers, saying, his work is not with
eloquency, nor humane Arts.

In the Examination of which, we do find that he has often slipped, and used
much impertenency of speech and rudeness of style, and neither Eloquency,
Spirituality or true Humanity in his works, many of which being so plainly seen
to all, is accounted not worth Printing again; but something here is mentioned,
by which all the other may be Compared and Judged.

Again, diverse Reasons are alleged as a cause of Printing J. G. his Defense
of the Priests, first he says, The great Malice and Envy against the
Ministers, and the many Letters and Printed Books sent by Quakers, and the
great growth and increase in Errors, and because many of his old Friends and
Acquaintance are (as he says) seduced from the Church, and to strengthen such
as are wavering through ignorance and weakness, and to clear himself, etc. and
that it might be seen and come into many hands.

Answ. He that would accomplish those things before named, to wit, subdue
Malice and Envy, and Errors, and instruct the ignorant, and him that is out of
the way, and strengthen the weak, he must be such a one as is led by the
Spirit, and walks in the Light of Christ, which is so much hated and contemned
by Priests and their Defenders; that first those things may be subdued in
themselves, and then Minister against them in others; but none of those things
can be done by that spirit which has ruled in J. G. but that his latter
Reasons, which he says, moved him to Print, may be fulfilled; that (...) That
it may be seen, and come into many hands; and that to thy own shame, when they
read and consider thy unlearned Lodgick, wherein thou go to prove, that it
is not sufficient to bring us to Heaven to be freed from fin; for thou say, A
Horse has no sin; and so by thy comparison a man without sin, is but as a
Horse; so that thou have truly said, Thy work is without Eloquence or Humane
Art: but seeing thou have taken in hand to put things to public view, in thy
next prove, who those men are upon the Earth that are without sin, and are not
sufficient for the Kingdom of Heaven; and whether was it any thing that did
separate man from God, but sin? And was not Christ only made manifest to take
away sin? And is not man perfectly Righteous, when his sin is taken away and
made the Righteousness of God in him, Which takes it away, to wit, the Lamb of
God, which all the Nations of them that are saved, must walk in his Light? and
it is those that hate the Light, and is against freedom from sin, that have no
understanding of the Mysteries of God, which is like the Horse or Mule, whose
mouth must be held with Bit and Bridle, and are like the Beast that perish; but
they that are freed from sin, are not so, neither is the Horse their
Comparison; but herein thou have shamed thy self and thy Ministers, that they
should be so ignorant, as neither to teach thee better Doctrine before thou
did write, nor correct thee when thou had written; but to suffer such a
thing to appear in this Nation, where Light is broken forth, that the state of
freedom from sin, is no better than the state of a Horse; but as the Scriptures
says, Your folly shall be made manifest unto all men; which Scripture is daily
fulfilling, and we are satisfied in it.

Again, to ^ndicate the Priests of England to be Ministers of the Gospel, thou
bringst many Scriptures, whereby thou would prove them to be lawfully called,
though they be out of the Power of God, and want the Power of that which they
teach, page 7.

As the sons of Eli (thou say) were lawful Priests, though they were wicked
men; and this is a fit comparison, as thou may read in the first of Samuel. 2.
12. Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord; and so
according to this, thou have rightly compared the Priests; for though they have
the name of being called, yet know they the Lord no more than the Sons of
Belial did.

Again in the same page thou say, The Scribes and Pharisees were called to
teach, and Judas was a true Apostle; from which thou would prove the Call of
the Priests to be a true Call to the Ministry.

Answ. If the Priests did Minister as truly as the Scribes and Pharisees did;
that is, read or speak the Scriptures truly, then thou mighest exhort the
People, to do as the Priests say, but not to do as they do; but seeing that
they do not truly speak the Scripture, but by consequences pervert it, as thou
have done in thy Book; it is not therefore a good Doctrine, to bid the People
either do as they say, or as they do, because they both say falsely and do
falsely; and as for thy comparing of them to Judas, as for his being called and
receiving part of the Ministry; that, they are not like unto him in, because as
yet they have no part nor lot in that matter; but for his Treachery and
Covetousness, bearing the Bag, and betraying the Lord of Life, for pieces of
money, in that, they may be compared to him.

But thou say, The wickedness of the Person does not disanul his Office,
being lawfully called thereunto, until he be degraded from that Office; And to
prove it, thou bring'st several Scriptures, as Ezekiel 34. 3. where the
Shepherds eat the Fat and cloth with the Wool, and did not feed the Flock;
Esa. 56. 10, 11. They are dumb Dogs that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from
his Quarter, come ye (say they) I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant;
and these, say thou, were truly called.

From which Example your Ministers, as thou thus provest, are lawfully called
to the work of the Ministry; but when these Ministers and People read thy Book,
they will not much commend thee for such a Defense for them; But how do thou
prove that those before mentioned were lawfully called unto the work of the
Ministry, being wicked Persons? But when thou read'st the Scripture over again,
thou may see that those are such as the Lord said, did run and he sent them
not, and said, the Lord says, when he had not spoken unto them, Jer. 14. 14.
Now in this Vindication, thou have not done any thing of that pretented
confuting E. B. his Book called A Just and Lawful Trial of the Ministers and
Teachers of this Age; but have rather confirmed it, for he truly compared them
unto those spoken of before mentioned, and thou have compared them, as to the
sons of Eli, which were sons of Belial, and knew not God; and so his Book yet
stands in force (for a Trial to such) unanswered.

And again as for thy pleading for Tithes for such as are like the sons of
Belial, thou have no Precept, Practice nor Example in Scripture to plead for
such a thing, neither as such, nor as the Ministers of Christ. And whereas thou
mention'st, Act. 4 and Act. 5. and 1 Cor. 9. 4, 5, etc.

These Scriptures, speak nothing of Tithes, nor of any Maintenance to the
Ministry; but only how that when they had planted a Vineyard, they might eat
of the fruit; and when they had gathered a Flock, might eat of the milk; and
when they had sown spiritual things (amongst a people) they had power to eat
and power to drink; and so it was ordained that they who Preached the Gospel
should live of the Gospel; but it was not ordained that those who Preached the
Gospel, should live by forced Maintenance, or by making Merchandise of men's
Goods and Estates, of which the Priests in England, for which thou writest this
Defense, are guilty.

Again, thou go about to Defend the Prie^ts sprinkling of Infants, saying,
It is a Sign or Seal of Salvation, page 64.

Answ. If this be true that all Children thus sprinkled with water, have the
Seal of Salvation by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and are by this Baptism
made partakers of Grace, and United into the Church as Members of the Church;
Why do you say both Priests and Professors, that there is no falling from
Grace? have not many been so engrafted into the Church, and received that Seal,
whom you now call Heretics and Deceivers? why do you so confound one Principle
with another, for we have been already so ingrafted into the visible Church,
and made partakers of that Grace, which you say, its impossible to fall from.

And thou bring'st Calvin's words, which says, That although there be but a
little water cast upon our heads, yet notwithstanding it is not a vain figure,
for the Heavens are opened upon us, and God speaks in it, as it were from
Heaven, and Christ is there present with his blood, as Witnesses of the usage
and operation of the Sacrament, and says, Baptism is a Token and Proof of our
Cleansing, or a Seal and Character whereby God confirms unto us that all our
sins are cancelled and abolished, and that they may never be rehearsed nor
imputed.

So then by this he that has a little water cast on his Head, he hears God
speak in it, and Christ being present with his blood, washes away all sin; and
this is a proof of his Cleansing. So, why do thou and the Priests speak and
write against us, as being fallen from Grace, or departed from the Truth,
seeing we have received as well as you, the Seal of the Covenant and Proof of
Cleansing; and cannot fall from it, if your Doctrine be true; but as for
Spinkling Infants, thou have not brought one Scripture to prove it; but say
Baxter against Tombs has proved it, and quotest Calvin and Beza, as if their
words were plainer proof for thy purpose, then any Scripture; for there is no
Scripture without invented consequences, that is a precept for it; and when
thou have wearied thy self and can not prove it, thou say, whatsoever may
be proved from the Scripture by consequence, to be the scope and meaning of the
Scripture, is sufficient proof, page 73.

Again thou ask us a question, To show thee one Command or Example in the
Scripture, for the Baptizing of those that are grown up, whose Parents one or
both were Christians by professing the Gospel of Christ.

Answ. If thou knew the Scriptures, or did weigh thy own words, it would stop
thee from asking such foolish and unlearned Questions; for thou thy self
confessest, that those which were grown up were Baptized, and that they had
also received the Holy Ghost before they were Baptized; and as for them, or
their Parents, being called Christians by their Profession, many beleivers were
Baptized and followed Christ, before the name Christians was given to them, as
thou may read Acts 11. 26. that after much people was gathered, and so become
Churches, they were first called Christians at Antioch, so whatsoever their
Parents were called by Profession, that is nothing to that which thou art about
to prove (sprinkling of Infants) but to conclude thy proof for Infants Baptism,
thou quotes Rob. Brook, who thou say has read more Ecclesiastical histories
to find out the rise and beginning of Baptism of Infants in the Church of
Christ then all the Quakers, and yet he could never find the beginning of it;
so here all this while thou have pleaded for that, which thou know not, who
was the first Author of; and so thou have run out thy self into mere ignorance:
But that thou may be informed and made wiser than thy Teachers, and thy
learned Readers of Ecclesiastical Historyes, I shall show thee the beginning of
that Baptism, and who first invented Holy Water, In the reign of Pope
Alexander, was Holy Water first invented, water mixed with salt, and by the
saying of these words, we bless water mixed with salt among the people, that
all men sprinkled therewith may be Sanctified, and purified, and this we
command all Priests to do, as Plynny writes.

And hereby thou may know the first Father or Inventor of this your
practice; the Pope and not the Apostles, so when thou writes again do not so
undervallew all the Quake's, as thou have done in this thy book, as to say that
they dare not read Latin Books, nor have read Histories, and thou say, we
count it a sin for Ministers to learn Latin: But these are but false
aspersions, for we do not account it sin to learn Latin, Greek, or Hebrew,
neither are we a fraid to read them, but we so far do read and know them, that
we have found out the Priests deceit, by pretending that of the Tongues which
they had not; and though you Preach and Practice that which you know not where
it had it is beginning, yet we know how deceit came in, and how it has
overspread you with darkness and ignorance, and because you see not, therefore
you judge us to be blind, but the Light of knowledge is arisen, in which we see
before the Pope, his holy Water mingled with salt or sprinkling Infants was,
and see the beginning, and End of those dark inventions, and our Doctrine, and
Principles, tends to the bringing of People, to know a true living foundation
for all their practices, and that the darkness of Popery, and traditions of
men may not always keep people in blindness; to practice the Popes
inventious, instead of the Apostles and Christ Doctrine, who by the bright
shining of his light is leading people to his Baptism, which is by one spirit
into one body, by fire and by the Holy Ghost, and such can no longer be kept in
that, which does not so much as wash away the filth of the flesh, but comes to
the Answer of a good Conscience, and witnesses the Baptism which saves, as
the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 3. 21. and such are come to the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Again, to fill up thy book thou have charged many false things upon us, and so
findst thy self work, by enlarging thy lies one after another.

As first thou say some of us have affirmed that Christ did never arise from
the grave, and that his body is rotted within the grave, and that some of us
have made a mock of his Doctrine of Justification, by the imputation and the
intercession of Christ.

Answ. These things are thy own, and were never affirmed by any of us; but on
the contrary that Christ is arisen from the dead and is become our first
fruits, and by the imputation and intercession are we Justified, and of God is
he made unto us Justification and life.

Again thou say, we neither know nor understand what your Ministers preach.

Answ. Yes, we both know and understand, that they preach lies in the Name of
the Lord, and we know and understand that thou art going about to make a
defense and vindication for them in so doing.

Again thou say the Quakers say, it matters not whether a man do any good
works, seeing they make him not good: Page 41.

Answ. This is false, for none of the Quakers ever said so; for our goodness
is of the Lord and not of works, and because we have received goodness and
mercy from him therefore do we those things that please him, and are obedient
to his Will and Commands,

Again, Page (43.) that we say a man is saved by harkening to the light within
him and obeying the same.

Answ. We never said that by harkening or obeying, that man is saved; but by
him which they are to hear and obey are they saved, and without harkening to
his voice, and obeying of him to whom he is preached, there is no Salvation.

Again Page 47. Thou say the Quakers instead of blessing and praying for
their Enemies, curse them

Answ. This is false for we bless, and curse not, but all cursed practices,
words, and actions, we testify against, and for this cause are we accounted
thy enemies, because we tell thee the truth.

Again, page (48.) Thou saint instead of abhorring our selves, we justify our
selves.

Answ. This is of the number of the rest a false accusation, for self is that,
which we bear witness against in all, justifying nothing but what God
justifies, and condemning nothing but what God condemns.

Again, page 49. Thou say the Quakers are so proud to think, and say, they
are more perfect then the Apostle Paul.

Answ. When did any of the Quakers say, they were more perfect then the
Apostle? but it seems thy tongue is at liberty to make a refuge for the
Priests, and fill a volume of paper with lies.

Again, page (51) thou say, that many of the Quakers go up and down naked, to
manifest that they are as perfect, as Adam was in Innocence.

Answ. Their going naked is as a Sign unto thee, and the Priests, whom the Lord
is now stripping of the sheeps clothing, that all may see your shame and
nakedness, and that which you have been covered with is but as leaves, and a
Formal Notional Profession of God, without his Life, Power or Spirit, and you
must be as naked from this covering, before you be Innocent, as ever any Quaker
has been from their clothes.

Again, page (56. 57) thou say that we do condemn not only the Churches now
in being; but all that ever have been; the Churches of Asia, Corin^h, Galatia,
and Thessalonica, etc.

Answ. This is but an addition to thy former lies, for those Churches we do
own, and all such as do walk in their life, and are guided by their Spirit, for
the Church of the Thessalonians was in God, 1 These. 1. but thou have appeared
to be of another Spirit, and have manifested thy self to be a condemner of
those Churches, as well as of us, as in page 55. thou say in the Church at
Corinth that there was such corrupt members among them, as you can scarce find
in the worst of your Congregations.

So of that which thou falsely chargest us, thou art truly guilty thy self, and
so have condemned those Churches, and Justified your selves: But what
corruption was it that was so bad in those Churches, that is not in the worst
of your Congregations.

Again, as a proof for thy condemning your own Churches, thou brings
Brightmans, words saying, behold whatsoever is first, that is true, and
whatsoever is later, that is false, Chap. 3. page 113. So that hereby, by thy
old Author and Logic, thou have proved all your Churches in England to be
false, for the Churches of Asia, Corinth, Galatia, and Thessalonica, these were
the first; but the Churches in England Episcopal and Presbytery, these are
latter, therefore false.

Again, page 60. Thou say, the Quakers say they are so perfect, that they
cannot grow in knowledge nor grace.

Answ. The Quakers never said so, but on the contrary, we do grow in knowledge
and in grace, whereby we se, and comprehend, how thou and the Priests do grow
in rage, enmity, and false accusations against us, and we know also, that you
must fulfill your measure of Iniquity, and that all manner of evil must be
spoken against us falsely, and so we are satisfied, because we suffer not for
evil doing, but for well doing.

Again, page 61. Thou chargest us not to obey the commands of Christ, but do
teach men to break his commands; twice in one page, and again in the next page.

Answ. All which does but prove and manifest thy unbridled tongue, under which
is the poison of Aspes, but if thou, or any other could in meekness and
simplicity prove, that we have either broken any of his Commands, or taught
others to break them; then we would be convinced, and thou should be counted a
reprover and instructor in righteousness; but on the contrary we see, that
bitterness and a lying spirit has possessed thee, and that thou only invents
and Imagines false things to fill up thy book, which we were never guilty of,
which never any sober man, that had but the parts of a man, would ever lay to
our charge, seeing, that both our principles, and practices, witnesses to the
contrary.

Again, to make thy Vollume large, in page 82. thou brings the same lies over
again, charging us to say, That we are more fuller of the Spirit then the
Apostles, and of more knowledge, and stronger in Faith then the Apostles.

Which Affirmation is thy own, and not ours; and therefore is returned back to
be Condemned, where it did arise.

In page 83. thou say, The Quakers will have no Order; and page 84. thou
say, We are wise in our own conceit, and that we think our selves, wiser than
Christ, or his Apostles, or Churches.

All which is but multiplying lies, and so not worth much speaking unto, but
only that People may see, how thou have run out thy self till thou have no
order over thy tongue, nor over thy Pen, which have been so long time, as above
half a year, in adding lie, unto lie, to make a Defense for the Priests; and so
it appears that Truth will not defend them; and thy Defense of lies, will not
long defend them; for God will sweep away the refuge of lies, and he that
loves and tells a lie (as thou have done) has no part in the Kingdom of God.

In page 94. thou accusest Sara Blackborow, as concerning a Woman speaking in
the Church, as if she had said that the flesh was the Woman; from which thou
concludes, That then the flesh must be married to Christ, and so would make up
absurdities from thy own words.

Answ. This is thy Ordinary way of proving Error, first to affirm a lie of thy
own making, charging it upon another, and then draw a Conclusion, Answering
this lie: but Sara Blackborow, nor any other of the Quakers, have ever said,
that the flesh was the Woman: but that which Sara Blackborow said, was, That
the flesh was to be silent, and that which spoke in thee, was that which was
silly, and was ever learning; but when any does Pray or Prophecy, whether man
or woman, and speak forth that which God has made manifest; that is, The
Spirit of the Father in both, and is not to be quenched, for there is neither
male nor female, but all is one in Christ and in the Spirit, from which
Preaching and Prophesying proceeds; and the Promise is, that daughters as well
as sons shall Prophecy: And in the Church at Corinth they might all Prophecy
one by one, that all might hear, and all might be edified; but thou say,
Those women that did Prophecy, it was not in the Church; Where then did they
Prophecy, if not in the Church? Or what was the Church? For it is written, 1
These. 1. 1. That the Church is in God; And where must a woman be when she
Prays or Prophesies, if not in the Church which is in God? And where was it
that Philips four Daughters prophesied, whether in the Church or out of it? And
where was it that that Priscilla did Minister, whether in the Church or out of
it? And Pheba, a servant of the Church, whether she might not Pray nor
Prophecy in it? And Priscilla, who was a helper of Paul in Christ, and
labored with him in the Gospel, Romans 16. Might not Pray or Prophecy in the
Church?

But now to speak the Truth in plainness to thee, that which thou Cavel'st
against; Is not the woman nor the man, simply considered, But it is the Spirit
speaking in either, which thou cannot bear; for where the Spirit of the Father
speaks in man or woman, thou sets thy self against it to oppose it.

And thou say, Susan Bond said, Christ was the Husband, and of him they were
to be taught; and thou say, Sara Blackborow did like the Answer well.

Answ. Who could like it ill? Was not that a good Answer? And thou thy self
must own Christ to be thy Teacher, and learn of him, before ever God will make
use of thee in his service or work, though the Priests may make use of thee for
their Defender.

Again page 99. thou say, We deny that any should either Rule in the Church,
or have any Honor.

Answ. No, we do not deny the Head of the Church, which is Christ, to Rule, and
to have all the honor; but we deny any Priest to bear Rule by his means, or to
receive the Honor due unto Christ; for we see they are such as seek Honor of
one another, and not the Honor which belongs to God only.

Now whereas thou goes about to Vindicate, That wicked men may sing Psalms;
and to prove it, makes this Argument, If any be merry, let him sing Psalms; Now
wicked men are merry as well as godly, though they have no true cause, Ergo.
page 87.

Answ. This Logic does but prove, thy own ignorance and darkness, and not the
thing intended by thee, as we shall show; but first to Answer thee with thy own
contradiction; Do thou not say in the next words before this Argument, that
the chief ground (or cause) is, the Moral duty lying upon all men by the
commandment of God? Now if wicked men, do sing Psalms by the commandment of
God, do they do it without a true cause? Is not the Commandment of God, a true
cause of any action to them which are commanded by him? But in this thou art
but building again that which thou have destroyed, and so makes thy self a
transgressor, and so let thy own confusion correct thee; In the same page thou
say, Thou will make good what thou have written by Scripture; Come then here
we shall try thee; Where in the Scripture do thou prove, that wicked men may
be merry and sing Psalms, though they have no true cause? but on the contrary
have thou not read in the Scriptures, Ps. 69. That David was the song of the
drunkards: and if drunkards now in Taverns and Alehouses say and sing, I am
not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye; and say, That as a weaned child they
have behaved themselves; by thy Argument, if they be never so wicked, yet,
because they are merry in their wickedness, they may s^ng lies in the Name of
the Lord; and by thy Argument be Justified, as men doing only that which God
had commanded them. And again thou may read in Scripture. Joel 1. 5. that
such wicked men and drunkards were called to weep and bowl, for their misery
was coming upon them; so the Prophet did not call them to to sing David's
Psalms, because they were merry in their wickedness, as thou have done; and
again thou may read in Amos. 8. 3. That the songs of the Temple shall be turned
into bowling, and these wicked men in the Temple were Merry, and by thy
argument might sing Psalms or spiritual Songs; but the Prophet says instead
of singing they must bowl and come to bitter Lamentation; and praise is not
comely in the mouth of Fools, as the wise man says who is taught of God, but
the mouth of a Fool pours forth his folly, and the instruction of Fools is
folly, Pro. 16. 22. And this Script^^^e we se fulfilled in thee; for thy
instructing of Fools and wicked men, because they are merry in their
wickedness, they may sing Psalms as a Command from God; and herein I have
answered a fool according to his folly, least he should be wise in his own
conceit; and although David calls all Gods host, and all living things made
and created to praise the Lord, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Heavens, and the
Waters, the Earth, the Dragons and the Deeps, Fire, Hail, Snow, and Vapor,
Storms and Wind fulfilling his word, Mountains and Hills, and fruitful Trees,
all Beasts, Cattle, Creeping things, and flying Fowls, Kings of the earth, and
all People, etc. And now as David was in the Covenant, he saw the Creatures as
they stood in their Covenant, uncorrupted: and so in a fit capacity to praise
the Lord, only man degenerated and unrestored again into the Covenant, he saw
it was not comely for him to praise, nor to pray, nor to take Gods words in his
mouth, nor to speak of his Statutes; so far, from Justifying thy Argument, that
wicked men because they are merry therefore may sing Psalms, but when the
Priests or people, takes notice of thy book, and what Logic thou have learned
to jutify the wicked in their Singing, as well as the godly, and how thou have
shamed both thy self and them, with such foolish confusion, and University
Logic, its like they will set thee no more awork, to defend and vindicate them
with such weapons.

Again, page 89. thou say, that it is said by the Prophet prove. 21. 4. that
the ploughing of the Ploughman is sin.

Answ. Here thou have belyed the Prophet, and perverted his words, as thou have
done the Quakers; for the Prophers words is these, an high look, and a proud
heart, and the ploughing of the wicked is sin; but he does not say that the
ploughing of the Ploughman is sin; But who can escape the envy of slandrous
tongues, which accounts lying no sin, if thereby they can accomplish their
own wicked ends? but the truth has found thee out and made thee manifest, and
the Priests had better a wanted thy defense, then to be so shamed by it; as
they will be, unless they deny both thee and it.

Again, in the same page thou say, to hear, read, pray, sing psalms, and
giving of thanks, they are works morally good being Commanded by the Lord* but
the person doing them, being not justified, they are not good to him: for
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

Answ. This is another piece of confusion, and charging of God foolishly and
falsely, to say that the Lord commands those things to be done, and those he
commands to do them, in doing of which it is not good to them but sin; Where
have thou learned? or where do thou read of such a doctrine, that wicked men
are commanded of God, to do such things, which in doing is not good to them but
sin? Is God or Christ then the Minister of sin, or commands a man to conmit
sin? Is not this Blasphemy and Error in the highest degree? And how daest thou
speak of God, or of his Commands, or of his Obedience, seeing thou thus
Blasphems him in his Worship? but this shall remain as a Testimony against
thee; many other lies and abominations have thou spoken against us, and against
God and his Truth; a few of which is sufficient to make thee manifest.

In page (107.) thou say, our Quaking fits, many are of opinion that they are
diabolical, by a kind of witcheraft, and said, thou have heard strange
relations of Enchanted Ribbons, and giving drink after, etc.

Answ. Upon the same account, many was of opinion, that Christ had a Devil,
and was a Deceiver, and that the Apostles were Ringleaders of Sects, and
Heresies, and such strange relations might have been heard concerning the
Apostles in their days; and it seems to thee, that such reports is sufficient
proof, but this is contrary, to what thou have said in an other place, that
thou would speak nothing, but according to what was written in the
Scriptures; And whereas thou tells of Enchanted Ribbons, Is there some Ribbons
that are enchanted? it may be thou means enchanting Ribbons, but if so, where
did thou ever know such a thing, and for proof, thou names Gilpin and
Toldervyes books, which neither of them does relate such a thing, so that it is
thy enmity and wickedness, for there was never any such thing among the
Quakers, as giving Ribbans, and drink after; but that charge thou might have
laid upon the Priests and their Defenders, for there are the most ribbons used
and justified, till in pride they are become the Servants of the Devil, and
there is the giving of drink one to another until they be enflamed, and made
unsensible of God and of his fear, by which they are enchanted, and bewitched,
that they do not obey the Gospel, but are given up to their own hearts
Lusts, and thereby are become the Servants of sin and so free from
righteousness.

Lastly, not only we, have been falsely accused in these and many other things
by thee; but even the spirit of God, which is the Fountain of cleanness, is by
thee charged and accused to be corrupt, an defiled page 33. by passing through
man's corrupt nature (thou say) becomes defiled.

Answ. Is not this a sin against the holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven,
to charge the spirit to be corrupt and defiled? And in this thou also charge
both the Father, and the Son, to be corrupt and defiled, for they are one, so
that if one of them be corrupt, the other is corrupt also, and as the spirit is
in the Saints, so is the Father in them, and the Son, the hope of their glory,
and none of them are defiled by man's corrupt nature. But there is that in man,
by which that which corrupts his nature is wrought out, so that man is made
clean and undefiled by the spirit, and that spirit is not made corrupt and
defiled by Man; for that is contrary to the Scripture, to say, that by man's
nature the spirit is defiled; but to say, that by the spirit man's nature is
cleansed, and sanctified, this is according to the Scripture: but it is the
work of Satan and his Messengers to Blasphem God in his Temple, and so account
his spirit (by which he leads into all truth) an unholy thing; and so thou
art of the number of them, which account the blood, and Spirit of the Covenant
an unholy thing; and we seeing and knowing these things, as concerning our
selves we are satisfied, because the Servant is not abo^e his Master; for if
the Master be called Beelzebub, and the spirit a defiled or corrupt thing, well
may we be called Deceivers, (although we be true) and falsely accused with all
manner of evil, according to our Masters words; and these things we should bear
in patience and silence, as to our selves, but as in respect unto others, we
are constrained, by the uncorrupted and undefiled Spirit of the Lord, to
testify to the world, that their deeds are evil, and to manifest the workings
of Satan in the Mystery of Iniquity, which now already works in many,
justifying the wicked, and condemning the Just, which is abomination to the
Lord, which his Spirit will not bear unreproved; and not only the Just men are
condemned and falsely accused, but also the Just undefiled, Eternal, and
unerring Spirit, is accused by him, who makes a defense for the Priests in
their unrighteous Practices and Wages; so by the plain Evidence and
Demonstration of Truth, he being made manifest to be an Enemy to God, and by
his wicked works and words, I do Judge him not worthy of much more Answer to
his Book; and also I do Judge him not able to prove any of the false
Accusations charged in it against us, some of which is herein returned unto him
again, which when he does but really weigh it and consider, it may be, he will
sit down in silence, and wait, if there may be hope of his forgiveness for this
(not only ignorance, but) wilfulness, charging us, the Spirit of God, and his
people, with that, of which they were never guilty; for we are in the Truth,
unto which every tongue shall confess, and by which every Opposer shall become
silent before the Lord; and in the Spirit of this Truth do we desire not the
Di^^ruction, but the Repentance and Forgiveness of our Enemies; And those that
do abuse us and wrong us ignorantly, their sins will be sooner blotted out,
then those who wilfully have set their hearts and tongues to work wickedness,
for they shall receive the greater condemnation.

The knowledge and life of truth, is that we desire all people may come into,
that by it the power of the wicked one may be taken away, which so furiously
works in the hearts of those, which receives not the Truth in the love of it,
but brings forth floods of enmity and bitterness against the Lambs of Christ;
but the love of God which thinks no evil, neither does any unto another, is
that which when it is felt and obeyed in all, will dry up those floods from off
the face of the Earth, that there may be a place of Rest for the Redeemed and
Elect Seed, who only has the Lord and his light for their habitation, and the
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, for their Armor and Defense.

THE END.

