A HUE and CRY after Dr. T. O.
O Yes! O Yes! O Yes!
IF there be any Man, Woman, or Child in City, Town, or Country, that can tell
Tale or Tidings of a Salamanca Doctor, stolen, strayed, banished or kidnapp'd
out of White Hall on Tuesday last. His marks are as follows; The off Leg
behind something shorter than the other, and cloven Foot on the nether side;
His Face Rain-bow-colour, and the rest of his Body black: Two slouching Ears,
ready to be cropp'd the next Spring, if they do not drop off before; His Mouth
is in the middle of his Face, exactly between the upper part of his Forehead
and the lower part of his Chin; He has a short Neck, which makes him defy the
Pillory; A thin Chin, and somewhat sharp, bending up almost to his Nose; He
has few or no Teeth on the upper Jaw, but bites with his Tongue; His voice
something resembles that of the Guinney-Pigs; His Habit is covered with a black
Gown, which was made at Salamanca and Oxford both at once, because he took his
Degrees at both places at one time; His eyes are very small, and sunk, and is
supposed to be either thick-ey'd, or Moon-blind, by reason he did not know C --
m by Candlelight, though he had before sworn Treason against him; He has a
natural Bob-tail, because he never was dock'd nor gelded; He seldom frequents
the Company of Women, but keeps private Communication with four Bums, to make
good the old Proverb, Lying together makes Swine to love; His Food is the
Intrals and Blood of Loyalists; His Drink the Tears of Widows and Orphans; He
is one that has endeavored to make the King Great, by taking away the Lives
of his Friends by Perjury; which by consequence must expose His Sacred Majesty
to the Fury of the Mobile; He is one that brought 40 Commissions from St.
Omers, and distributed them all for old Hats and old Shoes to the Papists, though
no body ever saw one of them but himself; He has 40000 Black Bills under his
Gown, which he has concealed these 3 years, and no body ever saw them but
himself; His usual haunts are Dick's Coffee-House. Aldersgate Street, B -- 's
Conventicle, and St. Lobb's Convent in Swallow-street; He is one that preached
B -- y before the Weavers, in respect to his Father being one of the same Trade
and Tribe; He is one that swears quite through B -- l's Conscience, or the thick
Basis of the Monument; He is one whose ingratitude to his Benefactors calls
them Rogues and Rascals, and endeavors to swear their Lives and Estates away
by Perjury; He is one that brought nothing but Rags and Lice into White Hall,
but carried away Cart-loads of Goods, whereof part was his Famous Library, (
viz.) That Famous History of Tom Thumb, Guzman, The Spanish-Rogue,
French-Rogue, Don Thomazo Dangerfieldo, English-Rogue, All the Famous Histories
of Robin Hood and Little-Iohn, The History of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, All the
Infamous Works of Smith, Janeway, Curtis, and Care; As also the great Works of
that Unreverend Divine R. B -- r, and another brave Book, much admired by the
Doctor, called, Hobbs's Leviathan; also two brace of Bums, with a Masculine
Chambermaid, which he keeps to scour his Yard: All which, and a great deal
more, he has purchased by the price of Blood and Damnation, since he creep'd
into White Hall, and created himself Savior of the Nation; He is one that has
sworn it to be his duty to the Devil to make the K -- to prosecute the Qu --,
and to dis-inherit his Royal Brother, and to make the Son rebel against the
Father. -- It Is supposed he herds somewhere in the C --.

These are some part of the Marks of the Beast; Whoever can give any a count of
him, let them repair to Dick' s Coffee-House, Lying Curtis, Elephant Smith, or
Mrs. Richard, and they shall have the Doctor's Wheel of Fortune for their
pains, and perhaps be called as many Rascals to boot as the Doctor used to call
the King's Life-Guards.

LONDON: Printed for Alex. Banks, 1681.


