AGATHOCLES THE Sicilian USURPER. A POEM.

-- Mutato Nomine, de Te
Fabula narratur. --
LONDON Printed for J. C. and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen Corner,
1683.

The Preface.
IF a Poem have a Genius (says the Incomparable Author, in the Preface of
Absalom and Achitophel) it forces it is own Reception in the World. The Maxim
however generally true in the Theory, yet we find but very few Instances
wherein it holds, in Practice. And the Reason may be this; That Genius he
intends there, that Irresistible Charming Genius is scarce any where to be met
with, but in his own Absalom, and some other of His Works. The Event in that
was suitable to his Praesages, because they were founded on an Unerring
Impartial Judgment; but He that writes after him with the same Expectations, I
am afraid, the Partiality, and Weakness of his Judgment will too soon appear
in the Event. It Is not therefore with any such vain Thoughts that the following
Poem ventures into the World; The Honesty it carries in the Design is all it
has to plead for it self, and in that particular, (if I may say it without
Offense) it is very loath to yield even to the Best Poem that ever was writ.

Therefore without endeavoring at farther Apologies, I shall only trouble the
Reader with a short Account of the Poem. If any desire a particular Relation of
the Life of the Sicilian Tyrant, I would refer them to Dr. Perrinchiefe his
History of Agathocles. But for the Person Uncharacterized under my Usurper, it is
sufficient for my purpose, if he contradict not the Sicilian Story, tho, it may
be the Parallel is not exactly drawn. I suppose there will need no Key to
decipher him, since those Men, who have so near outlived the Act for Renouncing
the Solemn League and Covenant cannot but remember Whom their Rebellious
Practices, at last, advanced to the enslaving the Good People of England. I
must confess their renewing lately the Old Methods would make one believe they
had forgot how miserably they labored under the sad Consequences of such
Measures. Examples are commonly said to leave deeper Impressions on the Minds
of Men, then Praecepts; and those Examples have bin esteemed fittest for that
purpose, which are drawn from Histories not too remote from the Persons to whom
they are directed. If so; the ensuing Poem may promise it self some success,
which affords an Example so far from being too distant from, that, even yet the
Characters of his Tyrannies are too frequently to be read among us.

To have made my Usurper die in his Bed had bin too notorious a Trespass upon
the Sicilian History, which tells us that He was Poisoned by Maenon a
Malecontent. And some have bin of the Opinion that our Late Agathocles made his
last Exit the same way. What ground they might have for that Opinion is not my
Business here to enquire; but for the former Reason, and to avoid a Solecism in
Poetry, I have taken it for granted. And tho my Maenon might, possibly, not be
the Man, who did this Nation that Good Office, yet He was One, who with the
greatest probability might be presumed to have don it, or procured it to be don.

Here the Poem might have concluded; but who could have declined the Honor of
bringing the Excellent HIERO to his Undoubted Right and Crown? For my part, I
could almost as easily have forgiven the present Disturbers of his Peace, as my
own Self, had I bin guilty of an Omission so near approaching to an Indirect
kind of Treason. I am very sensible that I come Infinitely short of a just
Representation of that Happy Time, but, I hope, it derogates not from the
Pleasures of Heaven, that they are such as cannot be expressed by grovelling
Men; and it is some Excuse for us, that upon such Occasions our Words are too
little for our Conceptions, as well as our Conceptions for those Transcendent
Things.

AGATHOCLES THE Sicilian Usurper. A POEM.
UNhappy Man! whom cursed without Redress,
It seems beyond the Power of Heaven to bless.
Not that, oppressed with charge, it is forct to spare;
Or that It looks on Man not worth the Care
No, Its own Rights and Properties It gives,
But Man defeats his Great Prerogatives:
Of all things, to Himself, he only owes
The Ill he suffers, or the Good he does.
Cursed in that fatal Liberty of Will,
Cursed in free Choice, because still choosing Ill.
TO our Great first Parent Monarchy was given,
A Sacred Model from the State of Heaven,
Where One Blessed King fills the Eternal Throne,
And with a Father's Love rules All, alone.
That Love, entailing Right on Birth, did place
Succession in the Line of such a Race,
For Government did carefully provide,
And all Defects in Mortal Power supplied.
Thus, for a while, Mankind received its Lord,
In peace One King obeyed, One God adored.
Till that dark Principle, his Will, did blind
The nobler judging Faculty, his Mind.
Then with blind Zeal to many Gods he bowed,
Then many Lords enslaved the Unthinking Crowd,
Monsters, and Dogs usurped the Throne, and Sky,
As fear would King, or Folly Deify.
Then flowed all Ills, which naturally spring
From debaucht notions of a God or King;
For God, and King, essentially, are One,
Many, in each, always implying None.
But now they rue the Plagues their folly brought,
(A purchase just, by change, and rashness bought,)
The Plagues of all the Modes of Government
Ambition, or Confusion can invent.
In vain, for ease, they change each tottering frame,
The Form may change; the Misery's the same,
Still grasping at, but never finding Rest,
Unfixt, and but half satisfied at best.
It Is just we greet the Glorious Sun with praise,
Who feel the Influence of his kinder Rays;
To whose blessed Heat, and noble Light we owe,
The daily Comforts of the World below;
But 'twere unfit we should abandon Light,
And on each other prey, like Beasts, by night,
Because some Earth-born Comets then appear,
Amaze the Rout, and seem to Govern here.
Those dangerous Objects dazzle Vulgar eyes,
Unable to impose upon the Wise,
Who see Death's ghastly face through the too thin Disguise.
They see the Plagues they scatter through the Air,
And find the seeds of some Impending War.
'Twere no less madness, for redress, to fly
To the weak helps of Ignes Fatui,
The lower Region's base Democracy.
Some signs of Men, some shapes of walking Clay,
Insensible of the benefit of Day,
May leave the way when those false Lights appear,
In hopes of Safety and Refection near.
But, left in danger by the expireing Light,
Through Fenns, and Boggs they wander all the night,
Till Day's return their drooping Spirits chears,
Displays their Dangers, and dispells their Fears.
And wretches, by such Vapors near undone,
This glory add to the Returning Sun,
His presence ends the mazes they have run.
Witness Sicilia to the truth I tell,
( Sicilia taught, by sad experience, well!)
Who all the yokes of Tyranny has worn,
Wasted by Wars, by striving Factions torn,
Tired out with fruitless Change, and forct, at last,
To kneel to Injured Monarchy for rest.
Against the Coasts of fruitful Italy,
The Pride, and Envy of the Mid-land Sea,
The dearest pledge of Nereus's beauteous Store,
The fair Sicilia spreads her lovely Shore.
A narrow Isthmus (fame tells,) joined the Bride
Of old to her Rich Latian Husband's side,
Torn off, and ravished since by amorous Force
Too rough by slow advances to divorce.
Now in soft watery folds it clasps the Place,
With endless kisses, and a Dear embrace.
For Capes, and form Trian'glar known of old,
But more for temperate Clime, and fruitful Mould.
The healthful Air does Life's short Span prolong,
And the rich Soil makes it seem always Young.
For Grain excelling neighboring Parts so far,
Their Bards then sang 'twas Ceres's only care.
Much fatal Steel it is guilty entrails hold,
Much Tinn, and some few Veins of treacherous Gold.
From Spain, at first, the old Sicani came,
From them the Island took it is ancient Name.
These were a pleasant, Courteous, Valiant kind,
To guests innately Sweet, but not Refined,
With noble Anger could resent a wrong,
But scorned to hoord Revenge, or Malice long.
Tender of Right, yet did not Change admire,
Firm to their Prince, and to their Friend entire.
Brave; but too weak to foyl the Roman Band,
Whom fame of wealth had brought t'invade the Land.
With ease the warlike Siculi over came,
Possessed the Land, and once more changed the Name.
Next these some Colonies of Grecians come,
Whose over stockt Hives afford no room at home.
These new Intruders the Sicani drive
TO a Western Cape, among Hills and Woods to live.
The Grecian Arts, and Genius they transplant,
The only seeds the happy Land did want.
But Learning quickly ran over all the I Will,
Suiting the temper of the fruitful Soil.
Each age that flowed did constantly improve,
And Arts still found a more peculiar Love.
With zeal they all the mighty work pursue,
Cherish the Old, and propagate the New.
Thus, by Degrees, they to that Ac^me came,
Might justly challenge all the breath of Fame.
Their Wit Eternal, as their Godlike mind,
Without all Affectation most Refined,
In real Knowledge passing all Mankind.
Loved Race! whom Heaven and Nature strove to bless,
With the utmost stretch of Human happiness;
But fate, which bore Eternal spite to Man,
Left out the fairest Link of all the Golden Chain.
The noble Link of Constancy they need,
Of firm Adherence to their lawful Head.
That only Blessing added to their store,
The fates could grant, and they could wish no more,
Yet Kings they had, (and might have still bin blessed,)
Fortune in War, and Wealth in Peace possessed;
The warlike Gelo, and Good Hiero's Name
Had left some lasting footsteps of their Fame.
But still the Compound Roman-Grecian Race
Retained the Humors of their former Place.
The first Resentments that provoke their Cries
Are Heavy Loans, and frequent Subsidies,
Pursuing next with an Implicit Hate
The Crowns best Friends, and Ministers of State.
Hard fate of Statesmen, who forgo their Ease
For Public Safety, yet so seldom please!
They rule Inferior Mankind for their Share,
And ease the Gods of more then half the Care;
While Crowds profanely quarrel with their Good,
And Providence deny, because not understood.
Led by a Traitorous Mungril Kind of Flamen,
A wretched Medly betwixt Priest and Layman!
Somewhat from each the Pulpit Zanys stole
To dress their Pride and Lust in Ridicule.
These Holy Men, pursuing Earthly Ends,
Taught, None could be the Prince and People's Friends;
That precious Liberty, and Wealthy Kings
Were mere Repugnant, Inconsistent Things.
And more to smooth the Blasphemy's they said,
The Gods were parties in their Treasons made.
Blessed, Never-failing, Specious Design,
In common Interest Heaven and Earth to join!
With these conspired the Throng of Libellers,
Their Daily Bread was Jealousies, and Fears,
And swelling with the ill-digested Load
The poisonous Vernim cast their Filth abroad.
Secure themselves in no Estate and Name,
They vallu'd no man's Person, or his Fame;
Till to that height their prosperous Guilt was grown
They strove to eclipse the Glories of the Crown.
Conscious all hopes of Pardon were foregon,
The hardened Wretches sinned, and scribbled on.
'Twere endless to repeat the loathsome Cries
Of daily Letters, Pacquetts, Mercurys;
Through all the Land the catching Venom spread,
As all, whom Mad Dogs bite, themselves run Mad;
But ablest Huntsmen, as the easy'st Cure,
Hang the Distract, the Kennel to secure.
Nor must we here the Factious Clubs forget,
In Close Caball where Treason nightly met.
Shameless She sat, and naked to each eye,
And laid the Masque of Public Interest by;
No more that Name was heard among the Crowd,
But base Revenge, and private Wrong were Loud.
A numerous huddled Concourse filled the place,
Cracked Citizens, and Lawyers in Disgrace;
Vexed Courtiers, Officers without Command,
Raw Esquires lately bubbled of their Land.
Pleased with a Ruban, and a Patriot's Name,
The Boon Garson, and Fopp of Business came.
Honor, and Age alike Indifference met,
And Noble Peers with Zealous Joiners sat.
Yet 'twas but fit; all were Mechaniques there,
And Public Good was measured by their Square.
There 'twas resolved, when next the Senate sat,
What Subject was the ripest for Debate;
What Greivances 'twas proper to present;
What Limb to lopp next off the Government.
And still the more the Indulgent Scepter gave
These Men found greater Reason more to crave.
Till, by excess of Goodness quite undon,
They levelled with the Ground the Weakened Throne.
Uncertain Grandeur, which must fall no less
If Monarchs are Indulgent, or Oppress!
False Demagogues into such Failings pry,
And founding all the Power in Property,
Their Master's they depress, to raise the People's high.
Inferring, 'cause he gave too much before,
For Common Safety He must now give more.
But, grant, all Power in Property we found,
Yet why, from hence, must Kingly Power loose ground:
For in the Prince all Property we own,
And Subjects are but Tenants to the Crown.
Else, why of Old did Men Allegiance swear,
Bound up to Feods, and ready Arms to bear.
It Is hard to think (Well-meaning Men!) they swore,
Or paid, to hire what was their Own before.
Thus Property in Kings, by Heaven, defined,
To Subjects, on Conditions, is consigned.
From whence it is plain, in Exigence of State,
The People should refund, not King abate;
For, if their Property he Dangerous make,
It Is more then One can give, or the other take.
So Ministers that err, tho by their Prince's Will,
Yet suffer Justly, 'cause He cannot do Ill.
But now 'twas time these Artists should produce
Their boasted Secret of such Sovereign use;
And Liberty, prepared to the Projectors will,
Was gilded for the Universal Pill.
No Cheat so prized, so easy to obtrude,
Do Charlatans impose upon the Multitude.
The Grief which made the People first complain,
Was an excess of Blood which crazed their Brain;
So these Physicians, by Long Wars, thought good
To cool the Fever of their Patient's Blood.
And more their Reputation to assure,
Turned the Disease it self into the Cure;
Their very Sickness was but Fancied Pain,
And Fancied Ease all they were like to gain.
All Old Imaginary Fears were dead,
Good Real New Ones reigning in their stead.
The Armies, which e'rlong the Earth did shield,
Like Jason's Harvest, covered all the Field;
And Troops, which lately hovered in the Air,
Lodged in Free Winter Quarters every where.
Thus all things altered for the better still,
'Cause it is more Manly to fear Real Ill.
The Mart for Liberty then most in use,
Grown Rich by the Trade, was ancient Syracuse.
And 'twas but just They should engross the Gain,
Who ventured most the Secret to obtain!
The Syracusans were a Restless Race,
In War Dejected, Turbulent in Peace.
Still Dreading, and still Doting after Fears,
Fond of Sham Plots, and New Discoverers.
These made them arm on every slight Pretense,
And Chain their Streets, and boast their Strong Defense.
Their Growth of Buildings, and still Changing Tide,
Expressed their Constancy, and Want of Pride.
An Hard-mouthed Beast, for slackened Raines unfitt,
And must be menag'd with the Spur, and Bitt.
Faction, and Noise now made their Magistrates,
And want of Worth was Title to their Seats.
To choose their Praetor, as before, in Course,
Destroyed the People's Choice, and, what was worse,
Resembled an Hereditary Thing,
And looked too like the Hated style of King,
If, spite of Arts to gain the Major Vote,
Merit, and Right sometimes the Fasces got,
The Suburb Rout, in Droves, came roaring down,
While Midnight Riots filled the affrighted Town.
Bone-fires in mere Contempt of Power were made,
And Barefac't Villains against the Good inveighed.
Bone-fires the Emblems of the People's Rage,
Which Puppets Sacrificed a while assuage.
May Heaven no Dearer Sacrifice require,
May their Offense among those Flames expire!
But God too far Provoked revenges Fire by Fire!
The Western Town was called Neapolis,
It self a City, tho but part of this.
There, while a Senate was, the Members met,
Bold without Rashness, Active without Heat.
Their willing Duty still supplied the Throne,
True to the ancient Splendor of the Crown.
Their pious Care b' Expedients would unite
The Subject's Safety, to the Prince's Right.
No men so often, or so justly blessed,
The truest Balance, and the Fairest Test,
Of Private Good, and Public Interest.
The Bulwark of the Nation, and the Law,
To shelter Loyalty, and Treason aw.
But these had bin! -- Then a packt Senate sat,
Of Fools, and Knaves to model the new State.
A Glorious Work, and like to take effect,
Where such Choice Tools, such Faithful Workmen act!
The Nobles were debarred their Ancient Right,
The House was purged, the Good excluded quite;
(What Wonders might these Men despair to do!)
The Most run down, out-voted by the Few.
Those who were left could only represent
The Dross, and Poor Remains of Government.
Religion, Liberty, and Law were now
Hard Words, they did not, or they would not know.
The Army was the only Bugg they feared,
And 'twas resolved that Grievance should be cleared.
This made the Swordsman frett, and Hero frown,
To be so baffled by the Lazy Gown.
Had they for this subscribed each Canting Clause,
Espoused the Contradictions of the Cause,
And fought against them, to maintain the Laws?
They had their Adjutators of their own,
And they should vote that Pageant Senate down.
The Church Banditti too joined in the Broyl,
Grieved at unequal Dividend of Spoil:
Some to the House, more to the Army fled,
As Interest biased, or Persuasion led.
The doubting Fates looked on, as at a stand
Whither the House, or Army to disband.
Poor Land! from Ill to Ill, so basely tosst,
Beyond all prospect of Recov'ry lost!
So easily with Fairy Freedom gulled,
With glittering Tinsel paid for promised Gold!
Thus our vain Hope we eagerly pursue,
Pleased with the Gay Chamaeleon's painted Hue:
And, when the long Pursuit has tired us quite,
It changes Color and deceives our Sight!
Thus our Crazed Heads the splendid Species make,
And we for Liberty fine Nothings take;
But when we hope to embrace a Goddess there,
Our cheated Arms return with Common Air.
But Oh! my Muse, thou have but trifled yet,
But told the Sport, and Raillery of Fate.
Prepare thy Tragic most expressive verse
The Luxurys of Misery to rehearse.
The dreadful Harmony of dying Groans,
Robbed Mothers sighs, and Widows piercing Moanes.
The Nation spoiled of her dear Youthful Store,
Grovelling in Dust, and welt'ring in the Gore.
These horrid Scenes, or Crimes transcending these,
Should introduce the Cursed Agathocles.
Agathocles whom the just Wrath of Fate
Had made as Wicked, as his Trust was Great.
His Constant Fortune, and Familiar Arts
Confirmed him General in the Soldiers hearts.
Yet still h' abused the Advantages he made,
The Army's Idol, and the Senate's Dread.
The Servant, and yet Master of the House,
Whom all would fain Chashier, but feared to rowze.
By their Commission, acting his own Will,
Caresst, and flattered tho still doing Ill.
The Rod stretched out by Heavens Vindictive Hand.
To scourge, and humble the Rebellious Land.
Yet tho this Vapor blazed so in the Sky,
It Is Rise as base was, as it is Glory high.
While, yet a boy, he learnt the Potters Trade,
Each day Discov'rys of his Temper made;
Unjust, and Spightful as Tyrannick Sway,
He spoiled the Finest of his Fathers Clay.
His Birth so abject, and his Childhood poor,
Why was his Vicious Youth made less Obscure?
His Youth too well, too Infamously known,
Unmatcht in Lewdness, and profane Renown.
His Lusts disgraced the meaness of his Trade,
And endless, unconstrained Debauches made
His Life the Good Man's Fear, and Scandal to the Bad.
Virtue, an Honorable fair Estate,
By no Decree entailed upon the Great,
Even by the Meanest, and Plebeian breast
Is often in Plenty, and Repute possessed.
And, Heaven has ordered Things with so much Care,
The Honest Man may still improve his Share.
Agathocles abhorred that Thrifty Course,
He daily made his little Portion worse.
But Prodigalls when to an Ebb they are drained,
The Show, and Outside still must be maintained:
So He had run his Stock of Virtue out,
And now too late began to look about,
Yet hoped, tho he had lost all Real Sense,
To piece his Credit with the Fair Pretense.
To outward Veiw a Perfect Change embraced,
With feigned Regrett for all his Follies past.
His stricter Life, and Morals sounded more,
Drowning the Cries of his Old Faults before.
Such Sudden Change but seldom well portends,
So often taken up for Evil Ends.
His End, in all, was only, then to please
A Rising Faction against the Nation's Peace.
Who under Zeal do Worldly Gain pursue,
And like himself were Great Dissemblers too.
These he out-did in their dear Cant, and Tone,
And gained the Name of Precious Teacher soon.
Often he harangu'd of Liberties, and Laws,
And made Religion Pimp to serve the Cause.
Yet this Disguise was not put on invain
His thriving Godliness still turned to Gain.
The Tears, which he had taught at will to flow,
The People's Wrongs made almost endless now;
And fresh Complaints against the bravely Great
Employed his Scurril Wit, and saucy Heat.
Yet these sure signs of Zeal, and Factious Grace
Advanced the Viper to a Member's place:
Tho then, so low his helpless Cense was out,
He scor'd for Stum, and Beef to buy the Rout.
From hence, his bold Ambition to promote,
He gained a Colo'nel's place by Public Vote.
But 'twere unjust his Conduct to defame,
We hate his Crimes, but envy not his Name.
None e're more faithfully performed the Trust,
True to his Men, and to his Masters just.
As Eminent in Dangers as Command,
Performing Wonders with his Conquering Hand.
Designing, Happy, ready of Dispatch,
Quick-sighted, and yet always on the Watch.
Prepared each lost Advantage to retrieve,
Or make his Foes for baffled Projects grieve.
Oh! had his Soul the Paths of Virtue trod,
His Glory had bin Clear, his Fame as Loud!
But these few Gleams of Good were darkened still,
By interposing Pregnant Clouds of Ill.
His Restless Spirit, and Immoderate Mind,
Despising Fame, to Factious Power inclined.
Nothing could slake his feav'rish Thirst of Rule,
Whom no Sin scared, no Scruple could control.
His tamp'ring Genius, and uneasy Frame,
Fomented Schism, and Faction where he came;
And still his Tongue so well his Cause maintained,
The most, by Interest, to his side, were gained.
When e're they seemed this Projects to espouse,
Nice of no Oaths, and Prodigal of Vows;
Which still to serve his Ends he duly broke
With the same ease which they first were took.
By these Fair Means all Rivals he displac't,
And gained himself the General's Staff at last.
But now his Greatness to that pitch was grown
He thought no Power superior to his own.
No more the Senate curbed his haughty Mind,
His Will got loose, would be no more confined.
H' had exercised the General's Power before,
And should the Office now admit no more
'Twere no Addition to his former Store.
So he presumed the Senate's Rights to invade,
To heal the Breaches by their Factions made:
And purged the Army as the ready'st way,
Cashiering all that clogged his Lawless Sway.
Next a New Set of Adjutators packt,
To make his private Guilt the Army's Act;
A Military Senate Modeled now,
TO affront, and keep the Civil Tyrants low.
But false Antander these so acted still,
By unseen Springs they meet the General's Will.
Antander near allied to him by Wife,
But nearer by the Foulness of his Life.
So Conversant in Deepest Villainies
He seemed the Transcript of Agathocles.
With him Base Cerdo, and Dull Zythus joined.
The Brewer's Zeal, and Cobbler's Brain combined.
And more beneath the Cognizance of Fame,
Whom 'twould debauch the vilest Rhimes to name.
Mean Slaves, by Fortune raised of very Sport,
The future Minions of a Potter's Court!
To these, convened on every slight Disgust,
When e're the House crossed his Aspiring Lust,
The Crocodile could weep, and call it Breach of Trust.
Now on a Solemn Day the Council met,
The Wise Assembly were all Gravely sat,
When nettled by the late Disbanding Vote
The Cous'ner sighing spoke. --
I grieve, Dear Partners of your General's Fame,
Who share his Praise, and Suffer in his Shame;
I grieve that all the vast expense of Blood,
The noble Scarrs bought for your Countries Good,
The brave Neglect, of Friends, Preferment, 'State,
And all that is Dear, deserves so hard a fate;
That Liberty, for which so long you 've fought,
Is still Unpurchas'd, tho so dearly Bought.
Ye must have heard; yes, the whole Nation cries
To You for Vengeance on Neapolis;
Ye must have heard what Havoc they have made,
Abused their Power, and their Trust betrayed.
Even now resolved; Oh! my Disorders well
Speak the loud Wrongs my Tongue is loath to tell!
Resolved to tear the Wreaths that crown your Brow,
To cropp your spreading Laurels e're they grow;
Tho now they sit beneath that Sacred Shade
Secure from Lightning, which they well might dread.
Some, by a specious Name, they would release,
Condemned to soften in Inglorious Ease;
The rest, as Aids, must for Sardinia sail,
Where no One needs for lost Arrears rebel;
Cold, Want, the dangerous Boggs, and Salvage Foe,
Will pay the Debt we all to Nature ow.
And is it so those Monsters would requite
The Gallant Men, who in their Quarrel fight?
Have they so soon forgot the Northern Moor,
And You, who could that desp'erate Field restore?
Forgot those Swords that durst ill Fate oppose,
And forced her back on your amazed Foes?
Then they could own the Glorious Happy Day
Due to your Conduct, and well-tim'd Delay.
Have they forgot Messana, Gela Fights,
Where you supported their declining Rights?
In those Disputes what valiant Numbers bled,
What Crowds of Captives were in Triumph led!
Mistaken, Honest Men! whose greatest Crime
Was thwarting our Hard Masters ever the time.
Ungrateful Masters! who for private ends
Discard the best of Servants, best of Friends.
Have they forgot the numerous Trophies placed,
The Noisy Hall with Flaggs, and Standards graced?
Long may those Standards flourish in that Hall,
And plead your Wrongs, and loud for Justice call!
What, do they see, with shame, your Glories won,
While You so much, They have so little don?
Or would their Coward and Malicious spite
Bar us the no great Privilege, to Fight?
Or do they so your services regard,
They Hate that Worth, which they could never Reward?
Poor Men! our Fruitful Hydra-Ills increase,
For One Head lost, an Hundred in the Place!
When will they learn to limit their Command,
Cease to enslave, and grieve the Entrusted Land?
But since so bold their Insolence is grown,
It Is time, at last, to let you know your Own.
Forgive me, that, so long, I did conceal
The Important Truth, which you would use so well!
Their endless Quarrels, and Inveterate Hate
Have torn, and broken the Sicilian State.
The Power so often Transfused, such Change has known,
The Life, and Spirits are exhaled, and flown;
And 'twould become your great Reforming Name
To bless the Nation with an Happyer Frame.
From things thus shattered, and to Chaos hurled
It Is God-like to inform a Beauteous World.
When some rich Vessel by long Tempests tossed
Upon your Shore, at last, is split, and lost,
It Is all Men's Right, and worth their Noble Pains,
To build a New One from the sad Remains.
Add; that, if Right be ever to Conquest due,
The Right of Rule is now devolved on you.
And by that Right they in the House are placed,
(They were till they destroyed that Right at last,)
From Kings their Ancient Charter is derived,
Who by that Title governed while they lived.
So then; or they by Usurpation reign,
And it is but Just to take your Own again;
Or You have equal Title to the Sway,
Who found your Power on the same Base as They.
Now let them urge, I meanly seek my own,
I place all Legal Power in You alone.
And Heaven has left it in your Sacred Breast
To keep it in your selves, where duly placed,
Or by Free Choice your Substitute to invest.
I must confess my Sense to this inclined,
(Wrest not the Freedom of an Honest Mind,)
Enjoy your selves the Sweets of your Estate,
But choose a Steward for the painful Weight.
My Weakness bids the unequal Load decline,
Alas, you want far abler Heads then mine!
To such, most freely, I resign their due,
May I enjoy an Easy'r Share with you!
Beside, the Senate tell ye, I Have betrayed
The Weighty Trust they on these Shoulders laid;
Ungrateful as they are! Yet let them know
It Is not to Them I stoop, but bow to you.
I dare the Harmless Lightning of their Frown,
Yet to just Right can lay my Office down.
But still must fear, One Wretches single fate
Will scarce the Malice of their Rage abate,
You too they justly fear, and therefore Hate;
You too they have wronged. -- Then spoke in Tears the rest
To show Their Wrongs sat nearest to his Breast.
And now, the Rout let in, the Cries increase,
Freedom, the Army and Agathocles!
But be Unmoved, like a Stanch Hypocrite,
Divests himself of Gene'ral in their sight,
Mean Trick the Melting Rabble to trepan!
To move their Pity for so Good a Man.
This false Antander found, and took the Cue,
Well skilled what Harms the least Delays ensue;
And thus replies. -- And who for Power more fit,
Then He, who would the well-weigh'd Burden quit?
Raw Saylors New Discove'rys hunt with joy,
While ablest Pilots shun the hard Employ.
It Is past belief He can the Trust abuse,
Who bravely dares the tempting Bait refuse.
Who grasps at Greatness for ambitious ends,
Must Parties Form, and make Seditious Friends.
Will He misuse Your Power, who gave his own?
So unconcerned, so readily laid down!
Methinks, I hear his troubled Soldiers call,
Antander, speak, entreat the General:
Tell him, He must not, shall not thus be lost,
Freedom were dearly bought, at so much Cost.
Tell him, his Army settled in their Choice,
Claim their Protector, with a general voice.
They claim you, Sir; their Safety and Delight,
Their Own Agathocles, their Dearest Right,
With whom they Suffer, and for whom they Fight.
To show their Right, and take your self away,
In the worst Sense, Your Army you betray.
What ready'r Way could the Cursed Senate choose,
To their Revenge our hated Lives to expose?
Oh, do not You, like them, Your Soldiers wrong,
Invading what to Us does most belong!
He said; And now again, with doubled Noise,
They call for their Protector and their Choice.
Mere Machins! yet the Movement hid so well,
They seem to act from a Free Principle:
But the Mechanique Power, by which they move,
It self is guided by some Hand above.
Ever this the Senate these Commotions hears,
Ill News has Wings, and Guilt is all o'r Ears.
But Fear conforms their Counsels to the times,
Unable to correct, they sooth his Crimes.
A Legate, at this Instant, brought their voice,
To back, with Their Consent, the Armies Choice.
At the glad News the Soldiers tear the Skys,
With Joys unbridled, and Exalted Cries.
But their Protector did expect no less,
He long foresaw such petty Shifts as these.
Yet loath so fair Advantage to refuse,
To please the Army, and the House to amuse,
In perjured Words, He forms his Answer thus.
Witness, Ye Gods, with what Regrett I take
The noble Weight, too heavy for this Back!
So prosper me, as I would much prefer
The unenvied Safety of a Private Share!
Whom Heaven prefers, with Liberty to bless
So Good a People, with so good Success;
How ill must He all meaner Hopes regard,
That Glorious Action is it is own Reward!
But since unworthy of the hoped Release,
To you I sacrifice my Thoughts of Ease.
Yet, One Condition let my Weakness make,
May Envy never my Just Designs mistake;
(The noblest Actions, and the clearest Heart,
Like strongest Towns, still have their weaker Part;)
May false Surmises never a Mind torment,
So nice of Fame, so honest in Intent!
I must confess, unwonted Means were used,
But our Disorders all Delays refused,
And the Issue has, at least, the Means excused.
Our Hot Distempers called for present Cure,
Unfit a tedious Course of Physic to endure.
This only way to Public Peace we saw,
And General Benefit is standing Law.
Indebted to the Army for their Choice,
Confirmed in Office by the Senate's Voice.
By both Elect, to both obliged I stand,
And both shall reap their Hopes in my Command.
My Care shall so the Senat's Fears remove,
As shall preserve the Army's constant Love;
My Faith the Army's Griefs shall so redress,
The Senate never shall find their Power less.
Thus, in dark Terms, the false Dissembler spoke,
And, with a general shout the Assembly broke.
Now, fearless with the, lately, frightful Load,
His swift Ambition rather flew, then rode;
Unlooked for to the amazed House he came,
The last Completion of their Vote to claim.
His wanton Ears, cloyed with the Soldiers Cries,
Hunt fresh Variety of Pop'lar Noise.
All things for his Instalment are prepared,
The Scarlet Senate to the Russet Guard.
On every Face some marks of Joy remain,
Such as Men show, who would disguise their Pain.
The Tumult, Noise, and Charges of the Day;
Were fatal Omens of his future Sway.
But the mixed Pomp in order to produce,
Would fret the Patience of a City Muse.
Let it suffice; to Ceres's Fane he came,
And touched the Lighted Tapers Holy Flame;
Then, by the Eternal Gods devoutly Swore,
That Law, and Right should moderate his Power.
But Vows, and Oaths have still too weak bin found,
No Tyrant by those Fetters ever was bound;
They hold the Madman till his Fits begin,
But break when the Fierce Demon raves within.
Had his proud Soul the Public Good designed,
Or would just Bounds of Power have pleased his Mind;
What fairer season could his wish befriend
Just Power to gain, the Nation's Griefs to end?
His generous Care the Bannisht Heir had found,
The I Will with Peace, his Prince with Right had crowned.
But our Protectour's Temper differed quite,
Could never restrain his Vicious Appetite.
The basest Means his impious Malice chose,
Kings, in their very Memory, to depose.
By Edict pulls their Gelon's Statues down,
With all the Sacred Ensigns of the Crown;
That, Former Liberty removed from sight,
The People might endure his Lawless might.
The Senate too might now his Meaning ghess,
Who never well could find their Power Less!
Justly Dissolved, yet not for hate to Ill,
But pure Design to show his boundless Will.
The Senate gone, the Army feels his Pride,
Their Adjutators must be laid aside,
The Senate's Power extinct, their Fate implied.
These Rival Evils were removed alone
To clear the way for worse compact in One.
Once more the wearied Nation hoped for rest,
And seeming Joy at the new Change expressed;
Not that they liked his Usurpations well,
But Change of Evil, is some ease in Hell.
As Men, when Fevers in the blood increase,
Each minute try short Intervalls of Ease,
But still the liquid Fires which feed their Pain
A Vast Expense of Spirits must maintain;
So their long Heats some little Respite had,
(Enough to make the quick Return more sad!)
But still they felt the Unsatiable Disease,
Kept low by Ravenous Agathocles.
By Monthly Subsidies he drained their Store,
And, for the Public Safety, kept them Poor.
Rewarding so their faithless Temper well,
Whom Wealth, and Ease still fitted to rebel.
Of every turn of Things such use he made,
As showed him perfect Master of his Trade.
Witness, the Plots which he so well contrived,
They always threatened, but they never triv'd.
These by such wondrous Providence he knew,
The Heavens seemed to have nothing else to do.
Or that their Jove, grown infamous and Poor,
Were setting up for a Discoverer.
And 'twas observed, only the Brave, and Great,
Conspicuous for Virtue, and Estate,
Did e're Imagine the Protectour's Fate.
Yet by these Means a fair Pretense he got
To keep his Army up to aw the Plot.
Armies, and Guards such frightful Things appear,
No Plot can e're succeed for very Fear!
And when such Service in a State they 've don,
'Twere mere Ingratitude to put them down!
Had all his Plots made this their only aim,
To levy Taxes in the Army's Name,
And with the Coin to keep that Bugg in play,
They might have born his Arbitrary Sway.
But his Designs at nobler Quarry fly,
Our Lives, and Fortunes are a Tyrant's Prey.
By Friends Pretended, but unmanly Spies,
He moves the Exiles to combine, and rise.
That, with some show of Justice, he might take
Their ample Fortunes as a Forfeit Stake.
Justice, thus wronged, went mourning over the Land,
Her Hands polluted, and her Garments stained,
And saw, with grief, the truly Good, or Great,
Exposed to Death, as dangerous to the State.
Oh, had his Fury always bin so Kind!
Death is the Center of a Noble Mind!
Heroic Worth can Death embrace with Joy,
To such, it is harder much to serve, then Die.
This truth, too well, the Cursed Usurper knew,
And striving, in One Act, Himself to outdo,
(My Muse for horror of the Monstrous Deed,
Starts back, and trembles, and can scarce proceed!)
A Numerous Train, robbed of their Right, and Lands,
He sells, (Just Gods!) he sells to serve on Foreign Sands!
Free Subjects all, the Old Sicilian Race,
Contemning Life, Impatient of Disgrace!
His Guilt, long since, no Elder-Rivals knew,
But this has foiled all future Tyrants too.
This Masterpeice, which drained the Widows eyes,
And filled the Air with helpless Orphans Cries.
Cursed Man! thy Fears allow such Arms as these,
Thy Cruel Sense such Combinations please!
Yet know, those Sighs are treasured in the Skys,
To fall in Tempests on thy Perjuries.
Thus his aspiring Baseness treads on all,
The Great regards not, but contemns the Small.
Like some great Deluge by just Heaven designed
To visit the Offenses of Mankind;
It Is boundless Fury sweeps the Cotts away,
And makes the Proudest Palaces a prey;
Yet some, untainted with the Common Crimes,
By special Grace, escape till better Times.
So here some Few avoid his Bloody'r Rage,
Saved to repair the Ruins of the Age.
But of the Brave Unfortunates was none
Whose glorious Sufferings Philocles out-shone.
His Courage, as his Sufferings Nobly Great,
Accused not fate, nor tamely could submit.
He heard his Mother for her Burden groan,
Concerned more at her Wrongs, then for his Own;
And came from Exile in a low Disguise
To head his Master's Friends prepared to rise.
But Fortune often the juster Cause forsakes,
Often the best Tempered, Wisest Counsels breaks!
Yet Heaven was pleased It Is Power to interpose,
TO elude the Watchful Malice of his Foes.
Heaven saw how much the Next Relapsing Age
Would want his Faith, his Wisdom would engage,
How much Sardinia, Twice his Weighty Care,
To her Loved Praefect's Honor should refer;
And this foreseeing, only stopped his Fame,
To pay't with Interest to his Greater Name.
With him Eudoxus justly claims a place,
Eudoxus formed to bless the Land in Peace.
From wrongful Wars, with his Great Prince, he went,
In Foreign Courts enjoying Bannishment;
By Converse, and Experience there, refined
His Polite Knowledge, and Discerning Mind.
Prepared, when God e're long restores his Cause,
With Equity to Mitigate the Laws.
Which in their Intruse Meaning are Severe,
And without such a Guide too often Err.
Oh Wonder of the Court! Oh glory of the Gown!
Thy Mighty Worth has Others Fame out-flown,
In God-like Sons, thou have excelled thy Own!
On Them thy mounting Soul has left behind
A Double Portion of their Father's Mind,
His Truth, his Prudence, and (his Glorious Fate)
Their Prince's Friendship, and the Rabble's Hate.
Here, Muse, return; Thou have too loosely fled,
Unwarily, by Virtue's Splendor, led
To leave thy Theme so excellently Bad!
Or was it the Hideous Rapine of the Times,
The frightful Shapes of Decimation Crimes?
Invain the Country Want of Stock complain,
The City plead Decay of Trade invain;
Where e're the Dreaded Civil Plund'rers come,
An Helpless Wast is left, a mournful Home.
To Heaven, his daring Sacrilegious Spite,
It Is Ancient Offering, and Unquestioned Right,
The Tithe denied; yet the fleec't Land must pay
Heaven's Dues Usurpt by this base Idol Clay.
Scarce one Remove from their first Nature Clod,
Each Dirty Tyrant would be thought a God:
And Gods they are; as Men in former days
To Plague, and Theft did Servile Altars raise.
In his best Actions Zealously Profane,
Thus all Religions flourisht in his Reign.
A vast increase of Gods came daily up,
Egypt never knew a more Prodigious Cropp;
Tho, every Year, her fruitful Waters rise
To satisfy her Godly Avarice.
Some New Grimace, or Foolish Differing Lie,
Was Title to this Mock- Theogony;
Yet none were entered gratis on the Line,
But bought a Mercenary Right Divine.
So Heralds with some slight Difference trepan
The buying Fopp, and dubb a Gentleman.
But Upstart Gods do always dangerous prove,
Still found the Established Worship to remove.
In Syracuse an Ancient Fabric stood,
At home much honored, much adored abroad,
An August Pile, it self almost a God,
To Great Diana built; --
Agathocles deemed naught but Gold Divine,
And spoiled the Goddess of her Silver Shrine.
H' had robbed her of her Annual Rents before,
Uncas't, and stripped her like a Common Whore.
And while she wandered from her Rightful home
Would, Providently, sell the Useless Dome;
As if 't had bin one of his Suburb Stews,
Would prostitute it to so vile an Use
As to become a Synagogue for Jews.
Cursed may thou stand, with that Bold Wretch, in Fame,
Who in her Ashes wrote his hated Name!
And may this Difference signalize thy Crimes,
While Story bears his Guilt to future times,
Untoucht by Time, may the Sicilian Fane
Collat'ral Witness to thy shame remain!
Thus having past the ancient Bounds of Vice,
And Fame ensur'd, by New Discoverys,
Uncloy'd, unwearied yet with doing Ill,
Left of temptation, more then wanting Will,
He forms himself by studied Arts to please,
Affecting to appear designed for Peace.
Kind Words, Obliging Smiles, and Gracious Bows,
Slight Favors are, He every where bestows,
Like Money to the Crowd in Public Shows.
He hates the Impertinence, and Forms of State,
(The Little Vanitys which make Men Great!)
Yet loves the Nation should proclaim that Hate.
But striving still to make his Virtues known,
Argues the Jewels False, or not his Own.
Tyrants with Royal Virtues strive to shine,
As Devils imitate the Power Divine;
While those Fictitious Attributes alone
Betray their false Pretensions to a Throne.
For Clemency, they make their Greatness Cheap,
And just Neglect by nauseous Follys reap.
For graceful Freedom, they Buffoon'ry choose,
And graciously vouchsafe themselves to expose.
Thus Ours frequenting the dull City Feasts,
With Buffoon Tricks tickled the Heavy Guests.
But tho these mean Disguises gained his Ends
Upon the Rout, they lost his Private Friends.
For Few to that Indifference arrive,
Made Public Laughter, that they can forgive;
And Men with less Reluctance commit
The Foulest Crime, then they can hear of it;
But nothing galls a Guilty Conscience more,
Then Lashes from that Fiend, which caused the Sore.
This made some Braves, abused in Public Feasts,
And touched too roughly by his Rustic Jests,
Too openly those Injurys resent,
Avowing, to their Cost, their Discontent.
But Maenon unconcerned submits to all,
And smiles to see the Angry Wretches fall.
His Faithful Wife had made the Tyrant Sport,
And him the Table Jest of Town, and Court;
And in the Camp his Interest grew so great,
It might in time give the Proctectorate.
Ambition, and Revenge, his Rage withold,
Vices too dear, for Railing, to be sold.
Yet tho to view he carry's Things so fair,
His swelling Heart does Mortal Poison bear;
And, he has ordered his Designs so well,
The Tyrant now, too late, the fatal Draught may feel.
Through all the Town the hasty Secret flies,
In Whispers told, and heard without Replies;
As if men feared some new Design behind,
Some yet Unfathomed Tyrannies to find;
But when so fast successive Tidings flew,
As made 'em credit their long Wishes true;
Not Seas got loose with greater Fury roar,
Which bearing down the Banks, regain their Shore;
Then over the Town spread the Tumult'ous noise
Of Crowds expressing their unruly Joys.
One never liked the Man, was never his Friend,
Another long foresaw his Tragic End.
Some insolently triumph in his Fall,
And others trace out Providence in all.
The Country, whom portentous Tokens fright,
Each Minute flock to tell some Dismal sight,
Aetna on all sides liquid Sulphur throws,
Which over the Meads in flaming Rivers flows;
Or neib'ring Lawns in dire Convulsions lie,
As Nature's self were at the point to die.
But, a much fiercer Aetna feeds his Pains,
And boiling Poisons travel through his Veins;
More pungent Pangs convulse his stubborn Heart,
And, minutely, he slowly Dies in every part.
Huge, Monstrous Whales forsake the troubled Sea,
Which gape like Hell, and seem to expect their Prey;
And dreadful Tempests hollow in the Air,
To waft him to the stormy Regions of Despair.
But those loud Storms can never be expressed,
Those Hurricanes which toss his troubled Breast;
And Loathsome Monsters no resemblance find
With those foul Shapes of Crimes which haunt his Mind.
Such Wrecks, such Anguish Soul, and Body feel.
He seems the sad Epitome of Hell.
His Lusts and Passions still more vigorous grow,
And wanting vent, prey on their Master now,
So exquisitely fierce, he suffers more,
Then all the Slaves they Sacrificed before.
Mean while such slow Assaults the Poisons make,
As if they would the tedious Siege forsake;
Or that they meant to kill the Wretch by parts,
Returning on himself his Barbarous Arts.
At last, by Friends forsaken, cursed by Foes,
Tired out of Life by cruel Lingering Woes.
Hardened, and Mad, and Cursing as he fell,
He dies not, but removes to another Hell.
Senseless, and Cold the Mighty Carcass lies,
Which was e're long so Busy, and so Wise.
And all his awful Presence, all his Pride
Must into Loathing, and Corruption slide.
No more his treacherous Arts beguile the Throng,
No more false Tears befriend his wily Tongue.
One little Daught has gained the Nation more,
Then all her Wealth, then all her Power before.
One little Draught has quenched that Thirst of Rule,
Which all her Blood, or Tears could never cool.
So from their Height may all Bold Wretches fall,
Unpitied, and Insulted over by all,
Who with false Shows the easy Rout betray,
To make their fenceless Properties a Prey;
Who of its Sacred Jewels spoil a Crown,
To deck Usurped Mock-Grandeur of their own!
So may they fall, o're-taken by their Crimes,
And their sad End affright succeeding Times!
Thus Maenon, who had winked at the Reproach
Successfully Revenged his Wife's Debauch;
Had not Ambition here put in a Claim.
The Common Good had found a nobler Name.
But Vulgar Spirits no Restraint admit,
They urge Ambition, if Success invite.
So He, whose Soul in some base Mould was made,
His Pow'rith' Army, more then Virtue, weighed;
And, while Confusions kept the City weak,
Resolved, by Force, the Tyrant's Room to take.
But as, often times, when gathering Tempests rise
Unite their Clouds, and darken all the Skies;
Some small Bright Tract, which on the Horizon's side
Unheeded lay, and almost Unespy'd,
Recovers the Lost Glory of the Day,
And seems to drive the scattered Host away;
So, tho his Motions bear a dreadful Form,
Threatening a Second, more Destructive Storm,
Yet from the North a Glorious Chief appears,
To scatter his Designs, and drive away their Fears.
The Brave Nicoetas has achieved his Fall,
And draws the Eyes, and fills the Mouths of all.
Himself Fame's Business and Delight alone;
Virtue's Darling; Honor's Mightyest Son.
Bold, Prudent, Just, Successful without Pride,
Loved of his Own, Praised by the Adverse side.
In Victory so Good, so True to his Word,
His Mercy held a Contest with his Sword.
He saw the People's Raging Calenture,
And Humor'd the Disease into a Cure;
He saw of Civil Broils the hideous Scarrs,
And put a Stop to more Unnat'ral Wars.
Ah, Wondrous Man! What Crowns belong to Thee,
Who from Her self set'st a Mad Nation Free,
And gain'st o'r War a Bloodless Victory!
Nothing could add to Thy sublime Renown,
But daring to refuse a proffered Crown:
And He, who durst attempt that generous Flight,
To make Success submit to Exiled Right,
Seems only Less, because at Greater Height.
On this Blessed Theme my Muse would ever dwell
Inspired by Worth she must delight to tell.
But whosoever Hiero to his Throne would bring,
In the same Verse Nicaetas's Praise must sing.
And, Lo! at last, the Goodly Prince is come,
In Triumph too, to Bless his Native Home.
Hiero of all Mankind, Beloved, and Blessed,
Of all Mankind the Lovly'st, and the Best.
Who from Great Hiero brings his Title down,
Heir to his Name, his Virtues, and his Crown;
Whose Right so long his Wilful Sinning Land
In Exile saw, yet would not Understand;
Whom, all his Years of Trouble and Distress,
The World abroad never Thought, or Honored less;
For, tho False Stones require a friendly Light,
The Royal Diamond shines no less by Night.
He comes, like the Great Indian God of old,
With Awful Beauty Graceful to behold.
Like Him reducing Humane Salvages.
A nobler way, reducing them by Peace.
Like Him too may he live, for ever Young
Beauty's Desire, and Wit's Eternal Song!
He comes, what yet is to be held most Dear,
As best befits Great Hiero's Greater Heir.
Mild, Gracious, Good, with Pardon in his hand,
His Mercy shaming even the Offending Land;
Embracing Wretches no Man durst propose,
Preventing even Repentance in his Foes.
He comes, and from all Coasts glad Throngs resort,
(The Northern Castle, and the Western Port)
As if the Nation had combined to meet,
And with one Breath their Welcome Monarch greet;
Or their United Duty that way strove
To make return for Universal Love.
The Household Gods with Holy Wreaths are crowned
The Streets with Hieroglyphic Pomps abound;
All Things assumed Unusu'al Brav'ry wear,
And in the Triumph bear a willing Share.
Nor can that Joy the Peoples Tongues express
Proceed but from a Sense of Happiness;
Their Eyes, and Hands, and every Speaking Part,
Proclaim alike the Language of their Heart.
Where e're, in all his long Triumphant way,
Himself the Brightest Glory of the Day,
The Mighty Prince with graceful Motion rides,
His heavenly Form into their Fancies glides,
Shedding a gentle Influence all around,
And Darting Charms which all beholders wound.
The Virgins blushing look their Hearts away;
Insensibly the Matron's Wishes stray.
The Aged Heads, joy'd at the Happy Sight,
In Tears express their Wonder, and Delight;
From their Own Years the Loyal Youth would take,
And to his Life a ready Offering make.
Oh, may thy Golden Years, Great Hiero flow,
Like Wealthy'st Rivers, Undisturbed and slow;
And every Day a Restoration prove,
A Conquest over their Hearts, a Triumph in their Love!
May Peace, which went, and with Thee came again,
And all her lovely Sons adorn thy Reign!
May Wealth sail in with every joyful Tide,
And, as just Tribute, all the World beside
To Thee transmit her Luxury, and Pride!
May Learning raise it is long neglected Head,
May Wit in all it is Ancient Glory spread,
Learning, and Wit, like Loyal Plants, shall thrive,
Which only in the Royal Sunshine live!
Tho Priests resume their Old Blasphemous Cant,
Asperse the King, and Curse the Government:
Tho Patriots talk of Jealousies, and Fears,
And Arbitrary Counsels fill all ears;
(If such Impostures can again take place
From Rebels sinning against the Highest Grace!)
Yet may the Gods that loved Sicilia best,
That gave her Hiero, and that gave her Rest,
May they outwatch the Malice of his Foes,
May they, in time, avert Her Threatening Woes!
And Thou, Dear Land! for whose Loved Sake alone
A Pit'ing Muse has made her Weakness known,
With just Regard her wholesome Words attend,
And weigh the Last Best Counsel of a Friend.
Return, return e're thou repent'st too late,
E're Heaven again has signed thy Woeful Fate;
A Worse Agathocles may be behind,
But Heaven can never so good an Hiero find.
FINIS.

