A Hue-and-Cry AFTER THE PLOT.
HAlloo the Plot! where is it ith'name of Fate?
Good People! what is become of Seventy Eight?
'Twas so long since, for all this great ado.
There Is Hopes, as said the old Crone, it may not be true.
These Years Egyptian Snakes we well may call,
The've eat the former Heads, and Tails, and all:
Never before was such an Hydra found;
Why't has in vain bin Burnt, and Hanged, and Drowned;
Yet still this Devil of a Plot revives;
Cats have but Nine, but this has Nine Cats Lives.
By great St. Coleman first it saw the light,
But then 'it's ugly shape so much did fright
The Holy Fathers, that without delay,
The unlucky Bastard must be made away.
And since to purpose they would the Business do,
In Godfreys Breast they Choakt, and Stabbed it too,
Yet what for a Deaths-Wound they meant to give,
Like an Imposthume pierst but made it Live,
Then up it got, but yet unhappy still,
'Twas fairly hanged with Bury, Green, and Hill,
And then, as soon as his old Friends were Dead,
By Transmigration into Langhorn fled.
No wonder if it would not there abide,
'Twas stripped and whipped, and sadly mortified;
Huffy with that, it left the Ill-natured Elf
E'ne to be string'd, and gutted by himself.
Then with the Jesuits at the Bar Harangu'd;
Then made fine Speeches, and was finely Hanged.
Treason as Dogs do Puddings, it did scorn,
And Died as Innocent as Child unborn.
Perkt up again it soon took up it is Station,
To comfort Wakeman in his Tribulation,
Grown Saucy there it Guinnys did not grudg,
Presto, 10000 li. blew up the Judge,
Though it was the' unconscionablest Dog alive,
In Fifteen-Thousand but to leave him five.
Well George rubbs off to France, but Plots so stout
'Twill play at small Games rather then stand out;
Grown jolly then with Dr. banished fears,
And took a rouch or two with brisk Celliers,
But frighted leaps from Meal-Tubb something sadder,
A Dow-baked Embryo like her BLOODY BLADDER,
Hodg took the Lump, and dip't in Holy Water,
Wraps it up warm in Wool, and Observator,
Brings it to Sams, where Crape with wine ecstatick,
(Who would have thought it,) Christens it PHANATICK
Plots turned to Puss, will no kind Mortal house her?
See how she is worried by that Dog-Rogue Towzer.
A PLOT! the word's a spell, the Crown's undone,
No Countercharm can save's but Forty one,
And Forty eight, and Forty one, and then,
Like Mill-Horse round to Forty eight again,
A PLOT! hence with the Bugbear, Srs. for shame,
Sly callow Treasons lurk in the pregnant name,
It Is Sinons Horse; as many Whigs are there
As in the Dreadful Oxford Army were,
Thus Roger yelps, as Children build a Town,
Of Snow or Dirt only to beat it Down,
No longer idleing here, poor Plot will stand,
But means to venture for a kinder Land.
Yet there hopeing to find a little rest
He Is hanged because he will not take the TEST,
And after all had made the Haddocks bite,
But that the courteous Gallows claimed it is right,
'Twas Conventickler next, but loath to loose
It Is life by falls of Pulpits, Seats, and Rews,
It Trimmer turned, and if you ask for Proof,
Here Is Rogers Ipse Dixit, that is enough.
It Is now Informer. If from thence it fall
It can be nothing but -- THE DEVIL AND ALL.
LONDON, Printed for F. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil.


