SOME CAUTIONS Offered to the CONSIDERATION Of Those who are to Choose MEMBERS
To SERVE in the Ensuing Parliament.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

Some Cautions offered to the Consideration of those who are to Choose MEMBERS
to serve in the Ensuing PARLIAMENT.
I Will make no other Introduction, than (...) it is hoped the Counties and
Buroughs will remember in general, That besides other Consequences, they will
have the Credit of a good Choice, or the Scandal that belongs to an ill one.

The Creators will be thought like their Creatures; and therefore an ill Choice
will either be a disparagement of their Understanding, or their Morals.

There cannot be a fuller Approbation of a thing, than the Choosing of it; so
that the fault of the Members chosen, if known beforehand, will be judged to
be of the growth of that County or Borough, after such a solemn Approbation of
them.

In short, those who send up their Representatives to Westminster, should take
care they may be such as will do them Right, and their Country Honor.

Now to the particulars.

I. A very extraordinary earnestness to be chosen, is no very good Symptom: A
desire to serve the Nation in Parliament, is an English Man's Ambition; always
to be Encouraged, and never to be Disapproved.

A Man may not only be willing to stand, but he may declare that willingness to
his Friends, that they may assist him, and by all the means becoming a modest
and prudent Man, he may endeavor to succeed, and prevent the being
disappointed in it.

But there is a wide difference between this and the raising a kind of a petty
War in the County or Corporation; entering the Lists rather for a Combat than an
Election; throwing Fireballs to put Men into a heat, and omitting to spread no
Reports, whether true or false, which may give an advantage by laying a Blemish
upon Competitor.

These Methods will ever be suspicious; it will never be thought a Natural
thing for Men to take such extravagant Pains for the mere sake of doing good to
others.

To be content to suffer something for a good end, is that which many would do
without any great repugnance: But where a Man can honestly propose nothing to
himself, except Troubles, Charge and Loss, by absence from his own Affairs, to
be so violent in the pursuit of so ill a Bargain, is not at all suited to the
languishing Virtue of Mankind so corrupted.

Such a self-denying Zeal in such a self-seeking Age, is so little to be
imagined, that it may without injury be suspected.

Therefore when these blustering Pretenders come upon the Stage, their natural
Temper and other Circumstances ought to be very well considered, before Men
trust them with the disposal of their Money, or their Liberty.

And I am apt to believe, there could hardly be found one single Man whose
other Qualifications would overballance the Objections that lie against such
importunate Suitors.

II. Recommending-Letters ought to have no effect upon Elections.

In this I must distinguish; For tho in strictness perhaps there should be no
Exception; yet in compliance with long practice, and out of an Indulgence that
is necessary in a time when Mankind is too much loosened from severe Rules, to
be kept close up to them, Letters sent only from Equal Men, doing Good men
right by giving Evidence in their behalf, offering them as fitly qualified,
when they really are so, and freeing them from unjust Aspersions, may be still
allowed.

The Letters I mean, are from Men of Power, where it may be beneficial to
comply, and inconvenient to oppose.

Choice must not only be free from Force, but from Influence, which is a degree
of Force: There must be no difficulty, no apprehension that a Refusal will be
ill taken, or resented.

The Freeholders must be Freemen too; they are to have no Shackles upon their
Votes in an Election; and the Men who stand, should carry their own Letters of
Recommendation about them, which are their good Character and Behavior in the
world, without borrowing Evidence, especially when it comes from suspected
hands.

Those who make use of these Epistles, ought to have no more advantage from
them, than the Muscovites have from the Letters put into their hands when they
are buried, to recommend them to St. Nicholas.

The First should as little get admittance for Men into the Parliament, as
these Letters can introduce the Bearers into Heaven.

The Scandal of such Letters lies first in the arrogant imposing of those that
write them, and next in the wretched Meanness of those that need them.

Men must be fallen very low in their Credit, who upon such an occasion have a
recourse to Power to support it: Their Enemies could not give stronger Evidence
of their not being fit for that which they pretend to. And if the Electors
judge otherwise, they will be pretty sure in a little time to see their
Mistake, and to repent it.

III. Non-Attendance in former Parliaments ought to be a Bar against the Choice
of Men who have been guilty of it.

It is one of the worst kinds of Non-Residence, and the least to be excused: It
is very hard that men should despise a Duty, which perhaps is the only ground
of the Respect that is paid to them.

It is such a piece of Sawciness for any one to press for the Honor of Serving
in Parliament, and then to be careless in Attending it, that in a House where
there were so many Officers, the Penalty had not been improper to have
Cashiered them for not appearing at the General Muster.

If men forbear to come out of Laziness, let them be gratified by taking their
Ease at Home without Interruption: If out of small Cunning to avoid
Difficulties, and to escape from the Inconvenience of Voting in Critical Cases,
let them enjoy that despicable pitch of Wisdom, and never pretend to make a
Figure where the Public is to be served.

If it would not be thought advisable to trust a man immediately after he has
been drawn out of a Gaol, it may be as reasonable to look upon one who for his
Non-attendance in the House has been sent for in Custody, as a kind of
Bankrupt, which puts him upon unequal terms with those who have been
assiduons in the discharge of their Duty.

They who thought fit in one Session to neglect the Public Business, may be
justly suspected, by their standing, in the next to intend their own.

Besides these more deliberate Offenders, there are some who do not Attend even
when they are in the House; absent in their Thoughts for want of Comprehending
the Business that is doing, and therefore diverted from it by any thing that is
Trivial.

Such Men are Nusances to a serious Assembly; and when they are Numerous, it
amounts almost to a Dissolution; it being scarce possible for good sense to
be heard, whilst a noise is made by the buzzing of these Horse-flies.

The Roman Censors who degraded a Senator for yawning whilst there was a
Debate, would have much more abundant matter here upon which they might
exercise their Jurisdiction.

To conclude this Head, There are so few that ever mended in these Cases, that
after the first Experiment it is not at all reasonable to take them upon a new
Trial.

IV. Men who are unquiet and busy in their Natures, are to give more than
ordinary proofs of their Integrity, before the Electing them into a Public
Trust can be justified. As a hot Summer breeds greater swarms of Flies, so an
active time breeds a greater number of these shineing Gentlemen.

It is pretty sure, That men who cannot allow themselves to be at rest, will
let no body else be at quiet. Such a perpetual Activity is apt by degrees to be
applied to the pursuit of their private Interest. And their thoughts being in a
continual motion, they have not time to dwell long enough upon any thing to
entertain a scruple.

So that they are generally at full liberty to do what is most convenient for
them, without being fettered by any Restraints.

Nay further; Whenever it happens that there is an Impunity for Cheating,
these nimble Gentlemen are apt to think it a disparagement to their
Understandings not to go into it.

I doubt it is not a wrong to the present Age, to say, That a Knave is a less
unpopular Calling than it has been in former times. And to say truth, it would
be ingratitude in some Men to turn Honest, when they owe all they have to their
Knavery.

The People are in this respect unhappy; they are too many to do their own
business; their numbers, which make their strength, are at the same time the
cause of their weakness; they are too unweildy to move; and for this reason
nothing can ever redeem them from this incurable Impotency: So that they must
have Solicitors to pursue and look after their Interests; who are too often
disposed to dispense with the Fidelity they owe to those that trust them;
especially if the Government will pay their Bills without Abatement.

It is better these Gentlemen's dexterity should be employed any where than in
Parliament, where the ill consequence of their being Members is too much
diffused, and not restrained to the County or Borough who shall be so unwary
as to Choose them.

V. Great Drinkers are less fit to Serve in Parliament than is apprehended.

Men's Virtue, as well as their Understanding, is apt to be tainted by it.

The appearance of it is Sociable and well-natur'd, but it is by no means to be
reli'd upon.

Nothing is more frail than a Man too far engaged in wet Popularity.

The habit of it makes Men careless of their business, and that naturally
leads them into Circumstances that make them liable to Temptation.

It is seldom seen, That any Principles have such a root, as that they can be
proof against the continual droppings of a Bottle.

As to the Faculties of the Mind, there is not less Objection; the vapors of
Wine may sometimes throw out sparks of Wit, but they are like scattered pieces
of Ore, there is no Vein to work upon.

Such Wit, even the best of it, is like paying great Fines; in which case there
must of necessity be an abatement of the constant Rent.

Nothing sure is a greater Enemy to the Brain, than too much moisture; it can
the least of any thing bear the being continually steeped: And it may be said,
that Thought may be resembled to some Creatures which can live only in a dry
Country.

Yet so arrogant are some men, as to think they are so much Masters of
Business, as that they can play with it; they imagine they can drown their
Reason once a day, and that it shall not be the worse for it; forgetting, that
by too often diving the Understanding at last grows too weak to rise up again.

I will suppose this fault was less frequent when Solon made it one of his
Laws, That it was Lawful to Kill a Magistrate if he was found Drunk. Such a
Liberty taken in this Age, either in the Parliament or out of it, would do
terrible Execution.

I cannot but mention a Petition in the year 1647, from the County of Devon, to
the House of Commons, against the undue Election of Burgesses, who are strong
in Wine and weak in Wisdom.

The cause of such Petitions is to be prevented by Choosing such as shall not
give handle for them.

VI. Wanting-Men give such cause of suspicion wherever they deal, that surely
the Chusers will be upon their guard, as often as such dangerous pretenders
make their application to them.

Let the behavior of such Men be never so plausible and untainted, yet they
who are to pitch upon those they are to trust with all they have, may be
excused, if they do not only consider what they are, but what they may be.

As we pray our selves we may not be led into Temptation, we ought not by any
means to thrust others into it; even though our own Interest was not concerned;
And sure when it is, the Argument has not less force.

If a man has a small Estate, and a numerous Family; where it happens that a
Man has as many Children as he has Tenants, It is not a Recommending
Circumstance for his Election.

When it comes to be the Question with such a Man, Whether he shall be Just to
the Public, or Cruel to his Family? It is very possible the decision may be on
the side of Corrupted Nature.

It is a Compliment to this Age, which it does not deserve, to suppose Men are
so tied up to Morality, as that they cannot be pinched out of it; especially
now when it is called Starving not to be Embroidered, or served in Plate.

The Men Chosen to serve their Country, should not be laden with Suits that
may tempt them to assume Privileges; much less under such Necessities as may
more immediately prepare them for Corruption.

Men who need a Parliament for their own particular Interest, have more reason
to offer their Service than others have to accept of it. And though I do not
doubt, but there may be some whose Virtue would triumph over their Wants, let
them be never so pressing; yet to expose the Public to the hazard of being
deceived, is that which can never be justified by those that Choose. And tho it
must be allowed possible for a wanting-Man to be honest, yet it is impossible
for a Man to be wise that will depend upon it.

VII. There is a sort of Men that have a Tinsel-wit, which make them shine
among those who cannot judge.

Club and Coffee-house Gentlemen, Petty Merchants of small Conceits, who have
an Empty habit of prating without meaning; They always aim at Wit, and
generally make false Fire.

Their business is less to learn, than to set themselves out; which makes them
choose to be with such as can only be Witnesses of their small Ingenuity, rather
than with such as might improve it.

There is a subordinate Wit, as much inferior to a Wit of business, as a Fiddler
at a Wake is to the lofty Sound of an Organ.

Men of this Size are in no degree suited to the business of redressing
Grievances, and making Laws.

There is a Parliament-Wit to be distinguished from all other kinds; those who
have it, do not stuff their heads only with Cavils and Objections.

They have a deliberate and an observing Wit, a Head turned to Public things;
Men who place a greater pleasure in mending a Fault, than in finding it out.

Their Understanding directs them to object in the right place, and not like
those who go by no other Rule, than to conclude, That must be the best Counsel
which was not taken.

These Wholesale Judges show such a gross and peevish Ignorance, that it
appears so openly in all they say or do, That they give loud warning to all
considering Men, not to choose them.

VIII. The dislike of slight Airy Men must not go so far, as to recommend
heaviness in opposition to it, especially where men are convicted of it by
Experience in former Sessions.

As a lively Coxcomb will seldom fail to lay in his claim for Wit; so a
Blockhead is apt to pretend, That his heaviness is a proof of his Judgment.

Some have an universal Lethargy spread upon their Understanding without
exception; others have an Insufficiency quo ad hoc, as in some Cases men have
quo ad hanc; These last can never so turn their thoughts to public Business,
as to give the attention that is necessary to comprehend it.

There are those who have such a thick Shell upon their Brains, that their
Ignorance is impenetrable, and makes such a stout resistance against Common
Sense, that it will never be subdued by it: True Heart of Oak, Ignorance that
will never yield, let Reason beat never so hard upon it; and though their kind
Neighbors have at several Elections sent them up to School again, they have
still returned the same incurable Dunces.

There is a false Gravity that is a very ill symptom; and it may be said, That
as Rivers, which run very slowly, have always the most Mud at the bottom; so a
solid stiffness in the constant course of a man's Life, is a sign of a thick
bed of Mud at the bottom of his Brain.

A dull Man is so near a dead Man, that he is hardly to be ranked in the List
of the Living; and as he is not to be buried whilst he is half alive, so he is
as little to be employed whilst he is half dead.

Parliaments are now grown to be quite other things than they were formerly.

In Ancient Times they were little more than Great Assizes; A Roll of
Grievances; Magna Charta confirmed; Privileges of Holy Church preserved; so
many Sacks of Wool given, and away.

Now there are Traps and Gins laid for the well-meaning Countrey-Gentlemen; he
is to grapple with the Cunning of Men in Town, which is not a little improved
by being rewarded and encouraged.

So that men whose good Intentions are not seconded and supported by some
degree of Ability, are as much the more dangerous, as they are less criminal
than Cunning Knaves. Their honest Mistakes, for want of distinguishing, either
give a Countenance to, or at least lessen the Scandal of the injurious things
that are done to the Public; and with leave asked for so odd an expression,
Their Innocent Guilt is as mischievous to the Laws and Liberties, as the most
deliberate Malice of those that would destroy them.

IX. There is an Abuse which daily increases, of sending such to Parliament,
as are scarce old enough to be sent to the University.

I would not in this restrain the Definition of these Boys to the Age of Twenty
One: If my Opinion might take place, I should wish that none might be chosen
into the House of Commons under Thirty; and to make some Equality, I should
from the same Motives think it convenient, That no Lord should have a Vote in
Judicature under that Age.

But to leave this Digression; I cannot see why the Chusers should not at least
make it a Rule among themselves, Not to send any Man to Represent them under
the Age of Twenty five, which is the time of Majority in most other places of
the world.

Surely it is not that we are Earlier Plants than our Neighbors.

Such supposition could neither be justified by our Climate, nor by the degree
of Latitude in which we are placed; I must therefore attribute it to the haste
our Ancestors had (and not without reason) to free themselves from the Severity
of Wardships.

But whether this, or any thing else, was the cause of our earlier stepping
into Man's Estate; so it is now, that according to our Laws, Twenty one is the
Age of Discretion; and the Young Man is then vested with a Legal, how defective
soever he may be in his Natural Understanding.

With all this, there ought to be a difference made between coming out of
Pupilage, and leaping into Legislatorship.

It is perhaps inconvenient enough that a man should be so soon let loose to
destroy his own Estate; but it is yet worse, that he should then have a Power
of giving away other men's.

The Law must make General Rules, to which there always will be some Objections.

If there were Tryers appointed to judge when Leading-Strings should be left
off, many would wear them a very great while, and some perhaps with their Gray
Hairs; there being no small number of Old Boys in all times, and especially in
this.

It is necessary therefore to make Exceptions to this General Rule, where the
Case so much requires it, as it does in the matter in question.

The ground of sending these Minors to Parliament ought not to recommend the
Continuance of it to those who are Lovers of Liberty; since it was by the
Authority and Influence of Great Men, that their Stripling Sons were first
received by the humble depending Boroughs, or the complying Counties.

They called it, as many do still, the best School for Young Men. Now
Experience has showed us, that it is like a School only in this respect, That
these Youngsters when they are admitted, deserve to be whipped in it.

If the House of Commons is a School, it must be for Men of riper Age; these
are too young to learn there, and being elevated by a mistaken smattering in
small Politics, they grow too supercilious to learn any where else; so that
instead of improving young promising Plants, they are destroyed by being
misplaced.

If then they do themselves hurt by it, it is surer yet that they do the House
no good by coming into it.

They were not Green Geese that are said to have saved the Capitol; they were
certainly of full Age, or else their Cackling could not have been heard, so as
to give warning.

Indeed it looked of late, when the Fashion was to have long continued
Parliaments, as if we might plant a Boy in the House with a Prospect that he
might continue there till he had Gray Hairs: And that the same Sapling might
have such a Root, as that he might grow up to be Timber without being removed.

If these Young Men had skill enough to pitch upon some Body in the House, to
whom they might resign their Opinion, and upon whose Judgment they might lean
without Reserve, there might be less Objection.

But to speak Truth, they know as little how to choose, as those did who elected
them; so that there is no other Expedient left, than the letting them alone.

One may say, generally speaking, That a young Man being too soon qualified for
the serious Business of Parliaments, would really be no good Symptom.

It is a sign of too much Phlegm, and too little Fire in the beginning of Age,
if Men have not a little more heat than is convenient; for as they grow older
they will run a hazard of not having so much as is necessary.

The Truth is, The vigor of Youth is softened and misappli'd, when it is not
spent either in War or close Studies; all other Courses have an idle Mixture
that comes to nothing, and makes them like Trees, which for want of Pruning
run up to Wood, and seldom or never bear any Fruit.

To conclude this Head, it must be owned, That there is no Age of our Life
which does not carry Arguments along with it to humble us; and therefore it
would be well for the Business of the World if young Men would stay longer
before they went into it, and old Men not so long before they went out of it.

X. Next to these may be ranked a sort of superfine Gentlemen, Carpet-Knights,
Men whose Heads may be said to be only Appurtenances to their Perukes, which
entirely ingross all their Care and Application.

Their Understanding is so strictly appropriated to their Dress, that no part
of it is upon pain of their utmost Displeasure to be diverted to any other use.

It is not by this intended to recommend an affected Clown, or to make it a
necessary Qualification for a Member of Parliament, that he must renounce clean
Linen or good Manners; but surely a too earnest Application to make every thing
sit Right about them, strikes too deep into their small stock of Thoughts to
allow it Furniture for any thing else.

To do Right to the these fine-spun Gentlemen, Business is too course a thing
for them, which makes it an unreasonable Hardship upon them to oppress them
with it; so that in tenderness to them, no less than out of care to the
Public, it is best to leave them to their Tailors with whom they will live in
much better Correspondence, when the Danger is prevented of their falling out
about Privileges.

XI. Men of Injustice and Violence, in their private Dealings, are not to be
trusted by the People with a Commission to treat for them in Parliament.

In the 4th of Edw. 3. The King Commands in his Writs not to choose any
Knights who had been Guilty of Crime, or Maintenance.

These warm Men seldom fail to run into Maintenance, taken in a larger Extent.

It is an unnatural Sound to come from a Man that is Arbitrary in his
Neighborhood, to talk of Laws and Liberties at Westminster; he is not a proper
Vehicle for such Words, which ought never to be profaned.

An habitual Breaker of the Laws, to be made one of the Lawmakers, is as if
the Benches in Westminster Hall should be filled with Men out of Newgate.

Those who are of this Temper cannot change their Nature out of respect to
their Country.

Quite contrary, they will less scruple to do Wrong to a Nation where no Body
takes it to himself, than to particular Men to whose Resentments they are more
immediately exposed.

In short, they lie under such strong Objections, that the overbalance of
better Men cannot altogether purify an Assemby where these unclean Beasts are
admitted.

XII. Excessive Spenders and unreasonable Savers are to be Excluded, being both
greedy from differing Causes.

They are both of them Diseases of Infection, and for that Reason are not to be
admitted into public Assemblies.

A prodigal Man must be greedy, because he thinks he can never spend enough.

The Wretch must be so, because he will never think he can hoard enough.

The World first admireth Men's Wisdom for getting Money, and then raileth at
them if they do not throw it away; so that the Prodigal Man is only the less
unpopular Extreme; he is every jot as well prepared as the Miser to fall out
with his Morals, when once a good Temptation is offered him to lay them aside.

On the other side, some rich Men are as eager to overtake those that are
Richer, as a Running-horse is to get to the Race-post, before the other that
contendeth with him.

Men often desire to heap, rather because others have more, than that they know
what to do with that which they covet with so much Impatience.

So that it is plain, the Fancy has as great a share in this imaginary
Pleasure of Gathering, as it has in Love, Ambition, or any other Passion.

It is pretty sure, that as no Man was ever the Richer for having a good
Estate, if he did not look after it; so neither will he be the Honester if he
has never so much.

Want of Care will always create want of Money; so that whether a Man is a
Beggar because he never had any Money, or because he can never keep any, it is
all one to those who are to trust him.

Upon this head of Prodigality, it may be no unreasonable Caution to be afraid
of those who in former Service have been extravagantly Liberal of the Public
Money.

Trusting is so hazardous a thing, that it should never be done but where it is
necessary; so that when Trustees are found upon Trial to be very Lavish, even
without examining into the Causes of it, (which are generally very suspicious)
it is a reasonable part of Preventing-Wit to change Hands, or else the Chusers
will pay the Penalty that belongs to good Nature so misplaced, and the
Consequences will be attended with the Aggravation of their not being made
Wiser by such a severe and costly warning.

XIII. It would be of very great use to take a general Resolution throughout
the Kingdom, That none should be chosen for a County but such as have either in
Possession, or Reversion, a considerable Estate in it; nor for a Borough,
except he be Resiant, or that he has some Estate in the County, in present, or
Expectancy.

There have been Eminent Men of Law who were of opinion, That in the Case of a
Burgess of a Town not Resiant, the Court is to give Judgment according to the
Statute, notwithstanding Custom to the contrary.

But not to insist now upon that, the prudential part is Argument enough to set
up a Rule to abrogate an ill Custom.

There is not, perhaps, a greater Cause of the Corruption of Parliaments, than
by adopting Members, who may be said to have no title by their Births.

The Juries are by the Law to be Ex vicineto; And shall there be less care that
the Representatives of the People be so too?

Sure the Interest of the County is best placed in the hands of such as have
some share in it.

The Outliers are not so easily kept within the pale of the Laws.

They are often chosen without being known, which is more like choosing
Valentines, than Members of Parliament. The Motive of their standing is more
justly to be supposed, that they may redress their own Grievances which they
know, than those of the Country, to which they are strangers.

They are chosen at London to serve in Cornwall, etc. and are often Parties,
before they come to be Representatives: One would think the Reproach it is for
a County not to have Men within their own Circle to serve them in Parliament,
should be Argument enough to reject these Trespassers, without urging the ill
Consequences in other Respects of their being admitted.

XIV. As in some Cases it is advisable to give a total exclusion to Men not
fitly qualified; so in others it is more proper to lay down a general Rule of
Caution, with allowance of some Exceptions, where Men have given such proofs of
themselves, as create a Right for them to be distinguished.

Of this nature is that which I shall say concerning Lawyers, who, by the same
Reason that they may be useful, may be also very dangerous.

The Negligence, and want of Application in Gentlemen, has made them to be
thought more necessary than naturally they are in Parliament.

They have not only engrossed the Chair of the Speaker, but that of a Committee
is hardly thought to be well filled, except it be by a Man of the Robe.

This makes it worthy of the more serious reflection of all Gentlemen, that it
may be an Argument to them to qualify themselves in Parliamentary Learning, in
such a manner, as that they may rely upon their own Abilities, in order to the
serving their Country.

But to come to the point in question; It is not without Precedent, that
Practising-Lawyers have been excluded from serving in Parliament; and, without
following those Patterns strictly, I cannot but think it reasonable, that
whilst a Parliament sits, no Member of Parliament should plead at any Bar.

The Reason of it is in many respects strong in it self, and is grown much
stronger by the long sitting of Parliaments of late; but I will not dwell upon
this: The matter now in question being concerning Lawyers being Elected, which
I conceive should be done with so much circumspection, that probably it would
not often happen.

If Lawyers have great Practice, that ought to take them up; if not, it is no
great sign of their Ability; and at the same time gives a suspicion, that they
may be more liable to be tempted.

If it should be so in Fact, That no King ever wanted Judges to soften the
stiffness of the Laws that were made, so as to make them suit better with the
Reason of State, and the Convenience of the Government;

It is no Injury now to suppose it possible for Lawyers in the House of
Commons, so to behave themselves in the making of New Laws, as the better to
make way for the having their Robes lined with Fur.

They are Men used to argue on both sides of a Question; And if ordinary Fees
can inspire them with very good Reasons in a very ill Cause, that Faculty
exercised in Parliaments, where it may be better encouraged, may prove very
inconvenient to those that choose them.

And therefore, without arraigning a Profession, that it would be scandalous
for a man not to honor; one may, by a Suspicion, which is the more excusable
when it is in the behalf of the People, imagine that the habit of taking Money
for their Opinion, may create in some such a forgetfulness to distinguish, that
they may take it for their Vote.

They are generally Men who by a laborious study hope to be advanced: They have
it in their Eye as a Reward for the Toil they undergo.

This makes them generally very slow, and ill disposed (let the Occasion never
so much require it) to wrestle with that Soil where Preferment grows.

Now if the Supposition be in its self not unreasonable, and that it should
happen to be strengthened and confirmed by Experience, it will be very
unnecessary to say any more upon this Article, but leave it to the Electors to
consider of it.

XV. I cannot forbear to put in a Caveat against Men tied to a Party.

There must in every body be a Leaning to that sort of Men who profess some
Principles, more than to others who go upon a different Foundation; but when a
man is drowned in a Party, plunged in it beyond his depth, he runs a great
hazard of being upon ill terms with good Sense, or Morality, if not with both
of them.

Such a man can hardly be called a Free Agent, and for that reason is very
unfit to be trusted with the Peoples Liberty, after he has given up his own.

It is said, That in some part of the Indies they do so affect little Feet,
that they keep them squeezed while they are Children, so that they stay at that
small size after they are grown Men.

One may say something like this of Men locked up in a Party; They put their
Thoughts into such a Narrow Mould, that they can never be enlarged nor released
from their first Confinements.

Men in a Party have Liberty only for their Motto; in reality they are greater
Slaves than any body else would care to make them.

A Party, even in times of Peace, (tho against the Original Contract, and the
Bill of Rights) sets up and continues the exercise of Martial Law: Once
enrolled, the Man that quitteth, if they had their will, would be hanged for a
Deserter.

They communicate Anger to one another by Contagion: And it may be said, that
if too much Light dazzleth the Eyesight, too much Heat does not less weaken
the Judgment.

Heat reigns in the Fancy; and Reason, which is a colder Faculty of the
Brain, takes more time to be heard, than the other will allow.

The Heat of a Party is like the Burning of a Fever, and not a Natural Warmth,
evenly distributed to give Life and Vigor.

There was a time indeed when Anger showed a good sign of Honesty; but that
Evidence is very much weakened by Instances we have seen since the Days of Yore:
And the Publick-spirited Choler has been thrown off within time of Memory, and
lost almost all its Credit with some People, since they found what Governments
thought fit to make their so doing a step to their Preferment.

A strong blustering Wind seldom continues long in one Corner.

Some men knock loud only to be let in; the Bustle they make is animated by
their private Interest. The outward Blaze only is for Religion and Liberty: The
true lasting Fire, like that of the Vestals which never went out, is an
eagerness to get somewhat for themselves.

A House of Commons composed of such Men, would be more properly so many
Merchants incorporated in a Regular Company, to make their particular
Adventures, than Men sent from the People to serve and represent them.

There are some Splenetick Gentlemen who confine their favorable Opinion
within so narrow a compass, that they will not allow it to any man that was not
hanged in the late Reigns.

Now by that rule one might expect they should rescue themselves from the
disadvantage of being now alive; and by abdicating a World so little worthy of
them, get a great Name to themselves, with the general satisfaction of all
those they would leave behind them.

Amongst the many other ill consequences of a stated Party, it is none of the
least, that it tempts low and insignificant men to come upon the Stage, to
expose themselves, and to spoil Business.

It turns a Cipher into a Figure, such a one as it is: A man in a Party is
able to make a noise, let it be never so empty a sound.

A weak man is easily blown out of his small senses, by being mustered into a
Party; he is flattered till he likes himself so well, that he takes it
extremely ill if he has not an Employment.

Nothing is more in fashion, than for men to desire good Places, and I doubt
nothing is less so than to deserve them.

From Nobody to Somebody is such a violent stride, that Nature, which has the
Negative Voice, will not give its Royal Assent to it: So that when insufficient
Men aim at being in business, the worst of their Enemies might out of malice to
them, pray for their Preferment.

There could be no end, if one did not stop till this Theme had no more matter
to furnish. I will only say, Nothing is more evident, than that the Good of the
Nation has been sacrificed to the Animosities of the several Contending
Parties; and without entering into the dispute which of them are more or less in
the right, it is pretty sure, that whilst these Opposite Sets of Angry Men are
playing at Football, they will break all the Windows, and do more hurt than
their pretended Zeal for the Nation will ever make amends for.

In short, a man so engaged is retained before the people take him for their
Council; he has such a Reserve for his Party, that it is not advisable for
those who would choose him, to depend upon his Professions. All Parties assuming
such a Dispensing Power, that by their Sovereign Authority they cancel and
dissolve any Act or Promise that they do not afterward approve.

These things considered, those who will choose such men deserve whatever
follows.

XVI. Pretenders to Exorbitant Merit in the late Revolution, are not without
Objections against them, when they stand to serve in Parliament. It would not
only be a low, but a criminal kind of Envy, to deny a distinguishing Justice to
Men who have been instrumental and active, when the Service of their Country
required it. But there ought to be Moderation in men's Claims, or else it is
out of the power of our poor Island to satisfy them. It is true, Service of all
kinds is grown much dearer, like Labourer's Wages, which formerly occasioned
several Statutes to regulate them.

But now the men who only carried Mortar to the Building, when it is finished,
think they are ill dealt with if they are not made Master-Workmen.

They presently cry out, The Original Contract is broken, if their Merit is not
rewarded, at their own Rate too.

Some will think there never ought to be an end of their Rewards; when
indifferent Judges would perhaps be puzzled to find out the beginning of their
Merit.

They bring in such large Bills, that they must be examind': Some bounds must
be put to men's Pretensions; else the Nation, which is to pay the Reckoning,
will every way think it a scurvy thing to be undone, whether it be by being
over run by our Enemies, or by the being exhausted by our Friends.

There ought therefore to be deductions where they are reasonable, the better
to justify the paying what remains.

For example, if any of these passionate Lovers of the Protestant Religion
should not think fit, in their manner of Living, to give the least evidence of
their Morality, their claims upon that Head might sure be struck off without
any Injustice to them.

If there are any who set down great Sums as a Reward due to their Zeal for
rescuing Property from the Jaws of Arbitrary Power; their pretensions may
fairly be rejected, if now they are so far from showing a care and tenderness
of the Laws, that they look rather like Council retained on the other side.

It is no less strange, than I doubt it is true, that some Men should be so in
Love with their dear Mistress, Old England, with all her wrinkles, as out of an
Heroic Passion to Swim over to rescue her from being Ravished; and when they
have done the Feat, the first thing after Enjoyment is, that they go about to
Strangle her.

For the sake of true Love, it is not fit that such ungentile Gallants should
be too much encouraged; and their Arrogance for having done well at first, will
have no right to be excused, if their doing so ill at last does not make them a
little more modest.

True Merit, like a River, the deeper it is, the less noise it makes.

These loud proclaimers of their own Deserts, are not only to be suspected for
their truth, but the Electors are to consider that such meritorious Men lay an
Assessment upon those that Choose them.

The Public Taxes are already heavy enough without the addition of these
private Reckonings. It is therefore the safer way not to employ Men, who will
expect more for their Wages, than the mistaken Borough that sends them up to
Parliament could be sold for.

XVII. With all due regard to the noblest of Callings, Military Officers are
out of their true Element when they are misplaced in a House of Commons.

Things in this World ought to be well suited. There are some Appearances so
unnatural, that men are convinced by them without any other Argument.

The very Habit in some Cases, recommendeth or gives Offense.

If the Judges upon the Bench should, instead of their Furrs, which signify
Gravity, and bespeak Respect, be Clothed like the Jockeys at New Market, or
wear Jack-Boots and Steenkirks; they would not in reality have less Law, but
Mankind would be so struck with this unusual Object, that it would be a great
while before they could think it possible to receive Justice from Men so
Accouter'd.

It is to some degree the same thing in this Case; such Martial Habits,
Blew-Coats, Red Stockings, etc. make them look very unlike Grave Senators. One
would almost swear they were Creatures apart, and of a differing Species from
the rest of the Body.

In former times, when only the Refiant Shopkeeper was to Represent his
Corporation (which by the way is the Law still at this day) the Military Looks
of one of these Sons of Mars, would have stared the Quaking Member down again
to his Borough.

Now the number of them is so increased, that the Peaceable part of the House
may lawfully swear they are in fear of their Lives, from such an Awful
Appearance of Men of War.

It makes the Room look like a Guard-house by such an ill-suited mixture. But
this is only the outside, the bark of the Argument; the root goes yet deeper
against Choosing such Men, whose Talents ought to be otherwise applied.

Their two Capacities are so inconsistent, that Men's undertaking to serve both
the Cures, will be the cause in a little time, that we shall neither have Men
of War, nor Men of Business, good in their several kinds.

An Officer is to give up his Liberty to obey Orders; and it is necessarily
incident to his Calling that he should do so.

A Member of Parliament is originally to be tender of his own Liberty, that
other Men may the better trust him with theirs.

An Officer is to enable himself by his Courage, improved by Skill and
Experience, to support the Laws (if Invaded) when they are made; but he is not
supposed to be at leisure enough to understand how they should be made.

A Member of Parliament is to fill his thoughts with what may best conduce to
the Civil Administration; which is enough to take up the whole Man, let him be
never so much raised above the ordinary Level.

These two opposite Qualifications, being placed in one Man, make him such an
ambiguous divided Creature, that he does not know how to move.

It is best to keep Men within their proper Sphere; few Men have Understanding
enough exactly to fill even one narrow Circle, fewer able to fill two;
especially when they are both of so great compass, and that they are so
contrary in their own Natures.

The Wages he has as a Member, and those he receives as an Officer, are paid
for Services that are very differing; and in the doubt which of them should be
preferably performed, it is likely the greater Salary may direct him, without
the further inducements of complying most, where he may expect most advantage
by it.

In short, if his dependence is not very great, it will make him a scurvey
Officer; if it is great, it will make him a scurvier Member.

XVIII. Men under the scandal of being thought private Pensioners, are too fair
a mark to escape being considered, in reference to the point in Question.

In case of plain Evidence, it is not to be supposed, possible, that Men
convicted of such a Crime should ever again be Elected.

The difficulty is in determining what is to be done in case of suspicion.

There are suspicions so well grounded, that they may pretend to have the force
of proofs, provided the penalty goes only to the forbearing to Trust, but not
extending it so far as to Punish.

There must be some things plain and express to justify the latter, but
Circumstances may be sufficient for the former: As where Men have had such
sudden Cures of their ill Humors, and opposition to the Court, that it is out
of the way of ordinary methods of recovery from such Distempers, which have a
much slower progress; it must naturally be imputed to some Specific that
makes such a quick alteration of the whole Mass of Blood.

Where Men have raised their way of Living, without any visible means to
support them in it, a suspicion is justified, even by the Example of the Law,
which in cases of this kind, though of an inferior nature, does upon this
foundation not only raise Inferences, but inflict Punishments.

Where Men are immoral, and scandalous in their Lives, and dispense familiarly
with the Rules by which the World is Governed, for the better preserving the
bonds of human Society; it must be a confidence very ill placed, to conclude it
impossible for such Men to yield to a Temptation well offered and pursued;
when, the truth is, the habit of such Bons vivants, which is the fashionable
word, makes a suspicion so likely, that it is very hard not to believe it to
be true.

If there should be nothing but the general Report, even that is not to be
neglected.

Common Fame is the only Liar that deserves to have some Respect still
reserved to it; tho she tells many an Untruth, she often hits right, and most
especially when she speaks ill of men.

Her Credit has sometimes been carried too far, when it has gone to the
divesting men of any thing of which they were possessed, without more express
evidence to justify such a proceeding.

If there was a doubt whether there ever was any Corruption of this kind, it
would alter the Question; but sure that will not bear the being controverted.

We are told, That Charles the Fifth sent over into England 1200000 Crowns to
be distributed amongst the Leading Men, to encourage them to carry on Elections.

Here was the Protestant Religion to be bought out for a valuable Consideration
according to Law, though not according to Gospel, which exalts it above any
Price that can be set upon it.

Now, except we had reason to believe that the Virtue of the World is improved
since that time, we can as little doubt that such Temptations may be Offered,
as that they may be Received.

It will be owned, that there is to be a great tenderness in Suspecting; but it
must be allowed at the same time, that there ought not to be less in Trusting,
where the People are so much concerned; especially, when the Penalty upon the
Party suspected goes no further than a suspension of that Confidence, which it
is necessary to have in those who are to represent the Nation in Parliament.

I cannot omit the giving a Caution against admitting Men to be chosen, who
have Places of any value.

There needs the less to be said upon this Article, the truth of the
Proposition being supported by such plain Arguments.

Sure no Man has such a plentiful spring of Thought, as that all that flows
from it is too much to be applied to the Business of Parliament.

It is not less sure, that a Member of Parliament, of all others, ought least
to be exempted from the Rule, That no man should serve two Masters.

It does so split a man's Thoughts, that no man can know how to make a fitting
distribution of them to two such differing Capacities.

It exposes Men to be suspected, and tempted, more than is convenient for the
Public Service, or for the mutual good Opinion of one another, which there
ought to be in such an Assembly.

It either gives a real dependence upon the Government, which is inconsistent
with the necessity there is, that a Member of Parliament should be disengaged;
or at least it has the appearance of it, which makes them not look like
Freemen, though they should have virtue enough to be so.

More Reasons would lessen the Weight of this last, which is, That a Bill to
this effect, commonly called the Self-Denying Bill, passed even this last House
of Commons.

A greater demonstration of the irresistible strength of Truth cannot possibly
be given; so that a Copy of that Bill in every County or Borough, would hardly
fail of discouraging such Pretenders from Standing, or at least it would
prevent their Success if their own Modesty should not restrain them from
attempting it.

XX. If Distinctions may be made upon particular Men, or Remarks fixed upon
their Votes in Parliament, they must be allowed in relation to those Gentlemen,
who for Reasons best known to themselves thought fit to be against the
Triennial Bill.

The Liberty of Opinion is the thing in the World that ought least to be
controlled, and especially in Parliament.

But as that is an undoubted Assertion, it is not less so, That when Men Sin
against their own Light, give a Vote against their own Thought, they must not
plead Privilege of Parliament against the being Arraigned for it by others,
after they are Convicted of it by themselves.

There cannot be a Man, who in his definition of a House of Commons, will state
it to be an Assembly, that for the better redressing of Grievances the People
feel, and for the better furnishing such Supplies as they can bear, is to
continue, if the King so pleases, for his whole Reign.

This could be as little intended, as to throw all into one Hand, and to
renounce the Claim to any Liberty, but so much as the Sovereign Authority would
allow.

It destroys the end of Parliaments, it makes use of the Letter of the Law
to extinguish the Life of it.

It is, in truth, some kind of Disparagement to so plain a thing, that so much
has been said and written upon it; and one may say, It is such an Affront to
those Gentlemen's Understandings to censure this Vote only as a Mistake, that,
as the Age goes, it is less Discredit to them to call it by its right Name;
and if that is rightly understood by those who are to choose them, I suppose
they will let them Exercise their Liberty of Conscience at home, and not make
Men their Trustees, who in this Solemn Instance have such an unwillingness to
surrender.

It must be owned, That this Bill has met with very hard Fortune, and yet that
does not in the least diminish the value of it.

It had in it such a Root of Life, that it might be said, It was not Dead but
Sleeped; and we see that the last Session, it was revived and animated by the
Royal Assent, when once fully informed of the Consequence, as well as of the
Justice of it.

In the mean time, after having told my Opinion, Who ought not to be Chosen:

If I should be asked, who ought to be, my Answer must be, Choose Englishmen;
and when I have said that, to deal honestly, I will not undertake that they are
easy to be found.

FINIS.

