THE COURT OF NEPTUNE.

A Poem.

ADDRESSED To the Right Honorable CHARLES MONTAGUE Esquire.

BY JOHN HUGHES.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at Gray's-Inn Gate in Gray's-Inn Lane. 1700.

THE COURT OF NEPTUNE.
A Poem.
BEgin, Celestial Muse! a tuneful Strain,
Of Albion's Prince conducted over the Main;
Of Courts concealed in Waves, and Neptune's watery Reign!
Sing, from beneath, how the Green Deity
Rose to the Sovereign of the British Sea;
To Power confessed the Triple Mace resigned,
O'er-rul'd the Floods, and charged the Rebel Wind;
Secured his Passage homeward, and restored
Safe to the loveli'st Isle, the best-lov'd Lord.
The generous Name of Montague has long
Been famed in Verse, and graced the Poet's Song;
In Verse himself can happy Wonders do,
The best of Patrons, and of Poets too.
Amidst the skilful Quire that court his Ear,
If he vouchsafe these ruder Lays to hear,
His bright Example, while to him I sing,
Shall raise my feeble Flight, and mount me on the Wing.
On Albion's Eastern Coast, an Harwich.
ancient Town
O'erlooks the Sea, to Mariners well known;
Where the swift The River Stoure, that runs between Suffolk and Essex.
Stourus ends his Snaky Train,
And pays his Watery Tribute to the Main:
Stourus, whose Stream, prolifick as it glides,
Two Fertile Counties in its Course divides,
And rolls to Sea-ward with a Lover's Pace:
There beauteous Orwell meets his fond Embrace;
They mix their amorous Streams, the briny Tide
Receives em joined; their crooked Shores provide
A spacious Bay within, for Anchored Ships to ride.
Here, on the Margin of the rolling Flood,
Divinely Fair, like Sea-born Venus, stood
Britannia's Genius, in a Robe arrayed
Of broider'd Arms, and Heraldry displayed:
A Crown of Cities charged her graceful Brows;
In waving Curls her Hair luxuriant flows;
Celestial Glories in her Eyes are seen;
Her Stature tall, Majestic is her Mien.
With such a Presence, through the adoring Skies,
Shines the Great Parent of the Deities;
Such Tow'ry Honors on her Temples rise,
When drawn by Lions, she proceeds in State:
Trains of Attendant-Gods around her Chariot wait;
The Mother-Goddess, with superior Grace,
Surveys, and numbers over her bright Immortal Race.
While thus the lovely Genius hovers over
The Water's Brink, and from the sandy Shore
Beholds the alternate Billows fall and rise,
(By Turns they sink below, by Turns they mount the Skies.)
And must, she said, --
Then paused, and drew a Sigh of anxious Love;
Must my dear Lord this faithless Ocean prove?
Escaped the Chance of War, and Fraud of Foes,
Will thou to warning Waves thy sacred Life expose?
Why am I thus divided by the Sea,
From all the World, and all the World in thee?
Could Sighs and Tears the Rage of Tempests bind,
With Tears I Would bribe the Seas, with Sighs the Wind.
Soft sighing Gales thy Canvas should inspire;
But hence ye boistrous Storms! far hence retire,
To inland Woods, there your mad Powers appease,
And scour the dusty Plains, or strip the Forest Trees,
Or lodged in hollow Rocks, profoundly sleep,
And rest from the loud Labors of the Deep!
Why should I fear? -- if Heroes be the Care
Of Heaven above, and Heaven inclines to Prayer,
Thou sail'st secure; my Sons with lifted Eyes,
And pious Vows, for thee have gained the Skies.
Come then my much-loved Lord! No more th'Alarms
Of wastful War require thee from my Arms.
Thy Sword gives plenteous Peace, but without thee,
Peace has no Charms, and Plenty's Poverty.
At length enjoy, for whom you have fought, the Queen
Of Islands, Bright, majestic, and serene!
Unveiled from Clouds, which did her Form disguise,
And hid a thousand Beauties from thy Eyes.
A thousand Treasures unsurvey'd invite,
Their Lord to various Scenes of new Delight.
Come see the Dower I brought! My spacious Downs,
My numerous Counties, and my ancient Towns.
Landskips of rising Mountains, shaggy Woods,
Green Valleys, smiling Meadows, silver Floods,
And Plains with lowing Herds enriched around,
The Hills with Flocks, the Flocks with Fleeces crowned;
All these with native Wealth thy Power maintain,
And bloom with Blessings of thy easy Reign.
Haste, hoist thy Sails! and through the foamy Brine,
Rush to my Arms! henceforth be wholly mine;
After Nine toilsome Years, let warlike Labor cease,
And flourish now secure in the soft Arts of Peace!
She said; th'entreated Winds her Accents bore,
And winged the Message to the Belgic Shore.
The pious Hero heard, nor could delay
To meet the lovely Voice, that summoned him away;
The lovely Voice, whose soft complaining Charms
Before had called the Succor of his Arms,
Nor called in vain; when fired with generous Rage
To Oppose the Fury of a barbarous Age,
Like Jove with awful Thunder in his Hand,
Through Storms and Fleets at Sea, and Foes at Land
He urged his daring Way; before his Sight
On Silver Wings bright Glory took her Flight,
And left to guide his Course long shining Tracks of Light.
And now once more embarked, propitious Gales
Blow fresh from Shore, and fill his hollow Sails.
As when the golden God that rules the Day
Drives down his flaming Chariot to the Sea,
And leaves the Nations here involved in Night,
To distant Regions he transports his Light;
So William's Rays by turns two Nations cheer,
And when he sets to them, he rises here.
Forsaken Belgia, e're the Ship withdrew,
Shed generous Tears, and breathed this soft Adieu.
Since Empire calls thee, and a glorious Throne,
Thy People's weighty Interests, and thy own;
(Though struggling Love would fain persuade thy Stay)
Go, where thy better Fortune leads the Way!
Mean while my Loss allows me to complain,
And wish -- ah no! that partial Wish were vain.
Though honored Crete had nursed the thundering God,
Crete was not always blessed with his Abode;
Nor was it fit that William's Godlike Mind,
For Nations born, should be to One confined.
This only grant, since I must ask no more,
Revisit once again your Native Shore!
That Hope my Sorrows shall beguile, and thou
My happy Rival! wilt that Hope allow;
It Is all th'Enjoyment Fate has left me now.
So may thou, fair Britannia! ever be
Firm to thy Sov'reign's Love, and his to thee!
While widowed I -- there rising Sighs repressed
Her fainting Voice, and stifled in the rest.
Now while the bounding Vessel drives before
The gusty Gales, and leaves the lessening Shore,
Behold the parting Clouds to Distance fly!
And Golden Glories pouring from on high
New dress the Day, and cheer th'enlightn'd Sky.
One shooting Beam, like Lightning doubly bright,
Darts on the Middle Main its streaming Light.
Lo! William's Guardian Angel there descends;
To Neptune's Court his heavenly Message tends.
In Arms celestial how he shines afar,
Like Pallas marching to th'awaken'd War!
His Left Hand gripes a spacious Orb of Shield
With thousand intercepted Dangers filled,
And Deaths of various Kind; his right displays
A tempered Blade that spreads a formidable Blaze.
He strikes the Waves, th'obsequious Waves obey,
And opening in a Gulf disclose the downward Way.
O Muse! by thee conducted down, I dare
The Secrets of the Watery World declare,
For Nothing scapes thy View; to thee it is given,
To range the Space of Earth, and Seas and Heaven,
Descry a thousand Forms, concealed from mortal Sight,
And in immortal Verse to give the Visions Light.
A Rock there lies, in Depth of Sea profound,
About its Clefts rich Beds of Pearl abound,
Where sportful Nature, covering her Retreat
With flowing Waters, holds her secret Seat.
In Woods of Coral intricate she strays,
And wreaths the Shells of Fish a thousand various ways,
And animates the Spawn of all her finny Race.
Th'unnumber'd Species of the fertile Tide
In Shoals around their mighty Mother glide.
From out the Rock's wide Caverns deep below
The rushing Ocean rises to its Flow,
And ebbing here retires; within its sides
In roomy Caves the God of Seas resides.
Pillars unhewn of living Stone bear high
His vaulted Courts; in Storms the Billows fly
Over th'ecchoing Roof, like Thunder through the Skies,
And warn the Ruler of the Floods to rise,
And check the raving Winds, and the swollen Waves chastise.
Rich Spoils, by plundring Tempests hither born,
An Universe of Wealth, the Palace Rooms adorn.
Before its Entrance broken Wrecks are seen
In Heaps deformed, a melancholy Scene.
But far within, upon a mossy Throne,
With washy Ooze, and Samphire overgrown,
The Seagreen King his forky Scepter rears;
Awful his Aspect, numerous are his Years.
A Pearly Crown circles his Brows Divine;
His Beard and dewy Hair shed trickling Drops of Brine.
The River-Gods, his numerous Progeny,
On Beds of Rushes round their Parent lie.
Here Danube and the Rhine; Nile's secret Source
Dwells here concealed, hence Tiber takes his Course.
Hence rapid Rhodanus his Current pours,
And issuing from his Urn Majestic Padus roars;
And Alpheus seeks with silent Pace the loved Sicilian Shores.
But chief in Honor, Neptune's darling Son,
The beauteous Thames, lies nearest to his Throne.
Nor thou, fair Boyne! shall pass unmention'd by,
Already sung in Strains that never shall die.
These, and a thousand more, whose winding Trains
Seek various Lands, the wealthy Sire maintains;
Each Day the fluid Portions he divides,
And fills their craving Urns with fresh recruited Tides.
But not alike; for often his partial Care
Bestows on some a disproportioned Share;
From whence their swelling Currents o'er-supply'd,
Through deluged Fields in noisie Triumph ride.
The God was just preparing to renew
His daily Task, when sudden in his View
Appeared the Guardian Power, all dazzling Bright,
And entering, flashed the Caves with Beamy Light.
Boyne, Rhine, the Sambre on their Banks had seen
The glorious Form, and knew his Martial Mien;
In Throngs the admiring Nereids round him pressed,
And Tritons crowd to view the Heavenly Guest.
Then thus advancing, he his Will explains,
O mighty Sovereign of the Liquid Plains!
Haste, to the Surface of the Deep repair,
This Solemn Day requires thy Presence there,
To rule the Storms, the rising Waves restrain,
And shake thy Scepter over the governed Main.
By breathing Gales on thy Dominions driven,
To thee Three Kingdoms Hopes in Charge are given,
The Glory of the World, and Best-belov'd of Heaven.
Behold him figured here! -- he said, and held
Refulgent to his View, the Guardian Shield.
On the rich Mould, inwrought with Skill Divine,
Great Williams Wars in splendid Sculpture shine.
Here, how his saving Power was first displayed,
And Holland rescued by his Youthful Aid;
When kindling in his Soul, the Martial Flame
Broke fiercely out, preluding future Fame,
And round the Frontiers dealt avenging Fire;
Swift from the hot Pursuit the blasted Foes retire.
Then Battles, Sieges, Camps are engraved afar,
And the long Progress of the dreadful War.
Above the rest, Seneffe's immortal Fight,
In larger Figures, offered to the Sight,
With Martial Terror charms, and gives a fierce Delight.
Here the Confederate Troops are forced to yield,
Driven by unequal Numbers through the Field:
With his bright Sword young Nassau there withstands
Their Flight, with Prayers and Blows he urges his Commands,
Upbraids their fainting Force, and boldly throws
Himself the first amidst the wondering Foes.
What dare not Men, by such a General led?
Rallying with Shouts, their Hero at their Head,
Fired with new Rage, ashamed they once did fly,
Resolved to conquer now, or resolute to die,
Through trampled Heaps of Slain they rush to Victory.
Earth trembles at the Charge; Death, Blood, and Prey
Insatiate riot all the murderous Day;
Nor peaceful Night it self their Fury can allay,
Till the pale Moon, that sickens at the Sight,
Retires behind a Cloud, to blind the bloody Fight.
Again, the Shield in Savage Prospect shows
An ancient St. Dennis near Mons.
Abbey, which rough Woods enclose;
And Precipices vast abruptly rise,
Where, safe encamped, proud Luxemburgh defies
All open Violence, or close Surprise.
But see! a second Hannibal from far
Up the steep Height conducts the entangl'd War.
Brave Ossory, attended with the Pride
Of English Valor, charges by his Side.
Enclosed, they fight; the Forests shine around
With flashing Fires, the thundered Hills rebound,
And the shocked Country wide beneath rebellows to the Sound.
Forced from their Holds, at length they haste their Flight;
Rich Tents, and Stores of War, the Victor's Toils requite.
Then Peace ensues; and in a shining Train
The Friendly Chiefs assemble on the Plain.
An ardent Zeal the Gallick General warms,
To see the Youth that kindled such Alarms;
Wondering, he views; secure the Soldiers press
Round their late Dread, and the glad Treaty bless.
Next, on the broad Circumference is wrought
The Nine Years War for loved Britannia fought,
The Cause the same: Fair Liberty betrayed,
And banished Justice, fly to him for Aid.
Here sailing Ships are drawn, the crowded Strand,
And Heavens Avenger hasting to the Land.
Oppression, Fraud, Confusion, and Affright,
Fierce Fiends, that ravaged in the gloomy Night
Of Lawless Power, defeated, fly before his dazzling Light.
So to the eclipsing Moon, by the still Side
Of some 'lone Thicket, rev'lling Haggs provide
Dire Charms, that threat the sleeping Neighborhood,
And quaff, with Magic mixed, vast Bowls of Humane Blood;
But when the Dawn reveals the Purple East,
They vanish sullen from the unfinished Feast.
Here joyful Crowds Triumphal Arches rear
To their Deliv'rer's Praise, glad Senates there
In splendid Pomp the Regal State confer.
Hibernia's Fields new Triumphs then supply;
The Rival Kings in Arms the Fate of Empire try.
See where the Boyne two Warring Hosts divides,
And rolls between the Fight his interposing Tides!
In vain -- Hills, Forests, Streams, must all give place
When William leads, and Victory's the Chase.
Thou saw him, Boyne! when thy charged Waters bore
The swimming Coursers to the opposing Shore,
And round thy Banks thou heard'st the murdering Cannons rore.
What more than Mortal Bravery inspired
The daring Troops, by his Example fired!
Thou saw their wondrous Deeds; to Neptune's Court
Thy flying Waves conveyed the swift Report,
And Red with Slaughter, to their Father showed
Streams not their own, and a discolored Flood.
Here, on the Aetherial Mould, hurled from afar,
Exploded Ball had marked a dinted Scar.
'Twas destined thus; for when all glowing Red
The Angel took it from the Forge, he said,
This Part be left unfated from the Foe!
And scarce escaped, once let the Hero know
How much to my Protection he shall owe.
Yet from the batterd Shield the Ball shall bound,
And on his Arm inflict a Scarlet Wound.
Elsewhere, behold Namure's proud Turrets rise,
Majestic to the Sight, advancing to the Skies!
The Meuse and Sambre here united flow,
Nature's Defense against the invading Foe:
Industrious Art her Strength of Walls supplies;
Before the Town the British Army lies.
The Works are manned; with Fury they contend;
These thunder from the Plains, those from the Walls defend.
Red Globes of Fire from bellowing Engines fly,
And lead a sweeping Blaze, like Comets, through the Sky.
The kindled Region glows; with deaf'ning Sound
They burst, their Iron Entrails hurled around
Strew with thick-scatter'd Deaths the Crimson Ground.
See where the Genius of the War appears,
Nor shuns the Labor, nor the Danger fears!
In Clouds of sulfurous Smoke he shines more bright,
For Glory round him waits with Beams of living Light.
At length the widen'd Gates a Conquest own,
And to his Arms resign the abandoned Town.
Here, from the Field returned, with Olive crowned,
Applauding Throngs their welcome Prince surround:
Bright Honors in his glorious Entry shine,
And Peace restored concludes the Great Design.
Long over the Figured Work, with vast Surprise,
Admiring Neptune rolled his ravished Eyes;
Then rising from his Throne, thus called aloud:
Ye lovely Daughters of the briny Flood!
Haste, comb your Silver Locks, and straight prepare
To fill my Train, and gaze in upper Air.
This Day Majestic Glories you shall see;
Come all ye Watery Powers, who under me
Your little Tridents weild, and rule the boisterous Sea!
What God, that views the Triumphs here displayed,
Can to such Worth refuse his Heavenly Aid?
He said no more, -- but bade two Tritons sound
Their crooked Shells, to spread the Summons round.
Through the wide Caves the Blast is heard afar;
With speed two more provide his Azure Car,
A Concave Shell; two the finn'd Coursers join;
All wait officious round, and own the accustomed Sign.
The God ascends; his better Hand sustains
The three-fork'd Spear, his Left directs the Reins.
Through breaking Waves the Chariot mounts him high,
Before its thundering Course the frothy Waters fly;
He gains the Surface; on his either Side
The bright Attendants, ranged with comely Pride,
Advance in just Array, and grace the pompous Tide.
Mean while Britannia's King conspicuous stood,
And from his Deck surveyed the boundless Flood.
Smooth was the glassie Scene, the Sun beheld
His Face unclouded in the liquid Field.
The gazing Nereids in a shining Train
Enclose the Ruler of the British Main,
And sweetly sing; suspended Winds forbear
Their loud Complaints, the soothing Lay to hear.
Hail, Sacred Charge! they cry; the Beauties We
Of Neptune's Court, are come to attend on thee,
Accept our offered Aid! thy potent Sway,
Unbounded by the Land, these watery Realms obey,
And We thy Subject-Pow'rs our duteous Homage pay.
See Neptune's Self, inferior in Command,
Presents his Trident to thy honored Hand!
They said; the Sire approached with Awe profound;
The Rite performed, their Shells the Tritons sound;
Swelled with the shrill Alarm, the joyful Billows bound.
Now from the Shore Britannia first descries
White Sails afar; then bulky Vessels rise
Nearer to View; her beating Heart foretells
The pleasing News, and eager Transport feels.
Safe to her Arms Imperial Neptune bears
The entrusted Charge, then diving, disappears.
FINIS.

