THESAURUS MUSICUS: BEING, A COLLECTION of the Newest SONGS PERFORMED At Their
Majesty's Theaters; and at the Consorts in Viller-street in York-Buildings, and
in Charles-street Covent Garden.

WITH A Thorow-Bass to each SONG for the Harpficord, Theorbo, or Bass-Viol.

To which is Annexed A Collection of Aires, Composed for two Flutes, by several
Masters.

THE FIRST BOOK.

LESSONS FOR THE RECORDER
depiction of four children sitting around a table and playing recorders

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall for John Hudgebut. And are to be Sold by
John Carr, at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, and by John Money,
Stationer at the Miter in Miter Court in Fleet Street. And at most Musick-Shops
in Town. 1693.

A Table of SONGS contained in this Book.
A
Ah Friends, how happy are we here, 8 And in each Track of Glories, 26
B
Beauty first the heart inspires, 5
D
Down, down with Bacchus, 38
E
'Ere Time had run so long a Race, 25
F
Fie Jocky never prattle mere so like a Loon, 16 Fond Virgins run into the
Snare, 17
H
How long must Women wish in vain, 28
I
Jack, Whither so fast? 7 I wonder what those Lovers mean, 24
O
Of noble Race was Shinking, 20
S
Such command over my Fate, 12
T
Though you make no return to my Passion, 1 Tell me no more, no more I am
deceived, 2 It Is pity Myrtilla you should be a Wife, 3 To Convent Streams, or
shady Groves, 6 Tell me-thou fairest of all thy whole Sex, 11 That scornful
Sylvia's Chains I wear, 13 The Queen of Beauty loved a Swain, 18 To yonder
Sweet delicious Shade, 21
W
What beastly to drink! that is a jest, 9 Why wonders beauteous Cloris, 14 Where
Phoebus with his kindest look, 22
A Table of the Flute-Tunes in two parts.
Aires for 2 Flutes by Mr. King. P. 30, 31, 32, 33. Aires for 2 Flutes by Mr.
Godfrido Finger, and Mr. John Banister. P. 34, 35. Aires for 2 Flutes by Mr.
Keen P. 36, 37.
TO Thomas Drax, Esquire.
SIR,
BY the advice and assistance of some Eminent Masters of Music, whom I have
great reason to believe my very good Friends, and by some Care and Industry of
my own, I have Collected this small Volume, which I find wants nothing but your
Name to Recommend it to the Musical part of the World; the Sense of this
Encourages me (but with all Humility imaginable) to beg your Protection of it,
since none (especially who have had Gentleman-like Education) will be so
unmannerly as to oppose what a Person of your Sense and Merit has Vouchsafed to
Patronise. I am not unsensible how Ridiculous an attempt of Panegyric would
appear in me, who am altogether as unfit for it, as to perform in a Consort of
Music, but this I must beg leave to affirm, that if Persons of your Rank and
Sphere, not only condescend to be Patrons of the Sons of Apollo, but to be
Performers also, we have all the ground imaginable to be assured, that our
Island will be as famous for Excellent Compositions and admirable Performances
in Music, as Rome the long acknowledged Mistress of the World. Now Sir I must
beg if you should find any Errors that you would not Impute them to the want of
Skill in the Masters, but either to mine or the Printers oversight, who do not
pretend to Infallibility. But this I need not have mentioned, since I know you
are so Generous as to Connive at such faults, and I hope you will Pardon this
presumption of

Your already infinitely obliged, And most humble Servant, John Hudgebutt.

The first Song in the Maids last Prayer,
by Mr. Henry Purcell. Sung by Mrs. Dyer.
THOUGH you make no return to my pas -- sion, still, still I pre -- sum to a --
door; it is in Love but an odd re -- pu -- ta -- tion, when faintly re --
puls'd, to give over. When you talk of your Duty, I gaze on your Beauty, nor
mind the dull maxim at all: Let it reign in Cheapside, with a Ci -- tizens
Bride; it will never be received, it will never, never, it will never be
received at White -- hall. ^

II.
What Apocryphal Tales are you told,
By one who would make you believe,
That, because of to have and to hold,
You still must be pinned to his sleeve.
'Twere apparent high Treason,
Against Love and against Reason,
Should one such a Treasure engross:
He who knows not the Joys,
That attend such a Choice,
Should resign to another who does.
The 2d. Song in the Maids last Prayer,
Sung by Mrs. Ayliff.
TELL me no more, no more I am de -- ceiv'd, that Cloe's false, that Cloe's
false and common: by Heaven I all a -- long believed she was, she was a ve --
ry, ve-ry, Woe -- man. As such I liked, as such ca -- rest, she still, she still
was con -- stant when pos -- sect; she could, she could, she could, she could
do more for no man. ^

2d. Stanza. But oh! but oh her thoughts on o -- there is ran, and that you think,
and that you think a hard thing; per -- haps she fan -- cy'd you the Man, why
what care I, why what care I one Far -- thing. You say she is false, I Am sure
she is kind, I Will take, I Will take her -- Bo -- die, you her Mind; who, who, who
has the better Bar -- gain?

By Mr. Akeroyd
IT IS pit -- ty pit -- ty Myr -- til -- la you should be a Wife, to be made a
mere slave and a drudge all thy life; to throw all thy freedom and pleasures a
-- way, change the joys of Command for the curse of O -- bey: Be un -- ea -- sy
a -- broad 'cause home you must come, to be plagued all the night with a
fumbling hum -- drum, with a fum, fum, fum, fumbling, with a fumbling hum --
drum. ^

The Words by Mr. Jo. O. Set by Mr. Akeroyd
BEAU -- TY first the heart In -- spires, e -- qual flames en -- crease the
fires; Mu -- tual loves have mu-tual blisses, hearts a -- greed the same soft
wi -- shes; Still de -- sire -- ing, still re -- qui -- ring, looking still,
and still ad -- mire -- ing. ^

II.
Some dear pleasing Raptures roll,
Alike about each ravished Soul;
True Lovers wishes are not cloyed,
The object never so often enjoyed.
Still, etc.
III.
Free from Troubles, free from harms,
Full of Honor, full of charms;
Bless these pairs ye Gods above,
Crown their hearts with lasting Love.
Still, etc.
Set by Mr. Ralph Courtivil.
TO convent Streams or sha -- die Groves, may Ce -- lia be con -- fined, and
from Au -- gus -- ta, from Au -- gus -- ta far re -- move, -- since hand --
some and un -- kind: Let her not range nor plea -- sures take, in Town which no
-- ne will give; why should we room for Beau -- ty make, why, why should we
room for Beau -- ty make, which will not let us live? why should we room -- for
Beau -- ty make, which wi -- ll not let us live? ^

A Catch for 3. Voices,
by Mr. King.
JACK, whither so fast? To the Devil; where should I? I Am not in such have to
go thither. A -- dieu to ye; I hope to in -- treague yet many a year, and Whore
in a -- bundance be -- fore I come there; May you al -- ways be damned to the
Hell of a Punck, while I at the Devil get Hea -- ven -- ly Drunk. ^

A Song for two Voices,
Set by Mr. Akeroyde.
AH friends how hap-py are we here, blessed with good Drink, blessed with good AH
friends how hap -- py are we here, blessed with good Drink, Drink, and with good
Cheer; we are crowned with joys a -- bove all blessed with good Drink, and with
good Cheer; we are crowned with joys a -- bove all measure, in War we fear to
lose our life, in Love, in Love there is measure, in War we fear to loose our
life, in Love, in Love, there is jea -- lou -- sy and streif, by Trade, and play
we lose our Treasure. jea -- lou -- sy and strief, by Trade, and play we loose
our Treasure. But here, but here, un -- less our Bowl should fall, and some
mis-chance should But here, but here, un -- less our Bowl should fall, and some
mis -- chance should spill it all, nothing can e -- ver baulk our pleasure, but
here un -- spill it all, nothing can e -- ver baulk our pleasure, but -- less
our Bowl should fall, nothing can baulk, nothing can baulk, here un -- less our
Bowl should fall nothing can baulk, nothing can nothing can baulk, can baulk
our pleasure. baulk, can baulk, can baulk our pleasure. ^

A Song for 2. Voices,
Set by Mr. Robert King.
WHAT Beastly to drink! that is a jest, that is a jest, I Will not bear it; WHAT
Beastly to drink! that is a jest, I Will not bear it; un -- un -- less you will de --
mon -- strate Beasts e -- ver drink Claret: -- less you will de -- monstrate, de
-- monstrate Beasts e -- ver drink Claret: But hanged it is a fol -- ly to make
a dis -- pute, it is the But hanged it is a fol -- ly, a fol -- ly to make a dis
-- pute, it is the dull sober, dull so -- ber Sot, that is real -- ly the Brute,
for while we drink dull so -- ber Sot, that is real -- ly the Brute, for while
we drink Wine, for Wine, for while we drink Wine, let all men hereafter
proclaim him a Beast that while we drink Wine, drink Wine, let all men
hereafter proclaim him a Beast that on -- ly drinks Water, proclaim him a
Beast, a Beast, who on -- ly drinks Water. on -- ly drinks Water, proclaim him
a Beast, a Beast, who on -- ly drinks Water. ^

Set by Dr. Staggins.
TELL me thou fairest of all thy whole Sex, why so much good nature poor hearts
does per -- plex; The un -- grate -- full be -- trays me with hopes in my
sleep, but when the Dreams gone my heart's rea -- die to break; This Charming
sweet Creature has a Soul so re -- fined, that I Would give all the world that we
were of one mind. ^

Set by Mr. Tho. Tallot.
SUCH command over my Fate, has your Love or your Hate, that no -- thing can
make me more wretched or great: Whilst expecting I lie to Live, or to Dye, thus
doubtful the sentence of such I re -- ly, your Tongue bids me go, though your
eyes say not so, but much kinder words from their language do flow. ^

II.
Then leave me not hear thus between hope and fear,
Though your Love cannot come let your Pity appear;
But this my request you must grant me at least,
And more I Will not ask but to you leave the rest;
If my Fate I must meet let it be at your Feet,
Death there with more joy than elsewhere I would greet.
Set by Mr. Akeroyd.
THAT Scornful Sil -- vias Chains I wear, the Groves and Streams can tell;
Those blasted with my Sighs ap -- pear, these with my Tears, my Tears over
swell: But Sights and Tears bring no re -- dress, and Love that sees, that sees
me greive, con -- spires with Sil -- via to op -- press the heart he shoul'd re
-- lieve. ^

A Song Set
by Mr. Samuel Akeroyde. The Words by Sir Ed. S.
WHY wonders beauteous Clo -- ris, why, I Have aimed so often at Po -- e -- try?
since by my ge -- n'rous de -- sti -- ny, I Have seen the ob -- ject of her Eye;
why wonders beauteous Clo -- ris, why, I Have aimed so often at Po -- e -- try? I Am
in a Hea -- ven a -- -- las at least, when e're my Eyes do on her feast: why
wonders beauteous Clo -- ris, why, I Have aimed so often at Po -- e -- try; and in
that Hea -- ven my rap -- tures be im -- proved by her di -- vi -- ni -- ty?
why wonders beauteous Clo -- ris, why, I Have aimed so much at Po -- e -- try? ^

II.
Translated thus to Heavens blessed Shore,
I cease to be the thing before;
And in those hallowed Plains receive,
Rewards too great for Earth to give;
Then Cloris can you so admire,
At what you only, you Inspire;
The mighty wonders of whose Eyes,
Produce your Strephons Rhapsodies.
A Song in the Richmond Heirest, or a Woman once in the Right.
FIE Jocky never prattle mere so like a Loon, no Rebel e're shall garr my heart
to Love; Sawny was a Loyal Scot though dead and gone, and Jenny'd in her Daddy's
way with muckle joy shall move: Laugh at the Kirk A -- po-stles, and the
canting Swarms, and fight with bonny Lad that love their Monarchy and King;
then Jenny fresh and blithe, shall take thee in her Arms, and give thee twenty
kisses, and per -- haps a better thing. ^

A Song for 2 Voices,
Set by Mr. Samuel Akeroyde. The Words by Mr. Jo. O.
FOND Virgins run in -- to the snare, false Men to catch their hearts pre --
pare: FOND Virgins run in -- to the snare, false Men to catch their hearts pre
-- pare: With bro -- ken Oaths and Vows be -- tray'd, they would complain, but
are a -- With bro -- ken Oaths and Vows be -- tray'd, they would complain, but
are a -- fraid; and each that Lists her self for a Wife, is doomed to -- fraid;
and each that Lists her self, a Wife is doomed to praise, is doomed, is doomed
to praise the care -- full life. praise is doomed to praise the care -- full
life. ^

II
Praise the careful life,
The Nymph she is both gay and wise,
The tempting Bait discreetly flies;
She loves her self, she loves her friend,
She looks for joys and has her end;
She only can her freedom boast,
Which when resigned is ever lost.
A Pastoral Dialogue
by Mr. Jo. O. Set by Mr. Samuel Akeroyd.
^

Thirsus THE Queen of Beau -- ty loved a Swain, and le -- ft her throne a --
bove; To sport it on the hum -- ble plain, and re -- vel, and re -- vel, and re
-- vel --


Flor. i -- n his Love. But what is the Wanton Queen to me, my -- Reason is my
Rule; Nor would it e -- ver be with thee, if --


Thris. I should play the fool: Were Reason, cruel Nymph, your guide, as you
mis -- -- take it is, you would not glo -- ry in your pride, nor shun Loves
Flor. sacred bliss.


Flor. My nu -- me -- rous Flocks are more than thine, my Fleeces fi -- ner
Wool; The herds that yon -- der graze are mine, my Barnes are al -- so full;


Thirs. But mine o -- h! fates are thine of store, my herds, my flocks but few;
I plead my Love I ask no more, since love does a -- ll sub -- due.


CHORUS. Then let us to yon -- der Grove re -- move, the coolest of the plain:
There CHORUS. Then let us to yon -- der Grove re -- move, the coolest of the
plain: There sing the Charms of mu -- tual love, so to our Flocks a -- gain.
sing the Charms of mu -- tual love, so to our Flocks a -- gain.


A Song in the Richmond Heirest, or a Woman once in the Right.
Harp.
OF no -- ble Race was Shinking, -- The Line of Omon: S: Tudor, thum, thum,
thum, thum, But her renown is fled and gone, since cruel Love persu'd her. ^

II.
Fair Winnies Eyes bright shining,
And Lilly breasts Alluring;
Poor Jenkins heart with fatal Dart,
Have wounded past all curing.
III.
Her was the prettyest Fellow
At Football, or at Crickett;
At Hunting Chase, or nimble Race,
Cots-plut how her could prick it.
IV.
But now all joy's are flying,
All pale and wan her Cheeks too;
Her heart so aches, her quite forsakes,
Her Herrings, and her Leeks too.
V.
No more must dear Metheglin,
Be top'd at good Mongomery;
And if Love sore, smart one week more,
Adieu Cream-Cheese and Flomery.
TO yon -- der sweet de -- li-cious shade, lovely Silvia let us retire; careless
-- ly on Roses laid, loose to ev'ery warm desire, loose to e -- very warm de
-- sire, loose to e -- v'ry warm de -- sire. Let us wanton lau -- ug and play,
lau -- gh and play, kiss and sing the hours a -- way, kiss and sing the hours a
-- way, kiss and sing the hours a -- way, kiss and sing the hours a -- way. ^

A Song on the Italian Woman,
The Words by Mr. Heningham. Set by Mr R. Courtiville.
WHERE Phoebus with his kindest, king -- est, kind -- est look vi -- fits his
Neighbors a -- ll the year; that place this Beauteous Nymph, this Beauteous,
this Beau -- tious Nymph, forsook to en -- ter -- tain and warm us here, here,
here, to en -- ter -- tain and warm us here, where Phoebus here: So the sweet
Cho -- ris -- ters of Air, who long have felt his scor -- ching heat, to
Sylvian Scenes of Woods re -- pair, to Sylvian Scenes of Woods re -- pair; and
there in sha -- des their Songs re -- peat, and there in sha -- des, and there,
and there in shades, in shades their Songs re -- peat, and there, and there in
shades, in sha -- -- des their Songs repeat, re -- peat, re -- peat their Songs
re -- peat, re -- peat. ^

Set by Mr. John Barrett.
I wonder what those Lovers mean, who say, they have given, they have given
their hearts a way: Some good kind Lo -- ver tell me how, for mine is: S: but a
tor -- meant now; some good kind Lo -- ver tell me how, for mine is but a tor --
meant now. ^

II
If so it be one place both hearts contain,
For what, for what do they complain;
What Courtesies can Love do more,
Then to join hearts that were parted before;
What Courtesies can Love do more,
Than to join hearts that were parted before*
A Scotch Song
set by Mr. Robert King.
E'RE Time had run so long a race, when Wul -- ly began en -- trea -- ty, then
I'ze was thought a bon -- ny Lass, and call -- ed wondrous pretty: But af --
ter Wedlock -- knot was wove, and the Lad my Charms had worn, he cursed my ea
-- sy yiedling Love, and wished he had had my scorn, and wished he had had my
scorn. ^

A Song for two Voices
by Mr. Henry Purcell.
AND in each track of Glo -- ry, since And in each track of Glo -- and in each
track of Glo -- ry since, -- ry, since of Glo -- ry, since for their loved Coun
-- try, or their Prince. Princes that for their loved Coun -- try, or their
Prince. Princes that hate, that hate Romes Ti -- ran -- ny and join the Nations
right, with their own hate, that hate Romes Ti -- ran -- ny and join the
Nations right, with their own Roy -- al -- ty; none were more ready, none were
more rea -- die, none, none, Roy -- al -- ty; none, none, none, none, none were
more, none were more, none, none, none were more ready in -- dis -- tress to
save, no, none were more ready, none were more ready in -- dis -- tress to
save, none were more Loyal, none, none, none, none, none, none, none, none,
none, none were more Loyal none, none, none, none, none, none, none, none, none
were more Loyal none, none more Brave. Loyal none, none more Brave. ^

A Song for 2 Voices.
By Mr. Robert King.
HOW long must Women wish in vain, a con -- stant How long must Woe -- men wish
in vain a constant Love to find? No art can Fic -- kle Man re -- Love to find?
no art can fic -- kle, can fic -- kle Man re -- tain, or fix a To -- ving mind:
Yet fond -- ly we, -- tain, or fix a To -- ving mind: Yet fond -- ly yet fond
-- ly we our selves deceive, and emp -- ty hopes pur -- sue; we our selves, our
selves de -- ceive, and emp -- ty hopes pur -- sue, Though Though false to o --
there is, we be -- leive they will to us prove true, false, though false to o --
there is we be -- lieve they will to us prove true, though false to o -- there is, though
false to o -- there is, though false to Though false to o -- there is, though false to o --
there is, others, we be -- leive they will to us prove true. others, we be --
lieve they will to us prove true. ^

First Treble.
(1.) ^

(2.) ^

(3.) ^

(4.) ^

(5.) ^

(6.) ^

(7.) ^

(8.) ^

(9.) ^

(10.) ^

(11.) ^

(12.) ^

(13.) ^

(14.) ^

Slow.
Second Treble.
(1.) ^

(2.) ^

(3.) ^

(4.) ^

(5.) ^

(6.) ^

(7.) ^

(8.) ^

(9.) ^

(10.) ^

(11.) ^

(12.) ^

(13.) ^

(14.) ^

Slow.
A Catch for 3 Voices.
By Mr. H. Purcell.
DOWN, down with Bacchus, down, down with Bacchus; from this hour renounce, re
-- nounce the Grapes Ty-ran -- nick power; whilst in our large, our large Con
-- fe -- d'rate Bowl, and mingling Virtue, mingling Ver -- tue, cheer the Soul.
Down with the French, down with the French, march on to Nantz for whose, for
whose dear sake we will con-quer France; and when, when th'inspiring Cups swell
high, their hun -- gry, hun -- gry juice with scorn, with scorn de -- fie.
Rouse, rouse, rouse, rouse, rouse Royal Boys, your Forces join, to rout, to
rout the Monsieur and his Wine; then, then, then, then the next year, our Bowl
shall be quaff'd, quaff'd un -- der the Vines in Bur -- gun -- die. ^

FINIS.

