THE QUAKERS HOUSE Built upon the Rock CHRIST.

Wherein neither their Doctrines, Principles, nor Practices can be confounded,
nor disproved; being neither damnable, nor pernicious. As Samuel Hammond has
falsely affirmed in his Book called, The Quakers House Built upon the Sand. Or,
a Discovery of the damnablenes of their pernicious Doctrins, in his Answer to
G. W. which to prove, he lays down seven Grounds of Delusion, and five
Arguments of Damnable Doctrine.

But in this Answer his seven Grounds is proved false in themselves, if they
were (as they are not) true against us; And his five Arguments is proved to be
his own false Positions, not according to our Doctrine and Principles: As
first, he lays down false Positions, and then proves them false; and then
boasts, as if he had proved our Doctrines or Principles false: The truth of
which is herein clearly made manifest, and wherein he falsely accuses us, he is
justly guilty himself.

Also the ten Fundamental Principles or Doctrines of the Hireling Priesthood,
here Discovered.

This is given forth, that all those that have wilfully, (and from pride and
presumpt on of spirit,) opposed the living truth, and the breaking-forth of
light from the pure everlasting Fountain of life, may put their mouths in the
dust, and keep silence, if so be for them there may be hope.

For the lying Tongue will God confound, but the lipp of Truth will he
establish for ever.

By a Servant to the Church of Christ, which is built of tried (and living)
stones, Richard Hubberthorne.

In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel, be justified and shall glory, Isay
45. 25. over all the false Prophets which have deceived the nations: among whom
is found the blood of the Saints.

The Quakers House Built upon the Rock CHRIST, etc.
THe holy Seed which the living Father does manifest his Life, Spirit, and
Power unto in all Ages, has been, and is, the reproach of the World, and of
all them that be strangers to the life of God, and to Christ's life manifest in
the mortal bodies; And though this seed be that which the Father has blessed,
and has received the truth, and by the truth is set free, (according to
Christ's words, John 8. 31.) yet in the world from slanderous Tongues and false
accusations, we expect not to be free, but to bear his reproaches, and in the
patience and power of the Lamb to overcome them, for God will bring forth our
Righteousness, Truth, and Innocence to shine as the light before all people,
whereby all hard speeches, and false reproaches will be wiped away out of the
Nations: And that shall fulfill and accomplish, that which in words we declare;
and in that are we known to God, and shall be known to the world. And now,
seeing that it has pleased the Father to reveal his Son in us, and to open
the hidden treasures of his life, and has given us of his holy Spirit, and the
Tongue of the Learned, we shall not cease to improve his gift, in speaking what
we know, and testify what we have seen; both by holding forth the truth in the
World. and by testifying against that in the World which is contrary to it. For
now has the living God opened the Fountain of Life abundantly, and is drying
up the Fountain of words, (where the life is wanting.) And the Lord by his
eternal Spirit is giving an understanding to many, whereby they are able to
discern of things that differ, and to know every Tree by its Fruit, and to try
all things by that measure of his light and holy spirit which he has given
them. And to that which is of God in all people do I commit my Testimony, to
be read and understood.

Now this from the meek spirit of Christ, in Answer to that which from the
pride, presumption, and arrogance of Hammonds spirit, is come forth against the
living truth it self, and the servants of it; but every Tongue that rises up
in judgment against us, will God confound. First, S. H. says, That the
Quakers House is built upon the Sand, etc.

Answer. How is it then that the Sea has so long roared, and listed up its
Waves, and the Winds has blown, and it is not yet fallen? Have not you (of all
Professions) joined together? and have not your Voices been as the Voice of
many Waters against us? And have you not been as blustering Winds, which if we
had regarded, we should not have sown the seed of the Kingdom? (As the Prophet
has said, He that regards the Wind shall not sow, Eccl. 11. 4.) So, if we had
regarded your noyses, uproars, swelling words of Vanity, lies, acensations, or
persecutions, we had not been obedient to the Lord, nor done his work. But the
Lord has made our persecutors to stumble, according to his promise; and his
enemies are even weary with smiting of his children, (Ier. 9. 5.) And he is
giving his power, and dominion to his anointed ones of the whole Earth; And
has ordained his arrows against the persecutors, Psalm. 7. 13. And in the Lord
shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory, Isay 45. 25. in
this the day of the Lords power, when the life of the holy Child Jesus is
appearing in the dark places of the Earth, who is the Rock of Ages, and the
Foundation of many Generations, upon which we are built, and stand a witness
against all the unrighteousness of men; the proof of which is not because we
say so; but the appearing, and breaking forth of his life, and the fruits of
his holy spirit shall make it manifest: And to all these that desire the
knowledge of Gods ways, it will be known perfectly that God is amongst us, and
that his spirit, power, and presence is with us.

Again Sam. Hammond says, That his Book is a discovery of the pernicious and
damnable Doctrines of the Quakers. And for securing the Saints, etc.

Answer. A refuge of lies will not secure the saints, (as I shall prove his
Book to be:) neither can he which is in the Doctrine, which is pernicious and
damnable, discover them in others, (nor to others;) as I shall prove in that
which follows, in reply to his Book.

And first, to begin with his Method, which is as he says. First, to show the
grounds of the Quakers Delusions. Secondly, to demonstrate the impossibility of
salvation, in, and by their Principles. Thirdly, to answer George Whitheads
cavills in his Pamphlet, as S. H. falsely calls it.

First cause of Delusion.

S. H. A spirit of giddiness hanging loose to the truth, and the love of it,
etc. and to prove it, he says, That there is three sorts of people that turn
Quakers. The first, are unlearned, and unstable, and these are they which have
been ancient Professors. The second sort, young men and women, which have been
under convictions and awakenings of the Law, and are come to terrors and
shakings, and brought into a Covenant of Works, etc. The third sort, such, who
for covetous ends to save their tithes, have rashly closed with them.

Ans. As for a spirit of giddiness hanging loose to the truth, that thou shall
never find in us, for we are staid and established in the Lord, and in his
truth, and shall be faithful in the truth of God which we have received,
until we see the Land cleansed of all Hirelings, and Deceivers, which make a
Prey upon the people for dishonest gain; for from you who pretend to be
Teachers of others, is profaneness gone forth into all the Earth; and your
ways and Doctrines have corrupted it, so that not a pure heart, nor an
undefiled mind and conscience can be found in your Congregations, not one that
is unreproveable in the sight of God; and Gods witness in you all, shall seal
to the truth of my testimony. And as for those three sorts of people which thou
says turn Quakers. First, ancient Professors, these knew as much (and
practiced more) of things which were just and righteous (then thou do) before
they knew the life and power of truth, which now they live in, and are both
learned and established in the things of God. And why does thou accuse them for
being unlearned and unstable before they turned to us, while they followed
thee, and such like? Here thou proves thy own Doctrine that which does not
learn, not establish people, (and not ours:) For if they were anciest
Professors under that Ministry, and not learned nor established; consider
where the cause was! How could they be established, where they found neither
life nor power of God amongst you? But now they have found him of whom Moses
and the Prophets did Write that should come, and they do not look for another:
And now are they both learned and established in the ways of God; And
therefore do not thou upbraid them with what they were before they received
the truth in the love of it, and obedience to it. And as for the young men and
women of which thou says is come to terrous, and shakings, and convictions,
then they are come further then ever thou came; for they that are sensible of
convictions, terrors, and shakings, wrought by the Spirit of God, they may be
thy Teachers, which has but the words of them, and art ignorant of the power
by which they were wrought, and therefore thou brings forth such words of
darkness as thou have expressed, as that thoso that follow the light of an
awakened Conscience, and sit down under that, and are under terrors, and
shakings; that these are ^nllod a sleep by Satan. Is not this blindness, and
ignorance? is this according to the form of sound words? were they nor a sleep
before their Consciences were awakened? But now, when they follow the light
which wakens their Consciences, (which is the light of Christ,) and when they,
through the obedience to his light, do the works of righteousness, is this a
ground of delusion? or when they are thus led, do thou say, they are then
lulled a sleep by Satan? this is a putting darkness for light, and light for
darkness; and in stead of showing us to be in the ground of delusion, thou
shows thy own ignorance and blindness to all that are able to discern any
thing of truth.

And for the third sort, which thou says, for covetous ends to save their
Tithes, has joined with us; In this will all sober people, and men of
understanding bear witness against thee, and by the effects, (even their
sufferings) thou will be condemned, as hundreds of this Nation has suffered
the spoiling of their Goods, and Imprisonment for a testimony against you, and
them, which covetous men could not do; as some, for the value of five
shillings Tithes, have goods taken worth five pounds: and for three pounds
worth of Tithe, goods taken worth ten pounds and for Tithes of the value of two
shillings, taken ten shillings. And many I could instance which have had taken
from them seven times the value, and ten times the value, and some forty times
the value. And then, how is this for covetousness? And others here in this
County of Bishopriok the Priests send their men to take peoples Lamb^ out of
the field, and off the Common, and their Corn off the field (which they have
labored for) without any Law, or pretense of Law, which according to Law might
be proceeded against; as Sheep-stealers, and Corne-stealers: which if there be
Law to give them Tithes, then according to the order of Law they are to receive
it, and not to take men's goods by violence; and thus we suffer the spoiling of
our goods with joy, which if we for covetousness denied Tithes, as Hammond
accuses us, we could not suffer men to act so contrary to both Law and Gospel,
and spoil our Goods, and bear it patiently; and many thousands in this
Nation, can in faithfulness, bear witness against him in this thing, that it
is not for covetousness, but in obedience to the Lord, and bearing a faithful
witness against the Ministry, that make merchandise of souls (and of their
goods also) which the Lord is bringing down by the arm of his power, and
making their folly manifest unto all men; And, according to his promise, he
will bring a shame, and a perpetual reproach upon them, which by their
iniquity, and their heavy burdens have kept in captivity the Seed of God,
which now by his mighty power he is bringing forth, to praise and glorify him,
and to rejoice over all the false Prophets and Teachers which has caused them
to suffer in the time of darkness and ignorance.

The second ground of our delusion, as Samuel Hammond says, is this.

Priest. Our not being able to distinguish betwixt the rightsousnesse imputed
upon the account of the blood of Christ; and the righteousness, or holiness
wrought in us by the Spirit, etc.

Ans. If this were true, this were not a ground of delusion, for God will not
give any up to a reprobate sense; nor condemn them for their not being able to
distinguish; for then he should condemn them for not doing that which they are
nor able to do. Here thou art ignorant of the Scriptures, and of the ground of
delusion; and it being my Duty and Calling to instruct the ignorant, and him
that is out of the way: I shall show thee the grounds of delusion, according as
it is written in the Scriptures, as Romans 1. 21. Because that when they know
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Ver. 22. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools; (as thou have done:) And were. 28.
And even as they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, God gave them
over to a reprohato mind, to do those things which are not convenient. And
this was not, because they were not able to distinguish; but because they did
not like to retain God in their Knowledge: And because, that when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God; and by the Fruits by which they were
manifest to be reprobates, Let all people of understanding judge, whether we,
or thy Generation of Priests, be more guilty; and then they will know the Tree
by the Fruit, as ver. 29. And as for thy charging of us, as not being able to
distinguish; this is but thy false accusation; for the Lord has given us of
his spirit, whereby we are able to distinguish and discern of things that
differ; And that righteousness which is wrought by Jesus Christ in us, is to
us a seal of that righteousness which was wrought in the Person of Christ,
and of that which in his blood is imputed to us for justification. And whereas
thou says, That we confound inherent, and imputed Righteousness; that is but
thy reproaching of us. And here thou art erred from the form of sound words;
for the Scriptures does not use these words to distinguish of Christ's
righteousness, as inherent and imputed, though by thy meaning, that which is
wrought in us by Christ, thou will call inherent; and that which was wrought in
his Person without us, imputed: but this I say unto thee, That if thou continue
ignorant of Christ, and his righteousness within thee, thy imputing of him,
and his righteousness without, will not save thee: And while thou keeps people
from Christ within them, and his righteousness within them, thou keep^ them
from that mystery which the Apostle Preached amongst the Gentiles, which had
been hid from ages and generations; but now is made manifest to the Saints,
which is Christ in them the hope of glory, (Col. 1. 26. 27) and this is your
work, by your Preaching and Printing, (all of you in that Ministry) who are
erred from the form of sound words (into your own imaginations) in this age, to
hide the riches of the glory of this mystery from the people, which is Christ
in them the hope of glory; and you would keep people in the sound of a report
of Christ in words, and from his life, by which the saints was saved; and the
life of Christ was made manifest in their mortal bodies, (2. Cor. 4. 11.) But
Samuel Hammond affirms, as his Principle or Doctrine in page 10. of his Book,
That the Scripture sends us to the right hand of God, to Christ; not to Christ
in us; Neither do I know (says he) any word of Scripture that bids us go to
the light in us, though it should mean Christ in us, that is, the work of grace
in us; And to prove it, he brings, Col. 3. 1. Heb. 12. 2.

Ans. As I said before, it is my work and calling to instruct the ignorant, and
him that is out of the way: Seeing that he says, that he knows not any word of
Scripture, that bids us go to the light in us, though it should mean Christ
in us, that is, the work of grace in us. If he stand upon these very words,
Go to the light in us; neither does the Scripture say, Go to the right hand
of God to Christ; but as it says, that Christ is at the right hand of God, and
sits at the right hand of God; and that they must seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits (Col. 3. 1.) so the Scripture says likewise,
that Christ is within, (Col. 1. 27.) And this was the Mystery the Apostle
Preached; and the Apostle says, Know you not that Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates? (2 Cor 13. 5.) and likewise he declares of the light in them, (2
Cor. 4. 6.) For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the Knowledge of the glory of God,
in the face of Jesus Christ: so the light which shined in their hearts, did
give them the light of the Knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. And David said, that he had hid the Word in his heart; And that the
Word was a lamp to his feet, and a light unto his paths, (Psalm 119. 11. and
ver. 105.) so here was light within, and by this light within he was guided,
and by this light within they did not confound inherent and imputed
righteousness (as he calls it) as he falsely accuses us to do. And the
Apostle Peter directs them to the light within, and says, We have a more sure
word of Prophecy, unto which ye do well to take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day, star arise in
your hearts, (2 Pet. 1. 19) so the day was to dawne, and the day star to
arise in their hearts.

Obj. But says the Priests, that sure Word of Prophecy was the Scriptures of
the Prophets, and not a light within, because ver. 20. 21. it says, Knowing
this first, that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private
interpretation: For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, etc.

Ans. The Scriptures of the Prophets is not more sure, nor more true, then the
Scriptures of the Apostles; neither is the Visions of the Prophets, more sure
that the Visions of the Apostles: Now that which the Apostle aludes to, Was the
voice which came from the excellent glory, which Voice they heard, when they
were with him in the holy Mount: so to them to whom he Wrote, the light which
shined in their hearts, which brought them to wait for the day-daw^ing and the
day fear a^ssing was more near, and more sure to them (though not to the
Apostle) then the declaration in words, or writing, of that which others have
seen or heard, though that which they have seen and heard be true as any thing
that is Written: as thus, For me to be obedient to the measure of light and
life that appears, and is manifest to me, is to me more a seal (or a more sure
word) to take heed unto, then the words or writings that proceed from a greater
manifestation in another, though by this, the truth of the greater, (or
surenesse of it) is not denied by the lesser light; but waited for that the
greatest manifestation, or discovery of the Father, may be as sure, and as true
to me, as to those that have declared it: He that has an ear to hear the
truth, let him hear; and he that can receive it, let him.

Now because Priest Hammond says, that he knows not any word of Scripture,
that bids us go to the light in us, though it should mean Christ in us, that
is, the work of grace in us. Now whereas he falsely accuses George Whithead,
that he is not well read in the literal Knowledge of the Scriptures, he justly
condemns himself: For if he were well read in the literal Knowledge of the
Scriptures, he would know, that the Scripture speaks of the light within, of
Christ within, and of the work of gracs within, which he has declared his
ignorance of; but his end of so speaking, is to keep people from the light
within, which gives the Knowledge of the glory of God, and from the Word
within, and the Kingdom within, and the grace within, in which their hearts
should be established, (Heb. 13. 9.) and by grace they were saved, (Ephesians. 2.
5.) and that being justified by his Grace, we should be made beires according
to the hope of eternal life, (Tit. 3. 7.) And the Word of Christ was to dwell
in them richly in all Wisdom, from which they were to a imonish one another
in Psalms, and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing with grace in their hearts
to the Lord, (Col. 3. 16.) and their speech was to be always with grace,
seasoned with salt, that they might know how to answer every man, (Col. 4. 6.)
and all these is to be known within. And Christ's Doctrine to the Pharisees was,
to bring their minds to within; and told them, the Kingdom of God was within
them, (Luke 17. 21.) and Christ bids them, Beleave in the light, while they
have the light, that they may be the children of light, (John 12. 36.) And
Jesus said unto them, I am the light of the World, he that follows me shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, (John 8. 12) and John
(a man sent from God) came for a witness to bear witness of the light, that
all men through him might believe; and says, this was the true light which
enlightneth every man which comes into the world; and in this light Christ
bid them believe in, and follow. And Paul said, that he was sent to opes their
eyes, and to turn people from the darkness to the light, from the power of
Satan unto God, that they might receive the remission of their sins, and be
partakers of the inheritance among them that was sanctified, (Acts 26. 18.) and
this was the Gospel which the Apostles Preached, and hereby may the ignorant be
instructed which has not read any word in the Scripture of light within, of
Christ within, nor the work of grace within, which I have read of all these to
be within, and believed it.

Harmonds third Ground of our Delution is this,

Pr. Their not being able to distinguish betwixt being justified ^coly by
Grace, which is the favor of God, upon the account of shrist: satisfaction,
and the Grace wrought by the spirit in the senls: or rather, that natural
light, which being improved, they call Grace, (as he says.)

Ans This is like the other, proceeding only from ignorance; For God will not
give us up to delusions that we may be damned for that which we are not able to
do; for God does ^e puire according to what a man has, and not according to
what a man has not; for if we have not power, nor ability, he will not
condemn us for that; but for ahusing that power, and ability which he has
given us, to be obedient unto him in, for that he is condemned, and because
that he does not retain God in his Knowledge, therefore he is given up to a
reprobate sense, and to strong delusions. And whereas thou says, That we
cannot distinguish between the Grace of God, which is the favor of God, upon
the account of Christ's satisfaction, and the natural light, which being
improved, (thou says) we call grace. Ans. Yea, We have always distinguished
between the justifying Grace, and a natural light, for the light of the Sun,
and of the Moon, and Stars, is narorall; and by their light the natural man
sees the Creation, and the things in it. And we never said, that this (if
improved) was the Grace, and so thou falsely accuses us. And that light which
we say is within, and which Christ has enlightened every man withal, is not
to be distinguished from the favor of God; for it is the love and favor of
God to man, that his free Grace, which brings salvation, has appeared unto
all men, (Tit. 2. 11.) and by this Grace, (and not another) are they saved, who
are saved, though thou, and others, turn this grace into wantennesse, and then
speaks despightfully against the spirit of it, and against its being within;
For if people be once brought to the grace of God within, and the light within,
then they will see your deceitful Teachings without; but while you ear keep
them blind, you may Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and they will love
to have it so: but so soon as any comes to the grace within, and the light
within, then they see your ways, and Doctrines, and receives the testimony of
the Lord against you; which testimony is now going forth in the mighty power of
the Lord; and God has raised up his Son, which is the light of the World,
and his faithful witness in his Children; and thousands shall come to the
brightness of his rising, whereby you shall all be discovered who has
labored to quench his appearance, and the breaking forth of his light, which
will stand over you for ever.

Hammonds fourth Ground of Delusion, is this:

Pr. Our not distinguishing betwixt the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of
Grace; and for the proof of this, instances the Perfect Pharisee; and because
we say, That Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, etc.

Aus. Let all people take notice of his proof; those lye^ and false
accusations which he and Coal, Yrideaux, Weld, and Durant did speak against
(us five years since) which was proved false by the Answer to it, those he
takes as sufficient proofs for his false accusing of us; now men of
understanding, will be ashamed of his Folly: if because that he standered, and
falsely accused us five years ago, and does so now again; Is his first lie made
a proof for his second? If he would have proved any thing against us, our
Doctrine, or Principles, to be a ground of delusion, he should have proved it
from our words or writings, and not from his own accusations (as by the Perfect
Pharisee.) Again, he brings our words, because that we have said, that Christ
is the end of the Law for righteousness; therefore this proves the ground of
our delusion; and that we cannot distinguish betwixt the Covenant of Grace and
the Covenant of Works. Then the Apostle is proved to be in the ground of
delusion, as well as we, for he said the same words, (Romans 10 4.) and this
(says he) is the direct Popish Doctrine, who say, that Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness, as in the fifth page of his Book; but, says he,
they express it of inherent righteousness, (and so calls it) because Christ
works it in them. Answer. As to say, that we express it, and call it inherent,
we have not so expressed it, nor called it so. But if because Christ works his
righteousness in us, we say, the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, (Romans 8. 4.) If we say,
that Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, this is not Popish
Doctrine, nor ground of delusion; but both the Apostles, and we, must bear the
reproaches of the World, and the conrradiction of sinners, if we bear witness
for Christ against the World.

Hammonds fifth Ground of Delusion is,

Pr. Our not distinguishing betwixt saving light given forth by Christ in
conversion, and the light of conscience, which every man has as a rational
Creature: and for proof, brings the Perfect Pharisee; and says, that will
confirm it; as if his first lie would confirm his second.

Ans. Sam. Hammond, thou have been too hasty in thy discourse, to prove the
grounds of our delusion; (and I cannot say in these things, that thou have gone
about in cunning devised Fables, but in such as is manifest to the least
measure of understanding in all:) Have thou known such a thing from any example
before thee, to prove a thing against us from thy own words, without any ground
from us, in thy so often mentioning the Perfect Pharisee; which is thy former
reproach, to prove this latter. And truly, in those things (which are in
plain, and evident) I should not answer thee: But least that then should be
wise in thy own conceit. And again then says, If we could but see a
difference betwixt the light given by Christ as the Word, (John 1.) and the
light given by Christ as Mediator, it might help us out of some pits. Before,
thou told of distinguishing between the light of Christ in conversion, and the
light of conscience: and now, betwixt the light of Christ, as the word; and as
Mediator. Now all they which know Christ, and his light wherewith he has
enlightened them, as he is the Word, and as he is the Mediator; they will
clearly, and perfectly see, that thou art in the pit (with thy distinctions)
when as we are not in it (for want of them.) Where did the Apostles distinguish
Christ's light, as he is the Word? and his light as Mediator? or, how many
lights did they declare that Christ had, that those that know but one light of
Christ in its several measures, and appearances of it, may know more lights?
Was there other, and several distinct lights of Christ to every several
distinct name which was put upon him, and so as many several lights, as
several names? And where does the Scripture speak of a natural light, or of
the light of a natural Conscience, if it does; declare it? or else learn to
speak in the Form of sound words, according to the Scriptures: For we knew,
that as Christ is one, so is his light, and so is his life, and so is his
power, and the way to the Father; but in the world (among the Hirelings) as
there is gods many, and lords many, so they make many lights; but to us there
is but one God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Lord Jesus,
by whom are all things, and we by him; and one light of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by which all that come unto the Father are led, and guided, and by which, all
that deny him to have enlightened every man that comes into the world, and
that set up any other light besides Christ to enlighten them, or lead to the
Father, is condemned: And by this light are we able to see all men's
foolishness, and ignorance, and do see all these pits and snares into which,
through their blindness, they are led.

Hammonds sixth Ground of our Delusion is this,

Pr. Our being scandalized at some loose Professors, and our not finding what
we would have been at under the means of Grace. etc. and our desiring to live
by sense, and not by faith.

Ans. This is darkness without mixture of any light in it; And as in his Book
he tells of pure darkness, (sure he means, gross darkness without any
mixture of light) then his sixth ground against us is it. For let all soberly
consider, whether this can be a ground of our delusion, Our being scandalized
at some loose Professors? If he had said, our being scandalized by some loose
Professors, the words would have had some sense in them to prove us as, we are;
but herein should we be justified; and he that scandalizes us rather to be in
the ground of delusion. For our being scandalized by loose Professors, as
^dammond and his Church; this does not prove us to be in delusion, but rather
himself. And for his saying, That we not finding what we would have been at
under the means of grace, that therefore we are deluded, or given up to be
damned, this is to ground neither of delusion; these thy dark soolish
expresssions cannot deceive many. Therefore I shall ask thee this oneffion,
that when thou Writes again, thou may speak thy meaning, and leave those dark
words which have no sense in them; What would we have been under the means of
Grace, which we could nor find for which God has given us up to delusion? Or,
Whether does God give any up to delusion, for not attaining that which they
cannot find under the means of grace, when they wait for it? And as for thy
saying, that we desire to live by sense and not by faith; that is false: for it
was never in our hearts to desire it, since we knew the Truth, and means of
Grace; but by that Faith of the Son of God we live, which overcomes the World.

Hammonds seventh and last ground of delusion against us, is,

Pr. Our shaking off all the outward Ordinances of Christ, under pretense of
receiving the inward Ministrations.

Ans. As thou begins, so thou ends with thy Grounds against us, being all
false; for by that pretense, we never cast off any Ordinance of Christ, but by
the inward Ministration of the Spirit, do we bring sorth and fulfill the
outward Ordinances; and from the inward Ministration of the Spirit, do we Pray
and Preach, which is outward Ordinances, and always give thanks for all
things, and bear our Testimonies against all false ways and worships; and by
the real (not pretended) Ministration of the Spirit, do we continue in all
things whatsoever he has commanded us, and by which we know his outward
Ordinances, and his inward worship which stands in the spirit, and in the
truth; and so continue we in the Apostles Doctrine, in Fasting, in breaking
Bread, and Prayer; being by the word of his power redeemed, and set free from
all the grounds of delusion, and do witness the life of righteousness,
whereby God will condemn every Tongue that rises up in judgment against us:
And now is the Lord making manifest, who it is that is in the pretenses, and
who is in the things it self; for though such (through sained words) boasts of
Christ's righteousness, but deny it, and them that walk in it; this I say unto
all such, they that deny to (...) in his rightee usnesse in the World, shall
never be justified by it before the Father; therefore as yea look by, is to be
justified; so also look to walk in it, and bring it forth in the World, as your
Fruits unto God.

Again Samuel Hammond brings five Arguments to demonstrate our Principles, and
Doctrines to be damnable; and its impossible for us to be saved, living and
dying in them.
First. Justification by Inherent Righteousness, a damnable Doctrine. Second.
The not owning the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, as the matter, and formal
cause of our justification. Third. To make our reconciliation to God to be
wrought by our improving the light within, and the renewing of the Image of God
in us. Fourth To take men off from going to the fulness of Christ at the right
hand of God for teaching, and send them to look to the light within them.
Fifth. The casting off all the known Ordinances of Christ.
Ans. As to all those above mentioned, we have not holden any particular of
them forth, (as our Doctrine, or Principles) in these words, in which he has
charged them against us. But as to the first, this we hold; that Christ is our
Righteousness: and that we are justified freely by his Grace, through Faith
that is in him, and by it is made Heirs, according to the hope of Eternal
life, (Pit. 3. 7) and that Christ in us, is the hope of Glory; which has been
hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest; and from that
manifestation of him in us do we witness him to be our Righteousness,
Justification, and Life from the Dead. And this is our Principle, and Doctrine
which to us is saving, and not damnable; and we living and dying in this, shall
never be condemned.

Pr. And as to the second, where he charges us, not to own the imputed
Righteousness of Christ as the matter and formal cause of our justification.

Ans. It is a false charge against us, for we never denied any righteousness
of Christ imputed unto us; neither did we ever hold forth any matter, or cause
of our justification, but Christ and his Righteousness. But if Sam: Hammond
might (in the devised words of his own wisdom) set down Doctrines and
Principles for us; then our Doctrines and Principles would be damnable, and
there were no possibility of salvation, living and dying in them; and so it is
casie for him to set down a form of unsound words, and then consute them, and
falsely charge them upon us; and say, we hold damnable Doctrine; but as we abide
in him in whom we have believed, we shall not enter into condemnation: but
every Tongue that rises up against us, will God condemn.

Pr. As to the Priests third Argument, which is, To make our reconciliation to
God, to be wrought by our improving the light within, and the renewing of the
Image of God in us, which (says he) is a damnable Doctrine, and for proof,
instances, the Perfect Pharisee page 10. 11. where A. P. has said, Christ
reconciles God and Man by the renewing of the Image of God in Man.

Ans. Now as to the first, we never said, that our reconciliation to God was
wrought by our improving, or for our improving the light within: And as for
Christ to renew the Image of God in us, that is the work that the Father has
given him to do; and so far as the Image of God by Christ is renewed in any,
so far are they reconciled to God: and this reconciliation of the Creature to
God, we never held to be, by, nor for our improving the light; neither was it
by, nor for our works of righteousness, but by Christ, according to the
Scriptures, and the Apostles testimony, (2 Cor. 5, 17.) therefore if any man be
in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are past away behold, all things
are become new: And all things are of God who has reconciled us to himself by
Jesus Christ, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation. To wit,
that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the Word of reconciliation,
etc. now here the Apostle does not exclude the renewing of the Image of God,
nor the new creature, a^ (...), and th^se (...) in England (...): For (by their
Do^^rin^) they would have such a (...)ciliation, that they (...) never be
changed, nor renewed to God; but the old man (wi^h his deeds) reconciled to
God; and would have Christ's righteousness to be theirs, and themselves reck^ed
to be Saints, while they are the servants of sin. But the Apostle says, While
they were the servants of sin they were fr^e from righteousness, (Romans 6 20.)
but (says he) being mad free from sin and become servants to God you have your
fruits unto hol^nesse, and the end everlasting l^fe: But this Doctrine and
Scripture of the Apostle, by the Priests is denied, that any can be free from
sin: But the Apostle twice in that Chapter tells them, that they are made free
from sin; (as ver. 18. and ver. 22.) and as the reconciliation to God, was
wrought by the death on the Cross, the Image of God was renewed in them; For,
says the Apostle, Having abolish^d in his flesh the enmity, even the law of
commandments tou^^ined is ordinances, for to make in himself of twain, one
new man, so maki^g peace. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body
by the cr^sse having slain the enmity thereby, (Ephesians. 3 15 16.) here the
renewing of the Image of God, was ^till mentioned in the work of
reconciliation; but of this, the Priests (of this generation) cannot endure to
hear, that the Image of God should be renewed; or, that being servants to God
they are made free from sin: For where thi^ Image is renewed, all their Pride
and Covetousness, false wa^es, and worships, whereby they keep people in their
sins, and from knowing the new Creature; or, from expecting the renewing of the
Image of God in them, is testified against. For the end of their Preaching and
Printing, is to keep people from the Knowledge of Christ within, the light
within, the word with^n, the renewing of the Image of God within, (...) (...)
righteousness of Christ within. And it is manifest, (...) (...) know little of
this within, because there is so little (...) i^ (...) ^^^th in the world as
F^uits unto God; And (...) God (...) revealed th^se things to any, whereby they
bring forth the Fruits of righteousness (...) (...) ((...) in the sight of
men) for a witness against them; then they Preach, and Print against such, and
charges lies against them, (as Hammond has done against us) in telling us of
the works of the Law, and our own righteousness, and of reconciliacion, by
improving the light within, which we did never make the cause of our
justification, nor remission of sins; but say, that without blood there is no
remission; and likewise, that without Christ's life, and light, and the renewing
of the Ima^e of God, there is no salvation, Now therefore* (that all people may
be satisfied) that we do not hold that by any thing, that we do; nor for any
thing that we have done are we saved, or rec^nciled to God; but by him, (who
having made peace through the blood of hi^ Cross) by him to reconcile all
things unto himself; by hi^, I say, whether they be things in Earth or things
in Heaven, And we that were sometimes enemies in our minds by (...) works yet
now h^th he reconciled, In the body of his flesh through death, to present us
holy and unblama^le in his sight, ((...) 1. 20, 21. 22.) and this is our
test^mony concerning our reconc^li^^ion by Christ alone, not by any thing else,
whereby all our accuse^s may be put to silence from their boasting against us,
without a ground.

Hammonds fourth Argument to prove ou^ Doctrine damnable is;

Pr. That we take men off from going to the fullness of Christ as the right
hand of God for teaching, and send them to look to the light within them.

Ans. Our turning people to the light within them does not take them off from
the fullness of Christ, nor his teachings; for the light within, is a measure
of his fullness; by it he teaches, and people must be brought to his light
(...) in, before ever they witness his teachings, or fullness; and by his
light within, they see him at the right hand of God; and never till they he
turned to the light within, do they perceive his fullness, nor his glory; and
so, that this is a weak Argument against us, to prove our Doctrine damnable;
but rather that Doctrine is damnable, which keeps people from the light within,
and so from the teachings of Christ, and from his fullness, and from seeing him
at the right hand of the Majesty on high; and all that know Christ in any
measure of his light, or have received of his fullness, will be a witness
against thee in this thy Argument, to say, that turning people to the light
within, is to take them off from Christ's fullness: which is just the contrary;
to bring men to it.

Hammonds last Argument to prove our Doctrine damnable, is;

Pr. The casting off of all the known Ordinances of Christ.

A^s. This was thy seventh ground of delusion against us; and now it thy last
Argument of our damnable Doctrine; and if thou will but set thy seven grounds,
and five Arguments over again, they will be four and twenty, and so thou may
enlarge thy Volume, by mentioning one thing often over. But in answer to thee,
in stead of casting off all, we own all the known Ordinances of Jesus Christ.
And again thou say, there are other dangerous Principles that thou might
mention; as, that of Perfection, by improving the light within. Ans. We never
held perfection neither by, nor for improving the light within; and if there
were any other things thou had against us, we do not question but thou would
bring them forth: But if that was a dangerous Principle, to Preach Perfection,
then Christ was a dangerous man to be either believed, or followed; For he
said, Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. And be ye
holy, as I am holy. And some said, that he was a good man; but there was some,
(that was of Hammonds spirit in those days) and said, that he deceived the
people; and said, that those that followed him then, was accursed: and they had
as good grounds to prove them accursed that followed him then, as Hammond has
to prove us in delusion that follows him now: For in those days they might
have said against them that followed Christ, that they Preached the light
within, and turned people to the light within, and Christ within, (Col. 1. 27.)
and told of having the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in them, and of the
word of Faith in their hearts, to obey it, and do ^it, (Romans 10) and as Christ
suffered the contradiction of sinners then, so must we do now: And the Apostle
Paul* he Preached Wisdom among those that was perfect; and let as many as be
perfect, be thus minded: and John said, He that is borne of God does not commit
sin: neither can he sin, because the seed of God remains in him, (1 John 3.
9.) and he that commits sin is of the Devil, and has not seen God, neither
known him; and in this the children of God is manifest, and the children of the
Devil; whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that
loves not his brother: but he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as
he is righteous. Now by Hammonds spirit, the Apostles Doctrine, and Writings,
is dangerous Principles; and if they were in their righteous lives, and
conversations upon the Earth, they would be scorned and reproached, as they
were then; and their Writings would be called Pamphlets; but in that life which
they were in, do we reign over all our Enemies, showing love to them that
show cruelty to us; and doing good to them, that despighfully use us; and Pray,
that God may forgive them that have falsely accused us, for they know not what
they do.

Pr. Again, Samuel Hammond, (in the 11. page of thy Book) thou takes the Lord
to witness, that thou have not any desire to pass sentence upon us.

Ans. Do thou think that all people is blind, or that God will be a witness
to thy lies? God is righteous, and true, and so is all that he bears witness
unto. Have thou not (in these twelve particulars before mentioned) given
sentence upon us to be in the^ grounds of delusion, and damnable Principles and
Doctrines? And have thou not given sentence upon us, to be one with the
Soc^^ian, and with the Papist, page 4. and page (...). Oh! what a confusion is
here? what have thou been doing in thy Book, to prove our House Built upon the
Sand; and says, (...) there is no possibility of salvation for (...), living
and dying in these Principles? And yet takes God to witness, that thou have
not any desire to pass senience against us: Have thou done all this against
thy desire? or do thou find God a witness, against thy passing sentence upon
us? Thou says, that it has been upon thy thoughts several years, (in the
same page) that a man living and dying in our Principles, cannot be saved; and
this is passing sentence upon us. Was it so long upon thy thoughts? and never
in thy desires? Here thou would seem to speak Mysteries to people; but the
ground of thy Mystery is easily seen to be thy lying imaginations, whereby,
when thou have done evil, would excuse thy self by pleading ignorance; but in
this, God will witness against thee, (not for thee.)

Now having cleared our Principles and Doctrines from the guilt of all thy
grounds of delusion, and Arguments of (...) Doctrines against us; and thy
grounds in themselves to be (...). I shall speak something as to thy words, in
(...) to G. W. of those things of which thou have accused him falsely art thou
guilty, viz. of railing words and passionate (...); calling his words of truth
to thee a Dung* hill, and full of ^itter railing and that his Pen and Spirit is
dipped in the gall of (...); and such like words: and yet says, that it was
never (...) thy desires to pass sentence upon us: but thy Tongue has proved
that the thought of thy heart has deceived thee as it is made manifest. And as
to thy words, That it has been upon thy thought many years, that the Quakers
living and dying in (...)e Principles, cannot be saved. G. W. A^s* is, That it
ap(...)rs then, that thou have spoken from thy thoughts, and not from the Lord.
Then thou replies. That many precious truths has been on the thoughts of the
Saints; and instances David, 1 Chr. ^9. 18. and 2 Cor. 9. 5. whereas David
desired, that the Mercies and Deliverances, Judgments, Testimonies and
Sta^^res, might be kept upon the thoughts of his Heart for ever; and this was
his Prayer. And Paul thought it necessary to exhort the Brothren. But what is
these proofs to thee, which has had ^al^e a(...)ions upon thy thought
several years and now speaks them forth; so that his words are true to the^,
that it appears thou speaks from thy thoughts, and not from the Lord; But he
does not say, That never any truth was in the Saints thoughts, as thou would
make people believe; and many may witness to the truth of his words, that it
appears thou speaks not from the Lord, but from thy thoughts and imaginations.
And it is manifest further, that thou knows not thy own thoughts, nor the
council of thy own heart; for if thou did, thou would not have said, that it
has been so many years in thy thoughts, and now speak it forth: And (yet) say,
It was not in thy desire to pass sentence upon us. But we see, that the
deepest of thy thoughts, and thy knowledge, is covered with darkness. And as
for thy saying, That God said that he would call for damnation at the
Watch-mans hand, (Ezekiel. 33. 6) this is a charging of God foolishly; for he
never said it, neither called for it; and all thy meanings to it has but led
thee into snares, and pits, which thou cannot get out of, as all that walk in
the light, sees.

Again, (in thy 13. and 14. pages) Thou speaks against the light which Christ
has enlightened every man withal that comes into the world; and calls it, the
relics of the light of the first Creation; and no other but the light of a
natural conscience, and that a blurred one too. Oh! what scornful and
despightfull words is here against Christ, and his light, as relics of the
old creation, natural, and blurred? Is not these names more proper to be given
to darkness, then to light? Where did thou learn those names? (not in the
Scripture, nor from any Minister of Christ) How is the Scripture thy Rule which
thou have so long prated upon? For here it is manifest to all (that are not
wilfully blind) that thou have lost the form of sound words, and ar^ devising
evil names to give to the light, whereby to keep people (in their sins) from
Christ. But I pray God to convince thee by the light of his Son of all the
hard speeches that thou (ungodly sinner) have spoken against him.

Pr. Again, (thou say) for that saying, that Christ is a light (...)
enlighten the Gentiles, (Isay 49. 6. Acts 13. 47.) it is mean^ of a new Gospel
light, given forth in conversi^^, Page 13.

Ans. Where had thou this expression? Is there a New, and an Old Gospel, and to
either of them a several light? The Apostle Preached that Christ which did
enlighten the Gentiles (Acts 13. 47.) and I know no other Gospel, but that
which he Preached; but if any Preach another, (either New or Old) let him be
accursed,

And again (in the same 13. page) thou say, that believing in a ^r^ated
light, that is blasphemy. And yet in the same page, says, that till Christ
creat^ a second Covenant-light, the light of Faith, upon the account of the
Covenant of Grace, they cannot follow Christ. Here is manifest confusion and
blindness heaped up together, manifest to all men: Is the second
Covenant-light, the light of Faith, a created light? Is not Christ the second
Covenant? And is his light created, as thou have affirmed? And is it blasphemy
to believe in a created light? then it is blasphemy to believe in the light of
Christ. Now this of thin^, will appear, and be manifest unto all (that have any
understanding) to be damnable Doctrine; and for thee, it is impossible to be
saved, living and dying in it: so that which thou have prepared for another,
(Esther 5. 14. chap. (...). 10.) comes upon thy self. Again, as to the
Scripture, (John 12. 46.) where Christ says, I am come a light into the World,
etc. thou says, that cannot be meant a created light, for then a man were to
follow his own light, etc. and thy words following, says, Christ must create a
second Covenant-light, the light of Faith: and here thou have so ensuared thy
self in the pi^ of ignorance, and darkness, that until Gods righteous
judgments come upon thee, and (...) that which has spoken it, thou will never
be free, (...) (...), for great is thy s^ares, and bonds of iniquity, and they
are daily made stronger by thy devising of cor(...)pt and evil words, to
speak against the light: but this (...) which thou have so d^spightfully
spoken against, must thou love, and obey, before ever thou come out of the
snares of Satan, and before thou profit the people by thy Teaching; and these
things are now laid plain before thee, that thou may see thy own ways and
words, and that thou art guilty of that thy self, whereof thou have accused
another; and this is written, that thou ma(...) ^om^ to repentance, and the
acknowledgement of the Truth, that thou may be saved.

Again, thou have charged a false thing against G. W. which he never spoke,
nor wrote, which is this, That doing justice, or our fulfilling of the Law, is
(...) justification; and then call^ (...)* a damnable opinion: If it be a
damnable opinion, it is thy own, not his! For his words are these, For it is
the d^ers of the Law, for justice) that God justifies, page (...). according
to* (Rom* 2. 13) but in this (Sam. Hemmond) th^n have shamed thy self; for
there is many in Newcastle, that had not thought that thou had been so
impudently wicked, as wilfully, and knowingly (for thy own wicked ends) to
charge those words upon others, which they never spoke, (but i^ thy own) and
then call it, a damnable Principle. But the Lord has made thee manifest, that
thou may no more deceive the Nations.

Pr. Again thou says, That pure darkness (...) manage justice.

Ans. Thou sure means gross darkness without any mig(...) of light: And thou
may, from such Doctrines as these, (...) of a New Gospel, (as thou said before)
and new expressions; for there is no such words mentioned in the Scriptures of
the Prophets and Apostles: but to prove this thy expression of pure darkness
to manage justice; thou says, That a Star man enlighten in the night; but its
the Sunn that makes day. Ans. A Star is not pure darkness, for there is some
light; and according to the measure of its brightness, it is pure light; so thou
must have another proof then that; and (...) is more properly called
darkness, when there is not so much as the light of a Star. Another proof
is, thou say, Godly Magistrates have two-lights, and so two eyes; that is,
the light of Conscience (which is, as thou says, pure darkness;) and the
light of Faith (which I say, is pure light.) Ans. These two Eyes, are one
contrary to the other: For light has no fellowship with darkness. And how can
any Magistrate in this state manage justice; one of his Eyes (the evil eye)
must be put out, if ever he manage justice well; for the one Eye will offend
the other. And if thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out, (as Christ said) it is
better to (do justice, and) enter into the Kingdom with one Eye, then having
two, to be cast into Hest fire. And this I am sure that neither Magistrate, nor
any other, can enter into the Kingdom, while darkness is his Eye: For if the
Eye be evil, the whole body is full of darkness, (as Christ said, Mat. 6.
23.) But if any judge for God, or do justice for him, his Eye must be single,
that his whole body may be full of light, (and fulfill Christ's words,) Mat. 6.
22. But we have learned better Doctrine, then to take Hammonds two Eyes for a
perfect sight. And it was this Eye in him (which is gross darkness) with
which he has Read over our Writings, and so could not (see to) speak our own
words again, because darkness had blinded his Eye. And so all people may now
see, what light this man has, to Preach, and Print withal, or to prove
damnable Doctrines by: But good is the Word of the Lord, which said, That their
folly should be made manifest unto all men, as it now is in measure, and will
be fulfilled.

Pr. Again, thy spirit is up against the light, and in page 18. thou say,
what ever a man may call the light within him, if he call it, the life of
Christ in him; yet if he live upon it as his righteousness for justification,
it is a plain Covenant of Works.

Ans. Here thou sets thy self against the light, and truth it self, in open
and wilful rebellion; but it is good for others, (who have formerly looked
upon thee, to be a man indewed with Wisdom, and Knowledge of the Scriptures,
(and now see thee so manifestly) to declare against what they speak:) for the
Scriptures testify of Christ; and says, that in him is life, and the life is
the light of men: and his life is manifest in the mortal bodies; and his life
they live upon, and eat his flesh, and drink his blood, or else they had no
life in them; and living in his life, we are the righteousness of God in him;
and in him are all the seed of Israel justified, and shall glory. And thou that
says, to live upon the life of Christ, is but a plain Covenant of Works,
that is blasphemy, and error! and the Lord has made thee manifest.

Pr. Another false Doctrine has Hammond affirmed, That there are thousands in
their state of darkness, that cannot follow Christ, for want of light, page 13.

Ans. Then, for what are they condemned? Whether are they condemned, because
they cannot believe? or because they do not believe on him whom the Father
has sent? And whether are they condemned, because they cannot follow Christ?
or because they do not follow him? Or, whether is it for want of light? or for
want of obedience to the light, that men is condemned? And is it not, because
they love the darkness, rather then light, when the light is come into the
world? Is this the condemnation, that the light is not come into the world, nor
given to men? or rather, is not this the condemnation, that light is come into
the World, and given unto men, that every man in him might believe? Their
loving the darkness, rather then the light, when come, and given; Is not this
the cause of condemnation? If so; then Hammonds Doctrine to thousands, is false.

Again, thou objects against G. Whitheads words, because he says, that the
light is greater then the conscience; which is true. Then thou say, How is it
that those Saints in New England never so the least breaking forth of it in
the Indians? and in Old-England hundreds manifest no other light, but that of a
natural conscience, and not much of that neither.

Ans. The Indians in New England, do manifest more of the true light of Christ
in their Words, and Actions, and Righteous Dealings, then many of those thou
calls saints there, and it does break forth to the sight of these that are
among them: and these hundreds i^ Old-England, that do not manifest much of
any light; Is there ^^ne, because they they do not manifest it? Does not the
true light of Christ enlighten people, because they do not manifest it to
others? that is thy ignorance of the light; For they that manifest to others
the true light, by their obedience to it, they show that they have received
Christ the true light; and they that do not manifest it to others, they show
that they reject Christ, who is the true light, and is disobedient to the light
wherewith he has enlightened them: and so (by that which ap(...)) it is
manifest, whether they love or hate, obey or (...) the light which Christ has
enlightened them with(...); and so the truth of what we have declared
concer(...) the light, will stand for a true testimony to the Lord through(...)
^ut all generations. Now is the day of Gods power, where^^ his light is broken
forth, and ^an understanding is begotten in people, whereby they can see when
the scorner (...) his ignorance.

Thou challenges to show Scripture, that bids you look to ^^e light within you.
I have showed thee many Scriptures (...) speaks of the light within, and Christ
within; and it is the light of Christ that thou so much hates, and us, for his
sake: (...) if we had still continued in darkness, and ignorance (...) thee,
then we should have been loved by thee, for the World loves its own; but
because we walk in the light, and bears testimony against the darkness, and
works of unrighteousness; therefore do thou hate us, and speak all manner of
evil against us. Now, whereas in many places of thy Book, thy scorn, and
envy, and false accusations of G. W. is ^o manifest, I shall let that pass,
and the truth of his words stand over thee for ever; and when thou art
manifestly declared to have spoken false things against us, which thou can
not prove; as that in page 18. A man improving (...) natural conscience, is
his growing up into perfection; Now when thou art found false in that, and that
we never said so; then thou say, we (...) so; and so thou makes thy meaning
the judge both of the Scriptures, and of our (...); but God will judge and
condemn thy false meanings. Again, thou being asked, what it was that was
imputed unto Abraham for righteousness? thy answer is, It was the promised
Seed, which is Christ. Here thou erres, not knowing the Scripture; as, (^amos
2. 23.) Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness;
his Faith was accounted unto him for righteousness: but Faith is not called,
the promised Seed nor Christ. And for thy saying, If a men were never so godly,
and have nothing but his tears to plead for him, he must go to Hell. This is
foolish ignoranc^ the godly never went to Hell; but it is like (thou meant, if
he seemed to be godly, but was not; for we must (...) have meanings to thy
words, which is contrary to thy words, or else the substance of thy whole
Volume will prove false: But it is the day of the discovery of thy nakedness.
Again, (in page 20.) when thou art confuted about Baptism and the Lords
Supper; thou say, thou meant standing Ordinances, and that thou meant, that
which the Pedobaptists, and (...) baptists use: and so in every particular thou
means, anot^^^ thing then thou speaks. And in page 22. when thou (...) that
trying all things cost Solomon a sad Apostasy; thou meant he fell into
Apostasy, but both thy former words, and letter meaning, is false.

Pr. Then thou would bring the Apostle for a cloak (...) thy covetousness,
and says, thou have warrant and example of the Apostle for receiving Wages.

Ans. Nay, thou have neither warrant, nor example from him; For he first
Planted a Vineyard, before he Eat of the Fruit; And he first did sow
spiritual things, before he di^ eat of the carnal things. And he said, Have
we not power to eat, and power to drink; But he did not say, Have we no power
to take tithes, as thou art pleading for a power to take Tithes; and so he is
no example, nor warrant for thee, (...) he said, that the Priesthood was
changed, and that the (...) was changed, by which Tithes were lawful. And
(...) (...) no example from Paul, to be so many years at New-easi le, and have
yearly Wages above 100 li. a year, and yet not profit the people at all, but
rather harden their hearts against the truth, and beget envy and wrath in them
against the appearance of Christ in any; so thou have no warrant nor example
from the Apostle for these things; therefore make them no more a cloak for thy
covetousness.

Pr. Again (thou brings Paul) that for the greatness of his Wages, the
Primitive Saints laid down their Estates at the Apostles feet.

Ans. But thou, and thy brethren, may long Preach, before the people lay down
their Estates at your feet; for if they did, you would spend it upon your lust,
and pride; for your Gospel does not open the hearts of people; neither can they
account you worthy to partake of their carnal things, because they receive no
spiritual things from you, as the Saints did from the Apostles. For that which
he had received of the Lord, did he deliver unto them. But thy brethren, and
laborers in the vineyard with thee, Henry Leavers, Richard Franklings, and
Josias Dockerey affirmed (upon the 21. day of the seventh Month) at Branspith*
castle, that they have the Scriptures, and their Gospel, not from God, but from
men: And to prove it, said, that Timothy received the Gospel not from God, but
from man, (viz.) from Paul. Therefore, how can people lay down their Estates at
your feet, which do but deliver unto them a Gospel received from Man? For they
can receive it from man, or have it from the Printer, for less money then they
give you yearly for Wages: And they need not give every year the tenth part
of their increase, for the Scripture and Gospel from man; for they may have it
for five shillings, or less, which will serve for many years. Now the
Apostle, he was worthy, and it was the least (if when he had Ministered unto
them spiritual things) that he did eat and drink of their carnal things; for
the Gospel which he Preached, he received it not of Man, neither was he taught
it; but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ; and so the people under his
Ministry, did not spend their money for that which was not Bread, nor their
labor for that which did not satisfy, as they do under your Ministry; and
therefore you must either make bargains beforehand for your Wages; or get a
Law to compel them to pay Tithes, as the complaint of many of your Priests is
in this Nation, that if it were left to the freedom of people, they might
starve, the hearts of people is so hard. What Gospel have you been Preaching
all this while, that peoples hearts is hard yet? and that you dare not trust
your Gospel, nor your Church for food and raiment; you are ashamed to all
profession of godliness. Did ever the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ starve
for want of food and raiment, where they had gathered Churches? Or for Wages,
did they either go to Law, or take men's goods by violence, as the Priests in
England do? but while they have received no Gospel from God, but from man; how
should it be otherwise? so from man you have received the Gospel, and from man
you have received a Law to take tithes; and so its another Gospel then Paul
Preached; For he received it not from man, neither was he taught it by man; but
from God, by the Revelation of Jesus Christ; but now you can no longer be hid,
but are made to consesse, to the glory of God, the truth against your selves,
that people may no more receive you, as sent of God, nor to have a Message from
God, but from men, according to your consession; and your Gospel must needs be
chargeable, and burdensome to people, contrary to that which the Apostle
Preached.

Pr. In page 21. thou accuses G. W. to be ignorant of the literal Knowledge
of the Scriptures; because he asks them, Where the Levites, had Houses, and
Lands, and Tithes appointed of God for their service. And thou brings these
Scriptures, Lev. 25. 32. and Numb. 35. 3. where it mentions, what Cities they
shall have to dwell in, etc. and brings Deuteronomy. 27. 21. which speaks nothing of
the Priests Tithes, Houses, nor Lands, but of another thing, which is nothing
to what thou would prove.

Ans. Here thou art Ignorant of the literal Knowledge of the Scriptures; we
never denied that they had Houses, and Cities to dwell in: And what i^ they had
five and forty Cities with their Suburbs? what is this to prove, that they had
Houses, and Lands and Tithes for their s^rvice, appointed of God? Have thou not
read in Numb. 18. 20. where the Lord spoke unto Aaron, saying thou shall have
no Inheritance in their Land, neither shall thou have any part among them; I am
thy part, and thine Inheri^ance among the Children of Israel? Ver. 21. And
behold I have g^ven of Levy all the tenth in Israel, for an Inheritance, for
their service which they serve, even the service of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. And have thou not read, Deuteronomy. 10. 9. Wherefore Levy has no part
nor Inheritance among their brethren; the Lord is his Inheritance, as the Lord
God promised him? etc. And have thou not read, Deuteronomy. 18. 1. 2. The Priests, the
Levites, and all the Tribe of Leui, shall have no p^rt nor Inheritance with
Israel: they shall eat the Offerings of the Lord made by fire, and his
Inheritance. Therefore shall they have no Inheritance among their Brethren, the
Lord is their Inheritance, as the Lord has said? etc. And have thou not read,
Joshua 13. 14. Only unto the Tribe of Levy he gave none Inheritance, the
sacrifice of the Lord God of Israel made by fire, was their Inheritance as the
Lord has said? And have thou not read, Ezekiel. 44 28. I am their Inheritance
(says the Lord) and ye shall give them no possession in Israel, I am their
possession?

Now this was their Inheritance, and Possession; and that which they had for
their service, was the Tithe; and out of that, all the Widows, Strangers, and
Fatherless, was to come to the Priests Gate, and be satisfied, that there
should not be a beggar in Israel. But though the Priests in England have the
Tithes; yet there are Widows, Strangers, and Fatherless, that wants, and many
beggars in England; and by their covetousness is many oppressed, and their
goods taken from them, (whereby they are brought to suffer want) but the Lord
has opened the bowels of compassion in some, to pity and supply those, which
the Priests (^er their cov^tous ends) make merchandise of. Now this I have
declared, that all such may see themselves, if so be that God at any time will
give them repentance, that they may be saved.

Another snare has Sam: Hammond run himself into, by perverting the
Apostles words, when he bids them, Prove all things, and hold fast that which
is good; these words Sam. Hammond limits to this; that they must try what is
according to the mind of Christ, and hold that. Ans. That is not all things,
but one thing; but they were to try all things what was according to the mind
of Christ, and what was not; and try the spirits, whether they be of God: and
when they had tried what was according to the mind of Christ, and what was not:
and what spirit was of God, and what was not: then they were to hold fast that
which was good. But S. H says, must they try sin? and must they go hear
the Papists to try their Doctrine? Ans. Thou art very blind and dark in thy
understanding; Is there no trying of sin, but by entering into the
experimental practice of it? Ans. Yes, The Lord ha^h given us of his spirit,
by which we are able to try your Ministry, your Wages, your Covetousness, and
your cruelty and slandering of the Innocent, and yet not enter into any of your
practices: and as we try you, so we do the Papists likewise, not from the
Orthodox writers (as thou calls them) but by the spirit of the living God. And
Paul did not bid the Thessalonians go to some Orthodox Writers, to try either
Spirit, or Doctrines by their Books. But thy end in speaking these words, is.
That people should not hear us declare the Truth, lest they should be
converted to God, and brought off all false ways and worships, which they have
long been kept under, by thy perverting of the Scripture to thy own end: And if
they must go to thy Books, (as Orthodox to try us by) there they may find thee
speaking evil of us without a cause, and laying open thy own nakedness and
ignorance of the things of God: But if people once come to know the measure of
Gods spirit, and with that try, and prove, they will see tha^ they have been
always learning, but was never able to know the truth from any of your
Teachings.

Again, thou goes to excuse the Magistrates of New Castle in their cruelty,
and hayling of the peaceable people of the Lord out of d^res; and says, that
it is their Zeal and Glory: (but Persecution was ever blind, and that Zeal
which sto^d in it.) And further thou says that they know no Law that tolerates
their Meetings. Answer. What! will thou shame the Magistrates of New Castle
before all people? What! ar^ they ignorant of the Law of the Nation, and of the
Instru(...) of Government? and by this account thou would ren^er them incapable
of doing justice in New Castle; or of executing their place of trust wherein
they are put to do justice, and perform the righteousness of the Law; But
when they truly come to see thee, and thy words; they will have no great
encouragement to give thee so great Wages for upbraiding them (with their
ignorance) of the Laws of the Nation.

Pr. Again, thou empties the Venom of thy heart, by false accusing (not only
the living, but the dead) in saying, that William Cotesworth of Shields, hired
a House in New Castle; but before that he could enjoy it, the Lord stroke him
with madness.

Ans. This is false, for he did enjoy the House he hired, and others, with him,
did meet peaceably in it, and enjoy the Lords presence, and teaching, before
the Lords stroke (as thou calls it;) but do not thou accuse the Lords stroke,
neither do thou charge God with any indignation against him: For when the Lord
makes inquisition for the blood of his Saints, thou will not be clear in this,
in saying, the Lord did witness against him, or us, in that particular.

Pr. Again, thou mentions a Shoemaker in New castle, which, thou says, was
one of us, and came, and rayled against thee, and was presently struke mad.

Ans. Here thou would make people believe wonders: was he not mad before he
rayled against thee? And that Shoemaker was never any of us, (nor owned of us
ever to be in the truth;) and he was mad and distracted before ever be saw us,
or we him: But he that is in the gall of bitterness, must vent it out: But the
Lord does keep us clear from the blood of all men, and that truth which we are
witnesses of, shall stand for ever over all our Accusers, who are filling up
the measure of their iniquities, by speaking all manner of evil against us: as
Christ said they should do: But in this we rejoice, When men speak all manner
of evil against us falsely for his name sake, for great is our reward in
Heaven, for even so persecuted they the prophets that went before us: and this
is that reproach which for his sake we must bear, as he has left us an
example; for the servant is not greater then his Lord.

Pr. The last thing in this Book, is a story which thou tells to thy own shame,
Of thy hyring a man (the Keeper of the Mutehall) to betray the truth, and to
break his promise, as the Chief Priests ^yred Judas to betray Christ; they
gave him thirty pieces of silver, to betray the just; and thou gave this man
thirty pence to break his Word and promise, which he had made to the servants
of the Lord, and in love to the truth, And thou says, thou gave it him to
prevent the Quakers temptings,

Ans. Oh! foolish man, thou makes it worse and worse; Is money a means to keep
men from temptation? Did thou not rather with the thirty pence, tempt him to
be unfathfull to the Lord, and to break his promise? And as without money,
Judas would hardly have been tempted to have betrayed Christ; neither (as thou
supposes) would this man to have broke his promise, and to resist the truth;
For thou says, thou considering that he might murmurre at your hindering of
his gain; therefore you gave it him: so then, (it seems) it was not any
convincement from your Doctrine, nor any faith that he had in you, that you
were of God, and we not; but by tempting him with words, and getting him into a
^^avish fear, and then giving him money; which if once the witness of God
arise in him, and he see the guilt of his treachery, by your tempting words and
money; he may come to give you your money again, and tell you, that the cu^se
of God was in it, and that by that thirty p^^c^, he did sell the truth, and
bought it not: But glory, and everlasting praises be to the Lord for ever, that
daily brings your hidden things of darkness, to light, and makes manifest the
counsels of your hearts, whereby all your temptings with money and words, is
discovered, and that is but carnal weapons to defend your selves withal, and
with that you cannot keep the truth ^ut of New Castle; but God has a seed
which he wild gather from amongst you, which cannot be tempted, neither with
your words, nor your money; for you want the sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God; so you must make use of carnal weapons, (money, and flattering
words) to keep people in the ways of sin, and death, telling them, that the
Lord is amongst you, and that no evil will come upon them, speaking peace to
them that live in iniquiry, as the false Prophets did, (Mal. 3 15.) and ye have
wearied the Lord with your words, (which have been without spirit and life)
Mal. 2. 17.

This is given forth to stop the ignorance of foolish men, and that none may
glory in their shame, as Samuel H^mmond has done of his Book, in his Letter to
A. P. wherein he desires him not to be offended with the seeming harshnesse of
the Assertions, and says, that he has written nothing but truth, and the mind
of Christ, etc. but what is here declared, it is manifest to all that desire to
know truth from deceit, that he has traveled in iniquity, and brought forth
lies, and wearied himself for very vanity, (Hab. 2. 13.) and though his
Aspersions is come forth in harshnesse against us, yet we shall render him
truth for lies, and love for harshnesse, as Christ has taught us, and so heap
coals of fire upon his Head.

NOw there remains something, that people may take notice of, which is the
Fundamental Principles, or Doctrine of that Priesthood; there being several
of their Brethren of that Priest hood met together in a dispute with some of us
in Branspith-castle upon the 21. day of the seventh Month, affirmed as
follows. Josias Dockerey affirmed, and the rest assented,
1. That they have the Scriptures, and their Gospel not from God, but from Men.

2. That there is no knowledge of the Spirit, without the Scriptures.

3. That immediate Revelation or Inspiration, is not to be expected, nor looked
for in these days, and that to expect it is Diabolical, (or Devilish.)

4. And that that which is contained (or Written) in this very Volume (laying
his Hand upon the Bible) and that which appears visibly to h^s external
senses, is the Gospel.

5. That the flesh of Christ is not in them.

6. That Christ had, and has a natural carnal Body, and is in Heaven with a
natural carnal body; and has an humane carnal fleshly Body joined to his
Divinity, and is in Heaven with it.

7. That Timothy received not this Gospel from God, but from man, (viz.) from
Paul.

Rich. Frankling affirmed,
8. That Grace could not be conveyed to any man from the Lord, without the
ordinary outward means of Preaching

9. That the light spoken of, in John 1. which enlightens every man, etc. is
not sufficient to lead up to Christ.

Hen. Leaver.
10 That they knew no such thing as Prophecy by immediate I^spiration, or
Revelation, in these days.



These things are their Principles, and Doctrines, which they Preach to people
to believe, and is but their own Tradition, contrary to the Principles of the
Doctrine of Ch(...) and the Testimony of Scriptures.

Ans. Now as to the first, if not from God, but from man they have received
their Gospel, then it is not that which the Apostle Preached, but another; And,
says the Apostle, though we, or an Angel from Heaven, Preach any other Gospel
unto you, then that which we have Preached unto you, let him be accursed, (Gal.
1. 8.) For (says he, in the 12. verse) I neither received it of man, neither
was I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, so no other Gospel
received in any other way, is to be received, or believed; for the Gospel is
the power of God, as (Romans 1. 16.) I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
for it is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes, etc. Now,
to say tha^ they receive the power of God from man, not from God is ignorance
and error; and to say that the Letter is the Gospel, is as great ignorance and
error; and that Gospel (...) accursed (and he that Preaches it) which is not
received from God.

Now as to the second:

Pr. That there is no knowledge of the Spirit without tho Scriptures:

Ans. If they had said, that there had been no knowledge of Scriptures without
the Spirit, then they had spoken the truth, whereas now they have spoken the
plain contrary; for the Spirit gives the Knowledge of the Scriptures; but the
Scriptures gives not the Knowledge of the Spirit: and the Apostle was of
another judgment and Principle, for, says he, the letter kills, but the
spirit gives life; and it is the spirit that quickneth, (John 6. 63.) And John
said, they knew that they dwelt in God, and he in them, because he had given
them of his spirit, (1 John. 4. 13.) And Paul was an able Minister of the
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit, for the letter kills, but
the spirit gives life, (2 Cor. 3. 6.) now those before mentioned, has
manifested, that they are Ministers of the letter, not of the spirit, and so
Preaches, that the letter must give the Knowledge of the spirit, when as the
true Ministers said, That it was the spirit that gave the Knowledge of God, and
of the Scriptures, as all that know God will confess.

Priests third Principle.

That immediate Revelation, or Inspiration is not to be expected, nor looked
for in these days, and that to expect it is Diabolical, (or Divelish.)

Ans. Then there is no Knowledge of the Father to be expected, nor looked for
in these days, and to expect the Knowledge of God to be revealed is
Diabolical; but this is contrary to Christ's words; for says Christ, Mat. 11.
^7. No man knows the Son, but the Father; neither knows any man the
Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him* and they that
would not have us to expect to have the Father revealed unto us by the Son,
this i^ a damnable Doctrine, and we cannot believe them; For revealed things
belong to us, as the Apostle said; and it pleases the Father to reveal his
Son in us; and it pleases the Son to reveal the Father to us; and by the
Son we know the Father; and the Scripture testifies of those things, but does
not reveal those things unto any. And they are they which testifies of me,
says Christ, John. 5. 39.

Priests fourth Principle.

That that which is contained (or Written) in the Bible, which appears visibly
to the external senses, is the Gospel.

Ans. Nay; For Christ, the power of God, who is the riches of the glory of this
Mystery, which was hid from Ages and Generations, which was Christ in them the
hope of glory; is the Gospel which the Apostles Preached, (Col. 1. 26. 27. 28.)
And the Apostle said, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost,
whom the god of the world has blinded their minds, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God, should shine in their
hearts, (2 Cor. 4. 3. 4.) Now the Gospel which was the Mystery was hid to the
unbeleevers; but the unb^l^^v^rs can see the Bible with their exter^all Eye;
and hear it with their exte^nall Ea^e; and yet the Gospel hid unto them: so
that is not the Gospel which the natural man, with his natural, carnal,
external senses (...) s^e, or hear, (and so these Principles is false) and
contrary to the Scriptures which hold such things.

Priests fifth Principle.

That the Flesh of Christ is not in them.

Ans. Then wh^^ is that flesh which Christ says, Except ye eat my flesh, and
drink my blood, ye have no lefe in you? (John 6. 53.) And whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats me,
even he shall live by me, (John 6. 54. 45. 56. 57.) Here you have made it
manifest, that the flesh of Christ you know not; you are not flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone as the Saints was, neither do you dwell in him,
nor he in you; neither have ye eternal life in you, by eating of his flesh,
and drinking of his blood. But we that are in Christ, and he in us; as he
lives by the Father, so we live by him, and his flesh to us is meat indeed,
and his blood is drink indeed; and we do witness his flesh to be spiritual,
and not carnal, as you say, and it feeds the spiritual man, and so have
eternal life abiding in us: But you that know nothing but carnal flesh, which
the carnal man feeds upon; as Christ said to the Pharisees, so say I unto you,
that you have not his Word abiding in you, (John 5. 38) and ye have neither
heard his voice, nor seen his shape, (ver. 37.) nor known his flesh.

Priests sixth Principle.

That Christ had, and has, a natural carnal Body, and is in Heaven with a
natural carnal Body, and has an humane carnal fleshly Body joined to his
Divinity, and is in Heaven with it.

Ans. This Principle is contrary to the Testimony of Scripture; for there is no
such thing said of Christ in the Scriptures, that he is in Heaven with such a
Body* For the Scripture says, there is a natural body, and there is a
spiritual Body, (1 Cor. 15. 44.) And that there are celestial bodies, and
bodies terrestrial; and the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of
the terrestria^ is another. And that it is sown a natural body, but is raised
a spiritual body. The (...) Adam was of the Earth, ^a^thy the second was the
lord from Heaven; Howbeit, that was not first which is sp^ritu^ll, but that
which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual. Now, we say, that
Christ was raised with a spiritual body, and is at the right hand of his
Majesty on high in a spiritual glorified body, and not in a carnal fleshly
natural body: For the terrestrial body of the first Adam in the
transgression, was natural, carnal, and fleshly; and this was the vile body,
which was to be changed: And we do believe that the bodies shall be changed
(from natural, carnal, and fleshly) and made lik^ unto his glorious body, in
which he is in Heaven. And this which you have held in this particular is
concrary to the Scriptures, and the Apostles Doctrine; and also contrary to the
judgment of many of your own Priests and Brethren; For they hold, that the
bodies shall be made spiritual; and that the Saints must enter into Heaven
with glorified Bodies. And if the Saints must be in Heaven with spiritual
glorified bodies, and Christ with a natural, carnal, fleshly Body? this is
not proportionable, nor according to truth.

Priests seventh Principle.

That Timothy received not the Gospel from God, but from ^an, (viz.) from Paul.

Ans. Then it would but have been of little effect to them that heard it from
him; but I shall bring in Paul as a witness against you in this; For Paul
says to Timothy, Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophosie, ((...) Tim. 4. 14.) so that his gift came by Prophecy from the
spirit of the Lord and not from Paul though Paul was a Father unto him. And
again, Paul said, Stir up the gift of God which is in thee; For God has not
given us the spi it of fear, but of power, of love, and a sound mind, (2 Timothy
1. 6. 7.) so that Timothy received his Gospel from God, by the spirit of his
power, and of love; and from the gift of God in him, he Preached, and not from
man, her by man; And cursed be the deceivers, which would draw people from the
Gospel of God, unto man's Traditions, as such Priests seek to do. Now, if you
had only said, that you have not received any Gospel from God, but from man,
many would have believed you; for they know it is so; but when you charge your
own guilt upon the Apostle, and say, that he did not receive the Gospel from
God, but from man; herein many will bear witness against you; for they know,
and believe to the contrary.

Priests eighth Principle.

That Grace cannot be conveyed to any man from the Lord, (...) it (...) the
ordinary outward means of Preaching.

Ans. This is to limit God from his spirit and power within, and Word in the
heart, (as Romans 10.) to outward Preaching, and to ordinary outward means; this
is blasphemy^ as to say, that God cannot convey Grace to any man, but ^y
outward Preaching. And if you mean by your outward Preaching; the Grace of God
has appeared to all men, where your outward Preaching never came: But in this,
all people may see your darkness, and that your offense is not only against
us; but against the Apostles, and against God himself, for giving his Grace
freely to people, who will not be limited by you: And by such Doctrines as
these, the Lord God has made you to appear (as you are) an ill savor in the
Nation, who goes not about only to keep people from the gift of God in them;
but also to limit God from giving good gifts to his children, who by the free
Grace of God received from him (without your outward Preaching) shall witness
against you, and your outward Teaching, by which he never conveyed (...) (...)
(...).

Priests ninth Principle.

That the light spoken of in John 1. which enlightens every man, etc. is not
sufficient to lead up to Christ.

Ans. In him was life, and the life was the light of men, (John 1. 4.) And this
was the true light which lightene^^ every man that comes into the World,
(ver. 9.) Now let all people consider, whether the life of Christ, (which is
the light of men,) be not able to lead to Christ, or to the Father. For he was
the light of men, that all men through him might believe, (ver. 7.) And here is
Christ, and his light ^ccused; (yea, his life accused not to be sufficient;) so
it is no great matter, if by those men we be accused, when neither the Father,
nor the Son, nor the holy Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, can escape their
accusation; but we are not greater then they, and so with patience we shall
bear it; for it is enough for the servant to be be as his Lord.

Priests tenth Principle.

That they know no such thing as Prophecy by immediate Inspiration, or
Revelation in these days.

Ans. No. How should you know any Prophecy by Inspiration, that knows not, how
God can give any Grace, but by outward Preaching? so you are far from the
gift of Prophecy, who are yet ignorant of the spirit of Grace, by which God
gives Grace unto his children. But though you know no such thing; yet there is
such a thing, and the Lord is faithful who has promised, Ieel 2. that he will
power out his Spirit upon Sons and Daughters, Servants and Hand maids, and
they shall Prophecy. And there is both Sons and Daughters, Servants and
Handmaids, that now do Prophecy. And there is no Prophecy, but by immediate
Inspiration. And because that Sons and Daughters do now Prophecy, being
Inspired by the holy Ghost, and from the gift of God received; therefore is
your envy and rag^ so great against them, because you know no Prophecy, nor no
Gospel from God, but from man; and so you are contrary to the Apostles; For he
would have had Prophesying in the Church; and bid them, covet to Prophecy. But
these Priests forbid to Prophecy, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and
Writing, (1 Cor. 14. 39.) Now when people ^ath tried you, What can they expect
from you, that know no Prophecy by Inspiration, nor knows no Gospel from G^d,
nor knows not the flesh of Christ, nor no sufficiency in his light, nor his
spiritual Body which is in Heaven, nor the Gospel, which is the power of God,
nor no Knowledge of God, by the Revelation of his Son: and these being your
maine Fundamental Principles, in which you so blasphemously are erred from the
Truth; it is now high unto to turn away from such, for many people have been
deceived by you; for they had thought that you had had the Knowledge of those
things, which now (it is manifest) you are ignorant of.

And now, blessed be the God of the spirits of all flesh, who has discovered
your ignorance, and blindness, which for a time was hid, under a pretense of
words; but now he has rent the Veil of the Covering, and he is drying up the
Fountain of your Imaginations, from whence your empty Words have proceeded,
that his life may have place in the Earth, which is now breaking forth amongst
his Children, which are come to the Fathers Teachings, which you have labored
to keep them from: But now has the Lord loosed their bands, and brought them
to his own Teachings, and into his own Fould, where they need no more your
false meanings, nor cousenings of those words which the Spirit of the Lord
inspired in them, which gave them forth.

And the Everlasting Day of God is broken forth upon us, though Night be come
upon you, that you have no Vision; and the secrets and Councels of the Lord is
shut up from you, that you have not a Word from his Mouth: But truly, the Lord
is good to Israel, even to them that be of an upright heart. And the Lord is
with us, as a mighty terrible one; therefore our persecutors shall stumble, and
they shall not prevail, they shall be greatly ashamed, they shall not prosper;
their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten, (Jeremiah 20. 21.) For
now is the Lord establishing his Everlasting Covenant with his seed, even his
Covenant of life and peace with those in whom the Law of truth is in their
Hearts, and iniquity not found in their l^pps; who walk with God in peace and
equity, and do turn many away from their iniquities, (Mal. 2. 5. 6.) And this
shall all they witness that fear the Lord, and that walk in the way of his
Righteousness.

FINIS.

