A CATALOGUE OF MANY Natural RARITIES, WITH Great Industry, Cost, and thirty
Years travel in Foraign Countries,

COLLECTED BY ROBERT HVBERT, alias FORGES, Gent. and sworn Servant to His
Majesty.

And daily to be seen, at the place called the Music House, at the MITER, near
the West end of St. Paul's Church.

London, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for the Author, 1664.

A CATALOGUE OF MANY Natural RARITIES.
I. Rarities HVMAN.
A Giants Thigh Bone, more than 4. feet in Length; found in Syria.

A Mummy, entire, and adorned with Hieroglyphics, that show both the
Antiquity, and eminent Nobility of the Person, whose Corpse it is, taken out of
one of the Egyptian Pyramids.

II. Rarities of BEASTS and Parts of them.
A Hahut or Sloth, a fourfooted Animal of America, in the Head and Neck
somewhat resembling a Man. It has 3. Claws one each foot, but the Claws are
like a Boares tuskes, it is of Florida, and is the slowest of all Beasts, from
whence it has its Name. It was given by Esquire Scott, an ingenious Gentleman and
a great traveller in America.

A Haget, which sleeps six months: it is a creature of the Island Mayonto in
the Lake Yondarro, two hundred miles from Hudsons river in America, it has a
Costly furre, and is held for excellent meat in that Country.

A Linx, it is a fierce creature with an excellent furre, it is as big as an
ordinary water Spaniel, and is a very quick sighted creature, this beast leap't
from a tree, and had almost killed a Woman, but that she was speedily delivered
by a Moor, who shot him to death. It was given by Mr. Linzey Surgeon of
Popler.

An Ermine; which living had rather suffer death, then to be defiled; as some
Authers testify.

A Monstrous Catt, with two bodies, one head, eight legs and two tails, it
was presented by worthy Mr. Thornton, Chaplain to the right honorable the
Earl of Bedford.

A Musk Ratt of Russia, this Creature lives in fresh rivers and has a large
long tail and duck-feet behind, the better to swim withal.

Parts of Beasts.
The Horns of a Dog, of a Land near China.

The Horns of a Hare, which were the Prince Electors of Saxony.

A Rinoceros Horn, that was also given by his Highness the Duke of Holstein.

The Claw and Scale of a Rinoceros, which is esteemed the Unicorn.

A very long winding Horn of a Ram in Germany.

The Black horns of a Russia Ram, four growing together; two straight, and two
crooked.

A strange horn of a Virginia Dear.

A strange horn of a German Rain Dear.

Another sort of Rain Deeres horn.

A pair of Antlopes horns.

A Male and Female Barbarouses heads, either of them are as big as a Swines
head; it is a strange beast of the Deserts of East India, it has two tusks
like a Boar in the lower jaw, and two great tusks growing upon the nose.

A Guinney Bats-skin, larger then a great Coney skin.

A soft Ball of hair, bigger then a man's fist, found in the maw of a Calf in
Holland.

A Black Ball, with a hard shell found in the stomach of a wild Bull in Brasil.

A little Orbicular Ball, hard and light, found in the stomach of a strange
beast of India.

A strange Tuske of a great Boar.

A great Tooth of an Hippopotamus.

Besides the things above mentioned, there are in a chest great variety of
strange bones, teeth and claws of many different Creatures.

III. BIRDS.
A Phenicopter or Passoflamingo; given by the Ingenious Lover of Rarities Mr.
Povey Treasurer to his Highness the Duke of York. This bird is good meat and
was much esteemed by the delicate-mouthed Romans.

A Manncodiata, or Bird of Paradise with feet, for it has great feet, to show
that it perches on trees in a land as yet unknown: for they are never seen
alive; but are found always dead in the Moluccos Islands, by reason of a
continual wind that blows six months one way and six months the other way and
because of their sharp head, little body, and a great feathered tail, they are
blown up so high that they fall dead in another climat or Country.

A Bird called the Alcion of East India.

A Tropick-bird, this Bird is called so, because that kind is seen near the
Tropic or under the line: for when the Mariners see them fly in the air, they
then can conjecture where about they are. It is a Sea foul, of a gray color,
but the quills of the feathers of his wings are black, and the feathers white,
and his bill like a crow, but very red; and his feet like a duckes, but of two
colors.

An Arcuata Coccinea, a sort of Sea- Curlew, highly esteemed by the Natives of
Brasile, who call it Guaro. It changes the color of its feathers thrice, viz.
from black to ash color, and then to white, but the second year put on new
ones of a scarlet, which the longer the bird lives it grows more bright and
orient; It is found in Marahoon and Rio de Janciro. Given me together with the
full Relation of it, by the learned Dr. Charlton one of the Kings Majesty's
Physicians in ordinary, and excellently knowing in Natural Rarities.

A strange Sea-fowle as big as a Goose; it is called the Sea Pinguin, it cannot
fly, for his wings are like finnes, and is so thick of feathers that one cannot
shoot him, unless behind against the growth of his thick down or feathers,
he is found threescore leagues from the Coast of Canada.

A Sea-Crow, it is as big as a Raven, it has feet like a Duck and a bill like
a Crow.

A Sea-Parret, or Coppernose of Greeneland, the bill is of several colors, but
the feet of a scarlet, and like a Duck.

A Great Bird of Guiney called the Guiney Wake, it resembles something a
Pea-cocke on the head, and has a tuffe like the bristles of a Hog on the top
of his head, and has a scent like musk, and as ill-favored feet as the Peacock.

Several Tominci or Humming Birds of several countries, which live by the dew
that they suck from the flowers with their little long tongues.

A very rare little Bird. The Nest and the Bird altogether do not weigh 24.
grains, it is a lesser species of humming Bird then ordinary.

The Head and Bill of the Bird Ibis of Egypt; it is the bird that taught the
use of Glysters; and in that Country there is a Law that condemns any to
death, who kills one of them. For they devour the Serpents in those parts.

An Indian Storkes head and bill.

An Acoras head and bill of Brasil.

A Pelicans head, bill and bag with the feet, to prove that it is a water
foul: he does not make himself to bleed a purpose for his young ones, but by
accident, by carrying of shellfishes in his thin bag makes it to bleed.

A Toucans head and bill of Peru; the head and bill of that bird are bigger
then all his body; it is a very rare one and did belong to the King of Spain.

The Head and Leg of an Estridge.

The Head and Bill of a Stone-pecker, of Germany.

A Leg of a Casoware or Emen.

A Leg of a Dodo a great heavy bird that cannot fly; it is a bird of the
Mauricius Islan.

Several sorts of Eggs, of bird, fishes and serpents.

The Nest of a Bird in Africa, built with a long Neck on a Tree, to secure
himself and young ones from Apes and Monkies.

A Nest of a Bird made like the secret parts of a man, by a little Bird in
Brasil, to secure him and his young ones from the Serpents.

A Nest of another Bird, made like another thing and of other materials, it is
also built on a tree, but of a Country distant from Brasil above 3000 miles.

An other Nest of a little Bird of India, but no body does know of what
material it is made, yet the great persons of that Country eats it for good
meat.

A large bush of black feathers, that for the Rarity, and beauty, does exceed
that which the master of these Rarities did see, of the great Turks or Sultan
at Constantinople.

IV. FISHES.
A Sea Elephant or Rock fishes head as big as a bushel. This sort of fish
loves to be near the Rocks therefore the Seamen when they espy the fish, come
not near the place, for fear of a Rock under water.

The Head of a Sea-sheep, of Caepe de Vert in Africa, the fish is good meat and
the head very like a sheeps head.

A Sea-Lyons head, for its form it is a species of doggefish, but is very good
meat especially the liver.

A Crack-Shell-fishes head, this fish lives upon shell-fishes, and has three
great teeth in the inner part of his mouth, with the which he grinds the shells
to small pieces, it is a fish of America.

A great Sea-Catts head of China.

A great Sturgeons bead of the German Ocean; The Sturgeon has no teeth, but
receives his food by a round hole that is under his head, by which he sucks in
his food.

A Head and Tail of a Dolphin, the Dolphins tail is different from all other
fishes for it grows thwartwise the better to rebound out of the water, as he
does often against a storm.

A great Sword-Fishes head and Sword of the black Sea; it is one of the
swiftest fishes that swims, and is excellent meat, sliced, broyled, with oil
peper and salt and the juice of a lemon on it.

The Scull of a Sea-Morce of Green land, this fish does sleep hanging on the
Rocks by the great teeth of the upper jaw and so is taken in Norway.

A strange fishes head that did belong to the King of Bohemia.

An Extraordinary great Tortises head of East India, it is called the
Logger-headed Tortoise.

A fish called the Dagger fish for the form of the head, it is a species of
Sea Unicorn.

The Head of a fish of Madagascar, this fish moves the upper jaw, and not the
lower.

The Head of a fish that is found in fresh rivers as the Danubius in Hungaria,
and the Elbe in Saxe, it is a fish with a round great head and small eyes and
two long horns like a beard, and is a good tasted fish, and is called Siluti.

Whole Fishes.
A Shoveller or Blew Sharke, very perfect, given by Doctor Eastgate, Physician
^n Popler.

A Monk-fish Shark, the Sharke does engender like fourfooted creatures on land,
and has ten or twelve at a litter; When their young ones are in any danger they
receive them in their stomach and then disgorge them out again.

A Spotted Dog-fish of the Coast of France.

A Shovell Dog fish, it is a species of Sharke, his eyes are seated before
distant one from another: It was given by his highness the Duke of Holstein.

A great Frog fish of the Baltic Sea, this fish is as big as a great hog.

A Sea Otter, this Creature is an Amphibium, and has his forefeet like sins:
but seated in the midst of his body like a cross; his skinn is hairy like down
or silk, it is so soft and bright.

A Sea Leopard, so called from his spots, it is a species of Seal, and is also
an Amphibium.

A little Sea Calfe or Seal which also participates of both Elements, and has
four feet but short, the two hinder broad, and no ears, the better to endure
long in the water. Olaus the Great writes, that this creature is the most
unconstant to his female of any; which is the cause often times of his death,
for the fisher men to take him counterfit the braying of a female, they are
common in the Finland Sea.

A Sea Wolf, it is a creature that has the strongest teeth and bites the
hardest of any for his bigness: for his head being cut off from his body
living, a quarter or half an hour after is able to bite ones hand off.

A Sea Ape, for his form, and is called the Joint fish for its nature, for if
one holds ones hand before his head, when he is living it makes the joints of
hand and arm to crack, this fish is found in Brasil.

A little Tortoise, called the Hawks-bill-Tortoise.

A Sea Tortoise has 3. hearts, and it is of a threefold nature, for it lives
in the Sea like a fish, it lays eggs in the sand by the shore side, to be
hatched by heat like a foul, and it crawles one 4. fennes like feet, and has
flesh and blood like a 4. footed beast.

A less Tortoise newly hatched out of his egg; all Sea Tortoises are good
meat when they are in season.

A great Sea Tortoise; it is a Creature much addicted to generating, for the
male will remain on the female ten days or more, to the great impoverishing of
himself to carry on, but to the bettering of the female in her laying of four
or five hundred of eggs at a time, in a hole she makes in the sands, then
covers them, and so they are afterward hatched by the Sun.

A Male Conny fish, armed with a hard shell, and two horns, or prickles before
and two behind.

A Triangular fish; it is a female Conny fish, larger then the male, the better
to contain her spawne, and is also armed with the like hard shell, but not with
prickles. Nature forcing her to follow the male for her defense.

A long narrow fish called the Sea Pelican: for the form of his head. Also it
is called the Sea Dart, for the form of his body and and tail that is like
the head of a barbed arrow.

A great Sea Porcupine fish of the West India.

A Hedge-Hog-fish. It is a species of the Sea Porcupine, only the prickles are
shorter. It was given as an addition of these Rarities by his Highness the
Duke of Holstein.

A Sea Mouse, so called for the form of his head and beard; this fish contrary
to the nature of other fishes shricks in the water and out of the water like a
mouse, but for his sins he is something like a Serpent in color, and is
about a foot long, but is very good meat.

A great horned Soal fish. It is like a large Soal, but has his Mouth right a
fore, with one great horn between his eyes, and both the sides of his body of
one color, different from the Nature of other Soales that are brown of one
side and white on the other.

A Saw fish, Vulgarly called the Sword-fish, but is not. This fish is the enemy
to the Whale; for with the prickles of his weapon he torments the Whale so much
that the great monstrous fish kills her self by swiming too hastily without her
Pilot-fish against the shore, her body being so fat and heavy, and her skin so
thin.

A little prickled Dog fish of the German Sea.

A Sturgeon of Holland.

A Sturgeon of an other species, such as is found in Italy.

A Parret, or Angrey fish of Brasile, it is a species of Globe-fish, which
cannot swim in a storm, and therefore fills his maw with stones, to lie steady
in the bottom of the water.

A Sucking fish of Ice land, it is a species of Lump-fish, that cannot swim
likewise in a storm, but sticks to the Rocks, with a seeming mouth that is
under the fore part of his belly.

A Poison fish of East India, so venomous that thirteen men in a ship dyed by
eating of one of them, he is called by some the Sea Hare; he is for his form
something long and four square and is a species of Conny-fish.

An Hermit fish of the bottom of the Sea, it is a creature that lives in the
shell of an other fish, the fishermen makes use of them to bait other fishes
withal.

A Soldier fish, it is a creature that lives on Mountains or highland in the
Caribea Islands under the roots of trees, but once a year comes to the Sea
side to spawn in vast multitudes, and then they possess themselves of the
shells of other fishes, and so march back again with their plundered shells.

A Woodcock fish of the the Baltic Sea, his head is like a long bill full of
sharp teeth, and for the length it is counted a Sea Serpent.

A Prickled Tead fish of India, being a species of Globe fish.

A 4. Prickled fish of East India. All other fishes, though greater, are afraid
of him, for his prickles that he has before and behind; therefore they will
not come near him, and he is always taken alone.

An Angel fish, so called for his beautiful colors, that he has under water,
this is of the West Indias.

A great flying-fish or Sea Swallow, that flies sometimes aboard the ships, and
thinking to escape a fish that is his adversary, becomes a good friend to man,
by being good meat, when well dressed.

A Trumpet fish of the Baltic Sea, it is a kind of Sea Serpent, and somewhat
resembles the Needel fish.

A Smith fish, it is likewise called S. Peter's fish, the one half is the head,
and the other half is the body; it was given by his Highness the Landgrave of
Hessen.

A Wave fish so called for the manner of the growing of his scales.

A Weapon fish of Bermudos, this fish has a long sharp bone on his back to
defend himself, which he raises, or lets fall in a hollow case, when he
will.

An other sort of Weapon fish of the West Indias.

A fish called the Sea cock of the Spanish coasts

A little fish of Guiney called the Cataphractus, that has two prickles
before, that are venomous.

A Sun fish, for sleeping in the Sun it is also called the Moon-fish, for
shining in the night to the amazement of Seamen that sees so great a light;
this fish is of a strange form, for it is like a head only, but has a very
little mouth for so great a body.

A great Netted Stare fish, for his form, it is one of the sensiblest
creatures of the world, and has but one eye. It was given by Sr. Thomas
Wardner Governor of Sr. Christophers Island.

A very rare great Star fish of India; this fish feeds on flat shell fishes,
and his mouth is in the Center of his body.

A large Comett, or Sixfingers fish of India, it is a species of Star fish.

A little Crowned Star fish of the Coast of Denmark.

A little round boded Star fish with long narrow feet or points.

A Flat flowered Star fish of the German Sea.

A five pointed little Star fish of the Coast of Holland.

A little Star fish with twelve points, taken on the Coast of England.

A prickled Crab called the Sea Spyder, which has little claws on his feet,
like birds claws; It was given to the augmenting of these Rarities, by the
Learned Petrus Carisius, the King of Denmark's Resident in the united Provinces.

A King Crab of the Moluccos Island this creature has the eyes on his back, and
is also called a Sea Spyder, for the resemblance.

A great Sea Crab.

A Witland Crab; it is like a deaths head, and lives in the ground like Connies
in a burrow, in some Islands of the West Indias.

An other species of King Crab or Sea Spyder, but as light as a sheet of Paper,
yet it is as big as an ordinary face.

An Icus Marinus, that is called the Sea Orange.

A Torpedo or Benumming fish, for it takes away the sense of feeling from the
fisher man's hands when he is in his Net. He is of Africa, and did belong to the
King of France.

A very perfect great and true Remora of India, whose property is to hinder or
stay great ships as they swim; it has on his head many open spaces out of
which proceeds a glutinous humor, with the which he sticks so fast to any
smooth thing that a man cannot well losen him.

A strange black Plaice, from the Sea of Denmark.

A little prickled Globe Fish, also called the Sea Owl, for his form.

An Hippocampus of the Mediterranean Sea; his belly is said to be very venomous.

An Hippocampus of Brasil, of an other sort: for he has a little white horn
under his head.

A little Spouting or Fountain fish; for it sticks to the Rocks, and when one
will take him, he spouts the water in ones face.

A strange sort of Oyster, that is called the Sentry fish for his nature, for
he is fastened to the Rocks and most commonly stands open to catch fish; for as
the fish thinks to eat him, he takes his enemy prisoner and then entertaines
him as good meat.

A Navell fish, a round slymy misshapen thing, that sticks to the Rocks, and
contracts it self in the shape of a Navell, and is a venomous creature.

A true Purple-fish, that sticks to the Rocks and is an insect of the Sea
composed of many hard shells laid over one another like the scales of
wood-lice. I walking by the Sea side to search after the secrets of Nature,
found one of them in the West India: but I wondered at the variety of colors
wherewith it stained my hand For, first it was green, then blew, afterward,
purple, and lastly it became a beautiful Red; and taking my handkerchief to my
hands it died the same likewise, and the colors remain in the linen not to
be washed out.

A Limpet, which sticks also to the rocks, and is an Insect of the Sea, having
a flat shell, but the creature within is something like a snaile, with little
horns and is very good meat.

A Needle-fish, it is a small little long fish of the form of of a needle.

A Sea Louse, is also an insect of the Sea in Greenland, and sticks to the
Whale, for food.

Some Sea-fleas, when the sea is at a low Ebb, they are found by hundreds
under some Rocks, and after storms, on the sands by the shore side.

Some Sea-Scorpions; they are insects of the Sea and have six feet like a
Scorpion, and a long tail.

Some Mint fishes, they are little round creatures, but when they are dry they
are flat and marked like money.

A Sea Eye, it is a species of the Mint fish, round and clear like Gelley, but
venomous.

A Paraquito fish of the Adriatic Sea; it is a little green fish like a
Paraquito, but has small teeth before like unto a Mouses.

A little Burre-fish, it is green and like a burre that sticks to ones
clothes, it is one of the species of Icus Marinus.

A little fish found in moarish grounds in Swedland, it has a little prickle
on the back that is venomous.

A little Sea Serpent, something resembling a Conger, but the head is bigger,
for the proportion of its body.

A Sea Insect called the Sea-chairs; it has many scales like a wood louse, two
long horns, and a forked tail.

A Water Insect called squilla Fluviatilis, or the water Cricket.

Also many hundred of very rare and beautiful fish shells all different in
their forms, works, or colors, and other things belonging to Animals, in
Chests and Boxes.

Amongst some of them a very rare Mother of Pearl, or the Pearl oyster, with
an oriential Pearl in the midst; and a Carvall fish shell of the Red Sea, and
two or three species of shells that grow contrary to the nature of all shells
in general: for they grow toward the left hand. Another sort called the
Antipathio shell for the Center is on the bottom, and the other shells in
general has the Center on the top.

Parts of FISHES.
A Ribb of a Triton or Mereman, taken by Captain Finny, upon the shouts of
Brasil, five hundred Leagues from the Maine; given by Doctor Esgate Physician.

The Vein of the tongue of that Whale that was taken up at Greenwich, a little
before Cromwell's death, it is like a vein stock that is withered.

A piece of the Skin of the Whale; the pizzle eight or nine foot long, the
Drum-^panne, a tooth, a finne of one of the Gills, some twelve foot long, and
the bone that the Whale spouts the water out withal and a neck bone.

The Tail of a Sea Cat, or stingray, it will saw like an iron saw.

A very great Saw, or Weapon of a Saw-fish.

A Round flat bone of a fish like a pancake.

An Extraordinary great Lobsters Claw.

A Great Jawe of a large Tabourein, it is a Species of Sharke, and has four or
five tire or rows of teeth, it was sent the Master of these Rarities from the
West Jndia.

V. SERPENTS, etc.
A Serpent above twenty foot long of the East India, it has in the upper chap
four rows of teeth; this Serpent when he was living, could swallow men or
beasts.

A long Narrow Serpent like a piece of narrow hair-coloured Satin edged with
white Satin.

A Beautiful Serpent called Ibaboca of Brasil, some ten or twelve foot long.

A Spotted Serpent of the Island Jamaica; this, with the three following
Serpents was given to the increase of these Rarities, by worthy Mr. Powey one
of the Royal Society of Philosophers, and Treasurer to his highness the Duke
of York.

A Gray Colored Serpent, this Serpent being held before the light, the skin
appears like Network.

A Gold Colored Serpent, for this Serpent skin is like cloth of Gold.

An other Serpent of India like Cloth of Silver, with black spotts.

A Black Serpent of Virginia, it is eaten for good meat.

A Boitininga, or Rattle Snake; Nature has formed him with a rattle at his
tail that men might avoid the danger of his biting; for being once bittten by
him, a Man dies in half an hour unless he has of the rattle snake root,
for to apply alittle of it to the offended place, and by eating a little of it
also; therefore the Savages of Virginia seldom travel without it.

A Viper of Italy.

A Viper of Germany.

An Adder of England.

A little Serpent of Germany.

A Slow-Worme of Hessen.

An other colored little Serpent.

An Aspe.

A great Tatoo or Armadillo of the Duke of Orleans; it lives under ground like
a Mole, and is as big as a pretty big dog; it is a great Rarity in the East
India, and a noble present of so great a Prince.

An Armadillo of the West India that is esteemed good meat there.

An other sort of Armadillo of the East India that was presented King James for
a Rarety.

A great Crocodile, given by Noble Squire Courtine, a lover of virtue and
ingenuity.

A little Spotted Crocidile of Egypt.

A very little Crocodile, as it first came out of his egg.

A little Aligater of Brasil, it is a species of Crocodile.

A great Lizzard of Africa, that is said to be so loving to Man, that if the
Man be a sleep and in danger of some other creature, he will then awake him.

A great Spotted Lizzard skin, that his Highness the Landgrave of Hessen gave
as a Rarity.

An other species of Lizard of Numidia, or of Arabia, it is called by some the
land Crocodile.

A B^^gelugey, it is a creature of some parts of Africa, a kind of Lizard, that
has great scales like a fish.

A C^^^l^on of Barbary; it is said to live only by the air, but it is not so,
for he lives by slyes and, yet he can live long without food, his skin being so
nervous, and very little porous.

A True Salamander, is said to live in the fire, as has been too often
reported, but will live longer in the fire then any living creature of his
bigness, for the matter or moisture that proceeds from him condenses and so
smothereth the fire, as milk or glue does.

A Guaena of America, it is a sort of Lizard as big as a good Rabett, but in
those parts held for better meat; it lives by the fruits of trees, and is so
harmless that one may take him by the tail as he is on a tree.

A Black land Tortoise full of little yellow speeks, such as those in Germany
or Greece.

A little land Tortoise of Canada with many other different land Tortoises out
of the East and West Indies, they are all generally good meat.

A fair Sincus Terrestris of Egypt, it has four feet like a Lizard, but
resembles a fish, though it be a land creature; it is said that one part of his
body is cooling; but the other part is provocative to man or woman.

A Coal Black Toade.

Frogs with two feet and a tail.

Frogs with four feet and a tail.

Two fortes of Scorpions.

VI. Insects or FLIES.
A Fly bigger then a Sparrow, called the bill- Scarabeus.

A rare great Fly called the Salamander Fly for his colors, and that it is
like to wrought velvet.

A great Scarabeus of the Amazones, very entire, and of beautiful colors.

A Lantern Fly of Peru; two or three of these Flies fastened to a stick, give
light to those that travel in the Country.

A Black Elephant Fly, for his form.

A Buck Fly, for his horns.

A Leopard Fly, for the colors of his spots on his body.

A Parret-Flie, for his shape and for his rare changeable colors.

A Mole Fly, for his feet and for his silken hairy down.

A Rich Colored great Cantharides of the East Indies.

An Emerauld Fly so called for his rare glittering green color.

A Saphir Fly so called for his bright shining blew color.

A Musk Fly, it is called so for his Odotiferous sent when he is alive.

A West India Cacaorche. An Insect some thing broad, but can insinuate himself
in the least chinck of a chest to the great offense of men by spoiling of
leather or woollen.

A little broune Scarabeus of East Indies.

A Rare Dragon-Flie.

A Rare Butter-Flie of Germany.

A Rare Butter-Flie of Swedland, with several hundreds of other rare insects
and Flies, all different one from another, either in shape, or colors.

THE SECOND PART OF THE CATALOGUE.
I. VEGETABLES.
A Stick that is grown hollow like a nett; it was Prince Maurice of Nassaw's
Rarity, that he brought out of Brasil.

A Stick that is grown like a knott, and is a pipe to play on.

A Stick like a Cross.

A Stick like St. Andrew's Cross.

A Stick like a Serpent.

A Stick or piece of wood grown like the secret parts of a man.

An other Stick or piece of wood grown as the above mentioned.

A Stick with two branches grown together; it was a Rarity of the Marquess of
Badon.

A Natural Brush or broom of India.

A Bag grown on a tree like woven stuff, as tiffeny or Cobweblawn of India.

A Blossom of a Suggar Cane.

A Branch of a Palm tree of the Jew land.

A great Codde or Blossom of another species of Palm of the West India.

A Right Cedar fruit, with a piece of the branch of one of the Cedars of Mount
Libanon.

An Ear of Corn or Mace of Virginia, whereof one grain produces hundreds.

An Ear of a strange Corn in a Country in Africa, whereof one grain
produces more then a thousand.

A great Blossom of the Fox-tayle-plant, of St. Thomas de Lovando in Africa.

A Limon, that represents both the secret parts of an Hermapherodite.

A Rose of Jerico, that is an hundred years old, and yet can open so wide, that
it cannot well be put in ones hat, and the next day will be closed less then
ones fist.

An Excrescence, or plant like a Rubbing brush.

A Fruit of Brasil, that grows with a cover; it is called the Apes Nutt,
because when the fruit is ripe, the Apes open it, to eat the many kernells
that are in it; the fruit is thick, hard and very heavy and grows naturally
with a cover, therefore it is also called the covered fruit.

A great Maraca, a fruit of India, that has an hard shell like a Nutt, but as
big as a man's head, it is like the scull of a man with the Sutures.

An other sort of Maraca, that grows on a high tree, but one cannot well climb
on it, because the branches are so small and so full of prickles, but that does
not hinder the ratts from being lickorish of them: for if that fruit or Nut
falls they make a hole to eat what is in it, and the Savages make a strong
drink of the sap within, but of the shells they make their necessary household
stuff, as Cups, Spoones, Dishes and the like.

A Ganobany fruit of Guiney.

A Bacbob or great Ganobany given by the King of Sweds Physician; this fruit is
great and heavy, and on the out side it is like velvet.

A great Gourd in the form of a Pear.

A Red Gourd of Guiney.

An other pretty shaped Gourd.

A Tomarus fruit of Binney.

A little double Pineapple.

A Cocos fruit whole; the fruit and tree, afford many necessary things for the
benefit of man, as Milk, Wine, Water, Oil, Vinegar, Needles, Thread, Boards,
Cordage, sails, and other things.

A Cocos Nut something round, representing a face.

A long Cocos Nut something like a fish in shape.

A Prickle-Apple of India.

A large Carab; it is a fruit that grows on a high tree in the Caribeis; the
shell of it burnt, casts a sent like perfume, and the inward part tastes like
dry spic'd bread.

A Loaf of Bread made of the Cassado-Rotte; the sap or moisture of that root
is deadly poison, yet it makes good bread, for the fire evaporates the
malignant nature of it.

A Silk Cotton Codd, such as in China, they make their fine paper of it.

An other Species of Cotton in a Codd of the West Indies.

A Stinging long Bean of Brasile.

A Fruit or great Bean like the heart of a Sheep.

A long Cassia fruit of Egypt.

A Fruit called the May-cock; it is common in Virginia, and the outward part of
it is meat there, and not the inward.

A Bunch of Ethiopian Pepper.

A square thing made of the Cocos Bark, to cover the secret parts of Men or
Women, and it is also in that Country their ready money.

A Purse woven without a seame of the Cocos fruit.

A Piece of Wood that turns water into two colors at once.

A piece of Wood, and part stone together; His Majesty King Charles the first
did try it, and gave it to the owner of these Rarities.

Two very perfect Mandrakes, the one Male, and the other Female; both of them
did grow in Africa; they are esteemed of Women in those parts, and are found by
accident in the feilds by a red flower that the root bears and a long stalk,
when it is in perfection.

A Fruit called Genipapa, it is of the form of a Limon, but of strange
operation, for the juice is as clear as water; but a little of it put on ones
hand dies it of a purple color; but to redouble it with more of the same
liquour, it makes the place as black as Jett and no art of man can fetch it
out, but it will grow out of it self in nine days; and if the hogs eat of it,
it does not endanger them, but makes their fat of a purple color.

II. Sea PLANTS, etc.
A Very fair purple Sea Feather.

A large gray colored Sea Feather.

A fine Limon colored Sea Fann.

A Deep yellow colored Sea Fann grown to a great pibble-stone.

An Iron-coloured Sea Fann, as stiff as Iron wire.

A Plant or little Tree of Black Horn; for the branches being burnt, they
stink and wrinkle like horn; and being put in warm water become very soft; but
the root or lower part is hard white stone.

A very great Trumpet plant, that grows in the bottom of the Indian Sea, and
they make trumpets of it in those parts.

A Purple Sea Plant, given by Dr. Towers of Hamburgh.

A very rare Sea Plant of two colors.

A fine Yellow Sea Plant like a branch of small Birch.

A Plant of the Sea, a Rock, and a Shell fastened or grown all together.

A Sea Plant like Heath.

A Sea Plant like the hair of ones heard.

A Black Sponge, grown in branches like a Tree on a Rock; it is a very fine
Rarity.

A very rare Sea Plant or Shrubb, with shell fishes, grown, like fruits on a
tree; it is esteemed rare and strange.

A Sea Plant grown on a white Coral.

A Strange Sea Plant called the transparent Coral; it is of the Color of Glue.

A Branch of the Solid white Coral.

A Tree of Rough white Coral, also called the bush coral, it is perfect and
rare.

A White Coral with little double shell fishes, that grew in each part of it;
it is a Rarity that was much esteemed of the Emperor in his room of Rarities.

A red Coral on the Rock as it did grow.

A white Coral grown on a Plant.

A perfect white Coral called Hearts horn Coral.

A branch of soft Yellowish Coral.

A branch of black and white Coral, called Joint Coral.

A piece of Red Coral grown on a shell together.

A piece of Red and white Coral grown together.

A great round Sea Stone like a great moushroome or toadestoole.

A rare Concretion of the Sea with several sorts of shells together.

A Concretion of Mussells together.

A Concretion of Stones and Iron together.

A Stone found in the bottom of the Sea in the form of an humane face.

Some of the right Alcionum of the red Sea, by which the water of the Sea
appears red in the shallow parts of it where that is found.

Over and above these things mentioned, there are in several chests and boxes,
many hundreds of stones of the Sea, plants of the Sea, with Coral and
Coralins, and Alcionums, Concretions of things of a different nature, and such
like, which are omitted for brevity sake: but upon further encouragement may be
declared in time.

III. MINERALS, Stones of strange shape, and things turned into Stones, with
Chrystals and precious Stones.
AN Hungarian Rock of vitriol, in the shape of a man's visage.

A Rock of Copper and Crystal together.

A Rock of a kind of Emerauld and Amethist together.

A Rock glittering like Silver.

A Rock of Portugal of a strange form.

A Rock with Muscle shells.

A Rock like a bunch of grapes of the Cardinal Richelieu.

A Rock with whole flat shells of a Mountain in Germany.

A Rock of a Quarry of stone near to the City of Franckfurd.

A Rock like a great piece of wax, or rosin.

A Rock of Moss in stone belonging to the Emperor Ferdinand the third.

A ^ak^ in stone, a Rarity that was esteemed very much by diverse persons beyond
Seas.

A Stone, like the bottom shell of a great Oyster, but never was one.

A piece of old wood turned to stone, yet reserving the color.

A piece of old worme-eaten bark of a tree in Stone.

A piece of old Birch-wood, that appears to have been chapt off at both ends,
turned into stone, yet reserves the true resemblance and color of the perfect
wood.

A piece of Oaken Wood turned into Jasper, it is polished on the one side, that
the grain of the Wood may appear, and was sawed off from a piece of Wood like a
billet, that a Cardinal had in Rome, for a great Rarity.

A Right Eagle Stone, it is a true Calcedonyan stone, but like a lump of Gum
Tragacant; it was the Kings of Marrocco, it is a precious stone that is very
Rare: for that King permits none in his country to have any of them but
himself, as a token of his royalty, but yet gives them to eminent persons, as a
mark of his great favor.

A great Lapis Ammonis, that did belong to the King of France.

An other great Lapis Ammonis, coal black.

A Yellow stone like Wax, that has on it the representation of a vine leaf or
flower; it is of a glittering substance.

A great Triangular Stone, that has a representation of trees and bushes.

A great Jasper stone in a frame, it does represent a moorish ground with
rivers, trees and bushes.

An Extraordinary rare Calcedonian stone in a frame, it is like a piece of Ice
on the ground.

A Marble stone of the river Arno in a frame, the Emperor Ferdinand the third
confessed he never saw a rarer: for it does represent a bridge and an old
ruinous tower, a tree with the bark, and birds flying in the Air, it was the
great Duke of Florences Rarity.

Another stone picture like an arm of the Sea, with Cottages and a Church by
the waterside.

A very rare Stone picture representing clowdy skies, and an excellent rocky
Cave Given by the Earl of Pembrock.

An other very fine stone picture like a ruinous town on a hill.

An other stone of the same Nature in a frame.

A very rare stone picture like a City all on fire. The Master of these
Rarities, had it as a rare thing from the Prince Elector of Cullens hands.

A white stone that does represent a tree, as if it was made by art with a pen.

Another very rare white Stone that does represent two or three trees also as
if they were drawn with a pen.

A large piece of Ice glass, but it is something brittle, and is a kind of
Gipsum.

A piece of Crystal, like a town built on a hill, it is much esteemed by
ingenious spirits.

A another piece of Crystal very clear and rare, that has in the midst a
representation of a mossey figure or statiew, with the liknesse of 2 horns on
the head; all this representation is but one, yet it appears to be 3 or 4 by
the reflections of the same natural Crystal.

A piece of European Crystal, very clear.

A piece of East India Crystal.

A piece of West India Crystal.

A piece of Yellow Crystal.

A piece of Seagreen Crystal.

A piece of bluish Crystal.

A piece of bush Crystal.

A piece of wave Crystal.

A piece of frisled Crystal.

And diverse other sorts or species of Chrystals, that are not nominated for
brevity sake.

IV. METALS, MINERALS, etc.
SEveral sorts of Iron Ore.

Several Lead Ores.

Several Tin Ores.

Several Copper Ores.

Several Silver Ores.

Several Gold Ores.

Besides Metals, and Minerals growing something rare, as Lead and Crystal
together.

Tin and Crystal together.

Iron and Cristal together.

Copper and Crystal together.

Silver and Crystal together.

Gold in the midst of a white stone.

An Iron Bullet in the midst of a Stone.

A Touch stone, and a Metalline substance on the other side like Copper.

A very strange kind of Mineral, held to be Quicksilver, that is fixed in his
mine; for being burnt it evaporates its self into a stinking vapor like to
Quicksilver, it is something rare; for the Master of these Rarities, in his
travells never saw more then two pieces, and this was one of them.

A Flint and Copper grown together.

Several sorts of Talks.

Several sorts of Sulphur.

Several sorts of Earths out of Mines.

Several sorts of other Minerals as Cinabaris, Antimonium, Saffor, Murienum,
Flores Martis, and diverse other Metals and Minerals and the like.

Precious STONES.
Amethist in the Mine. Granates in the Mine. A sort of rich Diamond in the
Mine. Chrysolits in the Mine. Jasper from the Mine. Lapis Lazuli from the Mine.
Malaguita from the Mine. Turkeise from the Mine. Rubies from the Mine.
Vermilions from the Mine. Emerauld from the Mine. Hyacinths from the Mine.
And diverse other sorts of precious stones and different sorts of Pearls, for
their colors and shapes, with several Toad stones and Eagle stones and such
like.

A Bohemian Topaz, on a rich pedestal of Ebony.

An other rare Topaz, that has in it a representation of a forest, or
bushy-hills.

A piece of Ambar, that has in it a representation of a rising vapor or Cloud.

Diverse other pieces of transparent Amber, that have all something or other in
them, as Flies, Spyders, Ants or the like.

Diverse Stones of strange shapes and regular forms.
Several Lapides Ammonis, or stones like Serpents.

Several Glosopetrat, or Tongue stones.

Several stones like unto Cloak buttons.

Several Lapides Lincei.

Several Lapides Judaici.

Lapis Hamatites of Numidia.

Lapis Nephriticus of India.

Stones like Caps.

Stones like Hearts.

Stones like Stars.

Stones like Wheels of Watches.

Stones like little Pillars.

Stones like Crosses.

Stones like Screws.

Stones like Pease.

Stones like Darts-heads.

Stones square like Dice.

Stones in shape like Tobaco rowls.

Stones with well formed impressions.

A Stone that is hollow and does appear as if it had a hole quite thorough but
it has not.

A Stone like a Dogs tooth.

Agate Stones like the eyes of fishes.

A Stone like a little ear.

A Stone like ones gummes with teeth.

A Stone like the little Toe of ones left foot.

A Stone like the secret parts of a Woman.

Several Stones like unto Sugar plums, Sweet-meates, March-pane, Sugar Candy,
Sugar-cake and the like, and diverse other sorts of stone of the like nature.

V. Things of strange Operation.
A Hard white Stone, that if one puts it in the fire, does suddenly turn to
dust.

Stones that being put into a glass of water, crack into small pieces, so that
one may hear them crackle.

A Stone that if one blows on it, it smells; but if one does not blow, it will
not smell at all; and the harder one blows, the stronger it sents.

A Stone that if one puts it on the fire, gives an excellent smell.

A Stone that is hard and heavy, yet being put in the water does sent
odoriferously like a hat-full of violet flowers.

A good Lodestone, that is as rare as any other thing, though common for his
sudden attraction of Iron.

A Stone being held in a moist hand, gives a sent like a nasty hog, and
therefore is called the swine stone.

A piece of Wood as bad for being scraped; and a little worm, smells like a
stinking Jakes.

A piece of Wood being scrapt in a glass of water, it makes the water appear
of two colors; for if one hold the glass betwixt two men, the one will say it
is yellow and the other will say that it is of a dark blew.

A piece of wood that is not heavy, yet sinks suddenly under water.

A stone, so hard, that can it scratch steel, yet being cast in the water does
not sink but swimes on the water.

A Mineral stone, that rubbing of it to a piece of bright Iron or Steel, turns
it suddenly into Copper.

Stones from the West India that are hard, yet being put in vinegar stirs to
and fro, and seems to creep or go.

Other sorts of Stones that have the like property of stirring in vinegar.

But above all these Stones for admiration, is a little stone like a gray
colored Agate, called by some Oculus Mundi; it being put in a glass of clear
water, becomes as clear as crystal, and then taken out, in a little time
returns to its first opacity; this Rarity was presented to the better adorning
of the forementioned curiosities, by worthy Sr. Francis Peter's.

A mineral substance, that being put in a glass of wine, makes infinite
bubbles like atoms that rises in the middle of the Wine to the delighting of
the beholders.

An other mineral substance, like silk, called Amianthus, and also Asbestos,
it being put in the fire does not consume.

A Crustated Sponge; a little of it dried and applied to ones wrist, makes it
to itch for eight days together.

A fruit that being stuck on a forke and then held over a candle, makes a very
pleasant fire work.

A Rose of Jerico that is drawn up together, a little bigger then a tenis ball,
and is an hundred years old.

Besides these above mentioned things, there are Chests and Boxes furnished
with many hundreds of Rarities, as several shells, stones, bones, marcasits,
mineralls, fruits, Nutts, excrescences, and such like things all different in
shapes, and operations, and of diverse countries, Their Names and Natures being
omitted for to avoid prolixity: But if the owner of this collection of Rarities
does sell them to any Noble minded party, he then, God willing, will write at
large a more ample declaration to the expressing of each thing in particular,
to honor that virtuous person that shall buy them.

A Catalogue of the Names of those Great Princes and persons of Quality whose
Love of Virtue, Learning and of the admirable works of God in Natural Rarities
has been showed by their Bountiful adding of something to the increase of the
forementioned Collection.
CHARLES the First, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. CHARLES
the Second, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. Ferdinand. the
third, Emper. of Germany etc. Elionora Empress, etc. Ferdinand. the fourth,
King of the Romans, etc. Elleonora Queen Dowagere of Sweade, etc. Christina
Queen of Swede, etc. John Philips Archbishop of Mentz and Prince Elector, etc.
Charles Lewis Palsgrave of the Rhein and Prince Elector, etc. John George
Prince Elector of Saxony, etc. Maximilianus Henry Archbishop of Collen and
Prince Elector, etc. Christian Lewis Duke of Lunemburg and Brunzwich, etc.
Frederick Duke of Holstein, etc. William Landgrave of Hessen, Prince of
Hersefeild, etc. Gaston Duke of Orleans, etc. Philip Earl of Pembrooke.
Monsieur de Believre Great Prresident of France. The Honorable Sr. Thomas Row,
His Majesty's Ambassador to the Great Mogor in India, and also Ambassador to
the Emperor of the Turks at Constantinople, and to the Emperor of Germany and
also to diverse other Kings, Princes and Free States. Sr. Thomas Wardner General
for the Caribea Islands, and Governor of St. Christophers, and one of the
Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber to King Charles the first. Sr. Francis Peter's a
friend to Ingenuity and Rarities. Frederick Shink Governor of Selle, and Privy
Counselor to the Duke of Brunzwich. The Learned Petrus Carisius Resident for
the King of Denmark, in the united Provinces. Sr. Theodore de Mayerne,
Physician to Queen Mother Heneretta, Maria. Esquire Courtine a lover of virtue
and Ingenuity. Mr. Povey Treasurer to his Royal Highness the Duke of York.
Dr. Saltzman Physician, and Professor in the University of Strasburgh. Dr.
Fausius, Professor in the University of Hidelberg. Dr. Moretus, Professor in
Astronomy in the University of Prague. Dr. Cornelius van der Lingon Physician
in the University of Utrecht. Dr. Housewetel, Physician to the King of Sweden,
and Chief Physician in Hamburg. Dr. Bezler Chief Physician in Nuramberg. Dr.
Brown Physician in Ausburg. Dr. Dewit, Physician in the Country of Liefland.
Dr. Eastgate, Physician in Poplar. Mr. Thornton Chaplain to the Righ Honorable
Earl of Bedford. Mr. Cornelius Middlegest, Clerk to the Company of the Royal
Adventurers of England Trading into Africa.
FINIS.

