ENGLAND'S LAMENTATION, Or Her sad Estate Lamented AS ALSO A Call to the Heads
and Rulers, and all sorts to Repentance, and showing them the cause why so many
disasters, and the Judgments of God which are in the Earth, and also a way how
to remove the same, with an Answer to some Objections.

Through the Servant of the Lord, S. H.

Isa. 17.13, 14. The Nations shall rush like the rushing of many Waters, but
God shall rebuke them, and they shall fly a far of, and shall be chased as the
chafe of the Mountains before the Wind, and like a rolling thing before the
Whirlwind.

And behold at evening tide trouble, and before the morning he is not, this is
the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.

Printed in the Year 1665.

The Epistle to the Reader.
FOrasmuch as great and many has been the sufferings of Gods People in all
ages, and also in this very age of ours, great and many and sore evils has
been acted against us, and all this for the Worship of God, and for the pure
exercise of our Conscience toward him; though great and many things has been
charged against us, as of groundless jealousies and suspicions: And to this day
we have been and do intend thorough Grace to be kept clear, for our weapons are
not carnal but spiritual, that so as to that we have been sufficiently tried,
both one way and another; and the God of our life has still kept us clear that
so they could have nothing justly to charge against us, but only and singularly
for Worshipping the true and Living God, in the spirit and in the truth, for
the which we have gone through many and great trials, even knockings, beatings,
stoneings, whipings, and over and above all this, our sufferings of late has
been augmented, even to the parting Man and Wife, and Wife from Husband, which
is contrary to the bonds of modesty in matters relating to Religion, and not
only this, by way of banishment, but in throwing many into Holes, and even into
infected Prisons, contrary to your own advice in your Prayer Book, so that many
has lost their lives: and no wonder which is or may be a great Cause of
spreading the Contagion, because we could not have the benefit which nature
requires, and which God affords unto Man, and all this we have suffered
patiently, and filled up the measure of the sufferings of Christ in our flesh,
though it has been to the loss of many Lives, so that all these, with many
more of the like sort, which were innumerable to mention, we have all borne,
and gone through to this day, and we have been persecuted even, as if Pharaoh,
and all his Host had been at our heels, and the God of our life knows, and
that of God in all Consciences shall one day bear us witness, that it is for
nothing, but for traveling on our own way to our own Land, and God has been
with us all along with his mighty hand, and with his outstretched Arm, and
though they have taken our Bread, and our Water from us, and us from it, yet
God has fed us wonderfully, that so oh England thou may clearly see the Cause
of this sad estate of our Native Country at this day, and I hope and doubt not,
that what is herein written, if thou read it with the spirit of moderation, but
that thou will answer to it, and the witness of God in thee, and if so thereby
any may come to be reclaimed, and turn from the evil of their ways, I shall
rejoice, or otherwise, I have my reward.

ENGLAND'S LAMENTATION, etc.
O England, England, thy case is sore lamented, that there should be found in
thee so much wickedness and ungodliness that has so provoked the Lord to anger
against thee; and has stired up his wrath, that so unless speedy repentance
and a returning unto him that has smitten, and does smite daily, there is no
hope of recovering nor escaping his hand: But his Judgments will surely find
you all out, and come upon you, if you continue in your wickedness, and in
provoking the Lord of Hosts to jealousy, in your pride, drunkenness, and
whoredom, and all manner of sin, against the Living God; contrary to the Light
and spirit of Jesus; made manifest in your mortal flesh; ye shall perish
eternally, for there is no other way for Mankind to come out of thraldom, and
the bondage of corruption, (as all men by nature are involved in Adam in the
fall) but by coming to the true Jesus the Light of the World, which is the
Salvation in which the Nations of them that are saved must walk, which leads
out of all sin and persecution, Revel. 21.24.
and envy, which is the cause of the wrath of God to come upon a Nation, and
this cause is come upon thee O England.

And woe and alas, for thee O England, the Land of my Nativity; what art thou
become a byword to other Neighbor Nations; for thy wickedness and over and
above all this, there is one sin over and above all the forementioned, and that
is persecuting men for good Conscience sake toward God, thou O England which
should be the wisest and the most Christian Nation in the World, how foul art
thou become guilty of this heinous offense which has caused the jealousy of
God to burn like fire against thee; and in this thou exceedest all other
Nations for wickedness; yea, I believe even amongst the Turks and Heathens one
might have more free liberty to exercise their Conscience toward God, then in
thee O England; and they shall be brought in to condemn thee: Oh what cruelty
has been acted by thee against thy Inhabitants; Oh what spoiling of Goods and
Estates; Oh what hailing into Prisons, and before Magistrates and Rulers, for
the Testomony of a good Conscience, and because we could not pay Tyths,
contrary to Gospel times, Hebr. 7.12.
and the Administration thereof: And Oh how has the false Prophet for his
greedy gain made havoc of the people, and even eaten them up, as a man does
eat up bread, and yet the long suffering of God has borne this long, that so
many people might think that God was not angry with them, or did not regard it
at all; for because Judgment is not speedily executed, therefore is the heart
of the wicked set to do wickedly; and therefore because of this is the
Judgments of God in the earth: But woe and alas for thee O England, this sin is
not only found in thee in this particular, but many more, especially one,
against the Saints of the most High, whom God has loved with an everlasting
love, and whom he will be with, in fire and in water, and will never forsake;
and woe be to them from God that hurts them: And that is this O England,
persecuting peaceable People for Meeting together peaceably to Worship and
serve the Living God, which is both according to Scripture, and the Liturgy,
Read in the Communion.
which says, It is our abundant duty at all times, and in all places (mark
that) to call upon God, etc. and the Scripture is so full and pregnant in that
behalf, that I need say little to the proof of it; for all wise men know how
that the Saints, Mat. 5.1. Acts 20.20. Act. 5.42.
Apostles, and Christ Jesus our Lord himself, used Prayer or Preaching,
sometime by the Sea side, and sometime on the Mountain; and the Apostles it is
evident that they Preached the Gospel in the Temple, and in every House; what
is that lawful now to preach the Gospel in a House? Nay, say they; Yes says
we, it is both agreeable to the Apostles Spirit and practice and the Liturgy
also.

But woe and alas, what shall I say, my heart is even troubled within me, and
my Bowels is even pained to see what persecution of late has attended the
people of God, for this very thing it would fill up a Chronicle, and deserves
to be Chronicled, and is in the Book of Life; Oh what treadings and what
stampings there has been, and daily is, of the people of God; and oh what
knockings and beating down the peaceable people of the most High, for
Worshipping the Lord; no wonder if the Plague be begun, and Gods wrath be gone
out against his Adversaries, who has grumbled at us, as you say in your
Prayer Book, and has despised our peaceable Meetings, and worship of God it
self, no wonder if God smite the Nation. And oh what calls and cries has been
from us the peaceable people of God, even with our lives in our hands, that
thou oh England might be reconciled to God; but oh how stiff has thy neck
been, and how dull thy ear, and how hard thy heart against all reproof, that
even so many of thy Inhabitants has chosen the worse way, and has refused to
be reproved, and would have none of his Council, when his Messengers has rose
early, and gone late to bed I know to this very end, that thou might be
reclaimed, who have preached the Gospel freely unto thee; Oh but many of thy
Nation O Engl. has refused, and has hearkened to the dumb hireling that
neither can nor never will gather you to God, Isa. 56.10, 11.
but to themselves, that they might have their bellies filled; and this is the
way of them O England, and they have made the World like a Wilderness, full of
briers and thorns, that so the Lambs of Christ (who only hears him Christ the
true Shepherd) can scarce go up and down now for the Wolves, though in sheeps
clothing the Scriptures, which were not given to be made a trade of, but to be
fulfilled, which the Saints lives in the life of; for which life sake in us, we
are a suffering people at this day.

But woe, and alas beside all these aforementioned evils inflicted upon our
Estates and Bodies, not only in treding upon and knocking down, in our
peaceable Meetings, but also to add unto these grievous sins against the Lord,
they have not only done so, but they have taken the peaceable people of God,
and thrown them in Holes and Dungeons, and all this for practicing that which
is as I said before, both according and agreeable to Liturgy and Scripture,
it is no wonder if the Lord send a Plague into the Land, who resists the spirit
of truth which is according to Scripture, the justest Authority, which is to be
obeyed above all Authorities; for mark, Christ is to be the head of the Church,
Col. 1.18.
that in all things relating thereunto, he may have the pre-eminence, as the
Husband is to be the head of the Wife, so it is a vain thing to cause people to
worship contrary to their Consciences, it is but to make people hypocrites, to
make people to Worship or not to Worship, contrary to the work of God and
spirit of truth in our hearts, who leads us only to Worship God in his own way:
I say unto you all, and that in the name of the Lord, you that are found
opposers heerin, you shall be broken to pieces, for God will have his own way,
and not his way set out by you, who are in the fallen estate, who are miserable
sinners, as you say, how are you like to prescribe the way of the pure God, and
limit the Holy one to your form and none else; methinks you might see your
selves blind in this thing, for there is a way which no Fowl knows, nor which
no Vulturs eye has seen, nor Lions Whelp trod in, who are in the uncircumcised
nature, who are miserable offenders, and does those things you ought not, etc.
and those have never seen the way of God, nor know it; what Vulturous eyes has
been in this Nation, that they can scarce let a Man go on the street but they
will have a byword for him; people is so full of the venom of Aspes, even
under their tongue, and these are not like to prescribe ways for God to be
Worshipped, who are so like the Lions Whelp, tearing and rending, and putting
people out of the Church before they be got in; nay, but these are like the
Beast and his Followers, Rev. 13.15.
who would compel all both small and great to worship him, into the wrong way
from the right, this is the Beast indeed.

And oh what killing has been this day about Religion and Worship, and forcing
to or fro to the false from the true, and what killing and knocking down in the
very streets, as I said before quite contrary and opposite to the Apostles
Doctrine, who says touching Religion, Phil. 2.3.
says he, do nothing by strife but in love and gentleness instruct, etc. If
God will give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.25.
mark that, ye Heads and Rulers of England, for God, yea even our God, has a
controversy with you; and be not proud, for the Lord has spoken, for he can
bring down the high and the mighty, and raise them of low degree, for them he
will exalt, for we have seen the mighty abased, and the loftiness of the lofty
laid low; and what was the cause of this? to wit, sin and transgression, and
afflicting the just, and limiting the Holy One to their own ways, which was
not Gods way, for Gods ways is to love enemies, which is the badg and true
Cognizance as you say of a Christian, and have you not manifested this love of
yours what it is, that it is but in word and in tongue, not in deed; for love
thinks no evil, love kills not about Religion, and Worship, Church and Faith,
but your love as I said before, is manifest, and the Nations have seen it, and
the blood of many Martyrs and Saints shall be required at your hands, even you
the Heads and Rulers of this Nation, who has drunk the blood of the Saints,
and now God is giving you something else to drink, and will do even the reward
of unrighteousness which you have purchased unto your selves, who has despised
both warning and reproof.

Oh England, England, that thou would see the cause of the Judgment of God in
the Earth, and remove the same thou might yet be happy, for I know God is as
yet striving as I may say, with some of thy Inhabitants, that if by any means
they may return. Oh I have a word from God in my heart, oh that the King and
the Council might lay it to heart, and that is this, that if any would persuade
thee and thy Nobles, that we who are called Quakers, is the cause of the
Judgment of God in the Earth; I say unto thee (in the name of the Lord) believe
them not, and so to stir thee up against us to afflict us, the Lord has not
spoken by them, for that spirit (mark that) in all ages which stirred up to
persecute even from Cain to this day, was not the spirit of Christ, but the
spirit of enmity which God will overthrow.

So King Charles hearken not to their spirit, but to the spirit of God in thy
heart, which will tell thee if thou be serious, thou should love enemies, and
not kill them in this cause; but we are thy friends and seeks thy peace and
welfare in that which is everlasting, and shows thee and all the World the
cause and the way how to remove Gods hand and sore Visitation off thee and the
Land, that is to say, to loose the bands of wickedness, Isa. 58.6.
and to let the oppressed go free; this were the only way for thee O King, and
all thy subordinate Ministers to obtain to perfect peace with God, and to curb
all sin, and licentiousness, lying, swearing, pride, drunkenness, and adultery,
with many more before named; because of which the Land mourns.

But woe and alas, there is one thing that we must require of thee and the
Nation, and that will tend to thy peace, and the peace of all men, and that is,
Liberty of Conscience toward God, in matters of Religion, or relating
thereunto; how can thou and the Nation O King deny us of this superlative
privilege which is allowed by Christ, and the Apostle who said in matters of
Religion, Romans 14.5.
as every one was persuaded in his own heart so to walk, and did not preach up
persecution and to kill men's lives, that is of another spirit, then of Christ's,
who came to save men's lives, but left it to the Lord that he might persuade
them that were in error, the error of their ways, etc. and so we request it of
thee O King, and the Heads of this Nation, as you will all answer it at the
dreadful day of Gods Judgments, to reverse that law of yours, which you have
made for the persecution of them of tender Consciences, and for banishing those
whom God has loved, with an everlasting love, who cannot deny their God for
the wrath of men, and for meeting together in the public Worship, to worship
the Lord in the beauty of Holiness, Joh. 1.21, 22, 23, 24
for the which so many and heinous offenses have been committed against us, and
charged upon us; yet I say the God of Heaven bears us witness, and the
Testimony of God in all hearts, that we are clear and innocent, and we
contained for naught but the truth; and we are subject to Magistracy, which
would be charged against us, for not being subject, but we are either in doing
or in suffering, and I never knew a Quaker that lifted up his hand against any
man; though as I said before, we have been stamped upon as the mire in the
streets; and so let none say we are not subject, for in that we cannot do what
man requires of us; I say we are subject in suffering the wrath of the wicked,
and the Angel of Gods Heavenly presence has been and still is with us, to
carry his chosen on in all sufferings for his names sake, until the suffering
of his seed be full, and then we know that God will plead our cause, and it is
at hand; and so I say to make laws to banish men for Worshipping of God in the
Spirit, and praying and singing in the Spirit, which is the public Worship set
up by Christ himself, John 4.
and to pretend the same your selves, and to kill and banish them who are in
the life of the Scriptures, and of the Saints that spoke them forth, this is an
error indeed.

And hear O ye Nations this thing, and especially thee O England, who should
have been the glory of them all, how unmercifully have thou used the Messengers
of the most High, and what laws has come out of thee against my people says
the Lord; so that God is beginning to plead with thee O England, even above all
other Nations, because of thy wicked laws against the servants of the most
High, whom God has loved with an everlasting love, and on whom his Heavenly
Countenance shines, and is his only Jewels, and as dear to him as the apple of
his eye: And is this your end and purpose, and to throw Men and Women even into
infected Prisons for Meeting together in the fear of God, and to worship him;
oh shame and hard heartedness, was ever the like in any Nation, has the like
been heard of, surely God will require it at your hands; Oh consider these
things and weighty causes, for God will judge righteously, and in the day of
Gods Righteous Judgments we shall be clear; and this in short, in a word, from
God unto you, If you persist on to do your work of persecution, and do not
desist from, nor change that law which you have made against us, you shall
utterly fall, the Lord has spoken it; and thus the cause is truly stated, why
the Judgments of the Lord is in the Earth; and if you O ye Heads and Rulers
would remove the cause, the effect might cease, which sin and persecution* for
good Conscience sake is the great cause, not only naturally in putting people
where the Plague is, but supernaturally to remove the wrath of the Almighty; Oh
therefore be wise O ye Kings, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.
and be ye instructed O ye Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with fear and
rejoice with trembling; kiss the Son least he be angry with you, and you perish
from the right way; for if his wrath be but kindled a little, blessed are all
they that put their trust in him: And oh call in that unrighteous Decree that
it may never be heard of in other Nations, (that a Christian Magistrate should
persecute and banish, and as it were kill his subjects, for their Conscience
sake toward the Lord) and this of a truth from the Lord, is the way to procure
the blessing and remove the curse, which so long as the contrary is lived in,
no blessing can surely attend the Nation, but God will find all the evil doers
out of the earth; and so God almighty keep and preserve all his people pure and
holy before him, that you may all be clothed in white, and have on the Wedding
Garment, and be kept innocent and harmless before him, sacrificed up in a clear
Conscience, waiting for his Son from Heaven, who will refresh all his Children
with his Heavenly presence, and water them with the dew of Heaven, and your
Souls shall be satisfied as with fatness, for the visitation of the Lord of
Hosts is gone over the Nation, and they who receives not his call, and
visitation of his tender love toward them, but hardens their own hearts; well
we must leave them to the Lord, only to discharge my duty toward God and all
Mankind, I rest and remain a friend to you all in the bonds of the Covenant of
God, waiting for the restoration of the Creature out of the bondage of
corruption and slavery of sin into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, in
which I rest. S. H.

The occasion of this was partly in Answer to a Book which I have seen, wherein
they would seem to lay the blame or the guilt of the judgment of God upon the
innocent, and to let the guilty go free, which may serve for an Answer to the
same, and the cause more truly and rightly stated then they have stated it.

But if any object and say if we be the cause of this heavy Judgment of the
Lord in this Nation, how is it then that you do suffer so deeply, and many of
you are taken away in it?

I answer, first for these reasons.

First, because we did believe, and do believe always that in a common calamity
such a one as this is, that the Just may suffer as well as the unjust, though
the unjust be the instrumental cause of the suffering of the just, and God may
and does undoubtedly take the one to himself in love, and the other is
separated from him in wrath.

2ly. Because Solomon says, God takes away the Righteous with the wicked; and
as the one dies, so dies the other, though as I said before, the one in love,
the other in wrath.

3ly. Because God has visited the Nation many years, and has sent his
Prophets and Messengers amongst them crying, turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways; thus Gods Visitation has gone over the Nation, and they who have not
received this love of God, but hardened their hearts against all reproof, that
so it is just with the Lord to take away the Righteous with the wicked, that so
and for this very reason, that they might be blinded, and that they might not
discern the Righteous from the ungodly.

4ly. And lastly we may see and it is evident that that in David where he caused
Joab to number the people, contrary to the command of God, and there died
70000. and said he, what has these sheep done? He knew the guilt was in him,
for his heart did smite him; but said he, let thy hand be upon me and my
Fathers House: Thus you may plainly see, how that the innocent or sheep may
suffer for the transgression of others. Thus with many more reasons which might
be given as to that Objection, why we suffer in this affliction, or in any
common calamity.

Though I say and do still believe that God has a remnant that he will
preserve through it to bear witness to his name in a greater trial if it come:
And doubtless there is yet a Remnant that God will gather to himself, out of
all the false ways of the World, and sandy foundations into the true way of
God, and to the true foundation, Christ the Rock, the true Light of the World,
which abides one and the same for ever.

S. H.

THE END.

